Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position . 
For his lair he had the sewer of the Arche-Marion . 
He was six feet high , his pectoral muscles were of marble , his biceps of brass , his breath was that of a cavern , his torso that of a colossus , his head that of a bird . 
One thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and a cotton velvet waistcoat . 
Gueulemer , built after this sculptural fashion , might have subdued monsters ; he had found it more expeditious to be one . 
A low brow , large temples , less than forty years of age , but with crow 's - feet , harsh , short hair , cheeks like a brush , a beard like that of a wild boar ; the reader can see the man before him . 
His muscles called for work , his stupidity would have none of it . 
He was a great , idle force . 
He was an assassin through coolness . 
He was thought to be a creole . 
He had , probably , somewhat to do with Marshal Brune , having been a porter at Avignon in 1815 . 
After this stage , he had turned ruffian . 
The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer . 
Babet was thin and learned . 
He was transparent but impenetrable . 
Daylight was visible through his bones , but nothing through his eyes . 
He declared that he was a chemist . 
He had been a jack of all trades . 
He had played in vaudeville at Saint-Mihiel . 
He was a man of purpose , a fine talker , who underlined his smiles and accentuated his gestures . 
His occupation consisted in selling , in the open air , plaster busts and portraits of `` the head of the State . '' 
In addition to this , he extracted teeth . 
He had exhibited phenomena at fairs , and he had owned a booth with a trumpet and this poster : `` Babet , Dental Artist , Member of the Academies , makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids , extracts teeth , undertakes stumps abandoned by his brother practitioners . 
Price : one tooth , one franc , fifty centimes ; two teeth , two francs ; three teeth , two francs , fifty . 
Take advantage of this opportunity . '' 
This Take advantage of this opportunity meant : Have as many teeth extracted as possible . 
He had been married and had had children . 
He did not know what had become of his wife and children . 
He had lost them as one loses his handkerchief . 
Babet read the papers , a striking exception in the world to which he belonged . 
One day , at the period when he had his family with him in his booth on wheels , he had read in the Messager , that a woman had just given birth to a child , who was doing well , and had a calf 's muzzle , and he exclaimed : `` There 's a fortune ! 
my wife has not the wit to present me with a child like that ! '' 
Later on he had abandoned everything , in order to `` undertake Paris . '' 
This was his expression . 
Who was Claquesous ? 
He was night . 
He waited until the sky was daubed with black , before he showed himself . 
At nightfall he emerged from the hole whither he returned before daylight . 
Where was this hole ? 
No one knew . 
He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness , and with his back turned to them . 
Was his name Claquesous ? 
Certainly not . 
If a candle was brought , he put on a mask . 
He was a ventriloquist . 
Babet said : `` Claquesous is a nocturne for two voices . '' 
Claquesous was vague , terrible , and a roamer . 
No one was sure whether he had a name , Claquesous being a sobriquet ; none was sure that he had a voice , as his stomach spoke more frequently than his voice ; no one was sure that he had a face , as he was never seen without his mask . 
He disappeared as though he had vanished into thin air ; when he appeared , it was as though he sprang from the earth . 
A lugubrious being was Montparnasse . 
Montparnasse was a child ; less than twenty years of age , with a handsome face , lips like cherries , charming black hair , the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes ; he had all vices and aspired to all crimes . 
The digestion of evil aroused in him an appetite for worse . 
It was the street boy turned pickpocket , and a pickpocket turned garroter . 
He was genteel , effeminate , graceful , robust , sluggish , ferocious . 
The rim of his hat was curled up on the left side , in order to make room for a tuft of hair , after the style of 1829 . 
He lived by robbery with violence . 
His coat was of the best cut , but threadbare . 
Montparnasse was a fashion-plate in misery and given to the commission of murders . 
The cause of all this youth 's crimes was the desire to be well-dressed . 
The first grisette who had said to him : `` You are handsome ! '' 
had cast the stain of darkness into his heart , and had made a Cain of this Abel . 
Finding that he was handsome , he desired to be elegant : now , the height of elegance is idleness ; idleness in a poor man means crime . 
Few prowlers were so dreaded as Montparnasse . 
At eighteen , he had already numerous corpses in his past . 
More than one passer-by lay with outstretched arms in the presence of this wretch , with his face in a pool of blood . 
Curled , pomaded , with laced waist , the hips of a woman , the bust of a Prussian officer , the murmur of admiration from the boulevard wenches surrounding him , his cravat knowingly tied , a bludgeon in his pocket , a flower in his buttonhole ; such was this dandy of the sepulchre . 
COMPOSITION OF THE TROUPE These four ruffians formed a sort of Proteus , winding like a serpent among the police , and striving to escape Vidocq 's indiscreet glances `` under divers forms , tree , flame , fountain , '' lending each other their names and their traps , hiding in their own shadows , boxes with secret compartments and refuges for each other , stripping off their personalities , as one removes his false nose at a masked ball , sometimes simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but one individual , sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point that Coco-Latour himself took them for a whole throng . 
These four men were not four men ; they were a sort of mysterious robber with four heads , operating on a grand scale on Paris ; they were that monstrous polyp of evil , which inhabits the crypt of society . 
Thanks to their ramifications , and to the network underlying their relations , Babet , Gueulemer , Claquesous , and Montparnasse were charged with the general enterprise of the ambushes of the department of the Seine . 
The inventors of ideas of that nature , men with nocturnal imaginations , applied to them to have their ideas executed . 
They furnished the canvas to the four rascals , and the latter undertook the preparation of the scenery . 
They labored at the stage setting . 
They were always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and suitable to all crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder , and which were sufficiently lucrative . 
When a crime was in quest of arms , they under-let their accomplices . 
They kept a troupe of actors of the shadows at the disposition of all underground tragedies . 
They were in the habit of assembling at nightfall , the hour when they woke up , on the plains which adjoin the Salpetriere . 
There they held their conferences . 
They had twelve black hours before them ; they regulated their employment accordingly . 
Patron-Minette , -- such was the name which was bestowed in the subterranean circulation on the association of these four men . 
In the fantastic , ancient , popular parlance , which is vanishing day by day , Patron-Minette signifies the morning , the same as entre chien et loup -- between dog and wolf -- signifies the evening . 
This appellation , Patron-Minette , was probably derived from the hour at which their work ended , the dawn being the vanishing moment for phantoms and for the separation of ruffians . 
These four men were known under this title . 
When the President of the Assizes visited Lacenaire in his prison , and questioned him concerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied , `` Who did it ? '' 
demanded the President . 
Lacenaire made this response , enigmatical so far as the magistrate was concerned , but clear to the police : `` Perhaps it was Patron-Minette . '' 
A piece can sometimes be divined on the enunciation of the personages ; in the same manner a band can almost be judged from the list of ruffians composing it . 
Here are the appellations to which the principal members of Patron-Minette answered , -- for the names have survived in special memoirs . 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille . 
Brujon . 
-LSB- There was a Brujon dynasty ; we can not refrain from interpolating this word . -RSB- 
Boulatruelle , the road-mender already introduced . 
Laveuve . 
Finistere . 
Homere-Hogu , a negro . 
Mardisoir . 
-LRB- Tuesday evening . -RRB- 
Depeche . 
-LRB- Make haste . -RRB- 
Fauntleroy , alias Bouquetiere -LRB- the Flower Girl -RRB- . 
Glorieux , a discharged convict . 
Barrecarrosse -LRB- Stop-carriage -RRB- , called Monsieur Dupont . 
L'Esplanade-du-Sud . 
Poussagrive . 
Carmagnolet . 
Kruideniers , called Bizarro . 
Mangedentelle . 
-LRB- Lace-eater . -RRB- 
Les-pieds-en-l'Air . 
-LRB- Feet in the air . -RRB- 
Demi-Liard , called Deux-Milliards . 
Etc. , etc. . 
We pass over some , and not the worst of them . 
These names have faces attached . 
They do not express merely beings , but species . 
Each one of these names corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from the under side of civilization . 
Those beings , who were not very lavish with their countenances , were not among the men whom one sees passing along the streets . 
Fatigued by the wild nights which they passed , they went off by day to sleep , sometimes in the lime-kilns , sometimes in the abandoned quarries of Montmatre or Montrouge , sometimes in the sewers . 
They ran to earth . 
What became of these men ? 
They still exist . 
They have always existed . 
Horace speaks of them : Ambubaiarum collegia , pharmacopolae , mendici , mimae ; and so long as society remains what it is , they will remain what they are . 
Beneath the obscure roof of their cavern , they are continually born again from the social ooze . 
They return , spectres , but always identical ; only , they no longer bear the same names and they are no longer in the same skins . 
The individuals extirpated , the tribe subsists . 
They always have the same faculties . 
From the vagrant to the tramp , the race is maintained in its purity . 
They divine purses in pockets , they scent out watches in fobs . 
Gold and silver possess an odor for them . 
There exist ingenuous bourgeois , of whom it might be said , that they have a `` stealable '' air . 
These men patiently pursue these bourgeois . 
They experience the quivers of a spider at the passage of a stranger or of a man from the country . 
These men are terrible , when one encounters them , or catches a glimpse of them , towards midnight , on a deserted boulevard . 
They do not seem to be men but forms composed of living mists ; one would say that they habitually constitute one mass with the shadows , that they are in no wise distinct from them , that they possess no other soul than the darkness , and that it is only momentarily and for the purpose of living for a few minutes a monstrous life , that they have separated from the night . 
What is necessary to cause these spectres to vanish ? 
Light . 
Light in floods . 
Not a single bat can resist the dawn . 
Light up society from below . 
MARIUS , WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET , ENCOUNTERS A MAN IN A CAP Summer passed , then the autumn ; winter came . 
Neither M. Leblanc nor the young girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden . 
Thenceforth , Marius had but one thought , -- to gaze once more on that sweet and adorable face . 
He sought constantly , he sought everywhere ; he found nothing . 
He was no longer Marius , the enthusiastic dreamer , the firm , resolute , ardent man , the bold defier of fate , the brain which erected future on future , the young spirit encumbered with plans , with projects , with pride , with ideas and wishes ; he was a lost dog . 
He fell into a black melancholy . 
All was over . 
Work disgusted him , walking tired him . 
Vast nature , formerly so filled with forms , lights , voices , counsels , perspectives , horizons , teachings , now lay empty before him . 
It seemed to him that everything had disappeared . 
He thought incessantly , for he could not do otherwise ; but he no longer took pleasure in his thoughts . 
To everything that they proposed to him in a whisper , he replied in his darkness : `` What is the use ? '' 
He heaped a hundred reproaches on himself . 
`` Why did I follow her ? 
I was so happy at the mere sight of her ! 
She looked at me ; was not that immense ? 
She had the air of loving me . 
Was not that everything ? 
I wished to have , what ? 
There was nothing after that . 
I have been absurd . 
It is my own fault , '' etc. , etc. . 
Courfeyrac , to whom he confided nothing , -- it was his nature , -- but who made some little guess at everything , -- that was his nature , -- had begun by congratulating him on being in love , though he was amazed at it ; then , seeing Marius fall into this melancholy state , he ended by saying to him : `` I see that you have been simply an animal . 
Here , come to the Chaumiere . '' 
Once , having confidence in a fine September sun , Marius had allowed himself to be taken to the ball at Sceaux by Courfeyrac , Bossuet , and Grantaire , hoping , what a dream ! 
that he might , perhaps , find her there . 
Of course he did not see the one he sought . 
-- `` But this is the place , all the same , where all lost women are found , '' grumbled Grantaire in an aside . 
Marius left his friends at the ball and returned home on foot , alone , through the night , weary , feverish , with sad and troubled eyes , stunned by the noise and dust of the merry wagons filled with singing creatures on their way home from the feast , which passed close to him , as he , in his discouragement , breathed in the acrid scent of the walnut-trees , along the road , in order to refresh his head . 
He took to living more and more alone , utterly overwhelmed , wholly given up to his inward anguish , going and coming in his pain like the wolf in the trap , seeking the absent one everywhere , stupefied by love . 
On another occasion , he had an encounter which produced on him a singular effect . 
He met , in the narrow streets in the vicinity of the Boulevard des Invalides , a man dressed like a workingman and wearing a cap with a long visor , which allowed a glimpse of locks of very white hair . 
Marius was struck with the beauty of this white hair , and scrutinized the man , who was walking slowly and as though absorbed in painful meditation . 
Strange to say , he thought that he recognized M. Leblanc . 
The hair was the same , also the profile , so far as the cap permitted a view of it , the mien identical , only more depressed . 
But why these workingman 's clothes ? 
What was the meaning of this ? 
What signified that disguise ? 
Marius was greatly astonished . 
When he recovered himself , his first impulse was to follow the man ; who knows whether he did not hold at last the clue which he was seeking ? 
In any case , he must see the man near at hand , and clear up the mystery . 
But the idea occurred to him too late , the man was no longer there . 
He had turned into some little side street , and Marius could not find him . 
This encounter occupied his mind for three days and then was effaced . 
`` After all , '' he said to himself , `` it was probably only a resemblance . '' 
TREASURE TROVE Marius had not left the Gorbeau house . 
He paid no attention to any one there . 
At that epoch , to tell the truth , there were no other inhabitants in the house , except himself and those Jondrettes whose rent he had once paid , without , moreover , ever having spoken to either father , mother , or daughters . 
The other lodgers had moved away or had died , or had been turned out in default of payment . 
One day during that winter , the sun had shown itself a little in the afternoon , but it was the 2d of February , that ancient Candlemas day whose treacherous sun , the precursor of a six weeks ' cold spell , inspired Mathieu Laensberg with these two lines , which have with justice remained classic : -- Qu'il luise ou qu'il luiserne , L'ours rentre dans en sa caverne . 
-LSB- 26 -RSB- -LSB- 26 -RSB- Whether the sun shines brightly or dim , the bear returns to his cave . 
Marius had just emerged from his : night was falling . 
It was the hour for his dinner ; for he had been obliged to take to dining again , alas ! 
oh , infirmities of ideal passions ! 
He had just crossed his threshold , where Ma'am Bougon was sweeping at the moment , as she uttered this memorable monologue : -- `` What is there that is cheap now ? 
Everything is dear . 
There is nothing in the world that is cheap except trouble ; you can get that for nothing , the trouble of the world ! '' 
Marius slowly ascended the boulevard towards the barrier , in order to reach the Rue Saint-Jacques . 
He was walking along with drooping head . 
All at once , he felt some one elbow him in the dusk ; he wheeled round , and saw two young girls clad in rags , the one tall and slim , the other a little shorter , who were passing rapidly , all out of breath , in terror , and with the appearance of fleeing ; they had been coming to meet him , had not seen him , and had jostled him as they passed . 
Through the twilight , Marius could distinguish their livid faces , their wild heads , their dishevelled hair , their hideous bonnets , their ragged petticoats , and their bare feet . 
They were talking as they ran . 
The taller said in a very low voice : -- `` The bobbies have come . 
They came near nabbing me at the half-circle . '' 
The other answered : `` I saw them . 
I bolted , bolted , bolted ! '' 
Through this repulsive slang , Marius understood that gendarmes or the police had come near apprehending these two children , and that the latter had escaped . 
They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him , and there created , for a few minutes , in the gloom , a sort of vague white spot , then disappeared . 
Marius had halted for a moment . 
He was about to pursue his way , when his eye lighted on a little grayish package lying on the ground at his feet . 
He stooped and picked it up . 
It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers . 
`` Good , '' he said to himself , `` those unhappy girls dropped it . '' 
He retraced his steps , he called , he did not find them ; he reflected that they must already be far away , put the package in his pocket , and went off to dine . 
On the way , he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard , a child 's coffin , covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs , and illuminated by a candle . 
The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind . 
`` Poor mothers ! '' 
he thought . 
`` There is one thing sadder than to see one 's children die ; it is to see them leading an evil life . '' 
Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from his thoughts , and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations . 
He fell to thinking once more of his six months of love and happiness in the open air and the broad daylight , beneath the beautiful trees of Luxembourg . 
`` How gloomy my life has become ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Young girls are always appearing to me , only formerly they were angels and now they are ghouls . '' 
QUADRIFRONS That evening , as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed , his hand came in contact , in the pocket of his coat , with the packet which he had picked up on the boulevard . 
He had forgotten it . 
He thought that it would be well to open it , and that this package might possibly contain the address of the young girls , if it really belonged to them , and , in any case , the information necessary to a restitution to the person who had lost it . 
He opened the envelope . 
It was not sealed and contained four letters , also unsealed . 
They bore addresses . 
All four exhaled a horrible odor of tobacco . 
The first was addressed : `` To Madame , Madame la Marquise de Grucheray , the place opposite the Chamber of Deputies , No . 
-- '' Marius said to himself , that he should probably find in it the information which he sought , and that , moreover , the letter being open , it was probable that it could be read without impropriety . 
It was conceived as follows : -- Madame la Marquise : The virtue of clemency and piety is that which most closely unites sosiety . 
Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look of compassion on this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachment to the sacred cause of legitimacy , who has given with his blood , consecrated his fortune , evverything , to defend that cause , and to-day finds himself in the greatest missery . 
He doubts not that your honorable person will grant succor to preserve an existence exteremely painful for a military man of education and honor full of wounds , counts in advance on the humanity which animates you and on the interest which Madame la Marquise bears to a nation so unfortunate . 
Their prayer will not be in vain , and their gratitude will preserve theirs charming souvenir . 
My respectful sentiments , with which I have the honor to be Madame , Don Alvares , Spanish Captain of Cavalry , a royalist who has take refuge in France , who finds himself on travells for his country , and the resources are lacking him to continue his travells . 
No address was joined to the signature . 
Marius hoped to find the address in the second letter , whose superscription read : A Madame , Madame la Comtesse de Montvernet , Rue Cassette , No. 9 . 
This is what Marius read in it : -- Madame la Comtesse : It is an unhappy mother of a family of six children the last of which is only eight months old . 
I sick since my last confinement , abandoned by my husband five months ago , haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance . 
In the hope of Madame la Comtesse , she has the honor to be , Madame , with profound respect , Mistress Balizard . 
Marius turned to the third letter , which was a petition like the preceding ; he read : -- Monsieur Pabourgeot , Elector , wholesale stocking merchant , Rue Saint-Denis on the corner of the Rue aux Fers . 
I permit myself to address you this letter to beg you to grant me the pretious favor of your simpaties and to interest yourself in a man of letters who has just sent a drama to the Theatre-Francais . 
The subject is historical , and the action takes place in Auvergne in the time of the Empire ; the style , I think , is natural , laconic , and may have some merit . 
There are couplets to be sung in four places . 
The comic , the serious , the unexpected , are mingled in a variety of characters , and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the intrigue which proceeds misteriously , and ends , after striking altarations , in the midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes . 
My principal object is to satisfi the desire which progressively animates the man of our century , that is to say , the fashion , that capritious and bizarre weathervane which changes at almost every new wind . 
In spite of these qualities I have reason to fear that jealousy , the egotism of priviliged authors , may obtaine my exclusion from the theatre , for I am not ignorant of the mortifications with which new-comers are treated . 
Monsiuer Pabourgeot , your just reputation as an enlightened protector of men of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter who will explain our indigant situation to you , lacking bread and fire in this wynter season . 
When I say to you that I beg you to accept the dedication of my drama which I desire to make to you and of all those that I shall make , is to prove to you how great is my ambition to have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection , and of adorning my writings with your name . 
If you deign to honor me with the most modest offering , I shall immediately occupy myself in making a piesse of verse to pay you my tribute of gratitude . 
Which I shall endeavor to render this piesse as perfect as possible , will be sent to you before it is inserted at the beginning of the drama and delivered on the stage . 
To Monsieur and Madame Pabourgeot , My most respectful complements , Genflot , man of letters . 
P. S. Even if it is only forty sous . 
Excuse me for sending my daughter and not presenting myself , but sad motives connected with the toilet do not permit me , alas ! 
to go out . 
Finally , Marius opened the fourth letter . 
The address ran : To the benevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-haut-Pas . 
It contained the following lines : -- Benevolent Man : If you deign to accompany my daughter , you will behold a misserable calamity , and I will show you my certificates . 
At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be moved with a sentiment of obvious benevolence , for true philosophers always feel lively emotions . 
Admit , compassionate man , that it is necessary to suffer the most cruel need , and that it is very painful , for the sake of obtaining a little relief , to get oneself attested by the authorities as though one were not free to suffer and to die of inanition while waiting to have our misery relieved . 
Destinies are very fatal for several and too prodigal or too protecting for others . 
I await your presence or your offering , if you deign to make one , and I beseech you to accept the respectful sentiments with which I have the honor to be , truly magnanimous man , your very humble and very obedient servant , P. Fabantou , dramatic artist . 
After perusing these four letters , Marius did not find himself much further advanced than before . 
In the first place , not one of the signers gave his address . 
Then , they seemed to come from four different individuals , Don Alveras , Mistress Balizard , the poet Genflot , and dramatic artist Fabantou ; but the singular thing about these letters was , that all four were written by the same hand . 
What conclusion was to be drawn from this , except that they all come from the same person ? 
Moreover , and this rendered the conjecture all the more probable , the coarse and yellow paper was the same in all four , the odor of tobacco was the same , and , although an attempt had been made to vary the style , the same orthographical faults were reproduced with the greatest tranquillity , and the man of letters Genflot was no more exempt from them than the Spanish captain . 
It was waste of trouble to try to solve this petty mystery . 
Had it not been a chance find , it would have borne the air of a mystification . 
Marius was too melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well , and to lend himself to a game which the pavement of the street seemed desirous of playing with him . 
It seemed to him that he was playing the part of the blind man in blind man 's buff between the four letters , and that they were making sport of him . 
Nothing , however , indicated that these letters belonged to the two young girls whom Marius had met on the boulevard . 
After all , they were evidently papers of no value . 
Marius replaced them in their envelope , flung the whole into a corner and went to bed . 
About seven o'clock in the morning , he had just risen and breakfasted , and was trying to settle down to work , when there came a soft knock at his door . 
As he owned nothing , he never locked his door , unless occasionally , though very rarely , when he was engaged in some pressing work . 
Even when absent he left his key in the lock . 
`` You will be robbed , '' said Ma'am Bougon . 
`` Of what ? '' 
said Marius . 
The truth is , however , that he had , one day , been robbed of an old pair of boots , to the great triumph of Ma'am Bougon . 
There came a second knock , as gentle as the first . 
`` Come in , '' said Marius . 
The door opened . 
`` What do you want , Ma'am Bougon ? '' 
asked Marius , without raising his eyes from the books and manuscripts on his table . 
A voice which did not belong to Ma'am Bougon replied : -- `` Excuse me , sir -- '' It was a dull , broken , hoarse , strangled voice , the voice of an old man , roughened with brandy and liquor . 
Marius turned round hastily , and beheld a young girl . 
A ROSE IN MISERY A very young girl was standing in the half-open door . 
The dormer window of the garret , through which the light fell , was precisely opposite the door , and illuminated the figure with a wan light . 
She was a frail , emaciated , slender creature ; there was nothing but a chemise and a petticoat upon that chilled and shivering nakedness . 
Her girdle was a string , her head ribbon a string , her pointed shoulders emerged from her chemise , a blond and lymphatic pallor , earth-colored collar-bones , red hands , a half-open and degraded mouth , missing teeth , dull , bold , base eyes ; she had the form of a young girl who has missed her youth , and the look of a corrupt old woman ; fifty years mingled with fifteen ; one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible , and which cause those to shudder whom they do not cause to weep . 
Marius had risen , and was staring in a sort of stupor at this being , who was almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams . 
The most heart-breaking thing of all was , that this young girl had not come into the world to be homely . 
In her early childhood she must even have been pretty . 
The grace of her age was still struggling against the hideous , premature decrepitude of debauchery and poverty . 
The remains of beauty were dying away in that face of sixteen , like the pale sunlight which is extinguished under hideous clouds at dawn on a winter 's day . 
That face was not wholly unknown to Marius . 
He thought he remembered having seen it somewhere . 
`` What do you wish , Mademoiselle ? '' 
he asked . 
The young girl replied in her voice of a drunken convict : -- `` Here is a letter for you , Monsieur Marius . '' 
She called Marius by his name ; he could not doubt that he was the person whom she wanted ; but who was this girl ? 
How did she know his name ? 
Without waiting for him to tell her to advance , she entered . 
She entered resolutely , staring , with a sort of assurance that made the heart bleed , at the whole room and the unmade bed . 
Her feet were bare . 
Large holes in her petticoat permitted glimpses of her long legs and her thin knees . 
She was shivering . 
She held a letter in her hand , which she presented to Marius . 
Marius , as he opened the letter , noticed that the enormous wafer which sealed it was still moist . 
The message could not have come from a distance . 
He read : -- My amiable neighbor , young man : I have learned of your goodness to me , that you paid my rent six months ago . 
I bless you , young man . 
My eldest daughter will tell you that we have been without a morsel of bread for two days , four persons and my spouse ill . 
If I am not deseaved in my opinion , I think I may hope that your generous heart will melt at this statement and the desire will subjugate you to be propitious to me by daigning to lavish on me a slight favor . 
I am with the distinguished consideration which is due to the benefactors of humanity , -- Jondrette . 
P.S. My eldest daughter will await your orders , dear Monsieur Marius . 
This letter , coming in the very midst of the mysterious adventure which had occupied Marius ' thoughts ever since the preceding evening , was like a candle in a cellar . 
All was suddenly illuminated . 
This letter came from the same place as the other four . 
There was the same writing , the same style , the same orthography , the same paper , the same odor of tobacco . 
There were five missives , five histories , five signatures , and a single signer . 
The Spanish Captain Don Alvares , the unhappy Mistress Balizard , the dramatic poet Genflot , the old comedian Fabantou , were all four named Jondrette , if , indeed , Jondrette himself were named Jondrette . 
Marius had lived in the house for a tolerably long time , and he had had , as we have said , but very rare occasion to see , to even catch a glimpse of , his extremely mean neighbors . 
His mind was elsewhere , and where the mind is , there the eyes are also . 
He had been obliged more than once to pass the Jondrettes in the corridor or on the stairs ; but they were mere forms to him ; he had paid so little heed to them , that , on the preceding evening , he had jostled the Jondrette girls on the boulevard , without recognizing them , for it had evidently been they , and it was with great difficulty that the one who had just entered his room had awakened in him , in spite of disgust and pity , a vague recollection of having met her elsewhere . 
Now he saw everything clearly . 
He understood that his neighbor Jondrette , in his distress , exercised the industry of speculating on the charity of benevolent persons , that he procured addresses , and that he wrote under feigned names to people whom he judged to be wealthy and compassionate , letters which his daughters delivered at their risk and peril , for this father had come to such a pass , that he risked his daughters ; he was playing a game with fate , and he used them as the stake . 
Marius understood that probably , judging from their flight on the evening before , from their breathless condition , from their terror and from the words of slang which he had overheard , these unfortunate creatures were plying some inexplicably sad profession , and that the result of the whole was , in the midst of human society , as it is now constituted , two miserable beings who were neither girls nor women , a species of impure and innocent monsters produced by misery . 
Sad creatures , without name , or sex , or age , to whom neither good nor evil were any longer possible , and who , on emerging from childhood , have already nothing in this world , neither liberty , nor virtue , nor responsibility . 
Souls which blossomed out yesterday , and are faded to-day , like those flowers let fall in the streets , which are soiled with every sort of mire , while waiting for some wheel to crush them . 
Nevertheless , while Marius bent a pained and astonished gaze on her , the young girl was wandering back and forth in the garret with the audacity of a spectre . 
She kicked about , without troubling herself as to her nakedness . 
Occasionally her chemise , which was untied and torn , fell almost to her waist . 
She moved the chairs about , she disarranged the toilet articles which stood on the commode , she handled Marius ' clothes , she rummaged about to see what there was in the corners . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said she , `` you have a mirror ! '' 
And she hummed scraps of vaudevilles , as though she had been alone , frolicsome refrains which her hoarse and guttural voice rendered lugubrious . 
An indescribable constraint , weariness , and humiliation were perceptible beneath this hardihood . 
Effrontery is a disgrace . 
Nothing could be more melancholy than to see her sport about the room , and , so to speak , flit with the movements of a bird which is frightened by the daylight , or which has broken its wing . 
One felt that under other conditions of education and destiny , the gay and over-free mien of this young girl might have turned out sweet and charming . 
Never , even among animals , does the creature born to be a dove change into an osprey . 
That is only to be seen among men . 
Marius reflected , and allowed her to have her way . 
She approached the table . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said she , `` books ! '' 
A flash pierced her glassy eye . 
She resumed , and her accent expressed the happiness which she felt in boasting of something , to which no human creature is insensible : -- `` I know how to read , I do ! '' 
She eagerly seized a book which lay open on the table , and read with tolerable fluency : -- '' -- General Bauduin received orders to take the chateau of Hougomont which stands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo , with five battalions of his brigade . '' 
She paused . 
`` Ah ! 
Waterloo ! 
I know about that . 
It was a battle long ago . 
My father was there . 
My father has served in the armies . 
We are fine Bonapartists in our house , that we are ! 
Waterloo was against the English . '' 
She laid down the book , caught up a pen , and exclaimed : -- `` And I know how to write , too ! '' 
She dipped her pen in the ink , and turning to Marius : -- `` Do you want to see ? 
Look here , I 'm going to write a word to show you . '' 
And before he had time to answer , she wrote on a sheet of white paper , which lay in the middle of the table : `` The bobbies are here . '' 
Then throwing down the pen : -- `` There are no faults of orthography . 
You can look . 
We have received an education , my sister and I . 
We have not always been as we are now . 
We were not made -- '' Here she paused , fixed her dull eyes on Marius , and burst out laughing , saying , with an intonation which contained every form of anguish , stifled by every form of cynicism : -- `` Bah ! '' 
And she began to hum these words to a gay air : -- `` J'ai faim , mon pere . '' 
I am hungry , father . 
Pas de fricot . 
I have no food . 
J'ai froid , ma mere . 
I am cold , mother . 
Pas de tricot . 
I have no clothes . 
Grelotte , Lolotte ! 
Lolotte ! 
Shiver , Sanglote , Sob , Jacquot ! '' 
Jacquot ! '' 
She had hardly finished this couplet , when she exexclaimed : -- `` Do you ever go to the play , Monsieur Marius ? 
I do . 
I have a little brother who is a friend of the artists , and who gives me tickets sometimes . 
But I do n't like the benches in the galleries . 
One is cramped and uncomfortable there . 
There are rough people there sometimes ; and people who smell bad . '' 
Then she scrutinized Marius , assumed a singular air and said : -- `` Do you know , Mr. Marius , that you are a very handsome fellow ? '' 
And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both , and made her smile and him blush . 
She stepped up to him , and laid her hand on his shoulder : `` You pay no heed to me , but I know you , Mr. Marius . 
I meet you here on the staircase , and then I often see you going to a person named Father Mabeuf who lives in the direction of Austerlitz , sometimes when I have been strolling in that quarter . 
It is very becoming to you to have your hair tumbled thus . '' 
She tried to render her voice soft , but only succeeded in making it very deep . 
A portion of her words was lost in the transit from her larynx to her lips , as though on a piano where some notes are missing . 
Marius had retreated gently . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' said he , with his cool gravity , `` I have here a package which belongs to you , I think . 
Permit me to return it to you . '' 
And he held out the envelope containing the four letters . 
She clapped her hands and exclaimed : -- `` We have been looking everywhere for that ! '' 
Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope , saying as she did so : -- `` Dieu de Dieu ! 
how my sister and I have hunted ! 
And it was you who found it ! 
On the boulevard , was it not ? 
It must have been on the boulevard ? 
You see , we let it fall when we were running . 
It was that brat of a sister of mine who was so stupid . 
When we got home , we could not find it anywhere . 
As we did not wish to be beaten , as that is useless , as that is entirely useless , as that is absolutely useless , we said that we had carried the letters to the proper persons , and that they had said to us : ` Nix . ' 
So here they are , those poor letters ! 
And how did you find out that they belonged to me ? 
Ah ! 
yes , the writing . 
So it was you that we jostled as we passed last night . 
We could n't see . 
I said to my sister : ` Is it a gentleman ? ' 
My sister said to me : ` I think it is a gentleman . ' '' 
In the meanwhile she had unfolded the petition addressed to `` the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
`` Here ! '' 
said she , `` this is for that old fellow who goes to mass . 
By the way , this is his hour . 
I 'll go and carry it to him . 
Perhaps he will give us something to breakfast on . '' 
Then she began to laugh again , and added : -- `` Do you know what it will mean if we get a breakfast today ? 
It will mean that we shall have had our breakfast of the day before yesterday , our breakfast of yesterday , our dinner of to-day , and all that at once , and this morning . 
Come ! 
Parbleu ! 
if you are not satisfied , dogs , burst ! '' 
This reminded Marius of the wretched girl 's errand to himself . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , and found nothing there . 
The young girl went on , and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius ' presence . 
`` I often go off in the evening . 
Sometimes I do n't come home again . 
Last winter , before we came here , we lived under the arches of the bridges . 
We huddled together to keep from freezing . 
My little sister cried . 
How melancholy the water is ! 
When I thought of drowning myself , I said to myself : ` No , it 's too cold . ' 
I go out alone , whenever I choose , I sometimes sleep in the ditches . 
Do you know , at night , when I walk along the boulevard , I see the trees like forks , I see houses , all black and as big as Notre Dame , I fancy that the white walls are the river , I say to myself : ` Why , there 's water there ! ' 
The stars are like the lamps in illuminations , one would say that they smoked and that the wind blew them out , I am bewildered , as though horses were breathing in my ears ; although it is night , I hear hand-organs and spinning-machines , and I do n't know what all . 
I think people are flinging stones at me , I flee without knowing whither , everything whirls and whirls . 
You feel very queer when you have had no food . '' 
And then she stared at him with a bewildered air . 
By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets , Marius had finally collected five francs sixteen sous . 
This was all he owned in the world for the moment . 
`` At all events , '' he thought , `` there is my dinner for to-day , and to-morrow we will see . '' 
He kept the sixteen sous , and handed the five francs to the young girl . 
She seized the coin . 
`` Good ! '' 
said she , `` the sun is shining ! '' 
And , as though the sun had possessed the property of melting the avalanches of slang in her brain , she went on : -- `` Five francs ! 
the shiner ! 
a monarch ! 
in this hole ! 
Ai n't this fine ! 
You 're a jolly thief ! 
I 'm your humble servant ! 
Bravo for the good fellows ! 
Two days ' wine ! 
and meat ! 
and stew ! 
we 'll have a royal feast ! 
and a good fill ! '' 
She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders , made a low bow to Marius , then a familiar sign with her hand , and went towards the door , saying : -- `` Good morning , sir . 
It 's all right . 
I 'll go and find my old man . '' 
As she passed , she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode , which was moulding there amid the dust ; she flung herself upon it and bit into it , muttering : -- `` That 's good ! 
it 's hard ! 
it breaks my teeth ! '' 
Then she departed . 
A PROVIDENTIAL PEEP-HOLE Marius had lived for five years in poverty , in destitution , even in distress , but he now perceived that he had not known real misery . 
True misery he had but just had a view of . 
It was its spectre which had just passed before his eyes . 
In fact , he who has only beheld the misery of man has seen nothing ; the misery of woman is what he must see ; he who has seen only the misery of woman has seen nothing ; he must see the misery of the child . 
When a man has reached his last extremity , he has reached his last resources at the same time . 
Woe to the defenceless beings who surround him ! 
Work , wages , bread , fire , courage , good will , all fail him simultaneously . 
The light of day seems extinguished without , the moral light within ; in these shadows man encounters the feebleness of the woman and the child , and bends them violently to ignominy . 
Then all horrors become possible . 
Despair is surrounded with fragile partitions which all open on either vice or crime . 
Health , youth , honor , all the shy delicacies of the young body , the heart , virginity , modesty , that epidermis of the soul , are manipulated in sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources , which encounters opprobrium , and which accomodates itself to it . 
Fathers , mothers , children , brothers , sisters , men , women , daughters , adhere and become incorporated , almost like a mineral formation , in that dusky promiscuousness of sexes , relationships , ages , infamies , and innocences . 
They crouch , back to back , in a sort of hut of fate . 
They exchange woe-begone glances . 
Oh , the unfortunate wretches ! 
How pale they are ! 
How cold they are ! 
It seems as though they dwelt in a planet much further from the sun than ours . 
This young girl was to Marius a sort of messenger from the realm of sad shadows . 
She revealed to him a hideous side of the night . 
Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of revery and passion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors up to that day . 
The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement , which any one would have yielded to ; but he , Marius , should have done better than that . 
What ! 
only a wall separated him from those abandoned beings who lived gropingly in the dark outside the pale of the rest of the world , he was elbow to elbow with them , he was , in some sort , the last link of the human race which they touched , he heard them live , or rather , rattle in the death agony beside him , and he paid no heed to them ! 
Every day , every instant , he heard them walking on the other side of the wall , he heard them go , and come , and speak , and he did not even lend an ear ! 
And groans lay in those words , and he did not even listen to them , his thoughts were elsewhere , given up to dreams , to impossible radiances , to loves in the air , to follies ; and all the while , human creatures , his brothers in Jesus Christ , his brothers in the people , were agonizing in vain beside him ! 
He even formed a part of their misfortune , and he aggravated it . 
