They pinioned the ruffians . 
This throng of men , sparely lighted by the single candle , filled the den with shadows . 
`` Handcuff them all ! '' 
shouted Javert . 
`` Come on ! '' 
cried a voice which was not the voice of a man , but of which no one would ever have said : `` It is a woman 's voice . '' 
The Thenardier woman had entrenched herself in one of the angles of the window , and it was she who had just given vent to this roar . 
The policemen and agents recoiled . 
She had thrown off her shawl . 
but retained her bonnet ; her husband , who was crouching behind her , was almost hidden under the discarded shawl , and she was shielding him with her body , as she elevated the paving-stone above her head with the gesture of a giantess on the point of hurling a rock . 
`` Beware ! '' 
she shouted . 
All crowded back towards the corridor . 
A broad open space was cleared in the middle of the garret . 
The Thenardier woman cast a glance at the ruffians who had allowed themselves to be pinioned , and muttered in hoarse and guttural accents : -- `` The cowards ! '' 
Javert smiled , and advanced across the open space which the Thenardier was devouring with her eyes . 
`` Do n't come near me , '' she cried , `` or I 'll crush you . '' 
`` What a grenadier ! '' 
ejaculated Javert ; `` you 've got a beard like a man , mother , but I have claws like a woman . '' 
And he continued to advance . 
The Thenardier , dishevelled and terrible , set her feet far apart , threw herself backwards , and hurled the paving-stone at Javert 's head . 
Javert ducked , the stone passed over him , struck the wall behind , knocked off a huge piece of plastering , and , rebounding from angle to angle across the hovel , now luckily almost empty , rested at Javert 's feet . 
At the same moment , Javert reached the Thenardier couple . 
One of his big hands descended on the woman 's shoulder ; the other on the husband 's head . 
`` The handcuffs ! '' 
he shouted . 
The policemen trooped in in force , and in a few seconds Javert 's order had been executed . 
The Thenardier female , overwhelmed , stared at her pinioned hands , and at those of her husband , who had dropped to the floor , and exclaimed , weeping : -- `` My daughters ! '' 
`` They are in the jug , '' said Javert . 
In the meanwhile , the agents had caught sight of the drunken man asleep behind the door , and were shaking him : -- He awoke , stammering : -- `` Is it all over , Jondrette ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Javert . 
The six pinioned ruffians were standing , and still preserved their spectral mien ; all three besmeared with black , all three masked . 
`` Keep on your masks , '' said Javert . 
And passing them in review with a glance of a Frederick II . 
at a Potsdam parade , he said to the three `` chimney-builders '' : -- `` Good day , Bigrenaille ! 
good day , Brujon ! 
good day , Deuxmilliards ! '' 
Then turning to the three masked men , he said to the man with the meat-axe : -- `` Good day , Gueulemer ! '' 
And to the man with the cudgel : -- `` Good day , Babet ! '' 
And to the ventriloquist : -- `` Your health , Claquesous . '' 
At that moment , he caught sight of the ruffians ' prisoner . 
who , ever since the entrance of the police , had not uttered a word , and had held his head down . 
`` Untie the gentleman ! '' 
said Javert , `` and let no one go out ! '' 
That said , he seated himself with sovereign dignity before the table , where the candle and the writing-materials still remained , drew a stamped paper from his pocket , and began to prepare his report . 
When he had written the first lines , which are formulas that never vary , he raised his eyes : -- `` Let the gentleman whom these gentlemen bound step forward . '' 
The policemen glanced round them . 
`` Well , '' said Javert , `` where is he ? '' 
The prisoner of the ruffians , M. Leblanc , M. Urbain Fabre , the father of Ursule or the Lark , had disappeared . 
The door was guarded , but the window was not . 
As soon as he had found himself released from his bonds , and while Javert was drawing up his report , he had taken advantage of confusion , the crowd , the darkness , and of a moment when the general attention was diverted from him , to dash out of the window . 
An agent sprang to the opening and looked out . 
He saw no one outside . 
The rope ladder was still shaking . 
`` The devil ! '' 
ejaculated Javert between his teeth , `` he must have been the most valuable of the lot . '' 
THE LITTLE ONE WHO WAS CRYING IN VOLUME TWO On the day following that on which these events took place in the house on the Boulevard de l'Hopital , a child , who seemed to be coming from the direction of the bridge of Austerlitz , was ascending the side-alley on the right in the direction of the Barriere de Fontainebleau . 
Night had fully come . 
This lad was pale , thin , clad in rags , with linen trousers in the month of February , and was singing at the top of his voice . 
At the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier , a bent old woman was rummaging in a heap of refuse by the light of a street lantern ; the child jostled her as he passed , then recoiled , exclaiming : -- `` Hello ! 
And I took it for an enormous , enormous dog ! '' 
He pronounced the word enormous the second time with a jeering swell of the voice which might be tolerably well represented by capitals : `` an enormous , ENORMOUS dog . '' 
The old woman straightened herself up in a fury . 
`` Nasty brat ! '' 
she grumbled . 
`` If I had n't been bending over , I know well where I would have planted my foot on you . '' 
The boy was already far away . 
`` Kisss ! 
kisss ! '' 
he cried . 
`` After that , I do n't think I was mistaken ! '' 
The old woman , choking with indignation , now rose completely upright , and the red gleam of the lantern fully lighted up her livid face , all hollowed into angles and wrinkles , with crow 's - feet meeting the corners of her mouth . 
Her body was lost in the darkness , and only her head was visible . 
One would have pronounced her a mask of Decrepitude carved out by a light from the night . 
The boy surveyed her . 
`` Madame , '' said he , `` does not possess that style of beauty which pleases me . '' 
He then pursued his road , and resumed his song : -- `` Le roi Coupdesabot S'en allait a la chasse , A la chasse aux corbeaux -- '' At the end of these three lines he paused . 
He had arrived in front of No. 50-52 , and finding the door fastened , he began to assault it with resounding and heroic kicks , which betrayed rather the man 's shoes that he was wearing than the child 's feet which he owned . 
In the meanwhile , the very old woman whom he had encountered at the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier hastened up behind him , uttering clamorous cries and indulging in lavish and exaggerated gestures . 
`` What 's this ? 
What 's this ? 
Lord God ! 
He 's battering the door down ! 
He 's knocking the house down . '' 
The kicks continued . 
The old woman strained her lungs . 
`` Is that the way buildings are treated nowadays ? '' 
All at once she paused . 
She had recognized the gamin . 
`` What ! 
so it 's that imp ! '' 
`` Why , it 's the old lady , '' said the lad . 
`` Good day , Bougonmuche . 
I have come to see my ancestors . '' 
The old woman retorted with a composite grimace , and a wonderful improvisation of hatred taking advantage of feebleness and ugliness , which was , unfortunately , wasted in the dark : -- `` There 's no one here . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
retorted the boy , `` where 's my father ? '' 
`` At La Force . '' 
`` Come , now ! 
And my mother ? '' 
`` At Saint-Lazare . '' 
`` Well ! 
And my sisters ? '' 
`` At the Madelonettes . '' 
The lad scratched his head behind his ear , stared at Ma'am Bougon , and said : -- `` Ah ! '' 
Then he executed a pirouette on his heel ; a moment later , the old woman , who had remained on the door-step , heard him singing in his clear , young voice , as he plunged under the black elm-trees , in the wintry wind : -- `` Le roi Coupdesabot -LSB- 31 -RSB- S'en allait a la chasse , A la chasse aux corbeaux , Monte sur deux echasses . 
Quand on passait dessous , On lui payait deux sous . '' 
-LSB- 31 -RSB- King Bootkick went a-hunting after crows , mounted on two stilts . 
When one passed beneath them , one paid him two sous . 
-LSB- The end of Volume III . 
`` Marius '' -RSB- SAINT-DENIS . 
THE IDYL IN THE RUE PLUMET AND THE EPIC IN THE RUE SAINT-DENIS BOOK FIRST . 
-- A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY WELL CUT 1831 and 1832 , the two years which are immediately connected with the Revolution of July , form one of the most peculiar and striking moments of history . 
These two years rise like two mountains midway between those which precede and those which follow them . 
They have a revolutionary grandeur . 
Precipices are to be distinguished there . 
The social masses , the very assizes of civilization , the solid group of superposed and adhering interests , the century-old profiles of the ancient French formation , appear and disappear in them every instant , athwart the storm clouds of systems , of passions , and of theories . 
These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movement and resistance . 
At intervals , truth , that daylight of the human soul , can be descried shining there . 
This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to be sufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal lines even at the present day . 
We shall make the attempt . 
The Restoration had been one of those intermediate phases , hard to define , in which there is fatigue , buzzing , murmurs , sleep , tumult , and which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a halting-place . 
These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to convert them to profit . 
In the beginning , the nation asks nothing but repose ; it thirsts for but one thing , peace ; it has but one ambition , to be small . 
Which is the translation of remaining tranquil . 
Of great events , great hazards , great adventures , great men , thank God , we have seen enough , we have them heaped higher than our heads . 
We would exchange Caesar for Prusias , and Napoleon for the King of Yvetot . 
`` What a good little king was he ! '' 
We have marched since daybreak , we have reached the evening of a long and toilsome day ; we have made our first change with Mirabeau , the second with Robespierre , the third with Bonaparte ; we are worn out . 
Each one demands a bed . 
Devotion which is weary , heroism which has grown old , ambitions which are sated , fortunes which are made , seek , demand , implore , solicit , what ? 
A shelter . 
They have it . 
They take possession of peace , of tranquillity , of leisure ; behold , they are content . 
But , at the same time certain facts arise , compel recognition , and knock at the door in their turn . 
These facts are the products of revolutions and wars , they are , they exist , they have the right to install themselves in society , and they do install themselves therein ; and most of the time , facts are the stewards of the household and fouriers -LSB- 32 -RSB- who do nothing but prepare lodgings for principles . 
-LSB- 32 -RSB- In olden times , fouriers were the officials who preceded the Court and allotted the lodgings . 
This , then , is what appears to philosophical politicians : -- At the same time that weary men demand repose , accomplished facts demand guarantees . 
Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is to men . 
This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector ; this is what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire . 
These guarantees are a necessity of the times . 
They must be accorded . 
Princes `` grant '' them , but in reality , it is the force of things which gives them . 
A profound truth , and one useful to know , which the Stuarts did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a glimpse of in 1814 . 
The predestined family , which returned to France when Napoleon fell , had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed , and that what it had bestowed it could take back again ; that the House of Bourbon possessed the right divine , that France possessed nothing , and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII . 
was merely a branch of the right divine , was detached by the House of Bourbon and graciously given to the people until such day as it should please the King to reassume it . 
Still , the House of Bourbon should have felt , from the displeasure created by the gift , that it did not come from it . 
This house was churlish to the nineteenth century . 
It put on an ill-tempered look at every development of the nation . 
To make use of a trivial word , that is to say , of a popular and a true word , it looked glum . 
The people saw this . 
It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carried away before it like a theatrical stage-setting . 
It did not perceive that it had , itself , been brought in in the same fashion . 
It did not perceive that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon . 
It thought that it had roots , because it was the past . 
It was mistaken ; it formed a part of the past , but the whole past was France . 
The roots of French society were not fixed in the Bourbons , but in the nations . 
These obscure and lively roots constituted , not the right of a family , but the history of a people . 
They were everywhere , except under the throne . 
The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot in her history , but was no longer the principal element of her destiny , and the necessary base of her politics . 
She could get along without the Bourbons ; she had done without them for two and twenty years ; there had been a break of continuity ; they did not suspect the fact . 
And how should they have suspected it , they who fancied that Louis XVII . 
reigned on the 9th of Thermidor , and that Louis XVIII . 
was reigning at the battle of Marengo ? 
Never , since the origin of history , had princes been so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of divine authority which facts contain and promulgate . 
Never had that pretension here below which is called the right of kings denied to such a point the right from on high . 
A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on the guarantees `` granted '' in 1814 , on the concessions , as it termed them . 
Sad . 
A sad thing ! 
What it termed its concessions were our conquests ; what it termed our encroachments were our rights . 
When the hour seemed to it to have come , the Restoration , supposing itself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country , that is to say , believing itself to be strong and deep , abruptly decided on its plan of action , and risked its stroke . 
One morning it drew itself up before the face of France , and , elevating its voice , it contested the collective title and the individual right of the nation to sovereignty , of the citizen to liberty . 
In other words , it denied to the nation that which made it a nation , and to the citizen that which made him a citizen . 
This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called the ordinances of July . 
The Restoration fell . 
It fell justly . 
But , we admit , it had not been absolutely hostile to all forms of progress . 
Great things had been accomplished , with it alongside . 
Under the Restoration , the nation had grown accustomed to calm discussion , which had been lacking under the Republic , and to grandeur in peace , which had been wanting under the Empire . 
France free and strong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples of Europe . 
The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre ; the cannon had had the word under Bonaparte ; it was under Louis XVIII . 
and Charles X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word . 
The wind ceased , the torch was lighted once more . 
On the lofty heights , the pure light of mind could be seen flickering . 
A magnificent , useful , and charming spectacle . 
For a space of fifteen years , those great principles which are so old for the thinker , so new for the statesman , could be seen at work in perfect peace , on the public square ; equality before the law , liberty of conscience , liberty of speech , liberty of the press , the accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions . 
Thus it proceeded until 1830 . 
The Bourbons were an instrument of civilization which broke in the hands of Providence . 
The fall of the Bourbons was full of grandeur , not on their side , but on the side of the nation . 
They quitted the throne with gravity , but without authority ; their descent into the night was not one of those solemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history ; it was neither the spectral calm of Charles I. , nor the eagle scream of Napoleon . 
They departed , that is all . 
They laid down the crown , and retained no aureole . 
They were worthy , but they were not august . 
They lacked , in a certain measure , the majesty of their misfortune . 
Charles X. during the voyage from Cherbourg , causing a round table to be cut over into a square table , appeared to be more anxious about imperilled etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy . 
This diminution saddened devoted men who loved their persons , and serious men who honored their race . 
The populace was admirable . 
The nation , attacked one morning with weapons , by a sort of royal insurrection , felt itself in the possession of so much force that it did not go into a rage . 
It defended itself , restrained itself , restored things to their places , the government to law , the Bourbons to exile , alas ! 
and then halted ! 
It took the old king Charles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV . 
and set him gently on the ground . 
It touched the royal personages only with sadness and precaution . 
It was not one man , it was not a few men , it was France , France entire , France victorious and intoxicated with her victory , who seemed to be coming to herself , and who put into practice , before the eyes of the whole world , these grave words of Guillaume du Vair after the day of the Barricades : -- `` It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of the great , and to spring , like a bird from bough to bough , from an afflicted fortune to a flourishing one , to show themselves harsh towards their Prince in his adversity ; but as for me , the fortune of my Kings and especially of my afflicted Kings , will always be venerable to me . '' 
The Bourbons carried away with them respect , but not regret . 
As we have just stated , their misfortune was greater than they were . 
They faded out in the horizon . 
The Revolution of July instantly had friends and enemies throughout the entire world . 
The first rushed toward her with joy and enthusiasm , the others turned away , each according to his nature . 
At the first blush , the princes of Europe , the owls of this dawn , shut their eyes , wounded and stupefied , and only opened them to threaten . 
A fright which can be comprehended , a wrath which can be pardoned . 
This strange revolution had hardly produced a shock ; it had not even paid to vanquished royalty the honor of treating it as an enemy , and of shedding its blood . 
In the eyes of despotic governments , who are always interested in having liberty calumniate itself , the Revolution of July committed the fault of being formidable and of remaining gentle . 
Nothing , however , was attempted or plotted against it . 
The most discontented , the most irritated , the most trembling , saluted it ; whatever our egotism and our rancor may be , a mysterious respect springs from events in which we are sensible of the collaboration of some one who is working above man . 
The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact . 
A thing which is full of splendor . 
Right overthrowing the fact . 
Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of 1830 , hence , also , its mildness . 
Right triumphant has no need of being violent . 
Right is the just and the true . 
The property of right is to remain eternally beautiful and pure . 
The fact , even when most necessary to all appearances , even when most thoroughly accepted by contemporaries , if it exist only as a fact , and if it contain only too little of right , or none at all , is infallibly destined to become , in the course of time , deformed , impure , perhaps , even monstrous . 
If one desires to learn at one blow , to what degree of hideousness the fact can attain , viewed at the distance of centuries , let him look at Machiavelli . 
Machiavelli is not an evil genius , nor a demon , nor a miserable and cowardly writer ; he is nothing but the fact . 
And he is not only the Italian fact ; he is the European fact , the fact of the sixteenth century . 
He seems hideous , and so he is , in the presence of the moral idea of the nineteenth . 
This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the origin of society . 
To terminate this duel , to amalgamate the pure idea with the humane reality , to cause right to penetrate pacifically into the fact and the fact into right , that is the task of sages . 
BADLY SEWED But the task of sages is one thing , the task of clever men is another . 
The Revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt . 
As soon as a revolution has made the coast , the skilful make haste to prepare the shipwreck . 
The skilful in our century have conferred on themselves the title of Statesmen ; so that this word , statesmen , has ended by becoming somewhat of a slang word . 
It must be borne in mind , in fact , that wherever there is nothing but skill , there is necessarily pettiness . 
To say `` the skilful '' amounts to saying `` the mediocre . '' 
In the same way , to say `` statesmen '' is sometimes equivalent to saying `` traitors . '' 
If , then , we are to believe the skilful , revolutions like the Revolution of July are severed arteries ; a prompt ligature is indispensable . 
The right , too grandly proclaimed , is shaken . 
Also , right once firmly fixed , the state must be strengthened . 
Liberty once assured , attention must be directed to power . 
Here the sages are not , as yet , separated from the skilful , but they begin to be distrustful . 
Power , very good . 
But , in the first place , what is power ? 
In the second , whence comes it ? 
The skilful do not seem to hear the murmured objection , and they continue their manoeuvres . 
According to the politicians , who are ingenious in putting the mask of necessity on profitable fictions , the first requirement of a people after a revolution , when this people forms part of a monarchical continent , is to procure for itself a dynasty . 
In this way , say they , peace , that is to say , time to dress our wounds , and to repair the house , can be had after a revolution . 
The dynasty conceals the scaffolding and covers the ambulance . 
Now , it is not always easy to procure a dynasty . 
If it is absolutely necessary , the first man of genius or even the first man of fortune who comes to hand suffices for the manufacturing of a king . 
You have , in the first case , Napoleon ; in the second , Iturbide . 
But the first family that comes to hand does not suffice to make a dynasty . 
There is necessarily required a certain modicum of antiquity in a race , and the wrinkle of the centuries can not be improvised . 
If we place ourselves at the point of view of the `` statesmen , '' after making all allowances , of course , after a revolution , what are the qualities of the king which result from it ? 
He may be and it is useful for him to be a revolutionary ; that is to say , a participant in his own person in that revolution , that he should have lent a hand to it , that he should have either compromised or distinguished himself therein , that he should have touched the axe or wielded the sword in it . 
What are the qualities of a dynasty ? 
It should be national ; that is to say , revolutionary at a distance , not through acts committed , but by reason of ideas accepted . 
It should be composed of past and be historic ; be composed of future and be sympathetic . 
All this explains why the early revolutions contented themselves with finding a man , Cromwell or Napoleon ; and why the second absolutely insisted on finding a family , the House of Brunswick or the House of Orleans . 
Royal houses resemble those Indian fig-trees , each branch of which , bending over to the earth , takes root and becomes a fig-tree itself . 
Each branch may become a dynasty . 
On the sole condition that it shall bend down to the people . 
Such is the theory of the skilful . 
Here , then , lies the great art : to make a little render to success the sound of a catastrophe in order that those who profit by it may tremble from it also , to season with fear every step that is taken , to augment the curve of the transition to the point of retarding progress , to dull that aurora , to denounce and retrench the harshness of enthusiasm , to cut all angles and nails , to wad triumph , to muffle up right , to envelop the giant-people in flannel , and to put it to bed very speedily , to impose a diet on that excess of health , to put Hercules on the treatment of a convalescent , to dilute the event with the expedient , to offer to spirits thirsting for the ideal that nectar thinned out with a potion , to take one 's precautions against too much success , to garnish the revolution with a shade . 
1830 practised this theory , already applied to England by 1688 . 
1830 is a revolution arrested midway . 
Half of progress , quasi-right . 
Now , logic knows not the `` almost , '' absolutely as the sun knows not the candle . 
Who arrests revolutions half-way ? 
The bourgeoisie ? 
Why ? 
Because the bourgeoisie is interest which has reached satisfaction . 
Yesterday it was appetite , to-day it is plenitude , to-morrow it will be satiety . 
The phenomenon of 1814 after Napoleon was reproduced in 1830 after Charles X . 
The attempt has been made , and wrongly , to make a class of the bourgeoisie . 
The bourgeoisie is simply the contented portion of the people . 
The bourgeois is the man who now has time to sit down . 
A chair is not a caste . 
But through a desire to sit down too soon , one may arrest the very march of the human race . 
This has often been the fault of the bourgeoisie . 
One is not a class because one has committed a fault . 
Selfishness is not one of the divisions of the social order . 
Moreover , we must be just to selfishness . 
The state to which that part of the nation which is called the bourgeoisie aspired after the shock of 1830 was not the inertia which is complicated with indifference and laziness , and which contains a little shame ; it was not the slumber which presupposes a momentary forgetfulness accessible to dreams ; it was the halt . 
The halt is a word formed of a singular double and almost contradictory sense : a troop on the march , that is to say , movement ; a stand , that is to say , repose . 
The halt is the restoration of forces ; it is repose armed and on the alert ; it is the accomplished fact which posts sentinels and holds itself on its guard . 
The halt presupposes the combat of yesterday and the combat of to-morrow . 
It is the partition between 1830 and 1848 . 
What we here call combat may also be designated as progress . 
The bourgeoisie then , as well as the statesmen , required a man who should express this word Halt . 
An Although-Because . 
A composite individuality , signifying revolution and signifying stability , in other terms , strengthening the present by the evident compatibility of the past with the future . 
This man was `` already found . '' 
His name was Louis Philippe d'Orleans . 
The 221 made Louis Philippe King . 
Lafayette undertook the coronation . 
He called it the best of republics . 
The town-hall of Paris took the place of the Cathedral of Rheims . 
This substitution of a half-throne for a whole throne was `` the work of 1830 . '' 
When the skilful had finished , the immense vice of their solution became apparent . 
All this had been accomplished outside the bounds of absolute right . 
Absolute right cried : `` I protest ! '' 
then , terrible to say , it retired into the darkness . 
LOUIS PHILIPPE Revolutions have a terrible arm and a happy hand , they strike firmly and choose well . 
Even incomplete , even debased and abused and reduced to the state of a junior revolution like the Revolution of 1830 , they nearly always retain sufficient providential lucidity to prevent them from falling amiss . 
Their eclipse is never an abdication . 
Nevertheless , let us not boast too loudly ; revolutions also may be deceived , and grave errors have been seen . 
Let us return to 1830 . 
1830 , in its deviation , had good luck . 
In the establishment which entitled itself order after the revolution had been cut short , the King amounted to more than royalty . 
Louis Philippe was a rare man . 
The son of a father to whom history will accord certain attenuating circumstances , but also as worthy of esteem as that father had been of blame ; possessing all private virtues and many public virtues ; careful of his health , of his fortune , of his person , of his affairs , knowing the value of a minute and not always the value of a year ; sober , serene , peaceable , patient ; a good man and a good prince ; sleeping with his wife , and having in his palace lackeys charged with the duty of showing the conjugal bed to the bourgeois , an ostentation of the regular sleeping-apartment which had become useful after the former illegitimate displays of the elder branch ; knowing all the languages of Europe , and , what is more rare , all the languages of all interests , and speaking them ; an admirable representative of the `` middle class , '' but outstripping it , and in every way greater than it ; possessing excellent sense , while appreciating the blood from which he had sprung , counting most of all on his intrinsic worth , and , on the question of his race , very particular , declaring himself Orleans and not Bourbon ; thoroughly the first Prince of the Blood Royal while he was still only a Serene Highness , but a frank bourgeois from the day he became king ; diffuse in public , concise in private ; reputed , but not proved to be a miser ; at bottom , one of those economists who are readily prodigal at their own fancy or duty ; lettered , but not very sensitive to letters ; a gentleman , but not a chevalier ; simple , calm , and strong ; adored by his family and his household ; a fascinating talker , an undeceived statesman , inwardly cold , dominated by immediate interest , always governing at the shortest range , incapable of rancor and of gratitude , making use without mercy of superiority on mediocrity , clever in getting parliamentary majorities to put in the wrong those mysterious unanimities which mutter dully under thrones ; unreserved , sometimes imprudent in his lack of reserve , but with marvellous address in that imprudence ; fertile in expedients , in countenances , in masks ; making France fear Europe and Europe France ! 
Incontestably fond of his country , but preferring his family ; assuming more domination than authority and more authority than dignity , a disposition which has this unfortunate property , that as it turns everything to success , it admits of ruse and does not absolutely repudiate baseness , but which has this valuable side , that it preserves politics from violent shocks , the state from fractures , and society from catastrophes ; minute , correct , vigilant , attentive , sagacious , indefatigable ; contradicting himself at times and giving himself the lie ; bold against Austria at Ancona , obstinate against England in Spain , bombarding Antwerp , and paying off Pritchard ; singing the Marseillaise with conviction , inaccessible to despondency , to lassitude , to the taste for the beautiful and the ideal , to daring generosity , to Utopia , to chimeras , to wrath , to vanity , to fear ; possessing all the forms of personal intrepidity ; a general at Valmy ; a soldier at Jemappes ; attacked eight times by regicides and always smiling . 
brave as a grenadier , courageous as a thinker ; uneasy only in the face of the chances of a European shaking up , and unfitted for great political adventures ; always ready to risk his life , never his work ; disguising his will in influence , in order that he might be obeyed as an intelligence rather than as a king ; endowed with observation and not with divination ; not very attentive to minds , but knowing men , that is to say requiring to see in order to judge ; prompt and penetrating good sense , practical wisdom , easy speech , prodigious memory ; drawing incessantly on this memory , his only point of resemblance with Caesar , Alexander , and Napoleon ; knowing deeds , facts , details , dates , proper names , ignorant of tendencies , passions , the diverse geniuses of the crowd , the interior aspirations , the hidden and obscure uprisings of souls , in a word , all that can be designated as the invisible currents of consciences ; accepted by the surface , but little in accord with France lower down ; extricating himself by dint of tact ; governing too much and not enough ; his own first minister ; excellent at creating out of the pettiness of realities an obstacle to the immensity of ideas ; mingling a genuine creative faculty of civilization , of order and organization , an indescribable spirit of proceedings and chicanery , the founder and lawyer of a dynasty ; having something of Charlemagne and something of an attorney ; in short , a lofty and original figure , a prince who understood how to create authority in spite of the uneasiness of France , and power in spite of the jealousy of Europe . 
Louis Philippe will be classed among the eminent men of his century , and would be ranked among the most illustrious governors of history had he loved glory but a little , and if he had had the sentiment of what is great to the same degree as the feeling for what is useful . 
Louis Philippe had been handsome , and in his old age he remained graceful ; not always approved by the nation , he always was so by the masses ; he pleased . 
He had that gift of charming . 
He lacked majesty ; he wore no crown , although a king , and no white hair , although an old man ; his manners belonged to the old regime and his habits to the new ; a mixture of the noble and the bourgeois which suited 1830 ; Louis Philippe was transition reigning ; he had preserved the ancient pronunciation and the ancient orthography which he placed at the service of opinions modern ; he loved Poland and Hungary , but he wrote les Polonois , and he pronounced les Hongrais . 
He wore the uniform of the national guard , like Charles X. , and the ribbon of the Legion of Honor , like Napoleon . 
He went a little to chapel , not at all to the chase , never to the opera . 
Incorruptible by sacristans , by whippers-in , by ballet-dancers ; this made a part of his bourgeois popularity . 
He had no heart . 
He went out with his umbrella under his arm , and this umbrella long formed a part of his aureole . 
He was a bit of a mason , a bit of a gardener , something of a doctor ; he bled a postilion who had tumbled from his horse ; Louis Philippe no more went about without his lancet , than did Henri IV . 
without his poniard . 
The Royalists jeered at this ridiculous king , the first who had ever shed blood with the object of healing . 
For the grievances against Louis Philippe , there is one deduction to be made ; there is that which accuses royalty , that which accuses the reign , that which accuses the King ; three columns which all give different totals . 
Democratic right confiscated , progress becomes a matter of secondary interest , the protests of the street violently repressed , military execution of insurrections , the rising passed over by arms , the Rue Transnonain , the counsels of war , the absorption of the real country by the legal country , on half shares with three hundred thousand privileged persons , -- these are the deeds of royalty ; Belgium refused , Algeria too harshly conquered , and , as in the case of India by the English , with more barbarism than civilization , the breach of faith , to Abd-el-Kader , Blaye , Deutz bought , Pritchard paid , -- these are the doings of the reign ; the policy which was more domestic than national was the doing of the King . 
As will be seen , the proper deduction having been made , the King 's charge is decreased . 
This is his great fault ; he was modest in the name of France . 
Whence arises this fault ? 
We will state it . 
Louis Philippe was rather too much of a paternal king ; that incubation of a family with the object of founding a dynasty is afraid of everything and does not like to be disturbed ; hence excessive timidity , which is displeasing to the people , who have the 14th of July in their civil and Austerlitz in their military tradition . 
Moreover , if we deduct the public duties which require to be fulfilled first of all , that deep tenderness of Louis Philippe towards his family was deserved by the family . 
That domestic group was worthy of admiration . 
Virtues there dwelt side by side with talents . 
One of Louis Philippe 's daughters , Marie d'Orleans , placed the name of her race among artists , as Charles d'Orleans had placed it among poets . 
She made of her soul a marble which she named Jeanne d'Arc . 
Two of Louis Philippe 's daughters elicited from Metternich this eulogium : `` They are young people such as are rarely seen , and princes such as are never seen . '' 
This , without any dissimulation , and also without any exaggeration , is the truth about Louis Philippe . 
To be Prince Equality , to bear in his own person the contradiction of the Restoration and the Revolution , to have that disquieting side of the revolutionary which becomes reassuring in governing power , therein lay the fortune of Louis Philippe in 1830 ; never was there a more complete adaptation of a man to an event ; the one entered into the other , and the incarnation took place . 
Louis Philippe is 1830 made man . 
Moreover , he had in his favor that great recommendation to the throne , exile . 
He had been proscribed , a wanderer , poor . 
He had lived by his own labor . 
In Switzerland , this heir to the richest princely domains in France had sold an old horse in order to obtain bread . 
At Reichenau , he gave lessons in mathematics , while his sister Adelaide did wool work and sewed . 
These souvenirs connected with a king rendered the bourgeoisie enthusiastic . 
He had , with his own hands , demolished the iron cage of Mont-Saint-Michel , built by Louis XI , and used by Louis XV . 
He was the companion of Dumouriez , he was the friend of Lafayette ; he had belonged to the Jacobins ' club ; Mirabeau had slapped him on the shoulder ; Danton had said to him : `` Young man ! '' 
At the age of four and twenty , in ' 93 , being then M. de Chartres , he had witnessed , from the depth of a box , the trial of Louis XVI. , so well named that poor tyrant . 
The blind clairvoyance of the Revolution , breaking royalty in the King and the King with royalty , did so almost without noticing the man in the fierce crushing of the idea , the vast storm of the Assembly-Tribunal , the public wrath interrogating , Capet not knowing what to reply , the alarming , stupefied vacillation by that royal head beneath that sombre breath , the relative innocence of all in that catastrophe , of those who condemned as well as of the man condemned , -- he had looked on those things , he had contemplated that giddiness ; he had seen the centuries appear before the bar of the Assembly-Convention ; he had beheld , behind Louis XVI. , that unfortunate passer-by who was made responsible , the terrible culprit , the monarchy , rise through the shadows ; and there had lingered in his soul the respectful fear of these immense justices of the populace , which are almost as impersonal as the justice of God . 
The trace left in him by the Revolution was prodigious . 
Its memory was like a living imprint of those great years , minute by minute . 
One day , in the presence of a witness whom we are not permitted to doubt , he rectified from memory the whole of the letter A in the alphabetical list of the Constituent Assembly . 
Louis Philippe was a king of the broad daylight . 
While he reigned the press was free , the tribune was free , conscience and speech were free . 
The laws of September are open to sight . 
Although fully aware of the gnawing power of light on privileges , he left his throne exposed to the light . 
History will do justice to him for this loyalty . 
Louis Philippe , like all historical men who have passed from the scene , is to-day put on his trial by the human conscience . 
His case is , as yet , only in the lower court . 
The hour when history speaks with its free and venerable accent , has not yet sounded for him ; the moment has not come to pronounce a definite judgment on this king ; the austere and illustrious historian Louis Blanc has himself recently softened his first verdict ; Louis Philippe was elected by those two almosts which are called the 221 and 1830 , that is to say , by a half-Parliament , and a half-revolution ; and in any case , from the superior point of view where philosophy must place itself , we can not judge him here , as the reader has seen above , except with certain reservations in the name of the absolute democratic principle ; in the eyes of the absolute , outside these two rights , the right of man in the first place , the right of the people in the second , all is usurpation ; but what we can say , even at the present day , that after making these reserves is , that to sum up the whole , and in whatever manner he is considered , Louis Philippe , taken in himself , and from the point of view of human goodness , will remain , to use the antique language of ancient history , one of the best princes who ever sat on a throne . 
What is there against him ? 
That throne . 
Take away Louis Philippe the king , there remains the man . 
And the man is good . 
He is good at times even to the point of being admirable . 
Often , in the midst of his gravest souvenirs , after a day of conflict with the whole diplomacy of the continent , he returned at night to his apartments , and there , exhausted with fatigue , overwhelmed with sleep , what did he do ? 
He took a death sentence and passed the night in revising a criminal suit , considering it something to hold his own against Europe , but that it was a still greater matter to rescue a man from the executioner . 
He obstinately maintained his opinion against his keeper of the seals ; he disputed the ground with the guillotine foot by foot against the crown attorneys , those chatterers of the law , as he called them . 
Sometimes the pile of sentences covered his table ; he examined them all ; it was anguish to him to abandon these miserable , condemned heads . 
One day , he said to the same witness to whom we have recently referred : `` I won seven last night . '' 
During the early years of his reign , the death penalty was as good as abolished , and the erection of a scaffold was a violence committed against the King . 
The Greve having disappeared with the elder branch , a bourgeois place of execution was instituted under the name of the Barriere-Saint-Jacques ; `` practical men '' felt the necessity of a quasi-legitimate guillotine ; and this was one of the victories of Casimir Perier , who represented the narrow sides of the bourgeoisie , over Louis Philippe , who represented its liberal sides . 
Louis Philippe annotated Beccaria with his own hand . 
After the Fieschi machine , he exclaimed : `` What a pity that I was not wounded ! 
Then I might have pardoned ! '' 
On another occasion , alluding to the resistance offered by his ministry , he wrote in connection with a political criminal , who is one of the most generous figures of our day : `` His pardon is granted ; it only remains for me to obtain it . '' 
Louis Philippe was as gentle as Louis IX . 
and as kindly as Henri IV . 
Now , to our mind , in history , where kindness is the rarest of pearls , the man who is kindly almost takes precedence of the man who is great . 
Louis Philippe having been severely judged by some , harshly , perhaps , by others , it is quite natural that a man , himself a phantom at the present day , who knew that king , should come and testify in his favor before history ; this deposition , whatever else it may be , is evidently and above all things , entirely disinterested ; an epitaph penned by a dead man is sincere ; one shade may console another shade ; the sharing of the same shadows confers the right to praise it ; it is not greatly to be feared that it will ever be said of two tombs in exile : `` This one flattered the other . '' 
CRACKS BENEATH THE FOUNDATION At the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point of penetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelop the beginning of Louis Philippe 's reign , it was necessary that there should be no equivoque , and it became requisite that this book should offer some explanation with regard to this king . 
Louis Philippe had entered into possession of his royal authority without violence , without any direct action on his part , by virtue of a revolutionary change , evidently quite distinct from the real aim of the Revolution , but in which he , the Duc d'Orleans , exercised no personal initiative . 
He had been born a Prince , and he believed himself to have been elected King . 
He had not served this mandate on himself ; he had not taken it ; it had been offered to him , and he had accepted it ; convinced , wrongly , to be sure , but convinced nevertheless , that the offer was in accordance with right and that the acceptance of it was in accordance with duty . 
Hence his possession was in good faith . 
Now , we say it in good conscience , Louis Philippe being in possession in perfect good faith , and the democracy being in good faith in its attack , the amount of terror discharged by the social conflicts weighs neither on the King nor on the democracy . 
A clash of principles resembles a clash of elements . 
The ocean defends the water , the hurricane defends the air , the King defends Royalty , the democracy defends the people ; the relative , which is the monarchy , resists the absolute , which is the republic ; society bleeds in this conflict , but that which constitutes its suffering to-day will constitute its safety later on ; and , in any case , those who combat are not to be blamed ; one of the two parties is evidently mistaken ; the right is not , like the Colossus of Rhodes , on two shores at once , with one foot on the republic , and one in Royalty ; it is indivisible , and all on one side ; but those who are in error are so sincerely ; a blind man is no more a criminal than a Vendean is a ruffian . 
Let us , then , impute to the fatality of things alone these formidable collisions . 
Whatever the nature of these tempests may be , human irresponsibility is mingled with them . 
Let us complete this exposition . 
The government of 1840 led a hard life immediately . 
Born yesterday , it was obliged to fight to-day . 
Hardly installed , it was already everywhere conscious of vague movements of traction on the apparatus of July so recently laid , and so lacking in solidity . 
Resistance was born on the morrow ; perhaps even , it was born on the preceding evening . 
From month to month the hostility increased , and from being concealed it became patent . 
The Revolution of July , which gained but little acceptance outside of France by kings , had been diversely interpreted in France , as we have said . 
God delivers over to men his visible will in events , an obscure text written in a mysterious tongue . 
Men immediately make translations of it ; translations hasty , incorrect , full of errors , of gaps , and of nonsense . 
Very few minds comprehend the divine language . 
The most sagacious , the calmest , the most profound , decipher slowly , and when they arrive with their text , the task has long been completed ; there are already twenty translations on the public place . 
From each remaining springs a party , and from each misinterpretation a faction ; and each party thinks that it alone has the true text , and each faction thinks that it possesses the light . 
Power itself is often a faction . 
There are , in revolutions , swimmers who go against the current ; they are the old parties . 
For the old parties who clung to heredity by the grace of God , think that revolutions , having sprung from the right to revolt , one has the right to revolt against them . 
Error . 
For in these revolutions , the one who revolts is not the people ; it is the king . 
Revolution is precisely the contrary of revolt . 
Every revolution , being a normal outcome , contains within itself its legitimacy , which false revolutionists sometimes dishonor , but which remains even when soiled , which survives even when stained with blood . 
Revolutions spring not from an accident , but from necessity . 
A revolution is a return from the fictitious to the real . 
It is because it must be that it is . 
None the less did the old legitimist parties assail the Revolution of 1830 with all the vehemence which arises from false reasoning . 
Errors make excellent projectiles . 
They strike it cleverly in its vulnerable spot , in default of a cuirass , in its lack of logic ; they attacked this revolution in its royalty . 
They shouted to it : `` Revolution , why this king ? '' 
Factions are blind men who aim correctly . 
This cry was uttered equally by the republicans . 
But coming from them , this cry was logical . 
What was blindness in the legitimists was clearness of vision in the democrats . 
1830 had bankrupted the people . 
The enraged democracy reproached it with this . 
Between the attack of the past and the attack of the future , the establishment of July struggled . 
It represented the minute at loggerheads on the one hand with the monarchical centuries , on the other hand with eternal right . 
In addition , and beside all this , as it was no longer revolution and had become a monarchy , 1830 was obliged to take precedence of all Europe . 
To keep the peace , was an increase of complication . 
A harmony established contrary to sense is often more onerous than a war . 
From this secret conflict , always muzzled , but always growling , was born armed peace , that ruinous expedient of civilization which in the harness of the European cabinets is suspicious in itself . 
The Royalty of July reared up , in spite of the fact that it caught it in the harness of European cabinets . 
Metternich would gladly have put it in kicking-straps . 
Pushed on in France by progress , it pushed on the monarchies , those loiterers in Europe . 
After having been towed , it undertook to tow . 
Meanwhile , within her , pauperism , the proletariat , salary , education , penal servitude , prostitution , the fate of the woman , wealth , misery , production , consumption , division , exchange , coin , credit , the rights of capital , the rights of labor , -- all these questions were multiplied above society , a terrible slope . 
Outside of political parties properly so called , another movement became manifest . 
Philosophical fermentation replied to democratic fermentation . 
The elect felt troubled as well as the masses ; in another manner , but quite as much . 
Thinkers meditated , while the soil , that is to say , the people , traversed by revolutionary currents , trembled under them with indescribably vague epileptic shocks . 
These dreamers , some isolated , others united in families and almost in communion , turned over social questions in a pacific but profound manner ; impassive miners , who tranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths of a volcano , hardly disturbed by the dull commotion and the furnaces of which they caught glimpses . 
This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of this agitated epoch . 
These men left to political parties the question of rights , they occupied themselves with the question of happiness . 
The well-being of man , that was what they wanted to extract from society . 
They raised material questions , questions of agriculture , of industry , of commerce , almost to the dignity of a religion . 
In civilization , such as it has formed itself , a little by the command of God , a great deal by the agency of man , interests combine , unite , and amalgamate in a manner to form a veritable hard rock , in accordance with a dynamic law , patiently studied by economists , those geologists of politics . 
These men who grouped themselves under different appellations , but who may all be designated by the generic title of socialists , endeavored to pierce that rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters of human felicity . 
From the question of the scaffold to the question of war , their works embraced everything . 
To the rights of man , as proclaimed by the French Revolution , they added the rights of woman and the rights of the child . 
The reader will not be surprised if , for various reasons , we do not here treat in a thorough manner , from the theoretical point of view , the questions raised by socialism . 
We confine ourselves to indicating them . 
All the problems that the socialists proposed to themselves , cosmogonic visions , revery and mysticism being cast aside , can be reduced to two principal problems . 
First problem : To produce wealth . 
Second problem : To share it . 
The first problem contains the question of work . 
The second contains the question of salary . 
In the first problem the employment of forces is in question . 
In the second , the distribution of enjoyment . 
From the proper employment of forces results public power . 
From a good distribution of enjoyments results individual happiness . 
By a good distribution , not an equal but an equitable distribution must be understood . 
From these two things combined , the public power without , individual happiness within , results social prosperity . 
Social prosperity means the man happy , the citizen free , the nation great . 
England solves the first of these two problems . 
She creates wealth admirably , she divides it badly . 
This solution which is complete on one side only leads her fatally to two extremes : monstrous opulence , monstrous wretchedness . 
All enjoyments for some , all privations for the rest , that is to say , for the people ; privilege , exception , monopoly , feudalism , born from toil itself . 
A false and dangerous situation , which sates public power or private misery , which sets the roots of the State in the sufferings of the individual . 
A badly constituted grandeur in which are combined all the material elements and into which no moral element enters . 
Communism and agrarian law think that they solve the second problem . 
They are mistaken . 
Their division kills production . 
Equal partition abolishes emulation ; and consequently labor . 
It is a partition made by the butcher , which kills that which it divides . 
It is therefore impossible to pause over these pretended solutions . 
Slaying wealth is not the same thing as dividing it . 
The two problems require to be solved together , to be well solved . 
The two problems must be combined and made but one . 
Solve only the first of the two problems ; you will be Venice , you will be England . 
You will have , like Venice , an artificial power , or , like England , a material power ; you will be the wicked rich man . 
You will die by an act of violence , as Venice died , or by bankruptcy , as England will fall . 
And the world will allow to die and fall all that is merely selfishness , all that does not represent for the human race either a virtue or an idea . 
It is well understood here , that by the words Venice , England , we designate not the peoples , but social structures ; the oligarchies superposed on nations , and not the nations themselves . 
The nations always have our respect and our sympathy . 
Venice , as a people , will live again ; England , the aristocracy , will fall , but England , the nation , is immortal . 
That said , we continue . 
Solve the two problems , encourage the wealthy , and protect the poor , suppress misery , put an end to the unjust farming out of the feeble by the strong , put a bridle on the iniquitous jealousy of the man who is making his way against the man who has reached the goal , adjust , mathematically and fraternally , salary to labor , mingle gratuitous and compulsory education with the growth of childhood , and make of science the base of manliness , develop minds while keeping arms busy , be at one and the same time a powerful people and a family of happy men , render property democratic , not by abolishing it , but by making it universal , so that every citizen , without exception , may be a proprietor , an easier matter than is generally supposed ; in two words , learn how to produce wealth and how to distribute it , and you will have at once moral and material greatness ; and you will be worthy to call yourself France . 
This is what socialism said outside and above a few sects which have gone astray ; that is what it sought in facts , that is what it sketched out in minds . 
Efforts worthy of admiration ! 
Sacred attempts ! 
These doctrines , these theories , these resistances , the unforeseen necessity for the statesman to take philosophers into account , confused evidences of which we catch a glimpse , a new system of politics to be created , which shall be in accord with the old world without too much disaccord with the new revolutionary ideal , a situation in which it became necessary to use Lafayette to defend Polignac , the intuition of progress transparent beneath the revolt , the chambers and streets , the competitions to be brought into equilibrium around him , his faith in the Revolution , perhaps an eventual indefinable resignation born of the vague acceptance of a superior definitive right , his desire to remain of his race , his domestic spirit , his sincere respect for the people , his own honesty , preoccupied Louis Philippe almost painfully , and there were moments when strong and courageous as he was , he was overwhelmed by the difficulties of being a king . 
He felt under his feet a formidable disaggregation , which was not , nevertheless , a reduction to dust , France being more France than ever . 
Piles of shadows covered the horizon . 
A strange shade , gradually drawing nearer , extended little by little over men , over things , over ideas ; a shade which came from wraths and systems . 
Everything which had been hastily stifled was moving and fermenting . 
At times the conscience of the honest man resumed its breathing , so great was the discomfort of that air in which sophisms were intermingled with truths . 
Spirits trembled in the social anxiety like leaves at the approach of a storm . 
The electric tension was such that at certain instants , the first comer , a stranger , brought light . 
Then the twilight obscurity closed in again . 
At intervals , deep and dull mutterings allowed a judgment to be formed as to the quantity of thunder contained by the cloud . 
