`` Enjolras said : ` Joly is ill , Grantaire is drunk . ' 
It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet . 
If he had come for me , I would have followed him . 
So much the worse for Enjolras ! 
I wo n't go to his funeral . '' 
This resolution once arrived at , Bossuet , Joly , and Grantaire did not stir from the wine-shop . 
By two o'clock in the afternoon , the table at which they sat was covered with empty bottles . 
Two candles were burning on it , one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green , the other in the neck of a cracked carafe . 
Grantaire had seduced Joly and Bossuet to wine ; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards cheerfulness . 
As for Grantaire , he had got beyond wine , that merely moderate inspirer of dreams , ever since mid-day . 
Wine enjoys only a conventional popularity with serious drinkers . 
There is , in fact , in the matter of inebriety , white magic and black magic ; wine is only white magic . 
Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams . 
The blackness of a terrible fit of drunkenness yawning before him , far from arresting him , attracted him . 
He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass . 
The beer-glass is the abyss . 
Having neither opium nor hashish on hand , and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight , he had had recourse to that fearful mixture of brandy , stout , absinthe , which produces the most terrible of lethargies . 
It is of these three vapors , beer , brandy , and absinthe , that the lead of the soul is composed . 
They are three grooms ; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them ; and there are formed there in a membranous smoke , vaguely condensed into the wing of the bat , three mute furies , Nightmare , Night , and Death , which hover about the slumbering Psyche . 
Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase ; far from it . 
He was tremendously gay , and Bossuet and Joly retorted . 
They clinked glasses . 
Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words and ideas , a peculiarity of gesture ; he rested his left fist on his knee with dignity , his arm forming a right angle , and , with cravat untied , seated astride a stool , his full glass in his right hand , he hurled solemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote : -- `` Let the doors of the palace be thrown open ! 
Let every one be a member of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup . 
Let us drink . '' 
And turning to Madame Hucheloup , he added : -- `` Woman ancient and consecrated by use , draw near that I may contemplate thee ! '' 
And Joly exclaimed : -- `` Matelote and Gibelotte , dod ' t gib Grantaire anything more to drink . 
He has already devoured , since this bording , in wild prodigality , two francs and ninety-five centibes . '' 
And Grantaire began again : -- `` Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission , and putting them on the table in the guise of candles ? '' 
Bossuet , though very drunk , preserved his equanimity . 
He was seated on the sill of the open window , wetting his back in the falling rain , and gazing at his two friends . 
All at once , he heard a tumult behind him , hurried footsteps , cries of `` To arms ! '' 
He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis , at the end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , Enjolras passing , gun in hand , and Gavroche with his pistol , Feuilly with his sword , Courfeyrac with his sword , and Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss , Combeferre with his gun , Bahorel with his gun , and the whole armed and stormy rabble which was following them . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long . 
Bossuet improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his mouth , and shouted : -- `` Courfeyrac ! 
Courfeyrac ! 
Hohee ! '' 
Courfeyrac heard the shout , caught sight of Bossuet , and advanced a few paces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie , shouting : `` What do you want ? '' 
which crossed a `` Where are you going ? '' 
`` To make a barricade , '' replied Courfeyrac . 
`` Well , here ! 
This is a good place ! 
Make it here ! '' 
`` That 's true , Aigle , '' said Courfeyrac . 
And at a signal from Courfeyrac , the mob flung themselves into the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE The spot was , in fact , admirably adapted , the entrance to the street widened out , the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit . 
Corinthe created an obstacle , the Rue Mondetour was easily barricaded on the right and the left , no attack was possible except from the Rue Saint-Denis , that is to say , in front , and in full sight . 
Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal . 
Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob . 
There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight . 
In the space of a flash of lightning , in the rear , to right and left , shops , stables , area-doors , windows , blinds , attic skylights , shutters of every description were closed , from the ground floor to the roof . 
A terrified old woman fixed a mattress in front of her window on two clothes-poles for drying linen , in order to deaden the effect of musketry . 
The wine-shop alone remained open ; and that for a very good reason , that the mob had rushed into it . 
-- `` Ah my God ! 
Ah my God ! '' 
sighed Mame Hucheloup . 
Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac . 
Joly , who had placed himself at the window , exclaimed : -- `` Courfeyrac , you ought to have brought an umbrella . 
You will gatch gold . '' 
In the meantime , in the space of a few minutes , twenty iron bars had been wrenched from the grated front of the wine-shop , ten fathoms of street had been unpaved ; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in its passage , and overturned , the dray of a lime-dealer named Anceau ; this dray contained three barrels of lime , which they placed beneath the piles of paving-stones : Enjolras raised the cellar trap , and all the widow Hucheloup 's empty casks were used to flank the barrels of lime ; Feuilly , with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of fans , had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps of blocks of rough stone . 
Blocks which were improvised like the rest and procured no one knows where . 
The beams which served as props were torn from the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks . 
When Bossuet and Courfeyrac turned round , half the street was already barred with a rampart higher than a man . 
There is nothing like the hand of the populace for building everything that is built by demolishing . 
Matelote and Gibelotte had mingled with the workers . 
Gibelotte went and came loaded with rubbish . 
Her lassitude helped on the barricade . 
She served the barricade as she would have served wine , with a sleepy air . 
An omnibus with two white horses passed the end of the street . 
Bossuet strode over the paving-stones , ran to it , stopped the driver , made the passengers alight , offered his hand to `` the ladies , '' dismissed the conductor , and returned , leading the vehicle and the horses by the bridle . 
`` Omnibuses , '' said he , `` do not pass the Corinthe . 
Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum . '' 
An instant later , the horses were unharnessed and went off at their will , through the Rue Mondetour , and the omnibus lying on its side completed the bar across the street . 
Mame Hucheloup , quite upset , had taken refuge in the first story . 
Her eyes were vague , and stared without seeing anything , and she cried in a low tone . 
Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from her throat . 
`` The end of the world has come , '' she muttered . 
Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup 's fat , red , wrinkled neck , and said to Grantaire : `` My dear fellow , I have always regarded a woman 's neck as an infinitely delicate thing . '' 
But Grantaire attained to the highest regions of dithryamb . 
Matelote had mounted to the first floor once more , Grantaire seized her round her waist , and gave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window . 
`` Matelote is homely ! '' 
he cried : `` Matelote is of a dream of ugliness ! 
Matelote is a chimaera . 
This is the secret of her birth : a Gothic Pygmalion , who was making gargoyles for cathedrals , fell in love with one of them , the most horrible , one fine morning . 
He besought Love to give it life , and this produced Matelote . 
Look at her , citizens ! 
She has chromate-of-lead-colored hair , like Titian 's mistress , and she is a good girl . 
I guarantee that she will fight well . 
Every good girl contains a hero . 
As for Mother Hucheloup , she 's an old warrior . 
Look at her moustaches ! 
She inherited them from her husband . 
A hussar indeed ! 
She will fight too . 
These two alone will strike terror to the heart of the banlieue . 
Comrades , we shall overthrow the government as true as there are fifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formic acid ; however , that is a matter of perfect indifference to me . 
Gentlemen , my father always detested me because I could not understand mathematics . 
I understand only love and liberty . 
I am Grantaire , the good fellow . 
Having never had any money , I never acquired the habit of it , and the result is that I have never lacked it ; but , if I had been rich , there would have been no more poor people ! 
You would have seen ! 
Oh , if the kind hearts only had fat purses , how much better things would go ! 
I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild 's fortune ! 
How much good he would do ! 
Matelote , embrace me ! 
You are voluptuous and timid ! 
You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister , and lips which claim the kiss of a lover . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , you cask ! '' 
said Courfeyrac . 
Grantaire retorted : -- `` I am the capitoul -LSB- 52 -RSB- and the master of the floral games ! '' 
-LSB- 52 -RSB- Municipal officer of Toulouse . 
Enjolras , who was standing on the crest of the barricade , gun in hand , raised his beautiful , austere face . 
Enjolras , as the reader knows , had something of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition . 
He would have perished at Thermopylae with Leonidas , and burned at Drogheda with Cromwell . 
`` Grantaire , '' he shouted , `` go get rid of the fumes of your wine somewhere else than here . 
This is the place for enthusiasm , not for drunkenness . 
Do n't disgrace the barricade ! '' 
This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire . 
One would have said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face . 
He seemed to be rendered suddenly sober . 
He sat down , put his elbows on a table near the window , looked at Enjolras with indescribable gentleness , and said to him : -- `` Let me sleep here . '' 
`` Go and sleep somewhere else , '' cried Enjolras . 
But Grantaire , still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him , replied : -- `` Let me sleep here , -- until I die . '' 
Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes : -- `` Grantaire , you are incapable of believing , of thinking , of willing , of living , and of dying . '' 
Grantaire replied in a grave tone : -- `` You will see . '' 
He stammered a few more unintelligible words , then his head fell heavily on the table , and , as is the usual effect of the second period of inebriety , into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him , an instant later he had fallen asleep . 
AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP Bahorel , in ecstasies over the barricade , shouted : -- `` Here 's the street in its low-necked dress ! 
How well it looks ! '' 
Courfeyrac , as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent , sought to console the widowed proprietress . 
`` Mother Hucheloup , were n't you complaining the other day because you had had a notice served on you for infringing the law , because Gibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window ? '' 
`` Yes , my good Monsieur Courfeyrac . 
Ah ! 
good Heavens , are you going to put that table of mine in your horror , too ? 
And it was for the counterpane , and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the attic window into the street , that the government collected a fine of a hundred francs . 
If that is n't an abomination , what is ! '' 
`` Well , Mother Hucheloup , we are avenging you . '' 
Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit which she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account . 
She was satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman , who , having received a box on the ear from her husband , went to complain to her father , and cried for vengeance , saying : `` Father , you owe my husband affront for affront . '' 
The father asked : `` On which cheek did you receive the blow ? '' 
`` On the left cheek . '' 
The father slapped her right cheek and said : `` Now you are satisfied . 
Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter 's ears , and that I have accordingly boxed his wife 's . '' 
The rain had ceased . 
Recruits had arrived . 
Workmen had brought under their blouses a barrel of powder , a basket containing bottles of vitriol , two or three carnival torches , and a basket filled with fire-pots , `` left over from the King 's festival . '' 
This festival was very recent , having taken place on the 1st of May . 
It was said that these munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pepin . 
They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis , and all the lanterns in the surrounding streets , de Mondetour , du Cygne , des Precheurs , and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie . 
Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac directed everything . 
Two barricades were now in process of construction at once , both of them resting on the Corinthe house and forming a right angle ; the larger shut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the other closed the Rue Mondetour , on the side of the Rue de Cygne . 
This last barricade , which was very narrow , was constructed only of casks and paving-stones . 
There were about fifty workers on it ; thirty were armed with guns ; for , on their way , they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer 's shop . 
Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than this troop . 
One had a round-jacket , a cavalry sabre , and two holster-pistols , another was in his shirt-sleeves , with a round hat , and a powder-horn slung at his side , a third wore a plastron of nine sheets of gray paper and was armed with a saddler 's awl . 
There was one who was shouting : `` Let us exterminate them to the last man and die at the point of our bayonet . '' 
This man had no bayonet . 
Another spread out over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman , the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription in red worsted : Public Order . 
There were a great many guns bearing the numbers of the legions , few hats , no cravats , many bare arms , some pikes . 
Add to this , all ages , all sorts of faces , small , pale young men , and bronzed longshoremen . 
All were in haste ; and as they helped each other , they discussed the possible chances . 
That they would receive succor about three o'clock in the morning -- that they were sure of one regiment , that Paris would rise . 
Terrible sayings with which was mingled a sort of cordial joviality . 
One would have pronounced them brothers , but they did not know each other 's names . 
Great perils have this fine characteristic , that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers . 
A fire had been lighted in the kitchen , and there they were engaged in moulding into bullets , pewter mugs , spoons , forks , and all the brass table-ware of the establishment . 
In the midst of it all , they drank . 
Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables with glasses of wine . 
In the billiard-hall , Mame Hucheloup , Matelote , and Gibelotte , variously modified by terror , which had stupefied one , rendered another breathless , and roused the third , were tearing up old dish-cloths and making lint ; three insurgents were assisting them , three bushy-haired , jolly blades with beards and moustaches , who plucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble . 
The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Enjolras had observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue des Billettes , was at work on the smaller barricade and was making himself useful there . 
Gavroche was working on the larger one . 
As for the young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings , and who had inquired for M. Marius , he had disappeared at about the time when the omnibus had been overturned . 
Gavroche , completely carried away and radiant , had undertaken to get everything in readiness . 
He went , came , mounted , descended , re-mounted , whistled , and sparkled . 
He seemed to be there for the encouragement of all . 
Had he any incentive ? 
Yes , certainly , his poverty ; had he wings ? 
yes , certainly , his joy . 
Gavroche was a whirlwind . 
He was constantly visible , he was incessantly audible . 
He filled the air , as he was everywhere at once . 
He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity ; no halt was possible with him . 
The enormous barricade felt him on its haunches . 
He troubled the loungers , he excited the idle , he reanimated the weary , he grew impatient over the thoughtful , he inspired gayety in some , and breath in others , wrath in others , movement in all , now pricking a student , now biting an artisan ; he alighted , paused , flew off again , hovered over the tumult , and the effort , sprang from one party to another , murmuring and humming , and harassed the whole company ; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach . 
Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his little lungs . 
`` Courage ! 
more paving-stones ! 
more casks ! 
more machines ! 
Where are you now ? 
A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with ! 
Your barricade is very small . 
It must be carried up . 
Put everything on it , fling everything there , stick it all in . 
Break down the house . 
A barricade is Mother Gibou 's tea . 
Hullo , here 's a glass door . '' 
This elicited an exclamation from the workers . 
`` A glass door ? 
what do you expect us to do with a glass door , tubercle ? '' 
`` Hercules yourselves ! '' 
retorted Gavroche . 
`` A glass door is an excellent thing in a barricade . 
It does not prevent an attack , but it prevents the enemy taking it . 
So you 've never prigged apples over a wall where there were broken bottles ? 
A glass door cuts the corns of the National Guard when they try to mount on the barricade . 
Pardi ! 
glass is a treacherous thing . 
Well , you have n't a very wildly lively imagination , comrades . '' 
However , he was furious over his triggerless pistol . 
He went from one to another , demanding : `` A gun , I want a gun ! 
Why do n't you give me a gun ? '' 
`` Give you a gun ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` Come now ! '' 
said Gavroche , `` why not ? 
I had one in 1830 when we had a dispute with Charles X. '' Enjolras shrugged his shoulders . 
`` When there are enough for the men , we will give some to the children . '' 
Gavroche wheeled round haughtily , and answered : -- `` If you are killed before me , I shall take yours . '' 
`` Gamin ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the street created a diversion ! 
Gavroche shouted to him : -- `` Come with us , young fellow ! 
well now , do n't we do anything for this old country of ours ? '' 
The dandy fled . 
PREPARATIONS The journals of the day which said that that nearly impregnable structure , of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , as they call it , reached to the level of the first floor , were mistaken . 
The fact is , that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet . 
It was built in such a manner that the combatants could , at their will , either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale its crest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top of each other and arranged as steps in the interior . 
On the outside , the front of the barricade , composed of piles of paving-stones and casks bound together by beams and planks , which were entangled in the wheels of Anceau 's dray and of the overturned omnibus , had a bristling and inextricable aspect . 
An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been made between the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which was furthest from the wine-shop , so that an exit was possible at this point . 
The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with ropes , and a red flag , fastened to this pole , floated over the barricade . 
The little Mondetour barricade , hidden behind the wine-shop building , was not visible . 
The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt . 
Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other fragment of the Rue Mondetour which opens through the Rue des Precheurs an issue into the Halles , wishing , no doubt , to preserve a possible communication with the outside , and not entertaining much fear of an attack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue des Precheurs . 
With the exception of this issue which was left free , and which constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a branch and taking into account , also , the narrow cutting arranged on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the interior of the barricade , where the wine-shop formed a salient angle , presented an irregular square , closed on all sides . 
There existed an interval of twenty paces between the grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of the street , so that one might say that the barricade rested on these houses , all inhabited , but closed from top to bottom . 
All this work was performed without any hindrance , in less than an hour , and without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skin cap or a single bayonet make their appearance . 
The very bourgeois who still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a glance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie , caught sight of the barricade , and redoubled their pace . 
The two barricades being finished , and the flag run up , a table was dragged out of the wine-shop ; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table . 
Enjolras brought the square coffer , and Courfeyrac opened it . 
This coffer was filled with cartridges . 
When the mob saw the cartridges , a tremor ran through the bravest , and a momentary silence ensued . 
Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile . 
Each one received thirty cartridges . 
Many had powder , and set about making others with the bullets which they had run . 
As for the barrel of powder , it stood on a table on one side , near the door , and was held in reserve . 
The alarm beat which ran through all Paris , did not cease , but it had finally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they no longer paid any attention . 
This noise retreated at times , and again drew near , with melancholy undulations . 
They loaded the guns and carbines , all together , without haste , with solemn gravity . 
Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside the barricades , one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the second in the Rue des Precheurs , the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Then , the barricades having been built , the posts assigned , the guns loaded , the sentinels stationed , they waited , alone in those redoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer , surrounded by those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated , enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which was drawing on , in the midst of that silence through which something could be felt advancing , and which had about it something tragic and terrifying , isolated , armed , determined , and tranquil . 
WAITING During those hours of waiting , what did they do ? 
We must needs tell , since this is a matter of history . 
While the men made bullets and the women lint , while a large saucepan of melted brass and lead , destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a glowing brazier , while the sentinels watched , weapon in hand , on the barricade , while Enjolras , whom it was impossible to divert , kept an eye on the sentinels , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Feuilly , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and some others , sought each other out and united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their student life , and , in one corner of this wine-shop which had been converted into a casement , a couple of paces distant from the redoubt which they had built , with their carbines loaded and primed resting against the backs of their chairs , these fine young fellows , so close to a supreme hour , began to recite love verses . 
What verses ? 
These : -- Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie , Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux , Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux , Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age , Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans , Et que , dans notre humble et petit menage , Tout , meme l'hiver , nous etait printemps ? 
Beaux jours ! 
Manuel etait fier et sage , Paris s ` asseyait a de saints banquets , Foy lancait la foudre , et votre corsage Avait une epingle ou je me piquais . 
Tout vous contemplait . 
Avocat sans causes , Quand je vous menais au Prado diner , Vous etiez jolie au point que les roses Me faisaient l'effet de se retourner . 
Je les entendais dire : Est elle belle ! 
Comme elle sent bon ! 
Quels cheveux a flots ! 
Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile , Son bonnet charmant est a peine eclos . 
J'errais avec toi , pressant ton bras souple . 
Les passants crovaient que l'amour charme Avait marie , dans notre heureux couple , Le doux mois d'avril au beau mois de mai . 
Nous vivions caches , contents , porte close , Devorant l'amour , bon fruit defendu , Ma bouche n'avait pas dit une chose Que deja ton coeur avait repondu . 
La Sorbonne etait l'endroit bucolique Ou je t ` adorais du soir au matin . 
C'est ainsi qu'une ame amoureuse applique La carte du Tendre au pays Latin . 
O place Maubert ! 
o place Dauphine ! 
Quand , dans le taudis frais et printanier , Tu tirais ton bas sur ton jambe fine , Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier . 
J'ai fort lu Platon , mais rien ne m ` en reste ; Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais , Tu me demontrais la bonte celeste Avec une fleur que tu me donnais . 
Je t ` obeissais , tu m ' etais soumise ; O grenier dore ! 
te lacer ! 
te voir Aller et venir des l'aube en chemise , Mirant ton jeune front a ton vieux miroir . 
Et qui done pourrait perde la memoire De ces temps d'aurore et de firmament , De rubans , de fleurs , de gaze et de moire , Ou l'amour begaye un argot charmant ? 
Nos jardins etaient un pot de tulipe ; Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon ; Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe , Et je te donnais le tasse en japon . 
Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire ! 
Ton manchon brule , ton boa perdu ! 
Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare Qu'un soir pour souper nons avons vendu ! 
J'etais mendiant et toi charitable . 
Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds . 
Dante in folio nous servait de table Pour manger gaiment un cent de marrons . 
La premiere fois qu'en mon joyeux bouge Je pris un baiser a ton levre en feu , Quand tu t ` en allais decoiffee et rouge , Je restai tout pale et je crus en Dieu ! 
Te rappelles-tu nos bonheurs sans nombre , Et tous ces fichus changes en chiffons ? 
Oh que de soupirs , de nos coeurs pleins d'ombre , Se sont envoles dans les cieux profonds ! 
-LSB- 53 -RSB- -LSB- 53 -RSB- Do you remember our sweet life , when we were both so young , and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well dressed and in love ? 
When , by adding your age to my age , we could not count forty years between us , and when , in our humble and tiny household , everything was spring to us even in winter . 
Fair days ! 
Manuel was proud and wise , Paris sat at sacred banquets , Foy launched thunderbolts , and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself . 
Everything gazed upon you . 
A briefless lawyer , when I took you to the Prado to dine , you were so beautiful that the roses seemed to me to turn round , and I heard them say : Is she not beautiful ! 
How good she smells ! 
What billowing hair ! 
Beneath her mantle she hides a wing . 
Her charming bonnet is hardly unfolded . 
I wandered with thee , pressing thy supple arm . 
The passers-by thought that love bewitched had wedded , in our happy couple , the gentle month of April to the fair month of May . 
We lived concealed , content , with closed doors , devouring love , that sweet forbidden fruit . 
My mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart had already responded . 
The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored thee from eve till morn . 
'T is thus that an amorous soul applies the chart of the Tender to the Latin country . 
O Place Maubert ! 
O Place Dauphine ! 
When in the fresh spring-like hut thou didst draw thy stocking on thy delicate leg , I saw a star in the depths of the garret . 
I have read a great deal of Plato , but nothing of it remains by me ; better than Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me celestial goodness with a flower which thou gavest to me , I obeyed thee , thou didst submit to me ; oh gilded garret ! 
to lace thee ! 
to behold thee going and coming from dawn in thy chemise , gazing at thy young brow in thine ancient mirror ! 
And who , then , would forego the memory of those days of aurora and the firmament , of flowers , of gauze and of moire , when love stammers a charming slang ? 
Our gardens consisted of a pot of tulips ; thou didst mask the window with thy petticoat ; I took the earthenware bowl and I gave thee the Japanese cup . 
And those great misfortunes which made us laugh ! 
Thy cuff scorched , thy boa lost ! 
And that dear portrait of the divine Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup ! 
I was a beggar and thou wert charitable . 
I kissed thy fresh round arms in haste . 
A folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a centime 's worth of chestnuts . 
The first time that , in my joyous den , I snatched a kiss from thy fiery lip , when thou wentest forth , dishevelled and blushing , I turned deathly pale and I believed in God . 
Dost thou recall our innumerable joys , and all those fichus changed to rags ? 
Oh ! 
what sighs from our hearts full of gloom fluttered forth to the heavenly depths ! 
The hour , the spot , these souvenirs of youth recalled , a few stars which began to twinkle in the sky , the funeral repose of those deserted streets , the imminence of the inexorable adventure , which was in preparation , gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low tone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire , who , as we have said , was a gentle poet . 
In the meantime , a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade , and in the large one , one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on Shrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks , on their way to la Courtille . 
These torches , as the reader has seen , came from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed on three sides to shelter it from the wind , and disposed in such a fashion that all the light fell on the flag . 
The street and the barricade remained sunk in gloom , and nothing was to be seen except the red flag formidably illuminated as by an enormous dark-lantern . 
This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag , with an indescribable and terrible purple . 
THE MAN RECRUITED IN THE RUE DES BILLETTES Night was fully come , nothing made its appearance . 
All that they heard was confused noises , and at intervals , fusillades ; but these were rare , badly sustained and distant . 
This respite , which was thus prolonged , was a sign that the Government was taking its time , and collecting its forces . 
These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand . 
Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong souls on the threshold of redoubtable events . 
He went in search of Gavroche , who had set to making cartridges in the tap-room , by the dubious light of two candles placed on the counter by way of precaution , on account of the powder which was scattered on the tables . 
These two candles cast no gleam outside . 
The insurgents had , moreover , taken pains not to have any light in the upper stories . 
Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment , but not precisely with his cartridges . 
The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered the tap-room and had seated himself at the table which was the least lighted . 
A musket of large model had fallen to his share , and he held it between his legs . 
Gavroche , who had been , up to that moment , distracted by a hundred `` amusing '' things , had not even seen this man . 
When he entered , Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes , admiring his gun ; then , all at once , when the man was seated , the street urchin sprang to his feet . 
Any one who had spied upon that man up to that moment , would have seen that he was observing everything in the barricade and in the band of insurgents , with singular attention ; but , from the moment when he had entered this room , he had fallen into a sort of brown study , and no longer seemed to see anything that was going on . 
The gamin approached this pensive personage , and began to step around him on tiptoe , as one walks in the vicinity of a person whom one is afraid of waking . 
At the same time , over his childish countenance which was , at once so impudent and so serious , so giddy and so profound , so gay and so heart-breaking , passed all those grimaces of an old man which signify : Ah bah ! 
impossible ! 
My sight is bad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
can this be ? 
no , it is not ! 
but yes ! 
why , no ! 
etc. . 
Gavroche balanced on his heels , clenched both fists in his pockets , moved his neck around like a bird , expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity of his lower lip . 
He was astounded , uncertain , incredulous , convinced , dazzled . 
He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart , discovering a Venus among the blowsy females , and the air of an amateur recognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs . 
His whole being was at work , the instinct which scents out , and the intelligence which combines . 
It was evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche 's life . 
It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras accosted him . 
`` You are small , '' said Enjolras , `` you will not be seen . 
Go out of the barricade , slip along close to the houses , skirmish about a bit in the streets , and come back and tell me what is going on . '' 
Gavroche raised himself on his haunches . 
`` So the little chaps are good for something ! 
that 's very lucky ! 
I 'll go ! 
In the meanwhile , trust to the little fellows , and distrust the big ones . '' 
And Gavroche , raising his head and lowering his voice , added , as he indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes : `` Do you see that big fellow there ? '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He 's a police spy . '' 
`` Are you sure of it ? '' 
`` It is n't two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port Royal , where I was taking the air , by my ear . '' 
Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand . 
The man left the room , and returned almost immediately , accompanied by three others . 
The four men , four porters with broad shoulders , went and placed themselves without doing anything to attract his attention , behind the table on which the man of the Rue des Billettes was leaning with his elbows . 
They were evidently ready to hurl themselves upon him . 
Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him : -- `` Who are you ? '' 
At this abrupt query , the man started . 
He plunged his gaze deep into Enjolras ' clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter 's meaning . 
He smiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful , more energetic , and more resolute could be seen in the world , and replied with haughty gravity : -- `` I see what it is . 
Well , yes ! '' 
`` You are a police spy ? '' 
`` I am an agent of the authorities . '' 
`` And your name ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Enjolras made a sign to the four men . 
In the twinkling of an eye , before Javert had time to turn round , he was collared , thrown down , pinioned and searched . 
They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of glass , and bearing on one side the arms of France , engraved , and with this motto : Supervision and vigilance , and on the other this note : `` JAVERT , inspector of police , aged fifty-two , '' and the signature of the Prefect of Police of that day , M. Gisquet . 
Besides this , he had his watch and his purse , which contained several gold pieces . 
They left him his purse and his watch . 
Under the watch , at the bottom of his fob , they felt and seized a paper in an envelope , which Enjolras unfolded , and on which he read these five lines , written in the very hand of the Prefect of Police : -- `` As soon as his political mission is accomplished , Inspector Javert will make sure , by special supervision , whether it is true that the malefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine , near the Jena bridge . '' 
The search ended , they lifted Javert to his feet , bound his arms behind his back , and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name . 
Gavroche , who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved of everything with a silent toss of his head , stepped up to Javert and said to him : -- `` It 's the mouse who has caught the cat . '' 
All this was so rapidly executed , that it was all over when those about the wine-shop noticed it . 
Javert had not uttered a single cry . 
At the sight of Javert bound to the post , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Combeferre , and the men scattered over the two barricades came running up . 
Javert , with his back to the post , and so surrounded with ropes that he could not make a movement , raised his head with the intrepid serenity of the man who has never lied . 
`` He is a police spy , '' said Enjolras . 
And turning to Javert : `` You will be shot ten minutes before the barricade is taken . '' 
Javert replied in his most imperious tone : -- `` Why not at once ? '' 
`` We are saving our powder . '' 
`` Then finish the business with a blow from a knife . '' 
`` Spy , '' said the handsome Enjolras , `` we are judges and not assassins . '' 
Then he called Gavroche : -- `` Here you ! 
go about your business ! 
Do what I told you ! '' 
`` I 'm going ! '' 
cried Gavroche . 
And halting as he was on the point of setting out : -- `` By the way , you will give me his gun ! '' 
and he added : `` I leave you the musician , but I want the clarionet . '' 
The gamin made the military salute and passed gayly through the opening in the large barricade . 
MANY INTERROGATION POINTS WITH REGARD TO A CERTAIN LE CABUC WHOSE NAME MAY NOT HAVE BEEN LE CABUC The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete , the reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a revolutionary birth , which contain convulsion mingled with effort , in their exact and real relief , were we to omit , in the sketch here outlined , an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurred almost immediately after Gavroche 's departure . 
Mobs , as the reader knows , are like a snowball , and collect as they roll along , a throng of tumultuous men . 
These men do not ask each other whence they come . 
Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac , there had been a person wearing the jacket of a street porter , which was very threadbare on the shoulders , who gesticulated and vociferated , and who had the look of a drunken savage . 
This man , whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc , and who was , moreover , an utter stranger to those who pretended to know him , was very drunk , or assumed the appearance of being so , and had seated himself with several others at a table which they had dragged outside of the wine-shop . 
This Cabuc , while making those who vied with him drunk seemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house at the extremity of the barricade , whose five stories commanded the whole street and faced the Rue Saint-Denis . 
All at once he exclaimed : -- `` Do you know , comrades , it is from that house yonder that we must fire . 
When we are at the windows , the deuce is in it if any one can advance into the street ! '' 
`` Yes , but the house is closed , '' said one of the drinkers . 
`` Let us knock ! '' 
`` They will not open . '' 
`` Let us break in the door ! '' 
Le Cabuc runs to the door , which had a very massive knocker , and knocks . 
The door opens not . 
He strikes a second blow . 
No one answers . 
A third stroke . 
The same silence . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
shouts Cabuc . 
Nothing stirs . 
Then he seizes a gun and begins to batter the door with the butt end . 
It was an ancient alley door , low , vaulted , narrow , solid , entirely of oak , lined on the inside with a sheet of iron and iron stays , a genuine prison postern . 
The blows from the butt end of the gun made the house tremble , but did not shake the door . 
Nevertheless , it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed , for a tiny , square window was finally seen to open on the third story , and at this aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired old man , who was the porter , and who held a candle . 
The man who was knocking paused . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said the porter , `` what do you want ? '' 
`` Open ! '' 
said Cabuc . 
`` That can not be , gentlemen . '' 
`` Open , nevertheless . '' 
`` Impossible , gentlemen . '' 
Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter ; but as he was below , and as it was very dark , the porter did not see him . 
`` Will you open , yes or no ? '' 
`` No , gentlemen . '' 
`` Do you say no ? '' 
`` I say no , my goo -- '' The porter did not finish . 
The shot was fired ; the ball entered under his chin and came out at the nape of his neck , after traversing the jugular vein . 
The old man fell back without a sigh . 
The candle fell and was extinguished , and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless head lying on the sill of the small window , and a little whitish smoke which floated off towards the roof . 
`` There ! '' 
said Le Cabuc , dropping the butt end of his gun to the pavement . 
He had hardly uttered this word , when he felt a hand laid on his shoulder with the weight of an eagle 's talon , and he heard a voice saying to him : -- `` On your knees . '' 
The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras ' cold , white face . 
Enjolras held a pistol in his hand . 
He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge . 
He had seized Cabuc 's collar , blouse , shirt , and suspender with his left hand . 
`` On your knees ! '' 
he repeated . 
And , with an imperious motion , the frail young man of twenty years bent the thickset and sturdy porter like a reed , and brought him to his knees in the mire . 
Le Cabuc attempted to resist , but he seemed to have been seized by a superhuman hand . 
Enjolras , pale , with bare neck and dishevelled hair , and his woman 's face , had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis . 
His dilated nostrils , his downcast eyes , gave to his implacable Greek profile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which , as the ancient world viewed the matter , befit Justice . 
The whole barricade hastened up , then all ranged themselves in a circle at a distance , feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the presence of the thing which they were about to behold . 
Le Cabuc , vanquished , no longer tried to struggle , and trembled in every limb . 
Enjolras released him and drew out his watch . 
`` Collect yourself , '' said he . 
`` Think or pray . 
You have one minute . '' 
`` Mercy ! '' 
murmured the murderer ; then he dropped his head and stammered a few inarticulate oaths . 
Enjolras never took his eyes off of him : he allowed a minute to pass , then he replaced his watch in his fob . 
That done , he grasped Le Cabuc by the hair , as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and shrieked , and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear . 
Many of those intrepid men , who had so tranquilly entered upon the most terrible of adventures , turned aside their heads . 
An explosion was heard , the assassin fell to the pavement face downwards . 
Enjolras straightened himself up , and cast a convinced and severe glance around him . 
Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said : -- `` Throw that outside . '' 
Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch , which was still agitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled , and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondetour . 
Enjolras was thoughtful . 
It is impossible to say what grandiose shadows slowly spread over his redoubtable serenity . 
All at once he raised his voice . 
A silence fell upon them . 
`` Citizens , '' said Enjolras , `` what that man did is frightful , what I have done is horrible . 
He killed , therefore I killed him . 
I had to do it , because insurrection must have its discipline . 
Assassination is even more of a crime here than elsewhere ; we are under the eyes of the Revolution , we are the priests of the Republic , we are the victims of duty , and must not be possible to slander our combat . 
I have , therefore , tried that man , and condemned him to death . 
As for myself , constrained as I am to do what I have done , and yet abhorring it , I have judged myself also , and you shall soon see to what I have condemned myself . '' 
Those who listened to him shuddered . 
`` We will share thy fate , '' cried Combeferre . 
`` So be it , '' replied Enjolras . 
`` One word more . 
In executing this man , I have obeyed necessity ; but necessity is a monster of the old world , necessity 's name is Fatality . 
Now , the law of progress is , that monsters shall disappear before the angels , and that Fatality shall vanish before Fraternity . 
It is a bad moment to pronounce the word love . 
No matter , I do pronounce it . 
And I glorify it . 
Love , the future is thine . 
Death , I make use of thee , but I hate thee . 
Citizens , in the future there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts ; neither ferocious ignorance , nor bloody retaliation . 
As there will be no more Satan , there will be no more Michael . 
