They renounce the world , towns , sensualities , pleasures , vanities , pride , interests . 
They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen . 
Not one of them possesses in his own right anything whatever . 
On entering there , each one who was rich makes himself poor . 
What he has , he gives to all . 
He who was what is called noble , a gentleman and a lord , is the equal of him who was a peasant . 
The cell is identical for all . 
All undergo the same tonsure , wear the same frock , eat the same black bread , sleep on the same straw , die on the same ashes . 
The same sack on their backs , the same rope around their loins . 
If the decision has been to go barefoot , all go barefoot . 
There may be a prince among them ; that prince is the same shadow as the rest . 
No titles . 
Even family names have disappeared . 
They bear only first names . 
All are bowed beneath the equality of baptismal names . 
They have dissolved the carnal family , and constituted in their community a spiritual family . 
They have no other relatives than all men . 
They succor the poor , they care for the sick . 
They elect those whom they obey . 
They call each other `` my brother . '' 
You stop me and exclaim , `` But that is the ideal convent ! '' 
It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent , that I should take notice of it . 
Thence it results that , in the preceding book , I have spoken of a convent with respectful accents . 
The Middle Ages cast aside , Asia cast aside , the historical and political question held in reserve , from the purely philosophical point of view , outside the requirements of militant policy , on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely a voluntary matter and shall contain only consenting parties , I shall always consider a cloistered community with a certain attentive , and , in some respects , a deferential gravity . 
Wherever there is a community , there is a commune ; where there is a commune , there is right . 
The monastery is the product of the formula : Equality , Fraternity . 
Oh ! 
how grand is liberty ! 
And what a splendid transfiguration ! 
Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into a republic . 
Let us continue . 
But these men , or these women who are behind these four walls . 
They dress themselves in coarse woollen , they are equals , they call each other brothers , that is well ; but they do something else ? 
Yes . 
What ? 
They gaze on the darkness , they kneel , and they clasp their hands . 
What does this signify ? 
PRAYER They pray . 
To whom ? 
To God . 
To pray to God , -- what is the meaning of these words ? 
Is there an infinite beyond us ? 
Is that infinite there , inherent , permanent ; necessarily substantial , since it is infinite ; and because , if it lacked matter it would be bounded ; necessarily intelligent , since it is infinite , and because , if it lacked intelligence , it would end there ? 
Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence , while we can attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence ? 
In other terms , is it not the absolute , of which we are only the relative ? 
At the same time that there is an infinite without us , is there not an infinite within us ? 
Are not these two infinites -LRB- what an alarming plural ! -RRB- 
superposed , the one upon the other ? 
Is not this second infinite , so to speak , subjacent to the first ? 
Is it not the latter 's mirror , reflection , echo , an abyss which is concentric with another abyss ? 
Is this second infinity intelligent also ? 
Does it think ? 
Does it love ? 
Does it will ? 
If these two infinities are intelligent , each of them has a will principle , and there is an I in the upper infinity as there is an I in the lower infinity . 
The I below is the soul ; the I on high is God . 
To place the infinity here below in contact , by the medium of thought , with the infinity on high , is called praying . 
Let us take nothing from the human mind ; to suppress is bad . 
We must reform and transform . 
Certain faculties in man are directed towards the Unknown ; thought , revery , prayer . 
The Unknown is an ocean . 
What is conscience ? 
It is the compass of the Unknown . 
Thought , revery , prayer , -- these are great and mysterious radiations . 
Let us respect them . 
Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul ? 
Into the shadow ; that is to say , to the light . 
The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of humanity . 
Close to the right of the man , beside it , at the least , there exists the right of the soul . 
To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite , such is the law . 
Let us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of creation , and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars . 
We have a duty to labor over the human soul , to defend the mystery against the miracle , to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd , to admit , as an inexplicable fact , only what is necessary , to purify belief , to remove superstitions from above religion ; to clear God of caterpillars . 
THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER With regard to the modes of prayer , all are good , provided that they are sincere . 
Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite . 
There is , as we know , a philosophy which denies the infinite . 
There is also a philosophy , pathologically classified , which denies the sun ; this philosophy is called blindness . 
To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth , is a fine blind man 's self-sufficiency . 
The curious thing is the haughty , superior , and compassionate airs which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which beholds God . 
One fancies he hears a mole crying , `` I pity them with their sun ! '' 
There are , as we know , powerful and illustrious atheists . 
At bottom , led back to the truth by their very force , they are not absolutely sure that they are atheists ; it is with them only a question of definition , and in any case , if they do not believe in God , being great minds , they prove God . 
We salute them as philosophers , while inexorably denouncing their philosophy . 
Let us go on . 
The remarkable thing about it is , also , their facility in paying themselves off with words . 
A metaphysical school of the North , impregnated to some extent with fog , has fancied that it has worked a revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with the word Will . 
To say : `` the plant wills , '' instead of : `` the plant grows '' : this would be fecund in results , indeed , if we were to add : `` the universe wills . '' 
Why ? 
Because it would come to this : the plant wills , therefore it has an _ I _ ; the universe wills , therefore it has a God . 
As for us , who , however , in contradistinction to this school , reject nothing a priori , a will in the plant , accepted by this school , appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it . 
To deny the will of the infinite , that is to say , God , is impossible on any other conditions than a denial of the infinite . 
We have demonstrated this . 
The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism . 
Everything becomes `` a mental conception . '' 
With nihilism , no discussion is possible ; for the nihilist logic doubts the existence of its interlocutor , and is not quite sure that it exists itself . 
From its point of view , it is possible that it may be for itself , only `` a mental conception . '' 
Only , it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in the lump , simply by the utterance of the word , mind . 
In short , no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all end in the monosyllable , No . 
To No there is only one reply , Yes . 
Nihilism has no point . 
There is no such thing as nothingness . 
Zero does not exist . 
Everything is something . 
Nothing is nothing . 
Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread . 
Even to see and to show does not suffice . 
Philosophy should be an energy ; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition of man . 
Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius ; in other words , the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man of felicity . 
Eden should be changed into a Lyceum . 
Science should be a cordial . 
To enjoy , -- what a sad aim , and what a paltry ambition ! 
The brute enjoys . 
To offer thought to the thirst of men , to give them all as an elixir the notion of God , to make conscience and science fraternize in them , to render them just by this mysterious confrontation ; such is the function of real philosophy . 
Morality is a blossoming out of truths . 
Contemplation leads to action . 
The absolute should be practicable . 
It is necessary that the ideal should be breathable , drinkable , and eatable to the human mind . 
It is the ideal which has the right to say : Take , this is my body , this is my blood . 
Wisdom is a holy communion . 
It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying , and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion . 
Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at its ease , without any other result than that of being convenient to curiosity . 
For our part , adjourning the development of our thought to another occasion , we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither understand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end , without those two forces which are their two motors : faith and love . 
Progress is the goal , the ideal is the type . 
What is this ideal ? 
It is God . 
Ideal , absolute , perfection , infinity : identical words . 
PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME History and philosophy have eternal duties , which are , at the same time , simple duties ; to combat Caiphas the High-priest , Draco the Lawgiver , Trimalcion the Legislator , Tiberius the Emperor ; this is clear , direct , and limpid , and offers no obscurity . 
But the right to live apart , even with its inconveniences and its abuses , insists on being stated and taken into account . 
Cenobitism is a human problem . 
When one speaks of convents , those abodes of error , but of innocence , of aberration but of good-will , of ignorance but of devotion , of torture but of martyrdom , it always becomes necessary to say either yes or no . 
A convent is a contradiction . 
Its object , salvation ; its means thereto , sacrifice . 
The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme abnegation . 
To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of monasticism . 
In the cloister , one suffers in order to enjoy . 
One draws a bill of exchange on death . 
One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light . 
In the cloister , hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise . 
The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity . 
It does not seem to us , that on such a subject mockery is permissible . 
All about it is serious , the good as well as the bad . 
The just man frowns , but never smiles with a malicious sneer . 
We understand wrath , but not malice . 
FAITH , LAW A few words more . 
We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues , we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal ; but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man . 
We salute the man who kneels . 
A faith ; this is a necessity for man . 
Woe to him who believes nothing . 
One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed . 
There is visible labor and invisible labor . 
To contemplate is to labor , to think is to act . 
Folded arms toil , clasped hands work . 
A gaze fixed on heaven is a work . 
Thales remained motionless for four years . 
He founded philosophy . 
In our opinion , cenobites are not lazy men , and recluses are not idlers . 
To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing . 
Without invalidating anything that we have just said , we believe that a perpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living . 
On this point , the priest and the philosopher agree . 
We must die . 
The Abbe de la Trappe replies to Horace . 
To mingle with one 's life a certain presence of the sepulchre , -- this is the law of the sage ; and it is the law of the ascetic . 
In this respect , the ascetic and the sage converge . 
There is a material growth ; we admit it . 
There is a moral grandeur ; we hold to that . 
Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say : -- `` What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery ? 
What purpose do they serve ? 
What do they do ? '' 
Alas ! 
In the presence of the darkness which environs us , and which awaits us , in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of us , we reply : `` There is probably no work more divine than that performed by these souls . '' 
And we add : `` There is probably no work which is more useful . '' 
There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never pray at all . 
In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that is mingled with prayer . 
Leibnitz praying is grand , Voltaire adoring is fine . 
Deo erexit Voltaire . 
We are for religion as against religions . 
We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons , and the sublimity of prayer . 
Moreover , at this minute which we are now traversing , -- a minute which will not , fortunately , leave its impress on the nineteenth century , -- at this hour , when so many men have low brows and souls but little elevated , among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment , and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter , whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us . 
The monastery is a renunciation . 
Sacrifice wrongly directed is still sacrifice . 
To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its own . 
Taken by itself , and ideally , and in order to examine the truth on all sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted , the monastery , the female convent in particular , -- for in our century it is woman who suffers the most , and in this exile of the cloister there is something of protestation , -- the female convent has incontestably a certain majesty . 
This cloistered existence which is so austere , so depressing , a few of whose features we have just traced , is not life , for it is not liberty ; it is not the tomb , for it is not plenitude ; it is the strange place whence one beholds , as from the crest of a lofty mountain , on one side the abyss where we are , on the other , the abyss whither we shall go ; it is the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds , illuminated and obscured by both at the same time , where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death ; it is the half obscurity of the tomb . 
We , who do not believe what these women believe , but who , like them , live by faith , -- we have never been able to think without a sort of tender and religious terror , without a sort of pity , that is full of envy , of those devoted , trembling and trusting creatures , of these humble and august souls , who dare to dwell on the very brink of the mystery , waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which is not yet open , turned towards the light which one can not see , possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is , aspiring towards the gulf , and the unknown , their eyes fixed motionless on the darkness , kneeling , bewildered , stupefied , shuddering , half lifted , at times , by the deep breaths of eternity . 
BOOK EIGHTH . 
-- CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT It was into this house that Jean Valjean had , as Fauchelevent expressed it , `` fallen from the sky . '' 
He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue Polonceau . 
That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of the night , was the nuns chanting matins ; that hall , of which he had caught a glimpse in the gloom , was the chapel . 
That phantom which he had seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was making reparation ; that bell , the sound of which had so strangely surprised him , was the gardener 's bell attached to the knee of Father Fauchelevent . 
Cosette once put to bed , Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had , as we have already seen , supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a good , crackling fire ; then , the only bed in the hut being occupied by Cosette , each threw himself on a truss of straw . 
Before he shut his eyes , Jean Valjean said : `` I must remain here henceforth . '' 
This remark trotted through Fauchelevent 's head all night long . 
To tell the truth , neither of them slept . 
Jean Valjean , feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his scent , understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to Paris . 
Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded him in this cloister . 
Jean Valjean had , henceforth , but one thought , -- to remain there . 
Now , for an unfortunate man in his position , this convent was both the safest and the most dangerous of places ; the most dangerous , because , as no men might enter there , if he were discovered , it was a flagrant offence , and Jean Valjean would find but one step intervening between the convent and prison ; the safest , because , if he could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there , who would ever seek him in such a place ? 
To dwell in an impossible place was safety . 
On his side , Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains . 
He began by declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter . 
How had M. Madeleine got there , when the walls were what they were ? 
Cloister walls are not to be stepped over . 
How did he get there with a child ? 
One can not scale a perpendicular wall with a child in one 's arms . 
Who was that child ? 
Where did they both come from ? 
Since Fauchelevent had lived in the convent , he had heard nothing of M. sur M. , and he knew nothing of what had taken place there . 
Father Madeleine had an air which discouraged questions ; and besides , Fauchelevent said to himself : `` One does not question a saint . '' 
M. Madeleine had preserved all his prestige in Fauchelevent 's eyes . 
Only , from some words which Jean Valjean had let fall , the gardener thought he could draw the inference that M. Madeleine had probably become bankrupt through the hard times , and that he was pursued by his creditors ; or that he had compromised himself in some political affair , and was in hiding ; which last did not displease Fauchelevent , who , like many of our peasants of the North , had an old fund of Bonapartism about him . 
While in hiding , M. Madeleine had selected the convent as a refuge , and it was quite simple that he should wish to remain there . 
But the inexplicable point , to which Fauchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain , was that M. Madeleine should be there , and that he should have that little girl with him . 
Fauchelevent saw them , touched them , spoke to them , and still did not believe it possible . 
The incomprehensible had just made its entrance into Fauchelevent 's hut . 
Fauchelevent groped about amid conjectures , and could see nothing clearly but this : `` M. Madeleine saved my life . '' 
This certainty alone was sufficient and decided his course . 
He said to himself : `` It is my turn now . '' 
He added in his conscience : `` M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it was a question of thrusting himself under the cart for the purpose of dragging me out . '' 
He made up his mind to save M. Madeleine . 
Nevertheless , he put many questions to himself and made himself divers replies : `` After what he did for me , would I save him if he were a thief ? 
Just the same . 
If he were an assassin , would I save him ? 
Just the same . 
Since he is a saint , shall I save him ? 
Just the same . '' 
But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent ! 
Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical undertaking ; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than his self-devotion , his good will , and a little of that old rustic cunning , on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generous enterprise , undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister , and the steep escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
Father Fauchelevent was an old man who had been an egoist all his life , and who , towards the end of his days , halt , infirm , with no interest left to him in the world , found it sweet to be grateful , and perceiving a generous action to be performed , flung himself upon it like a man , who at the moment when he is dying , should find close to his hand a glass of good wine which he had never tasted , and should swallow it with avidity . 
We may add , that the air which he had breathed for many years in this convent had destroyed all personality in him , and had ended by rendering a good action of some kind absolutely necessary to him . 
So he took his resolve : to devote himself to M. Madeleine . 
We have just called him a poor peasant of Picardy . 
That description is just , but incomplete . 
At the point of this story which we have now reached , a little of Father Fauchelevent 's physiology becomes useful . 
He was a peasant , but he had been a notary , which added trickery to his cunning , and penetration to his ingenuousness . 
Having , through various causes , failed in his business , he had descended to the calling of a carter and a laborer . 
But , in spite of oaths and lashings , which horses seem to require , something of the notary had lingered in him . 
He had some natural wit ; he talked good grammar ; he conversed , which is a rare thing in a village ; and the other peasants said of him : `` He talks almost like a gentleman with a hat . '' 
Fauchelevent belonged , in fact , to that species , which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last century qualified as demi-bourgeois , demi-lout , and which the metaphors showered by the chateau upon the thatched cottage ticketed in the pigeon-hole of the plebeian : rather rustic , rather citified ; pepper and salt . 
Fauchelevent , though sorely tried and harshly used by fate , worn out , a sort of poor , threadbare old soul , was , nevertheless , an impulsive man , and extremely spontaneous in his actions ; a precious quality which prevents one from ever being wicked . 
His defects and his vices , for he had some , were all superficial ; in short , his physiognomy was of the kind which succeeds with an observer . 
His aged face had none of those disagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead , which signify malice or stupidity . 
At daybreak , Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes , after having done an enormous deal of thinking , and beheld M. Madeleine seated on his truss of straw , and watching Cosette 's slumbers . 
Fauchelevent sat up and said : -- `` Now that you are here , how are you going to contrive to enter ? '' 
This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from his revery . 
The two men took counsel together . 
`` In the first place , '' ' said Fauchelevent , `` you will begin by not setting foot outside of this chamber , either you or the child . 
One step in the garden and we are done for . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` Monsieur Madeleine , '' resumed Fauchelevent , `` you have arrived at a very auspicious moment , I mean to say a very inauspicious moment ; one of the ladies is very ill . 
This will prevent them from looking much in our direction . 
It seems that she is dying . 
The prayers of the forty hours are being said . 
The whole community is in confusion . 
That occupies them . 
The one who is on the point of departure is a saint . 
In fact , we are all saints here ; all the difference between them and me is that they say ` our cell , ' and that I say ` my cabin . ' 
The prayers for the dying are to be said , and then the prayers for the dead . 
We shall be at peace here for to-day ; but I will not answer for to-morrow . '' 
`` Still , '' observed Jean Valjean , `` this cottage is in the niche of the wall , it is hidden by a sort of ruin , there are trees , it is not visible from the convent . '' 
`` And I add that the nuns never come near it . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
The interrogation mark which accentuated this `` well '' signified : `` it seems to me that one may remain concealed here ? '' 
It was to this interrogation point that Fauchelevent responded : -- `` There are the little girls . '' 
`` What little girls ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he had uttered , a bell emitted one stroke . 
`` The nun is dead , '' said he . 
`` There is the knell . '' 
And he made a sign to Jean Valjean to listen . 
The bell struck a second time . 
`` It is the knell , Monsieur Madeleine . 
The bell will continue to strike once a minute for twenty-four hours , until the body is taken from the church . 
-- You see , they play . 
At recreation hours it suffices to have a ball roll aside , to send them all hither , in spite of prohibitions , to hunt and rummage for it all about here . 
Those cherubs are devils . '' 
`` Who ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
`` The little girls . 
You would be very quickly discovered . 
They would shriek : ` Oh ! 
a man ! ' 
There is no danger to-day . 
There will be no recreation hour . 
The day will be entirely devoted to prayers . 
You hear the bell . 
As I told you , a stroke each minute . 
It is the death knell . '' 
`` I understand , Father Fauchelevent . 
There are pupils . '' 
And Jean Valjean thought to himself : -- `` Here is Cosette 's education already provided . '' 
Fauchelevent exclaimed : -- `` Pardine ! 
There are little girls indeed ! 
And they would bawl around you ! 
And they would rush off ! 
To be a man here is to have the plague . 
You see how they fasten a bell to my paw as though I were a wild beast . '' 
Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought . 
-- `` This convent would be our salvation , '' he murmured . 
Then he raised his voice : -- `` Yes , the difficulty is to remain here . '' 
`` No , '' said Fauchelevent , `` the difficulty is to get out . '' 
Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart . 
`` To get out ! '' 
`` Yes , Monsieur Madeleine . 
In order to return here it is first necessary to get out . '' 
And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded , Fauchelevent went on : -- `` You must not be found here in this fashion . 
Whence come you ? 
For me , you fall from heaven , because I know you ; but the nuns require one to enter by the door . '' 
All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` they are ringing up the vocal mothers . 
They are going to the chapter . 
They always hold a chapter when any one dies . 
She died at daybreak . 
People generally do die at daybreak . 
But can not you get out by the way in which you entered ? 
Come , I do not ask for the sake of questioning you , but how did you get in ? '' 
Jean Valjean turned pale ; the very thought of descending again into that terrible street made him shudder . 
You make your way out of a forest filled with tigers , and once out of it , imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to return thither ! 
Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that quarter , agents on the watch , sentinels everywhere , frightful fists extended towards his collar , Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
said he . 
`` Father Fauchelevent , say that I fell from the sky . '' 
`` But I believe it , I believe it , '' retorted Fauchelevent . 
`` You have no need to tell me that . 
The good God must have taken you in his hand for the purpose of getting a good look at you close to , and then dropped you . 
Only , he meant to place you in a man 's convent ; he made a mistake . 
Come , there goes another peal , that is to order the porter to go and inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a corpse . 
All that is the ceremony of dying . 
These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit . 
A doctor is a man who does not believe in anything . 
He lifts the veil . 
Sometimes he lifts something else too . 
How quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time ! 
What is the matter ? 
Your little one is still asleep . 
What is her name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
`` She is your daughter ? 
You are her grandfather , that is ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It will be easy enough for her to get out of here . 
I have my service door which opens on the courtyard . 
I knock . 
The porter opens ; I have my vintage basket on my back , the child is in it , I go out . 
Father Fauchelevent goes out with his basket -- that is perfectly natural . 
You will tell the child to keep very quiet . 
She will be under the cover . 
I will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend , a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert , who is deaf , and who has a little bed . 
I will shout in the fruit-seller 's ear , that she is a niece of mine , and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow . 
Then the little one will re-enter with you ; for I will contrive to have you re-enter . 
It must be done . 
But how will you manage to get out ? '' 
Jean Valjean shook his head . 
`` No one must see me , the whole point lies there , Father Fauchelevent . 
Find some means of getting me out in a basket , under cover , like Cosette . '' 
Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of his left hand , a sign of serious embarrassment . 
A third peal created a diversion . 
`` That is the dead-doctor taking his departure , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` He has taken a look and said : ` She is dead , that is well . ' 
When the doctor has signed the passport for paradise , the undertaker 's company sends a coffin . 
If it is a mother , the mothers lay her out ; if she is a sister , the sisters lay her out . 
After which , I nail her up . 
That forms a part of my gardener 's duty . 
A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger . 
She is placed in a lower hall of the church which communicates with the street , and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead . 
I do n't count the undertaker 's men and myself as men . 
It is in that hall that I nail up the coffin . 
The undertaker 's men come and get it , and whip up , coachman ! 
that 's the way one goes to heaven . 
They fetch a box with nothing in it , they take it away again with something in it . 
That 's what a burial is like . 
De profundis . '' 
A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping Cosette , who lay with her mouth vaguely open , and had the air of an angel drinking in the light . 
Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her . 
He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent . 
That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence . 
The good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble : -- `` The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery . 
They declare that they are going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery . 
It is an ancient cemetery which is outside the regulations , which has no uniform , and which is going to retire . 
It is a shame , for it is convenient . 
I have a friend there , Father Mestienne , the grave-digger . 
The nuns here possess one privilege , it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall . 
There is a special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf . 
But how many events have happened since yesterday ! 
Mother Crucifixion is dead , and Father Madeleine -- '' `` Is buried , '' said Jean Valjean , smiling sadly . 
Fauchelevent caught the word . 
`` Goodness ! 
if you were here for good , it would be a real burial . '' 
A fourth peal burst out . 
Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again . 
`` This time it is for me . 
The Mother Prioress wants me . 
Good , now I am pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle . 
Monsieur Madeleine , do n't stir from here , and wait for me . 
Something new has come up . 
If you are hungry , there is wine , bread and cheese . '' 
And he hastened out of the hut , crying : `` Coming ! 
coming ! '' 
Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his crooked leg would permit , casting a sidelong glance by the way on his melon patch . 
Less than ten minutes later , Father Fauchelevent , whose bell put the nuns in his road to flight , tapped gently at a door , and a gentle voice replied : `` Forever ! 
Forever ! '' 
that is to say : `` Enter . '' 
The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing the gardener on business . 
This parlor adjoined the chapter hall . 
The prioress , seated on the only chair in the parlor , was waiting for Fauchelevent . 
FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DIFFICULTY It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions , notably priests and nuns , to wear a grave and agitated air on critical occasions . 
At the moment when Fauchelevent entered , this double form of preoccupation was imprinted on the countenance of the prioress , who was that wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur , Mother Innocente , who was ordinarily cheerful . 
The gardener made a timid bow , and remained at the door of the cell . 
The prioress , who was telling her beads , raised her eyes and said : -- `` Ah ! 
it is you , Father Fauvent . '' 
This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent . 
Fauchelevent bowed again . 
`` Father Fauvent , I have sent for you . '' 
`` Here I am , reverend Mother . '' 
`` I have something to say to you . '' 
`` And so have I , '' said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him inward terror , `` I have something to say to the very reverend Mother . '' 
The prioress stared at him . 
`` Ah ! 
you have a communication to make to me . '' 
`` A request . '' 
`` Very well , speak . '' 
Goodman Fauchelevent , the ex-notary , belonged to the category of peasants who have assurance . 
A certain clever ignorance constitutes a force ; you do not distrust it , and you are caught by it . 
Fauchelevent had been a success during the something more than two years which he had passed in the convent . 
Always solitary and busied about his gardening , he had nothing else to do than to indulge his curiosity . 
As he was at a distance from all those veiled women passing to and fro , he saw before him only an agitation of shadows . 
By dint of attention and sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with flesh , and those corpses were alive for him . 
He was like a deaf man whose sight grows keener , and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more acute . 
He had applied himself to riddling out the significance of the different peals , and he had succeeded , so that this taciturn and enigmatical cloister possessed no secrets for him ; the sphinx babbled all her secrets in his ear . 
Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all ; that constituted his art . 
The whole convent thought him stupid . 
A great merit in religion . 
The vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent . 
He was a curious mute . 
He inspired confidence . 
Moreover , he was regular , and never went out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the orchard and vegetable garden . 
This discretion of conduct had inured to his credit . 
None the less , he had set two men to chattering : the porter , in the convent , and he knew the singularities of their parlor , and the grave-digger , at the cemetery , and he was acquainted with the peculiarities of their sepulture ; in this way , he possessed a double light on the subject of these nuns , one as to their life , the other as to their death . 
But he did not abuse his knowledge . 
The congregation thought a great deal of him . 
Old , lame , blind to everything , probably a little deaf into the bargain , -- what qualities ! 
They would have found it difficult to replace him . 
The goodman , with the assurance of a person who feels that he is appreciated , entered into a rather diffuse and very deep rustic harangue to the reverend prioress . 
He talked a long time about his age , his infirmities , the surcharge of years counting double for him henceforth , of the increasing demands of his work , of the great size of the garden , of nights which must be passed , like the last , for instance , when he had been obliged to put straw mats over the melon beds , because of the moon , and he wound up as follows : `` That he had a brother '' -- -LRB- the prioress made a movement -RRB- , -- `` a brother no longer young '' -- -LRB- a second movement on the part of the prioress , but one expressive of reassurance -RRB- , -- `` that , if he might be permitted , this brother would come and live with him and help him , that he was an excellent gardener , that the community would receive from him good service , better than his own ; that , otherwise , if his brother were not admitted , as he , the elder , felt that his health was broken and that he was insufficient for the work , he should be obliged , greatly to his regret , to go away ; and that his brother had a little daughter whom he would bring with him , who might be reared for God in the house , and who might , who knows , become a nun some day . '' 
When he had finished speaking , the prioress stayed the slipping of her rosary between her fingers , and said to him : -- `` Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening ? '' 
`` For what purpose ? '' 
`` To serve as a lever . '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother , '' replied Fauchelevent . 
The prioress , without adding a word , rose and entered the adjoining room , which was the hall of the chapter , and where the vocal mothers were probably assembled . 
Fauchelevent was left alone . 
MOTHER INNOCENTE About a quarter of an hour elapsed . 
The prioress returned and seated herself once more on her chair . 
The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied . 
We will present a stenographic report of the dialogue which then ensued , to the best of our ability . 
`` Father Fauvent ! '' 
`` Reverend Mother ! '' 
`` Do you know the chapel ? '' 
`` I have a little cage there , where I hear the mass and the offices . '' 
`` And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties ? '' 
`` Two or three times . '' 
`` There is a stone to be raised . '' 
`` Heavy ? '' 
`` The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar . '' 
`` The slab which closes the vault ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It would be a good thing to have two men for it . '' 
`` Mother Ascension , who is as strong as a man , will help you . '' 
`` A woman is never a man . '' 
`` We have only a woman here to help you . 
Each one does what he can . 
Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of Saint Bernard , while Merlonus Horstius only gives three hundred and sixty-seven , I do not despise Merlonus Horstius . '' 
`` Neither do I. '' `` Merit consists in working according to one 's strength . 
A cloister is not a dock-yard . '' 
`` And a woman is not a man . 
But my brother is the strong one , though ! '' 
`` And can you get a lever ? '' 
`` That is the only sort of key that fits that sort of door . '' 
`` There is a ring in the stone . '' 
`` I will put the lever through it . '' 
`` And the stone is so arranged that it swings on a pivot . '' 
`` That is good , reverend Mother . 
I will open the vault . '' 
`` And the four Mother Precentors will help you . '' 
`` And when the vault is open ? '' 
`` It must be closed again . '' 
`` Will that be all ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Give me your orders , very reverend Mother . '' 
`` Fauvent , we have confidence in you . '' 
`` I am here to do anything you wish . '' 
`` And to hold your peace about everything ! '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother . '' 
`` When the vault is open -- '' `` I will close it again . '' 
`` But before that -- '' `` What , reverend Mother ? '' 
`` Something must be lowered into it . '' 
A silence ensued . 
The prioress , after a pout of the under lip which resembled hesitation , broke it . 
`` Father Fauvent ! '' 
`` Reverend Mother ! '' 
`` You know that a mother died this morning ? '' 
