Jean Valjean remained silent , motionless , with his back towards the door , seated on the chair from which he had not stirred , and holding his breath in the dark . 
After the expiration of a rather long interval , he turned round , as he heard nothing more , and , as he raised his eyes towards the door of his chamber , he saw a light through the keyhole . 
This light formed a sort of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall . 
There was evidently some one there , who was holding a candle in his hand and listening . 
Several minutes elapsed thus , and the light retreated . 
But he heard no sound of footsteps , which seemed to indicate that the person who had been listening at the door had removed his shoes . 
Jean Valjean threw himself , all dressed as he was , on his bed , and could not close his eyes all night . 
At daybreak , just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue , he was awakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at the end of the corridor , then he heard the same masculine footstep which had ascended the stairs on the preceding evening . 
The step was approaching . 
He sprang off the bed and applied his eye to the keyhole , which was tolerably large , hoping to see the person who had made his way by night into the house and had listened at his door , as he passed . 
It was a man , in fact , who passed , this time without pausing , in front of Jean Valjean 's chamber . 
The corridor was too dark to allow of the person 's face being distinguished ; but when the man reached the staircase , a ray of light from without made it stand out like a silhouette , and Jean Valjean had a complete view of his back . 
The man was of lofty stature , clad in a long frock-coat , with a cudgel under his arm . 
The formidable neck and shoulders belonged to Javert . 
Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him through his window opening on the boulevard , but he would have been obliged to open the window : he dared not . 
It was evident that this man had entered with a key , and like himself . 
Who had given him that key ? 
What was the meaning of this ? 
When the old woman came to do the work , at seven o'clock in the morning , Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her , but he did not question her . 
The good woman appeared as usual . 
As she swept up she remarked to him : -- `` Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night ? '' 
At that age , and on that boulevard , eight o'clock in the evening was the dead of the night . 
`` That is true , by the way , '' he replied , in the most natural tone possible . 
`` Who was it ? '' 
`` It was a new lodger who has come into the house , '' said the old woman . 
`` And what is his name ? '' 
`` I do n't know exactly ; Dumont , or Daumont , or some name of that sort . '' 
`` And who is this Monsieur Dumont ? '' 
The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes , and answered : -- `` A gentleman of property , like yourself . '' 
Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning . 
Jean Valjean thought he perceived one . 
When the old woman had taken her departure , he did up a hundred francs which he had in a cupboard , into a roll , and put it in his pocket . 
In spite of all the precautions which he took in this operation so that he might not be heard rattling silver , a hundred-sou piece escaped from his hands and rolled noisily on the floor . 
When darkness came on , he descended and carefully scrutinized both sides of the boulevard . 
He saw no one . 
The boulevard appeared to be absolutely deserted . 
It is true that a person can conceal himself behind trees . 
He went up stairs again . 
`` Come . '' 
he said to Cosette . 
He took her by the hand , and they both went out . 
THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY An observation here becomes necessary , in view of the pages which the reader is about to peruse , and of others which will be met with further on . 
The author of this book , who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself , has been absent from Paris for many years . 
Paris has been transformed since he quitted it . 
A new city has arisen , which is , after a fashion , unknown to him . 
There is no need for him to say that he loves Paris : Paris is his mind 's natal city . 
In consequence of demolitions and reconstructions , the Paris of his youth , that Paris which he bore away religiously in his memory , is now a Paris of days gone by . 
He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed . 
It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a spot and says , `` In such a street there stands such and such a house , '' neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality . 
Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble . 
For his own part , he is unacquainted with the new Paris , and he writes with the old Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is precious to him . 
It is a delight to him to dream that there still lingers behind him something of that which he beheld when he was in his own country , and that all has not vanished . 
So long as you go and come in your native land , you imagine that those streets are a matter of indifference to you ; that those windows , those roofs , and those doors are nothing to you ; that those walls are strangers to you ; that those trees are merely the first encountered haphazard ; that those houses , which you do not enter , are useless to you ; that the pavements which you tread are merely stones . 
Later on , when you are no longer there , you perceive that the streets are dear to you ; that you miss those roofs , those doors ; and that those walls are necessary to you , those trees are well beloved by you ; that you entered those houses which you never entered , every day , and that you have left a part of your heart , of your blood , of your soul , in those pavements . 
All those places which you no longer behold , which you may never behold again , perchance , and whose memory you have cherished , take on a melancholy charm , recur to your mind with the melancholy of an apparition , make the holy land visible to you , and are , so to speak , the very form of France , and you love them ; and you call them up as they are , as they were , and you persist in this , and you will submit to no change : for you are attached to the figure of your fatherland as to the face of your mother . 
May we , then , be permitted to speak of the past in the present ? 
That said , we beg the reader to take note of it , and we continue . 
Jean Valjean instantly quitted the boulevard and plunged into the streets , taking the most intricate lines which he could devise , returning on his track at times , to make sure that he was not being followed . 
This manoeuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag . 
On soil where an imprint of the track may be left , this manoeuvre possesses , among other advantages , that of deceiving the huntsmen and the dogs , by throwing them on the wrong scent . 
In venery this is called false re-imbushment . 
The moon was full that night . 
Jean Valjean was not sorry for this . 
The moon , still very close to the horizon , cast great masses of light and shadow in the streets . 
Jean Valjean could glide along close to the houses on the dark side , and yet keep watch on the light side . 
He did not , perhaps , take sufficiently into consideration the fact that the dark side escaped him . 
Still , in the deserted lanes which lie near the Rue Poliveau , he thought he felt certain that no one was following him . 
Cosette walked on without asking any questions . 
The sufferings of the first six years of her life had instilled something passive into her nature . 
Moreover , -- and this is a remark to which we shall frequently have occasion to recur , -- she had grown used , without being herself aware of it , to the peculiarities of this good man and to the freaks of destiny . 
And then she was with him , and she felt safe . 
Jean Valjean knew no more where he was going than did Cosette . 
He trusted in God , as she trusted in him . 
It seemed as though he also were clinging to the hand of some one greater than himself ; he thought he felt a being leading him , though invisible . 
However , he had no settled idea , no plan , no project . 
He was not even absolutely sure that it was Javert , and then it might have been Javert , without Javert knowing that he was Jean Valjean . 
Was not he disguised ? 
Was not he believed to be dead ? 
Still , queer things had been going on for several days . 
He wanted no more of them . 
He was determined not to return to the Gorbeau house . 
Like the wild animal chased from its lair , he was seeking a hole in which he might hide until he could find one where he might dwell . 
Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetard quarter , which was already asleep , as though the discipline of the Middle Ages and the yoke of the curfew still existed ; he combined in various manners , with cunning strategy , the Rue Censier and the Rue Copeau , the Rue du Battoir-Saint-Victor and the Rue du Puits l'Ermite . 
There are lodging houses in this locality , but he did not even enter one , finding nothing which suited him . 
He had no doubt that if any one had chanced to be upon his track , they would have lost it . 
As eleven o'clock struck from Saint-Etienne-du-Mont , he was traversing the Rue de Pontoise , in front of the office of the commissary of police , situated at No. 14 . 
A few moments later , the instinct of which we have spoken above made him turn round . 
At that moment he saw distinctly , thanks to the commissary 's lantern , which betrayed them , three men who were following him closely , pass , one after the other , under that lantern , on the dark side of the street . 
One of the three entered the alley leading to the commissary 's house . 
The one who marched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious . 
`` Come , child , '' he said to Cosette ; and he made haste to quit the Rue Pontoise . 
He took a circuit , turned into the Passage des Patriarches , which was closed on account of the hour , strode along the Rue de l'Epee-de-Bois and the Rue de l'Arbalete , and plunged into the Rue des Postes . 
At that time there was a square formed by the intersection of streets , where the College Rollin stands to-day , and where the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve turns off . 
It is understood , of course , that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve is an old street , and that a posting-chaise does not pass through the Rue des Postes once in ten years . 
In the thirteenth century this Rue des Postes was inhabited by potters , and its real name is Rue des Pots . 
The moon cast a livid light into this open space . 
Jean Valjean went into ambush in a doorway , calculating that if the men were still following him , he could not fail to get a good look at them , as they traversed this illuminated space . 
In point of fact , three minutes had not elapsed when the men made their appearance . 
There were four of them now . 
All were tall , dressed in long , brown coats , with round hats , and huge cudgels in their hands . 
Their great stature and their vast fists rendered them no less alarming than did their sinister stride through the darkness . 
One would have pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois . 
They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group , like men in consultation . 
They had an air of indecision . 
The one who appeared to be their leader turned round and pointed hastily with his right hand in the direction which Jean Valjean had taken ; another seemed to indicate the contrary direction with considerable obstinacy . 
At the moment when the first man wheeled round , the moon fell full in his face . 
Jean Valjean recognized Javert perfectly . 
IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D'AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean : fortunately it still lasted for the men . 
He took advantage of their hesitation . 
It was time lost for them , but gained for him . 
He slipped from under the gate where he had concealed himself , and went down the Rue des Postes , towards the region of the Jardin des Plantes . 
Cosette was beginning to be tired . 
He took her in his arms and carried her . 
There were no passers-by , and the street lanterns had not been lighted on account of there being a moon . 
He redoubled his pace . 
In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries , on the front of which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient inscription : -- De Goblet fils c'est ici la fabrique ; -LSB- 14 -RSB- Venez choisir des cruches et des broos , Des pots a fleurs , des tuyaux , de la brique . 
A tout venant le Coeur vend des Carreaux . 
-LSB- 14 -RSB- This is the factory of Goblet Junior : Come choose your jugs and crocks , Flower-pots , pipes , bricks . 
The Heart sells Diamonds to every comer . 
He left behind him the Rue de la Clef , then the Fountain Saint-Victor , skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets , and reached the quay . 
There he turned round . 
The quay was deserted . 
The streets were deserted . 
There was no one behind him . 
He drew a long breath . 
He gained the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Tolls were still collected there at that epoch . 
He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou . 
`` It is two sous , '' said the old soldier in charge of the bridge . 
`` You are carrying a child who can walk . 
Pay for two . '' 
He paid , vexed that his passage should have aroused remark . 
Every flight should be an imperceptible slipping away . 
A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself , and on its way , like him , to the right bank . 
This was of use to him . 
He could traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart . 
Towards the middle of the Bridge , Cosette , whose feet were benumbed , wanted to walk . 
He set her on the ground and took her hand again . 
The bridge once crossed , he perceived some timber-yards on his right . 
He directed his course thither . 
In order to reach them , it was necessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered and illuminated space . 
He did not hesitate . 
Those who were on his track had evidently lost the scent , and Jean Valjean believed himself to be out of danger . 
Hunted , yes ; followed , no . 
A little street , the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , opened out between two timber-yards enclosed in walls . 
This street was dark and narrow and seemed made expressly for him . 
Before entering it he cast a glance behind him , From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Four shadows were just entering on the bridge . 
These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and were on their way to the right bank . 
These four shadows were the four men . 
Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured . 
One hope remained to him ; it was , that the men had not , perhaps , stepped on the bridge , and had not caught sight of him while he was crossing the large illuminated space , holding Cosette by the hand . 
In that case , by plunging into the little street before him , he might escape , if he could reach the timber-yards , the marshes , the market-gardens , the uninhabited ground which was not built upon . 
It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent little street . 
He entered it . 
TO WIT , THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727 Three hundred paces further on , he arrived at a point where the street forked . 
It separated into two streets , which ran in a slanting line , one to the right , and the other to the left . 
Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches of a Y. Which should he choose ? 
He did not hesitate , but took the one on the right . 
Why ? 
Because that to the left ran towards a suburb , that is to say , towards inhabited regions , and the right branch towards the open country , that is to say , towards deserted regions . 
However , they no longer walked very fast . 
Cosette 's pace retarded Jean Valjean 's . 
He took her up and carried her again . 
Cosette laid her head on the shoulder of the good man and said not a word . 
He turned round from time to time and looked behind him . 
He took care to keep always on the dark side of the street . 
The street was straight in his rear . 
The first two or three times that he turned round he saw nothing ; the silence was profound , and he continued his march somewhat reassured . 
All at once , on turning round , he thought he perceived in the portion of the street which he had just passed through , far off in the obscurity , something which was moving . 
He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked , hoping to find some side-street , to make his escape through it , and thus to break his scent once more . 
He arrived at a wall . 
This wall , however , did not absolutely prevent further progress ; it was a wall which bordered a transverse street , in which the one he had taken ended . 
Here again , he was obliged to come to a decision ; should he go to the right or to the left . 
He glanced to the right . 
The fragmentary lane was prolonged between buildings which were either sheds or barns , then ended at a blind alley . 
The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible , -- a lofty white wall . 
He glanced to the left . 
On that side the lane was open , and about two hundred paces further on , ran into a street of which it was the affluent . 
On that side lay safety . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean was meditating a turn to the left , in an effort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane , he perceived a sort of motionless , black statue at the corner of the lane and the street towards which he was on the point of directing his steps . 
It was some one , a man , who had evidently just been posted there , and who was barring the passage and waiting . 
Jean Valjean recoiled . 
The point of Paris where Jean Valjean found himself , situated between the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and la Rapee , is one of those which recent improvements have transformed from top to bottom , -- resulting in disfigurement according to some , and in a transfiguration according to others . 
The market-gardens , the timber-yards , and the old buildings have been effaced . 
To-day , there are brand-new , wide streets , arenas , circuses , hippodromes , railway stations , and a prison , Mazas , there ; progress , as the reader sees , with its antidote . 
Half a century ago , in that ordinary , popular tongue , which is all compounded of traditions , which persists in calling the Institut les Quatre-Nations , and the Opera-Comique Feydeau , the precise spot whither Jean Valjean had arrived was called le Petit Picpus . 
The Porte Saint-Jacques , the Porte Paris , the Barriere des Sergents , the Porcherons , la Galiote , les Celestins , les Capucins , le Mail , la Bourbe , l'Arbre de Cracovie , la Petite-Pologne -- these are the names of old Paris which survive amid the new . 
The memory of the populace hovers over these relics of the past . 
Le Petit-Picpus , which , moreover , hardly ever had any existence , and never was more than the outline of a quarter , had nearly the monkish aspect of a Spanish town . 
The roads were not much paved ; the streets were not much built up . 
With the exception of the two or three streets , of which we shall presently speak , all was wall and solitude there . 
Not a shop , not a vehicle , hardly a candle lighted here and there in the windows ; all lights extinguished after ten o'clock . 
Gardens , convents , timber-yards , marshes ; occasional lowly dwellings and great walls as high as the houses . 
Such was this quarter in the last century . 
The Revolution snubbed it soundly . 
The republican government demolished and cut through it . 
Rubbish shoots were established there . 
Thirty years ago , this quarter was disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings . 
To-day , it has been utterly blotted out . 
The Petit-Picpus , of which no existing plan has preserved a trace , is indicated with sufficient clearness in the plan of 1727 , published at Paris by Denis Thierry , Rue Saint-Jacques , opposite the Rue du Platre ; and at Lyons , by Jean Girin , Rue Merciere , at the sign of Prudence . 
Petit-Picpus had , as we have just mentioned , a Y of streets , formed by the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , which spread out in two branches , taking on the left the name of Little Picpus Street , and on the right the name of the Rue Polonceau . 
The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex as by a bar ; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur . 
The Rue Polonceau ended there ; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on , and ascended towards the Lenoir market . 
A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the Rue Polonceau , and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur , turning abruptly at a right angle , in front of him the wall of that street , and on his right a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had no issue and was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
It was here that Jean Valjean stood . 
As we have just said , on catching sight of that black silhouette standing on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue Petit-Picpus , he recoiled . 
There could be no doubt of it . 
That phantom was lying in wait for him . 
What was he to do ? 
The time for retreating was passed . 
That which he had perceived in movement an instant before , in the distant darkness , was Javert and his squad without a doubt . 
Javert was probably already at the commencement of the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood . 
Javert , to all appearances , was acquainted with this little labyrinth , and had taken his precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit . 
These surmises , which so closely resembled proofs , whirled suddenly , like a handful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind , through Jean Valjean 's mournful brain . 
He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot ; there he was cut off . 
He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus ; there stood a sentinel . 
He saw that black form standing out in relief against the white pavement , illuminated by the moon ; to advance was to fall into this man 's hands ; to retreat was to fling himself into Javert 's arms . 
Jean Valjean felt himself caught , as in a net , which was slowly contracting ; he gazed heavenward in despair . 
THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT In order to understand what follows , it is requisite to form an exact idea of the Droit-Mur lane , and , in particular , of the angle which one leaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into this lane . 
Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on the right , as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus , by houses of mean aspect ; on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines , composed of numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue Petit-Picpus side ; so that this building , which was very lofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side , was tolerably low on the side adjoining the Rue Polonceau . 
There , at the angle of which we have spoken , it descended to such a degree that it consisted of merely a wall . 
This wall did not abut directly on the Street ; it formed a deeply retreating niche , concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been , one in the Rue Polonceau , the other in the Rue Droit-Mur . 
Beginning with these angles of the niche , the wall extended along the Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49 , and along the Rue Droit-Mur , where the fragment was much shorter , as far as the gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected , thus forming another retreating angle in the street . 
This gable was sombre of aspect ; only one window was visible , or , to speak more correctly , two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept constantly closed . 
The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is rigorously exact , and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in the mind of old inhabitants of the quarter . 
The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and wretched door ; it was a vast , formless assemblage of perpendicular planks , the upper ones being broader than the lower , bound together by long transverse strips of iron . 
At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary dimensions , and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years previously . 
A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche , and the wall was covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau . 
In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself , this sombre building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted him . 
He ran his eyes rapidly over it ; he said to himself , that if he could contrive to get inside it , he might save himself . 
First he conceived an idea , then a hope . 
In the central portion of the front of this building , on the Rue Droit-Mur side , there were at all the windows of the different stories ancient cistern pipes of lead . 
The various branches of the pipes which led from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out a sort of tree on the front . 
These ramifications of pipes with their hundred elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writhe over the fronts of old farm-houses . 
This odd espalier , with its branches of lead and iron , was the first thing that struck Jean Valjean . 
He seated Cosette with her back against a stone post , with an injunction to be silent , and ran to the spot where the conduit touched the pavement . 
Perhaps there was some way of climbing up by it and entering the house . 
But the pipe was dilapidated and past service , and hardly hung to its fastenings . 
Moreover , all the windows of this silent dwelling were grated with heavy iron bars , even the attic windows in the roof . 
And then , the moon fell full upon that facade , and the man who was watching at the corner of the street would have seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing . 
And finally , what was to be done with Cosette ? 
How was she to be drawn up to the top of a three-story house ? 
He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe , and crawled along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau . 
When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette , he noticed that no one could see him there . 
As we have just explained , he was concealed from all eyes , no matter from which direction they were approaching ; besides this , he was in the shadow . 
Finally , there were two doors ; perhaps they might be forced . 
The wall above which he saw the linden-tree and the ivy evidently abutted on a garden where he could , at least , hide himself , although there were as yet no leaves on the trees , and spend the remainder of the night . 
Time was passing ; he must act quickly . 
He felt over the carriage door , and immediately recognized the fact that it was impracticable outside and in . 
He approached the other door with more hope ; it was frightfully decrepit ; its very immensity rendered it less solid ; the planks were rotten ; the iron bands -- there were only three of them -- were rusted . 
It seemed as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eaten barrier . 
On examining it he found that the door was not a door ; it had neither hinges , cross-bars , lock , nor fissure in the middle ; the iron bands traversed it from side to side without any break . 
Through the crevices in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone roughly cemented together , which passers-by might still have seen there ten years ago . 
He was forced to acknowledge with consternation that this apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a building against which it was placed . 
It was easy to tear off a plank ; but then , one found one 's self face to face with a wall . 
WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at some distance . 
Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street . 
Seven or eight soldiers , drawn up in a platoon , had just debouched into the Rue Polonceau . 
He saw the gleam of their bayonets . 
They were advancing towards him ; these soldiers , at whose head he distinguished Javert 's tall figure , advanced slowly and cautiously . 
They halted frequently ; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of the walls and all the embrasures of the doors and alleys . 
This was some patrol that Javert had encountered -- there could be no mistake as to this surmise -- and whose aid he had demanded . 
Javert 's two acolytes were marching in their ranks . 
At the rate at which they were marching , and in consideration of the halts which they were making , it would take them about a quarter of an hour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood . 
It was a frightful moment . 
A few minutes only separated Jean Valjean from that terrible precipice which yawned before him for the third time . 
And the galleys now meant not only the galleys , but Cosette lost to him forever ; that is to say , a life resembling the interior of a tomb . 
There was but one thing which was possible . 
Jean Valjean had this peculiarity , that he carried , as one might say , two beggar 's pouches : in one he kept his saintly thoughts ; in the other the redoubtable talents of a convict . 
He rummaged in the one or the other , according to circumstances . 
Among his other resources , thanks to his numerous escapes from the prison at Toulon , he was , as it will be remembered , a past master in the incredible art of crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons , by sheer muscular force , by leaning on the nape of his neck , his shoulders , his hips , and his knees , by helping himself on the rare projections of the stone , in the right angle of a wall , as high as the sixth story , if need be ; an art which has rendered so celebrated and so alarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by which Battemolle , condemned to death , made his escape twenty years ago . 
Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied the linden ; it was about eighteen feet in height . 
The angle which it formed with the gable of the large building was filled , at its lower extremity , by a mass of masonry of a triangular shape , probably intended to preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish of those dirty creatures called the passers-by . 
This practice of filling up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris . 
This mass was about five feet in height ; the space above the summit of this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen feet . 
The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping . 
Cosette was the difficulty , for she did not know how to climb a wall . 
Should he abandon her ? 
Jean Valjean did not once think of that . 
It was impossible to carry her . 
A man 's whole strength is required to successfully carry out these singular ascents . 
The least burden would disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards . 
A rope would have been required ; Jean Valjean had none . 
Where was he to get a rope at midnight , in the Rue Polonceau ? 
Certainly , if Jean Valjean had had a kingdom , he would have given it for a rope at that moment . 
All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimes dazzle , sometimes illuminate us . 
Jean Valjean 's despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of the blind alley Genrot . 
At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris . 
At nightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted ; they were ascended and descended by means of a rope , which traversed the street from side to side , and was adjusted in a groove of the post . 
The pulley over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in a little iron box , the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter , and the rope itself was protected by a metal case . 
Jean Valjean , with the energy of a supreme struggle , crossed the street at one bound , entered the blind alley , broke the latch of the little box with the point of his knife , and an instant later he was beside Cosette once more . 
He had a rope . 
These gloomy inventors of expedients work rapidly when they are fighting against fatality . 
We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted that night . 
The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct , like the rest ; and one could pass directly under it without even noticing that it was no longer in its place . 
Nevertheless , the hour , the place , the darkness , Jean Valjean 's absorption , his singular gestures , his goings and comings , all had begun to render Cosette uneasy . 
Any other child than she would have given vent to loud shrieks long before . 
She contented herself with plucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat . 
They could hear the sound of the patrol 's approach ever more and more distinctly . 
`` Father , '' said she , in a very low voice , `` I am afraid . 
Who is coming yonder ? '' 
`` Hush ! '' 
replied the unhappy man ; `` it is Madame Thenardier . '' 
Cosette shuddered . 
He added : -- `` Say nothing . 
Do n't interfere with me . 
If you cry out , if you weep , the Thenardier is lying in wait for you . 
She is coming to take you back . '' 
Then , without haste , but without making a useless movement , with firm and curt precision , the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol and Javert might come upon him at any moment , he undid his cravat , passed it round Cosette 's body under the armpits , taking care that it should not hurt the child , fastened this cravat to one end of the rope , by means of that knot which seafaring men call a `` swallow knot , '' took the other end of the rope in his teeth , pulled off his shoes and stockings , which he threw over the wall , stepped upon the mass of masonry , and began to raise himself in the angle of the wall and the gable with as much solidity and certainty as though he had the rounds of a ladder under his feet and elbows . 
Half a minute had not elapsed when he was resting on his knees on the wall . 
Cosette gazed at him in stupid amazement , without uttering a word . 
Jean Valjean 's injunction , and the name of Madame Thenardier , had chilled her blood . 
All at once she heard Jean Valjean 's voice crying to her , though in a very low tone : -- `` Put your back against the wall . '' 
She obeyed . 
`` Do n't say a word , and do n't be alarmed , '' went on Jean Valjean . 
And she felt herself lifted from the ground . 
Before she had time to recover herself , she was on the top of the wall . 
Jean Valjean grasped her , put her on his back , took her two tiny hands in his large left hand , lay down flat on his stomach and crawled along on top of the wall as far as the cant . 
As he had guessed , there stood a building whose roof started from the top of the wooden barricade and descended to within a very short distance of the ground , with a gentle slope which grazed the linden-tree . 
A lucky circumstance , for the wall was much higher on this side than on the street side . 
Jean Valjean could only see the ground at a great depth below him . 
He had just reached the slope of the roof , and had not yet left the crest of the wall , when a violent uproar announced the arrival of the patrol . 
The thundering voice of Javert was audible : -- `` Search the blind alley ! 
The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded ! 
so is the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
I 'll answer for it that he is in the blind alley . '' 
The soldiers rushed into the Genrot alley . 
Jean Valjean allowed himself to slide down the roof , still holding fast to Cosette , reached the linden-tree , and leaped to the ground . 
Whether from terror or courage , Cosette had not breathed a sound , though her hands were a little abraded . 
THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast and of singular aspect ; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made to be looked at in winter and at night . 
This garden was oblong in shape , with an alley of large poplars at the further end , tolerably tall forest trees in the corners , and an unshaded space in the centre , where could be seen a very large , solitary tree , then several fruit-trees , gnarled and bristling like bushes , beds of vegetables , a melon patch , whose glass frames sparkled in the moonlight , and an old well . 
Here and there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss . 
The alleys were bordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs . 
The grass had half taken possession of them , and a green mould covered the rest . 
Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him as a means of descent , a pile of fagots , and , behind the fagots , directly against the wall , a stone statue , whose mutilated face was no longer anything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely through the gloom . 
The building was a sort of ruin , where dismantled chambers were distinguishable , one of which , much encumbered , seemed to serve as a shed . 
The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had a wing on the Rue Petit-Picpus , turned two facades , at right angles , towards this garden . 
These interior facades were even more tragic than the exterior . 
All the windows were grated . 
Not a gleam of light was visible at any one of them . 
The upper story had scuttles like prisons . 
One of those facades cast its shadow on the other , which fell over the garden like an immense black pall . 
No other house was visible . 
The bottom of the garden was lost in mist and darkness . 
Nevertheless , walls could be confusedly made out , which intersected as though there were more cultivated land beyond , and the low roofs of the Rue Polonceau . 
Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined . 
There was no one in it , which was quite natural in view of the hour ; but it did not seem as though this spot were made for any one to walk in , even in broad daylight . 
Jean Valjean 's first care had been to get hold of his shoes and put them on again , then to step under the shed with Cosette . 
A man who is fleeing never thinks himself sufficiently hidden . 
The child , whose thoughts were still on the Thenardier , shared his instinct for withdrawing from sight as much as possible . 
Cosette trembled and pressed close to him . 
They heard the tumultuous noise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets ; the blows of their gun-stocks against the stones ; Javert 's appeals to the police spies whom he had posted , and his imprecations mingled with words which could not be distinguished . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though that species of stormy roar were becoming more distant . 
Jean Valjean held his breath . 
He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette 's mouth . 
However , the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm , that this frightful uproar , close and furious as it was , did not disturb him by so much as the shadow of a misgiving . 
It seemed as though those walls had been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak . 
All at once , in the midst of this profound calm , a fresh sound arose ; a sound as celestial , divine , ineffable , ravishing , as the other had been horrible . 
It was a hymn which issued from the gloom , a dazzling burst of prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night ; women 's voices , but voices composed at one and the same time of the pure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children , -- voices which are not of the earth , and which resemble those that the newborn infant still hears , and which the dying man hears already . 
This song proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden . 
At the moment when the hubbub of demons retreated , one would have said that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom . 
Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees . 
They knew not what it was , they knew not where they were ; but both of them , the man and the child , the penitent and the innocent , felt that they must kneel . 
These voices had this strange characteristic , that they did not prevent the building from seeming to be deserted . 
It was a supernatural chant in an uninhabited house . 
While these voices were singing , Jean Valjean thought of nothing . 
He no longer beheld the night ; he beheld a blue sky . 
It seemed to him that he felt those wings which we all have within us , unfolding . 
The song died away . 
It may have lasted a long time . 
Jean Valjean could not have told . 
Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment . 
All fell silent again . 
There was no longer anything in the street ; there was nothing in the garden . 
That which had menaced , that which had reassured him , -- all had vanished . 
The breeze swayed a few dry weeds on the crest of the wall , and they gave out a faint , sweet , melancholy sound . 
CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA The night wind had risen , which indicated that it must be between one and two o'clock in the morning . 
Poor Cosette said nothing . 
As she had seated herself beside him and leaned her head against him , Jean Valjean had fancied that she was asleep . 
He bent down and looked at her . 
Cosette 's eyes were wide open , and her thoughtful air pained Jean Valjean . 
She was still trembling . 
`` Are you sleepy ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` I am very cold , '' she replied . 
A moment later she resumed : -- `` Is she still there ? '' 
`` Who ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Madame Thenardier . '' 
Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed to make Cosette keep silent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he , `` she is gone . 
You need fear nothing further . '' 
The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast . 
The ground was damp , the shed open on all sides , the breeze grew more keen every instant . 
The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it round Cosette . 
`` Are you less cold now ? '' 
said he . 
`` Oh , yes , father . '' 
`` Well , wait for me a moment . 
I will soon be back . '' 
He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building , seeking a better shelter . 
He came across doors , but they were closed . 
There were bars at all the windows of the ground floor . 
Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice , he observed that he was coming to some arched windows , where he perceived a light . 
He stood on tiptoe and peeped through one of these windows . 
They all opened on a tolerably vast hall , paved with large flagstones , cut up by arcades and pillars , where only a tiny light and great shadows were visible . 
The light came from a taper which was burning in one corner . 
The apartment was deserted , and nothing was stirring in it . 
Nevertheless , by dint of gazing intently he thought he perceived on the ground something which appeared to be covered with a winding-sheet , and which resembled a human form . 
This form was lying face downward , flat on the pavement , with the arms extended in the form of a cross , in the immobility of death . 
One would have said , judging from a sort of serpent which undulated over the floor , that this sinister form had a rope round its neck . 
The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are sparely illuminated , which adds to horror . 
Jean Valjean often said afterwards , that , although many funereal spectres had crossed his path in life , he had never beheld anything more blood-curdling and terrible than that enigmatical form accomplishing some inexplicable mystery in that gloomy place , and beheld thus at night . 
It was alarming to suppose that that thing was perhaps dead ; and still more alarming to think that it was perhaps alive . 
He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass , and to watch whether the thing would move . 
In spite of his remaining thus what seemed to him a very long time , the outstretched form made no movement . 
All at once he felt himself overpowered by an inexpressible terror , and he fled . 
He began to run towards the shed , not daring to look behind him . 
It seemed to him , that if he turned his head , he should see that form following him with great strides and waving its arms . 
He reached the ruin all out of breath . 
His knees were giving way beneath him ; the perspiration was pouring from him . 
Where was he ? 
Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort of sepulchre in the midst of Paris ! 
What was this strange house ? 
An edifice full of nocturnal mystery , calling to souls through the darkness with the voice of angels , and when they came , offering them abruptly that terrible vision ; promising to open the radiant portals of heaven , and then opening the horrible gates of the tomb ! 
And it actually was an edifice , a house , which bore a number on the street ! 
It was not a dream ! 
He had to touch the stones to convince himself that such was the fact . 
Cold , anxiety , uneasiness , the emotions of the night , had given him a genuine fever , and all these ideas were clashing together in his brain . 
He stepped up to Cosette . 
She was asleep . 
THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep . 
He sat down beside her and began to think . 
Little by little , as he gazed at her , he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom of mind . 
He clearly perceived this truth , the foundation of his life henceforth , that so long as she was there , so long as he had her near him , he should need nothing except for her , he should fear nothing except for her . 
He was not even conscious that he was very cold , since he had taken off his coat to cover her . 
Nevertheless , athwart this revery into which he had fallen he had heard for some time a peculiar noise . 
It was like the tinkling of a bell . 
This sound proceeded from the garden . 
It could be heard distinctly though faintly . 
It resembled the faint , vague music produced by the bells of cattle at night in the pastures . 
This noise made Valjean turn round . 
He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden . 
A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the melon beds , rising , stooping , halting , with regular movements , as though he were dragging or spreading out something on the ground . 
This person appeared to limp . 
Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy . 
For them everything is hostile and suspicious . 
They distrust the day because it enables people to see them , and the night because it aids in surprising them . 
A little while before he had shivered because the garden was deserted , and now he shivered because there was some one there . 
He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors . 
He said to himself that Javert and the spies had , perhaps , not taken their departure ; that they had , no doubt , left people on the watch in the street ; that if this man should discover him in the garden , he would cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up . 
He took the sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap of old furniture , which was out of use , in the most remote corner of the shed . 
Cosette did not stir . 
From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon patch . 
The strange thing about it was , that the sound of the bell followed each of this man 's movements . 
When the man approached , the sound approached ; when the man retreated , the sound retreated ; if he made any hasty gesture , a tremolo accompanied the gesture ; when he halted , the sound ceased . 
It appeared evident that the bell was attached to that man ; but what could that signify ? 
Who was this man who had a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox ? 
As he put these questions to himself , he touched Cosette 's hands . 
They were icy cold . 
`` Ah ! 
good God ! '' 
he cried . 
He spoke to her in a low voice : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
She did not open her eyes . 
He shook her vigorously . 
She did not wake . 
`` Is she dead ? '' 
he said to himself , and sprang to his feet , quivering from head to foot . 
The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind . 
There are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies , and violently force the partitions of our brains . 
When those we love are in question , our prudence invents every sort of madness . 
He remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal . 
Cosette was pale , and had fallen at full length on the ground at his feet , without a movement . 
He listened to her breathing : she still breathed , but with a respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction . 
How was he to warm her back to life ? 
How was he to rouse her ? 
All that was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts . 
He rushed wildly from the ruin . 
It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a fire in less than a quarter of an hour . 
THE MAN WITH THE BELL He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden . 
He had taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his waistcoat . 
The man 's head was bent down , and he did not see him approaching . 
In a few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him . 
Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry : -- `` One hundred francs ! '' 
The man gave a start and raised his eyes . 
`` You can earn a hundred francs , '' went on Jean Valjean , `` if you will grant me shelter for this night . '' 
The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean 's terrified countenance . 
`` What ! 
so it is you , Father Madeleine ! '' 
said the man . 
That name , thus pronounced , at that obscure hour , in that unknown spot , by that strange man , made Jean Valjean start back . 
He had expected anything but that . 
The person who thus addressed him was a bent and lame old man , dressed almost like a peasant , who wore on his left knee a leather knee-cap , whence hung a moderately large bell . 
His face , which was in the shadow , was not distinguishable . 
However , the goodman had removed his cap , and exclaimed , trembling all over : -- `` Ah , good God ! 
How come you here , Father Madeleine ? 
Where did you enter ? 
