`` Why do you call me you ? 
Have I done anything to you ? '' 
`` No , '' he answered . 
Certainly , he had nothing against her . 
Far from it . 
Only , he felt that he could not do otherwise , now that he used thou to Cosette , than say you to Eponine . 
As he remained silent , she exclaimed : -- `` Say -- '' Then she paused . 
It seemed as though words failed that creature formerly so heedless and so bold . 
She tried to smile and could not . 
Then she resumed : -- `` Well ? '' 
Then she paused again , and remained with downcast eyes . 
`` Good evening , Mr. Marius , '' said she suddenly and abruptly ; and away she went . 
A CAB RUNS IN ENGLISH AND BARKS IN SLANG The following day was the 3d of June , 1832 , a date which it is necessary to indicate on account of the grave events which at that epoch hung on the horizon of Paris in the state of lightning-charged clouds . 
Marius , at nightfall , was pursuing the same road as on the preceding evening , with the same thoughts of delight in his heart , when he caught sight of Eponine approaching , through the trees of the boulevard . 
Two days in succession -- this was too much . 
He turned hastily aside , quitted the boulevard , changed his course and went to the Rue Plumet through the Rue Monsieur . 
This caused Eponine to follow him to the Rue Plumet , a thing which she had not yet done . 
Up to that time , she had contented herself with watching him on his passage along the boulevard without ever seeking to encounter him . 
It was only on the evening before that she had attempted to address him . 
So Eponine followed him , without his suspecting the fact . 
She saw him displace the bar and slip into the garden . 
She approached the railing , felt of the bars one after the other , and readily recognized the one which Marius had moved . 
She murmured in a low voice and in gloomy accents : -- `` None of that , Lisette ! '' 
She seated herself on the underpinning of the railing , close beside the bar , as though she were guarding it . 
It was precisely at the point where the railing touched the neighboring wall . 
There was a dim nook there , in which Eponine was entirely concealed . 
She remained thus for more than an hour , without stirring and without breathing , a prey to her thoughts . 
Towards ten o'clock in the evening , one of the two or three persons who passed through the Rue Plumet , an old , belated bourgeois who was making haste to escape from this deserted spot of evil repute , as he skirted the garden railings and reached the angle which it made with the wall , heard a dull and threatening voice saying : -- `` I 'm no longer surprised that he comes here every evening . '' 
The passer-by cast a glance around him , saw no one , dared not peer into the black niche , and was greatly alarmed . 
He redoubled his pace . 
This passer-by had reason to make haste , for a very few instants later , six men , who were marching separately and at some distance from each other , along the wall , and who might have been taken for a gray patrol , entered the Rue Plumet . 
The first to arrive at the garden railing halted , and waited for the others ; a second later , all six were reunited . 
These men began to talk in a low voice . 
`` This is the place , '' said one of them . 
`` Is there a cab -LSB- dog -RSB- in the garden ? '' 
asked another . 
`` I do n't know . 
In any case , I have fetched a ball that we 'll make him eat . '' 
`` Have you some putty to break the pane with ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` The railing is old , '' interpolated a fifth , who had the voice of a ventriloquist . 
`` So much the better , '' said the second who had spoken . 
`` It wo n't screech under the saw , and it wo n't be hard to cut . '' 
The sixth , who had not yet opened his lips , now began to inspect the gate , as Eponine had done an hour earlier , grasping each bar in succession , and shaking them cautiously . 
Thus he came to the bar which Marius had loosened . 
As he was on the point of grasping this bar , a hand emerged abruptly from the darkness , fell upon his arm ; he felt himself vigorously thrust aside by a push in the middle of his breast , and a hoarse voice said to him , but not loudly : -- `` There 's a dog . '' 
At the same moment , he perceived a pale girl standing before him . 
The man underwent that shock which the unexpected always brings . 
He bristled up in hideous wise ; nothing is so formidable to behold as ferocious beasts who are uneasy ; their terrified air evokes terror . 
He recoiled and stammered : -- `` What jade is this ? '' 
`` Your daughter . '' 
It was , in fact , Eponine , who had addressed Thenardier . 
At the apparition of Eponine , the other five , that is to say , Claquesous , Guelemer , Babet , Brujon , and Montparnasse had noiselessly drawn near , without precipitation , without uttering a word , with the sinister slowness peculiar to these men of the night . 
Some indescribable but hideous tools were visible in their hands . 
Guelemer held one of those pairs of curved pincers which prowlers call fanchons . 
`` Ah , see here , what are you about there ? 
What do you want with us ? 
Are you crazy ? '' 
exclaimed Thenardier , as loudly as one can exclaim and still speak low ; `` what have you come here to hinder our work for ? '' 
Eponine burst out laughing , and threw herself on his neck . 
`` I am here , little father , because I am here . 
Is n't a person allowed to sit on the stones nowadays ? 
It 's you who ought not to be here . 
What have you come here for , since it 's a biscuit ? 
I told Magnon so . 
There 's nothing to be done here . 
But embrace me , my good little father ! 
It 's a long time since I 've seen you ! 
So you 're out ? '' 
Thenardier tried to disentangle himself from Eponine 's arms , and grumbled : -- `` That 's good . 
You 've embraced me . 
Yes , I 'm out . 
I 'm not in . 
Now , get away with you . '' 
But Eponine did not release her hold , and redoubled her caresses . 
`` But how did you manage it , little pa ? 
You must have been very clever to get out of that . 
Tell me about it ! 
And my mother ? 
Where is mother ? 
Tell me about mamma . '' 
Thenardier replied : -- `` She 's well . 
I do n't know , let me alone , and be off , I tell you . 
`` I wo n't go , so there now , '' pouted Eponine like a spoiled child ; `` you send me off , and it 's four months since I saw you , and I 've hardly had time to kiss you . '' 
And she caught her father round the neck again . 
`` Come , now , this is stupid ! '' 
said Babet . 
`` Make haste ! '' 
said Guelemer , `` the cops may pass . '' 
The ventriloquist 's voice repeated his distich : -- `` Nous n ' sommes pas le jour de l'an , `` This is n't New Year 's day A becoter papa , maman . '' 
To peck at pa and ma . '' 
Eponine turned to the five ruffians . 
`` Why , it 's Monsieur Brujon . 
Good day , Monsieur Babet . 
Good day , Monsieur Claquesous . 
Do n't you know me , Monsieur Guelemer ? 
How goes it , Montparnasse ? '' 
`` Yes , they know you ! '' 
ejaculated Thenardier . 
`` But good day , good evening , sheer off ! 
leave us alone ! '' 
`` It 's the hour for foxes , not for chickens , '' said Montparnasse . 
`` You see the job we have on hand here , '' added Babet . 
Eponine caught Montparnasse 's hand . 
`` Take care , '' said he , `` you 'll cut yourself , I 've a knife open . '' 
`` My little Montparnasse , '' responded Eponine very gently , `` you must have confidence in people . 
I am the daughter of my father , perhaps . 
Monsieur Babet , Monsieur Guelemer , I 'm the person who was charged to investigate this matter . '' 
It is remarkable that Eponine did not talk slang . 
That frightful tongue had become impossible to her since she had known Marius . 
She pressed in her hand , small , bony , and feeble as that of a skeleton , Guelemer 's huge , coarse fingers , and continued : -- `` You know well that I 'm no fool . 
Ordinarily , I am believed . 
I have rendered you service on various occasions . 
Well , I have made inquiries ; you will expose yourselves to no purpose , you see . 
I swear to you that there is nothing in this house . '' 
`` There are lone women , '' said Guelemer . 
`` No , the persons have moved away . '' 
`` The candles have n't , anyway ! '' 
ejaculated Babet . 
And he pointed out to Eponine , across the tops of the trees , a light which was wandering about in the mansard roof of the pavilion . 
It was Toussaint , who had stayed up to spread out some linen to dry . 
Eponine made a final effort . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` they 're very poor folks , and it 's a hovel where there is n't a sou . '' 
`` Go to the devil ! '' 
cried Thenardier . 
`` When we 've turned the house upside down and put the cellar at the top and the attic below , we 'll tell you what there is inside , and whether it 's francs or sous or half-farthings . '' 
And he pushed her aside with the intention of entering . 
`` My good friend , Mr. Montparnasse , '' said Eponine , `` I entreat you , you are a good fellow , do n't enter . '' 
`` Take care , you 'll cut yourself , '' replied Montparnasse . 
Thenardier resumed in his decided tone : -- `` Decamp , my girl , and leave men to their own affairs ! '' 
Eponine released Montparnasse 's hand , which she had grasped again , and said : -- `` So you mean to enter this house ? '' 
`` Rather ! '' 
grinned the ventriloquist . 
Then she set her back against the gate , faced the six ruffians who were armed to the teeth , and to whom the night lent the visages of demons , and said in a firm , low voice : -- `` Well , I do n't mean that you shall . '' 
They halted in amazement . 
The ventriloquist , however , finished his grin . 
She went on : -- `` Friends ! 
Listen well . 
This is not what you want . 
Now I 'm talking . 
In the first place , if you enter this garden , if you lay a hand on this gate , I 'll scream , I 'll beat on the door , I 'll rouse everybody , I 'll have the whole six of you seized , I 'll call the police . '' 
`` She 'd do it , too , '' said Thenardier in a low tone to Brujon and the ventriloquist . 
She shook her head and added : -- `` Beginning with my father ! '' 
Thenardier stepped nearer . 
`` Not so close , my good man ! '' 
said she . 
He retreated , growling between his teeth : -- `` Why , what 's the matter with her ? '' 
And he added : -- `` Bitch ! '' 
She began to laugh in a terrible way : -- `` As you like , but you shall not enter here . 
I 'm not the daughter of a dog , since I 'm the daughter of a wolf . 
There are six of you , what matters that to me ? 
You are men . 
Well , I 'm a woman . 
You do n't frighten me . 
I tell you that you sha n't enter this house , because it does n't suit me . 
If you approach , I 'll bark . 
I told you , I 'm the dog , and I do n't care a straw for you . 
Go your way , you bore me ! 
Go where you please , but do n't come here , I forbid it ! 
You can use your knives . 
I 'll use kicks ; it 's all the same to me , come on ! '' 
She advanced a pace nearer the ruffians , she was terrible , she burst out laughing : -- `` Pardine ! 
I 'm not afraid . 
I shall be hungry this summer , and I shall be cold this winter . 
Are n't they ridiculous , these ninnies of men , to think they can scare a girl ! 
What ! 
Scare ? 
Oh , yes , much ! 
Because you have finical poppets of mistresses who hide under the bed when you put on a big voice , forsooth ! 
I ai n't afraid of anything , that I ai n't ! '' 
She fastened her intent gaze upon Thenardier and said : -- `` Not even of you , father ! '' 
Then she continued , as she cast her blood-shot , spectre-like eyes upon the ruffians in turn : -- `` What do I care if I 'm picked up to-morrow morning on the pavement of the Rue Plumet , killed by the blows of my father 's club , or whether I 'm found a year from now in the nets at Saint-Cloud or the Isle of Swans in the midst of rotten old corks and drowned dogs ? '' 
She was forced to pause ; she was seized by a dry cough , her breath came from her weak and narrow chest like the death-rattle . 
She resumed : -- `` I have only to cry out , and people will come , and then slap , bang ! 
There are six of you ; I represent the whole world . '' 
Thenardier made a movement towards her . 
`` Do n't approach ! '' 
she cried . 
He halted , and said gently : -- `` Well , no ; I wo n't approach , but do n't speak so loud . 
So you intend to hinder us in our work , my daughter ? 
But we must earn our living all the same . 
Have you no longer any kind feeling for your father ? '' 
`` You bother me , '' said Eponine . 
`` But we must live , we must eat -- '' `` Burst ! '' 
So saying , she seated herself on the underpinning of the fence and hummed : -- `` Mon bras si dodu , `` My arm so plump , Ma jambe bien faite My leg well formed , Et le temps perdu . '' 
And time wasted . '' 
She had set her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand , and she swung her foot with an air of indifference . 
Her tattered gown permitted a view of her thin shoulder-blades . 
The neighboring street lantern illuminated her profile and her attitude . 
Nothing more resolute and more surprising could be seen . 
The six rascals , speechless and gloomy at being held in check by a girl , retreated beneath the shadow cast by the lantern , and held counsel with furious and humiliated shrugs . 
In the meantime she stared at them with a stern but peaceful air . 
`` There 's something the matter with her , '' said Babet . 
`` A reason . 
Is she in love with the dog ? 
It 's a shame to miss this , anyway . 
Two women , an old fellow who lodges in the back-yard , and curtains that ai n't so bad at the windows . 
The old cove must be a Jew . 
I think the job 's a good one . '' 
`` Well , go in , then , the rest of you , '' exclaimed Montparnasse . 
`` Do the job . 
I 'll stay here with the girl , and if she fails us -- '' He flashed the knife , which he held open in his hand , in the light of the lantern . 
Thenardier said not a word , and seemed ready for whatever the rest pleased . 
Brujon , who was somewhat of an oracle , and who had , as the reader knows , `` put up the job , '' had not as yet spoken . 
He seemed thoughtful . 
He had the reputation of not sticking at anything , and it was known that he had plundered a police post simply out of bravado . 
Besides this he made verses and songs , which gave him great authority . 
Babet interrogated him : -- `` You say nothing , Brujon ? '' 
Brujon remained silent an instant longer , then he shook his head in various ways , and finally concluded to speak : -- `` See here ; this morning I came across two sparrows fighting , this evening I jostled a woman who was quarrelling . 
All that 's bad . 
Let 's quit . '' 
They went away . 
As they went , Montparnasse muttered : -- `` Never mind ! 
if they had wanted , I 'd have cut her throat . '' 
Babet responded `` I would n't . 
I do n't hit a lady . '' 
At the corner of the street they halted and exchanged the following enigmatical dialogue in a low tone : -- `` Where shall we go to sleep to-night ? '' 
`` Under Pantin -LSB- Paris -RSB- . '' 
`` Have you the key to the gate , Thenardier ? '' 
`` Pardi . '' 
Eponine , who never took her eyes off of them , saw them retreat by the road by which they had come . 
She rose and began to creep after them along the walls and the houses . 
She followed them thus as far as the boulevard . 
There they parted , and she saw these six men plunge into the gloom , where they appeared to melt away . 
THINGS OF THE NIGHT After the departure of the ruffians , the Rue Plumet resumed its tranquil , nocturnal aspect . 
That which had just taken place in this street would not have astonished a forest . 
The lofty trees , the copses , the heaths , the branches rudely interlaced , the tall grass , exist in a sombre manner ; the savage swarming there catches glimpses of sudden apparitions of the invisible ; that which is below man distinguishes , through the mists , that which is beyond man ; and the things of which we living beings are ignorant there meet face to face in the night . 
Nature , bristling and wild , takes alarm at certain approaches in which she fancies that she feels the supernatural . 
The forces of the gloom know each other , and are strangely balanced by each other . 
Teeth and claws fear what they can not grasp . 
Blood-drinking bestiality , voracious appetites , hunger in search of prey , the armed instincts of nails and jaws which have for source and aim the belly , glare and smell out uneasily the impassive spectral forms straying beneath a shroud , erect in its vague and shuddering robe , and which seem to them to live with a dead and terrible life . 
These brutalities , which are only matter , entertain a confused fear of having to deal with the immense obscurity condensed into an unknown being . 
A black figure barring the way stops the wild beast short . 
That which emerges from the cemetery intimidates and disconcerts that which emerges from the cave ; the ferocious fear the sinister ; wolves recoil when they encounter a ghoul . 
MARIUS BECOMES PRACTICAL ONCE MORE TO THE EXTENT OF GIVING COSETTE HIS ADDRESS While this sort of a dog with a human face was mounting guard over the gate , and while the six ruffians were yielding to a girl , Marius was by Cosette 's side . 
Never had the sky been more studded with stars and more charming , the trees more trembling , the odor of the grass more penetrating ; never had the birds fallen asleep among the leaves with a sweeter noise ; never had all the harmonies of universal serenity responded more thoroughly to the inward music of love ; never had Marius been more captivated , more happy , more ecstatic . 
But he had found Cosette sad ; Cosette had been weeping . 
Her eyes were red . 
This was the first cloud in that wonderful dream . 
Marius ' first word had been : `` What is the matter ? '' 
And she had replied : `` This . '' 
Then she had seated herself on the bench near the steps , and while he tremblingly took his place beside her , she had continued : -- `` My father told me this morning to hold myself in readiness , because he has business , and we may go away from here . '' 
Marius shivered from head to foot . 
When one is at the end of one 's life , to die means to go away ; when one is at the beginning of it , to go away means to die . 
For the last six weeks , Marius had little by little , slowly , by degrees , taken possession of Cosette each day . 
As we have already explained , in the case of first love , the soul is taken long before the body ; later on , one takes the body long before the soul ; sometimes one does not take the soul at all ; the Faublas and the Prudhommes add : `` Because there is none '' ; but the sarcasm is , fortunately , a blasphemy . 
So Marius possessed Cosette , as spirits possess , but he enveloped her with all his soul , and seized her jealously with incredible conviction . 
He possessed her smile , her breath , her perfume , the profound radiance of her blue eyes , the sweetness of her skin when he touched her hand , the charming mark which she had on her neck , all her thoughts . 
Therefore , he possessed all Cosette 's dreams . 
He incessantly gazed at , and he sometimes touched lightly with his breath , the short locks on the nape of her neck , and he declared to himself that there was not one of those short hairs which did not belong to him , Marius . 
He gazed upon and adored the things that she wore , her knot of ribbon , her gloves , her sleeves , her shoes , her cuffs , as sacred objects of which he was the master . 
He dreamed that he was the lord of those pretty shell combs which she wore in her hair , and he even said to himself , in confused and suppressed stammerings of voluptuousness which did not make their way to the light , that there was not a ribbon of her gown , not a mesh in her stockings , not a fold in her bodice , which was not his . 
Beside Cosette he felt himself beside his own property , his own thing , his own despot and his slave . 
It seemed as though they had so intermingled their souls , that it would have been impossible to tell them apart had they wished to take them back again . 
-- `` This is mine . '' 
`` No , it is mine . '' 
`` I assure you that you are mistaken . 
This is my property . '' 
`` What you are taking as your own is myself . '' 
-- Marius was something that made a part of Cosette , and Cosette was something which made a part of Marius . 
Marius felt Cosette within him . 
To have Cosette , to possess Cosette , this , to him , was not to be distinguished from breathing . 
It was in the midst of this faith , of this intoxication , of this virgin possession , unprecedented and absolute , of this sovereignty , that these words : `` We are going away , '' fell suddenly , at a blow , and that the harsh voice of reality cried to him : `` Cosette is not yours ! '' 
Marius awoke . 
For six weeks Marius had been living , as we have said , outside of life ; those words , going away ! 
caused him to re-enter it harshly . 
He found not a word to say . 
Cosette merely felt that his hand was very cold . 
She said to him in her turn : `` What is the matter ? '' 
He replied in so low a tone that Cosette hardly heard him : -- `` I did not understand what you said . '' 
She began again : -- `` This morning my father told me to settle all my little affairs and to hold myself in readiness , that he would give me his linen to put in a trunk , that he was obliged to go on a journey , that we were to go away , that it is necessary to have a large trunk for me and a small one for him , and that all is to be ready in a week from now , and that we might go to England . '' 
`` But this is outrageous ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
It is certain , that , at that moment , no abuse of power , no violence , not one of the abominations of the worst tyrants , no action of Busiris , of Tiberius , or of Henry VIII. , could have equalled this in atrocity , in the opinion of Marius ; M. Fauchelevent taking his daughter off to England because he had business there . 
He demanded in a weak voice : -- `` And when do you start ? '' 
`` He did not say when . '' 
`` And when shall you return ? '' 
`` He did not say when . '' 
Marius rose and said coldly : -- `` Cosette , shall you go ? '' 
Cosette turned toward him her beautiful eyes , all filled with anguish , and replied in a sort of bewilderment : -- `` Where ? '' 
`` To England . 
Shall you go ? '' 
`` Why do you say you to me ? '' 
`` I ask you whether you will go ? '' 
`` What do you expect me to do ? '' 
she said , clasping her hands . 
`` So , you will go ? '' 
`` If my father goes . '' 
`` So , you will go ? '' 
Cosette took Marius ' hand , and pressed it without replying . 
`` Very well , '' said Marius , `` then I will go elsewhere . '' 
Cosette felt rather than understood the meaning of these words . 
She turned so pale that her face shone white through the gloom . 
She stammered : -- `` What do you mean ? '' 
Marius looked at her , then raised his eyes to heaven , and answered : `` Nothing . '' 
When his eyes fell again , he saw Cosette smiling at him . 
The smile of a woman whom one loves possesses a visible radiance , even at night . 
`` How silly we are ! 
Marius , I have an idea . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` If we go away , do you go too ! 
I will tell you where ! 
Come and join me wherever I am . '' 
Marius was now a thoroughly roused man . 
He had fallen back into reality . 
He cried to Cosette : -- `` Go away with you ! 
Are you mad ? 
Why , I should have to have money , and I have none ! 
Go to England ? 
But I am in debt now , I owe , I do n't know how much , more than ten louis to Courfeyrac , one of my friends with whom you are not acquainted ! 
I have an old hat which is not worth three francs , I have a coat which lacks buttons in front , my shirt is all ragged , my elbows are torn , my boots let in the water ; for the last six weeks I have not thought about it , and I have not told you about it . 
You only see me at night , and you give me your love ; if you were to see me in the daytime , you would give me a sou ! 
Go to England ! 
Eh ! 
I have n't enough to pay for a passport ! '' 
He threw himself against a tree which was close at hand , erect , his brow pressed close to the bark , feeling neither the wood which flayed his skin , nor the fever which was throbbing in his temples , and there he stood motionless , on the point of falling , like the statue of despair . 
He remained a long time thus . 
One could remain for eternity in such abysses . 
At last he turned round . 
He heard behind him a faint stifled noise , which was sweet yet sad . 
It was Cosette sobbing . 
She had been weeping for more than two hours beside Marius as he meditated . 
He came to her , fell at her knees , and slowly prostrating himself , he took the tip of her foot which peeped out from beneath her robe , and kissed it . 
She let him have his way in silence . 
There are moments when a woman accepts , like a sombre and resigned goddess , the religion of love . 
`` Do not weep , '' he said . 
She murmured : -- `` Not when I may be going away , and you can not come ! '' 
He went on : -- `` Do you love me ? '' 
She replied , sobbing , by that word from paradise which is never more charming than amid tears : -- `` I adore you ! '' 
He continued in a tone which was an indescribable caress : -- `` Do not weep . 
Tell me , will you do this for me , and cease to weep ? '' 
`` Do you love me ? '' 
said she . 
He took her hand . 
`` Cosette , I have never given my word of honor to any one , because my word of honor terrifies me . 
I feel that my father is by my side . 
Well , I give you my most sacred word of honor , that if you go away I shall die . '' 
In the tone with which he uttered these words there lay a melancholy so solemn and so tranquil , that Cosette trembled . 
She felt that chill which is produced by a true and gloomy thing as it passes by . 
The shock made her cease weeping . 
`` Now , listen , '' said he , `` do not expect me to-morrow . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Do not expect me until the day after to-morrow . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Why ? '' 
`` You will see . '' 
`` A day without seeing you ! 
But that is impossible ! '' 
`` Let us sacrifice one day in order to gain our whole lives , perhaps . '' 
And Marius added in a low tone and in an aside : -- `` He is a man who never changes his habits , and he has never received any one except in the evening . '' 
`` Of what man are you speaking ? '' 
asked Cosette . 
`` I ? 
I said nothing . '' 
`` What do you hope , then ? '' 
`` Wait until the day after to-morrow . '' 
`` You wish it ? '' 
`` Yes , Cosette . '' 
She took his head in both her hands , raising herself on tiptoe in order to be on a level with him , and tried to read his hope in his eyes . 
Marius resumed : -- `` Now that I think of it , you ought to know my address : something might happen , one never knows ; I live with that friend named Courfeyrac , Rue de la Verrerie , No. 16 . '' 
He searched in his pocket , pulled out his penknife , and with the blade he wrote on the plaster of the wall : -- `` 16 Rue de la Verrerie . '' 
In the meantime , Cosette had begun to gaze into his eyes once more . 
`` Tell me your thought , Marius ; you have some idea . 
Tell it to me . 
Oh ! 
tell me , so that I may pass a pleasant night . '' 
`` This is my idea : that it is impossible that God should mean to part us . 
Wait ; expect me the day after to-morrow . '' 
`` What shall I do until then ? '' 
said Cosette . 
`` You are outside , you go , and come ! 
How happy men are ! 
I shall remain entirely alone ! 
Oh ! 
How sad I shall be ! 
What is it that you are going to do to-morrow evening ? 
tell me . '' 
`` I am going to try something . '' 
`` Then I will pray to God and I will think of you here , so that you may be successful . 
I will question you no further , since you do not wish it . 
You are my master . 
I shall pass the evening to-morrow in singing that music from Euryanthe that you love , and that you came one evening to listen to , outside my shutters . 
But day after to-morrow you will come early . 
I shall expect you at dusk , at nine o'clock precisely , I warn you . 
Mon Dieu ! 
how sad it is that the days are so long ! 
On the stroke of nine , do you understand , I shall be in the garden . '' 
`` And I also . '' 
And without having uttered it , moved by the same thought , impelled by those electric currents which place lovers in continual communication , both being intoxicated with delight even in their sorrow , they fell into each other 's arms , without perceiving that their lips met while their uplifted eyes , overflowing with rapture and full of tears , gazed upon the stars . 
When Marius went forth , the street was deserted . 
This was the moment when Eponine was following the ruffians to the boulevard . 
While Marius had been dreaming with his head pressed to the tree , an idea had crossed his mind ; an idea , alas ! 
that he himself judged to be senseless and impossible . 
He had come to a desperate decision . 
THE OLD HEART AND THE YOUNG HEART IN THE PRESENCE OF EACH OTHER At that epoch , Father Gillenormand was well past his ninety-first birthday . 
He still lived with Mademoiselle Gillenormand in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the old house which he owned . 
He was , as the reader will remember , one of those antique old men who await death perfectly erect , whom age bears down without bending , and whom even sorrow can not curve . 
Still , his daughter had been saying for some time : `` My father is sinking . '' 
He no longer boxed the maids ' ears ; he no longer thumped the landing-place so vigorously with his cane when Basque was slow in opening the door . 
The Revolution of July had exasperated him for the space of barely six months . 
He had viewed , almost tranquilly , that coupling of words , in the Moniteur : M. Humblot-Conte , peer of France . 
The fact is , that the old man was deeply dejected . 
He did not bend , he did not yield ; this was no more a characteristic of his physical than of his moral nature , but he felt himself giving way internally . 
For four years he had been waiting for Marius , with his foot firmly planted , that is the exact word , in the conviction that that good-for-nothing young scamp would ring at his door some day or other ; now he had reached the point , where , at certain gloomy hours , he said to himself , that if Marius made him wait much longer -- It was not death that was insupportable to him ; it was the idea that perhaps he should never see Marius again . 
The idea of never seeing Marius again had never entered his brain until that day ; now the thought began to recur to him , and it chilled him . 
Absence , as is always the case in genuine and natural sentiments , had only served to augment the grandfather 's love for the ungrateful child , who had gone off like a flash . 
It is during December nights , when the cold stands at ten degrees , that one thinks oftenest of the son . 
M. Gillenormand was , or thought himself , above all things , incapable of taking a single step , he -- the grandfather , towards his grandson ; `` I would die rather , '' he said to himself . 
He did not consider himself as the least to blame ; but he thought of Marius only with profound tenderness , and the mute despair of an elderly , kindly old man who is about to vanish in the dark . 
He began to lose his teeth , which added to his sadness . 
M. Gillenormand , without however acknowledging it to himself , for it would have rendered him furious and ashamed , had never loved a mistress as he loved Marius . 
He had had placed in his chamber , opposite the head of his bed , so that it should be the first thing on which his eyes fell on waking , an old portrait of his other daughter , who was dead , Madame Pontmercy , a portrait which had been taken when she was eighteen . 
He gazed incessantly at that portrait . 
One day , he happened to say , as he gazed upon it : -- `` I think the likeness is strong . '' 
`` To my sister ? '' 
inquired Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
`` Yes , certainly . '' 
`` The old man added : -- `` And to him also . '' 
Once as he sat with his knees pressed together , and his eyes almost closed , in a despondent attitude , his daughter ventured to say to him : -- `` Father , are you as angry with him as ever ? '' 
She paused , not daring to proceed further . 
`` With whom ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` With that poor Marius . '' 
He raised his aged head , laid his withered and emaciated fist on the table , and exclaimed in his most irritated and vibrating tone : -- `` Poor Marius , do you say ! 
That gentleman is a knave , a wretched scoundrel , a vain little ingrate , a heartless , soulless , haughty , and wicked man ! '' 
And he turned away so that his daughter might not see the tear that stood in his eye . 
Three days later he broke a silence which had lasted four hours , to say to his daughter point-blank : -- `` I had the honor to ask Mademoiselle Gillenormand never to mention him to me . '' 
Aunt Gillenormand renounced every effort , and pronounced this acute diagnosis : `` My father never cared very much for my sister after her folly . 
It is clear that he detests Marius . '' 
`` After her folly '' meant : `` after she had married the colonel . '' 
However , as the reader has been able to conjecture , Mademoiselle Gillenormand had failed in her attempt to substitute her favorite , the officer of lancers , for Marius . 
The substitute , Theodule , had not been a success . 
M. Gillenormand had not accepted the quid pro quo . 
A vacancy in the heart does not accommodate itself to a stop-gap . 
Theodule , on his side , though he scented the inheritance , was disgusted at the task of pleasing . 
The goodman bored the lancer ; and the lancer shocked the goodman . 
Lieutenant Theodule was gay , no doubt , but a chatter-box , frivolous , but vulgar ; a high liver , but a frequenter of bad company ; he had mistresses , it is true , and he had a great deal to say about them , it is true also ; but he talked badly . 
All his good qualities had a defect . 
M. Gillenormand was worn out with hearing him tell about the love affairs that he had in the vicinity of the barracks in the Rue de Babylone . 
And then , Lieutenant Gillenormand sometimes came in his uniform , with the tricolored cockade . 
This rendered him downright intolerable . 
Finally , Father Gillenormand had said to his daughter : `` I 've had enough of that Theodule . 
I have n't much taste for warriors in time of peace . 
Receive him if you choose . 
I do n't know but I prefer slashers to fellows that drag their swords . 
The clash of blades in battle is less dismal , after all , than the clank of the scabbard on the pavement . 
And then , throwing out your chest like a bully and lacing yourself like a girl , with stays under your cuirass , is doubly ridiculous . 
When one is a veritable man , one holds equally aloof from swagger and from affected airs . 
He is neither a blusterer nor a finnicky-hearted man . 
Keep your Theodule for yourself . '' 
It was in vain that his daughter said to him : `` But he is your grandnephew , nevertheless , '' -- it turned out that M. Gillenormand , who was a grandfather to the very finger-tips , was not in the least a grand-uncle . 
In fact , as he had good sense , and as he had compared the two , Theodule had only served to make him regret Marius all the more . 
One evening , -- it was the 24th of June , which did not prevent Father Gillenormand having a rousing fire on the hearth , -- he had dismissed his daughter , who was sewing in a neighboring apartment . 
He was alone in his chamber , amid its pastoral scenes , with his feet propped on the andirons , half enveloped in his huge screen of coromandel lacquer , with its nine leaves , with his elbow resting on a table where burned two candles under a green shade , engulfed in his tapestry armchair , and in his hand a book which he was not reading . 
He was dressed , according to his wont , like an incroyable , and resembled an antique portrait by Garat . 
This would have made people run after him in the street , had not his daughter covered him up , whenever he went out , in a vast bishop 's wadded cloak , which concealed his attire . 
At home , he never wore a dressing gown , except when he rose and retired . 
`` It gives one a look of age , '' said he . 
Father Gillenormand was thinking of Marius lovingly and bitterly ; and , as usual , bitterness predominated . 
His tenderness once soured always ended by boiling and turning to indignation . 
He had reached the point where a man tries to make up his mind and to accept that which rends his heart . 
He was explaining to himself that there was no longer any reason why Marius should return , that if he intended to return , he should have done it long ago , that he must renounce the idea . 
He was trying to accustom himself to the thought that all was over , and that he should die without having beheld `` that gentleman '' again . 
But his whole nature revolted ; his aged paternity would not consent to this . 
`` Well ! '' 
said he , -- this was his doleful refrain , -- `` he will not return ! '' 
His bald head had fallen upon his breast , and he fixed a melancholy and irritated gaze upon the ashes on his hearth . 
In the very midst of his revery , his old servant Basque entered , and inquired : -- `` Can Monsieur receive M. Marius ? '' 
The old man sat up erect , pallid , and like a corpse which rises under the influence of a galvanic shock . 
All his blood had retreated to his heart . 
He stammered : -- `` M. Marius what ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Basque , intimidated and put out of countenance by his master 's air ; `` I have not seen him . 
Nicolette came in and said to me : ` There 's a young man here ; say that it is M. Marius . ' '' 
Father Gillenormand stammered in a low voice : -- `` Show him in . '' 
And he remained in the same attitude , with shaking head , and his eyes fixed on the door . 
It opened once more . 
A young man entered . 
It was Marius . 
Marius halted at the door , as though waiting to be bidden to enter . 
His almost squalid attire was not perceptible in the obscurity caused by the shade . 
Nothing could be seen but his calm , grave , but strangely sad face . 
It was several minutes before Father Gillenormand , dulled with amazement and joy , could see anything except a brightness as when one is in the presence of an apparition . 
He was on the point of swooning ; he saw Marius through a dazzling light . 
It certainly was he , it certainly was Marius . 
At last ! 
After the lapse of four years ! 
He grasped him entire , so to speak , in a single glance . 
He found him noble , handsome , distinguished , well-grown , a complete man , with a suitable mien and a charming air . 
He felt a desire to open his arms , to call him , to fling himself forward ; his heart melted with rapture , affectionate words swelled and overflowed his breast ; at length all his tenderness came to the light and reached his lips , and , by a contrast which constituted the very foundation of his nature , what came forth was harshness . 
He said abruptly : -- `` What have you come here for ? '' 
Marius replied with embarrassment : -- `` Monsieur -- '' M. Gillenormand would have liked to have Marius throw himself into his arms . 
He was displeased with Marius and with himself . 
He was conscious that he was brusque , and that Marius was cold . 
It caused the goodman unendurable and irritating anxiety to feel so tender and forlorn within , and only to be able to be hard outside . 
Bitterness returned . 
He interrupted Marius in a peevish tone : -- `` Then why did you come ? '' 
That `` then '' signified : If you do not come to embrace me . 
Marius looked at his grandfather , whose pallor gave him a face of marble . 
`` Monsieur -- '' `` Have you come to beg my pardon ? 
Do you acknowledge your faults ? '' 
