Haste was even requisite . 
It occurred to Jean Valjean that the grating which he had caught sight of under the flag-stones might also catch the eye of the soldiery , and that everything hung upon this chance . 
They also might descend into that well and search it . 
There was not a minute to be lost . 
He had deposited Marius on the ground , he picked him up again , -- that is the real word for it , -- placed him on his shoulders once more , and set out . 
He plunged resolutely into the gloom . 
The truth is , that they were less safe than Jean Valjean fancied . 
Perils of another sort and no less serious were awaiting them , perchance . 
After the lightning-charged whirlwind of the combat , the cavern of miasmas and traps ; after chaos , the sewer . 
Jean Valjean had fallen from one circle of hell into another . 
When he had advanced fifty paces , he was obliged to halt . 
A problem presented itself . 
The passage terminated in another gut which he encountered across his path . 
There two ways presented themselves . 
Which should he take ? 
Ought he to turn to the left or to the right ? 
How was he to find his bearings in that black labyrinth ? 
This labyrinth , to which we have already called the reader 's attention , has a clue , which is its slope . 
To follow to the slope is to arrive at the river . 
This Jean Valjean instantly comprehended . 
He said to himself that he was probably in the sewer des Halles ; that if he were to choose the path to the left and follow the slope , he would arrive , in less than a quarter of an hour , at some mouth on the Seine between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf , that is to say , he would make his appearance in broad daylight on the most densely peopled spot in Paris . 
Perhaps he would come out on some man-hole at the intersection of streets . 
Amazement of the passers-by at beholding two bleeding men emerge from the earth at their feet . 
Arrival of the police , a call to arms of the neighboring post of guards . 
Thus they would be seized before they had even got out . 
It would be better to plunge into that labyrinth , to confide themselves to that black gloom , and to trust to Providence for the outcome . 
He ascended the incline , and turned to the right . 
When he had turned the angle of the gallery , the distant glimmer of an air-hole disappeared , the curtain of obscurity fell upon him once more , and he became blind again . 
Nevertheless , he advanced as rapidly as possible . 
Marius ' two arms were passed round his neck , and the former 's feet dragged behind him . 
He held both these arms with one hand , and groped along the wall with the other . 
Marius ' cheek touched his , and clung there , bleeding . 
He felt a warm stream which came from Marius trickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes . 
But a humid warmth near his ear , which the mouth of the wounded man touched , indicated respiration , and consequently , life . 
The passage along which Jean Valjean was now proceeding was not so narrow as the first . 
Jean Valjean walked through it with considerable difficulty . 
The rain of the preceding day had not , as yet , entirely run off , and it created a little torrent in the centre of the bottom , and he was forced to hug the wall in order not to have his feet in the water . 
Thus he proceeded in the gloom . 
He resembled the beings of the night groping in the invisible and lost beneath the earth in veins of shadow . 
Still , little by little , whether it was that the distant air-holes emitted a little wavering light in this opaque gloom , or whether his eyes had become accustomed to the obscurity , some vague vision returned to him , and he began once more to gain a confused idea , now of the wall which he touched , now of the vault beneath which he was passing . 
The pupil dilates in the dark , and the soul dilates in misfortune and ends by finding God there . 
It was not easy to direct his course . 
The line of the sewer re-echoes , so to speak , the line of the streets which lie above it . 
There were then in Paris two thousand two hundred streets . 
Let the reader imagine himself beneath that forest of gloomy branches which is called the sewer . 
The system of sewers existing at that epoch , placed end to end , would have given a length of eleven leagues . 
We have said above , that the actual net-work , thanks to the special activity of the last thirty years , was no less than sixty leagues in extent . 
Jean Valjean began by committing a blunder . 
He thought that he was beneath the Rue Saint-Denis , and it was a pity that it was not so . 
Under the Rue Saint-Denis there is an old stone sewer which dates from Louis XIII . 
and which runs straight to the collecting sewer , called the Grand Sewer , with but a single elbow , on the right , on the elevation of the ancient Cour des Miracles , and a single branch , the Saint-Martin sewer , whose four arms describe a cross . 
But the gut of the Petite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of the Corinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the Rue Saint-Denis ; it ended at the Montmartre sewer , and it was in this that Jean Valjean was entangled . 
There opportunities of losing oneself abound . 
The Montmartre sewer is one of the most labyrinthine of the ancient network . 
Fortunately , Jean Valjean had left behind him the sewer of the markets whose geometrical plan presents the appearance of a multitude of parrots ' roosts piled on top of each other ; but he had before him more than one embarrassing encounter and more than one street corner -- for they are streets -- presenting itself in the gloom like an interrogation point ; first , on his left , the vast sewer of the Platriere , a sort of Chinese puzzle , thrusting out and entangling its chaos of Ts and Zs under the Post-Office and under the rotunda of the Wheat Market , as far as the Seine , where it terminates in a Y ; secondly , on his right , the curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran with its three teeth , which are also blind courts ; thirdly , on his left , the branch of the Mail , complicated , almost at its inception , with a sort of fork , and proceeding from zig-zag to zig-zag until it ends in the grand crypt of the outlet of the Louvre , truncated and ramified in every direction ; and lastly , the blind alley of a passage of the Rue des Jeuneurs , without counting little ducts here and there , before reaching the belt sewer , which alone could conduct him to some issue sufficiently distant to be safe . 
Had Jean Valjean had any idea of all that we have here pointed out , he would speedily have perceived , merely by feeling the wall , that he was not in the subterranean gallery of the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Instead of the ancient stone , instead of the antique architecture , haughty and royal even in the sewer , with pavement and string courses of granite and mortar costing eight hundred livres the fathom , he would have felt under his hand contemporary cheapness , economical expedients , porous stone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation , which costs two hundred francs the metre , and the bourgeoise masonry known as a petits materiaux -- small stuff ; but of all this he knew nothing . 
He advanced with anxiety , but with calmness , seeing nothing , knowing nothing , buried in chance , that is to say , engulfed in providence . 
By degrees , we will admit , a certain horror seized upon him . 
The gloom which enveloped him penetrated his spirit . 
He walked in an enigma . 
This aqueduct of the sewer is formidable ; it interlaces in a dizzy fashion . 
It is a melancholy thing to be caught in this Paris of shadows . 
Jean Valjean was obliged to find and even to invent his route without seeing it . 
In this unknown , every step that he risked might be his last . 
How was he to get out ? 
should he find an issue ? 
should he find it in time ? 
would that colossal subterranean sponge with its stone cavities , allow itself to be penetrated and pierced ? 
should he there encounter some unexpected knot in the darkness ? 
should he arrive at the inextricable and the impassable ? 
would Marius die there of hemorrhage and he of hunger ? 
should they end by both getting lost , and by furnishing two skeletons in a nook of that night ? 
He did not know . 
He put all these questions to himself without replying to them . 
The intestines of Paris form a precipice . 
Like the prophet , he was in the belly of the monster . 
All at once , he had a surprise . 
At the most unforeseen moment , and without having ceased to walk in a straight line , he perceived that he was no longer ascending ; the water of the rivulet was beating against his heels , instead of meeting him at his toes . 
The sewer was now descending . 
Why ? 
Was he about to arrive suddenly at the Seine ? 
This danger was a great one , but the peril of retreating was still greater . 
He continued to advance . 
It was not towards the Seine that he was proceeding . 
The ridge which the soil of Paris forms on its right bank empties one of its water-sheds into the Seine and the other into the Grand Sewer . 
The crest of this ridge which determines the division of the waters describes a very capricious line . 
The culminating point , which is the point of separation of the currents , is in the Sainte-Avoye sewer , beyond the Rue Michelle-Comte , in the sewer of the Louvre , near the boulevards , and in the Montmartre sewer , near the Halles . 
It was this culminating point that Jean Valjean had reached . 
He was directing his course towards the belt sewer ; he was on the right path . 
But he did not know it . 
Every time that he encountered a branch , he felt of its angles , and if he found that the opening which presented itself was smaller than the passage in which he was , he did not enter but continued his route , rightly judging that every narrower way must needs terminate in a blind alley , and could only lead him further from his goal , that is to say , the outlet . 
Thus he avoided the quadruple trap which was set for him in the darkness by the four labyrinths which we have just enumerated . 
At a certain moment , he perceived that he was emerging from beneath the Paris which was petrified by the uprising , where the barricades had suppressed circulation , and that he was entering beneath the living and normal Paris . 
Overhead he suddenly heard a noise as of thunder , distant but continuous . 
It was the rumbling of vehicles . 
He had been walking for about half an hour , at least according to the calculation which he made in his own mind , and he had not yet thought of rest ; he had merely changed the hand with which he was holding Marius . 
The darkness was more profound than ever , but its very depth reassured him . 
All at once , he saw his shadow in front of him . 
It was outlined on a faint , almost indistinct reddish glow , which vaguely empurpled the flooring vault underfoot , and the vault overhead , and gilded to his right and to his left the two viscous walls of the passage . 
Stupefied , he turned round . 
Behind him , in the portion of the passage which he had just passed through , at a distance which appeared to him immense , piercing the dense obscurity , flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air of surveying him . 
It was the gloomy star of the police which was rising in the sewer . 
In the rear of that star eight or ten forms were moving about in a confused way , black , upright , indistinct , horrible . 
EXPLANATION On the day of the sixth of June , a battue of the sewers had been ordered . 
It was feared that the vanquished might have taken to them for refuge , and Prefect Gisquet was to search occult Paris while General Bugeaud swept public Paris ; a double and connected operation which exacted a double strategy on the part of the public force , represented above by the army and below by the police . 
Three squads of agents and sewermen explored the subterranean drain of Paris , the first on the right bank , the second on the left bank , the third in the city . 
The agents of police were armed with carabines , with bludgeons , swords and poignards . 
That which was directed at Jean Valjean at that moment , was the lantern of the patrol of the right bank . 
This patrol had just visited the curving gallery and the three blind alleys which lie beneath the Rue du Cadran . 
While they were passing their lantern through the depths of these blind alleys , Jean Valjean had encountered on his path the entrance to the gallery , had perceived that it was narrower than the principal passage and had not penetrated thither . 
He had passed on . 
The police , on emerging from the gallery du Cadran , had fancied that they heard the sound of footsteps in the direction of the belt sewer . 
They were , in fact , the steps of Jean Valjean . 
The sergeant in command of the patrol had raised his lantern , and the squad had begun to gaze into the mist in the direction whence the sound proceeded . 
This was an indescribable moment for Jean Valjean . 
Happily , if he saw the lantern well , the lantern saw him but ill . 
It was light and he was shadow . 
He was very far off , and mingled with the darkness of the place . 
He hugged the wall and halted . 
Moreover , he did not understand what it was that was moving behind him . 
The lack of sleep and food , and his emotions had caused him also to pass into the state of a visionary . 
He beheld a gleam , and around that gleam , forms . 
What was it ? 
He did not comprehend . 
Jean Valjean having paused , the sound ceased . 
The men of the patrol listened , and heard nothing , they looked and saw nothing . 
They held a consultation . 
There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer a sort of cross-roads called de service , which was afterwards suppressed , on account of the little interior lake which formed there , swallowing up the torrent of rain in heavy storms . 
The patrol could form a cluster in this open space . 
Jean Valjean saw these spectres form a sort of circle . 
These bull-dogs ' heads approached each other closely and whispered together . 
The result of this council held by the watch dogs was , that they had been mistaken , that there had been no noise , that it was useless to get entangled in the belt sewer , that it would only be a waste of time , but that they ought to hasten towards Saint-Merry ; that if there was anything to do , and any `` bousingot '' to track out , it was in that quarter . 
From time to time , parties re-sole their old insults . 
In 1832 , the word bousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin , which had become obsolete , and the word demagogue which has since rendered such excellent service . 
The sergeant gave orders to turn to the left , towards the watershed of the Seine . 
If it had occurred to them to separate into two squads , and to go in both directions , Jean Valjean would have been captured . 
All hung on that thread . 
It is probable that the instructions of the prefecture , foreseeing a possibility of combat and insurgents in force , had forbidden the patrol to part company . 
The patrol resumed its march , leaving Jean Valjean behind it . 
Of all this movement , Jean Valjean perceived nothing , except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenly wheeled round . 
Before taking his departure , the Sergeant , in order to acquit his policeman 's conscience , discharged his gun in the direction of Jean Valjean . 
The detonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt , like the rumbling of that titanic entrail . 
A bit of plaster which fell into the stream and splashed up the water a few paces away from Jean Valjean , warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head . 
Slow and measured steps resounded for some time on the timber work , gradually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance ; the group of black forms vanished , a glimmer of light oscillated and floated , communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter , then disappeared ; the silence became profound once more , the obscurity became complete , blindness and deafness resumed possession of the shadows ; and Jean Valjean , not daring to stir as yet , remained for a long time leaning with his back against the wall , with straining ears , and dilated pupils , watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol . 
THE `` SPUN '' MAN This justice must be rendered to the police of that period , that even in the most serious public junctures , it imperturbably fulfilled its duties connected with the sewers and surveillance . 
A revolt was , in its eyes , no pretext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their own mouths , and for neglecting society for the reason that the government was in peril . 
The ordinary service was performed correctly in company with the extraordinary service , and was not troubled by the latter . 
In the midst of an incalculable political event already begun , under the pressure of a possible revolution , a police agent , `` spun '' a thief without allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection and barricades . 
It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoon of the 6th of June on the banks of the Seine , on the slope of the right shore , a little beyond the Pont des Invalides . 
There is no longer any bank there now . 
The aspect of the locality has changed . 
On that bank , two men , separated by a certain distance , seemed to be watching each other while mutually avoiding each other . 
The one who was in advance was trying to get away , the one in the rear was trying to overtake the other . 
It was like a game of checkers played at a distance and in silence . 
Neither seemed to be in any hurry , and both walked slowly , as though each of them feared by too much haste to make his partner redouble his pace . 
One would have said that it was an appetite following its prey , and purposely without wearing the air of doing so . 
The prey was crafty and on its guard . 
The proper relations between the hunted pole-cat and the hunting dog were observed . 
The one who was seeking to escape had an insignificant mien and not an impressive appearance ; the one who was seeking to seize him was rude of aspect , and must have been rude to encounter . 
The first , conscious that he was the more feeble , avoided the second ; but he avoided him in a manner which was deeply furious ; any one who could have observed him would have discerned in his eyes the sombre hostility of flight , and all the menace that fear contains . 
The shore was deserted ; there were no passers-by ; not even a boatman nor a lighter-man was in the skiffs which were moored here and there . 
It was not easy to see these two men , except from the quay opposite , and to any person who had scrutinized them at that distance , the man who was in advance would have appeared like a bristling , tattered , and equivocal being , who was uneasy and trembling beneath a ragged blouse , and the other like a classic and official personage , wearing the frock-coat of authority buttoned to the chin . 
Perchance the reader might recognize these two men , if he were to see them closer at hand . 
What was the object of the second man ? 
Probably to succeed in clothing the first more warmly . 
When a man clothed by the state pursues a man in rags , it is in order to make of him a man who is also clothed by the state . 
Only , the whole question lies in the color . 
To be dressed in blue is glorious ; to be dressed in red is disagreeable . 
There is a purple from below . 
It is probably some unpleasantness and some purple of this sort which the first man is desirous of shirking . 
If the other allowed him to walk on , and had not seized him as yet , it was , judging from all appearances , in the hope of seeing him lead up to some significant meeting-place and to some group worth catching . 
This delicate operation is called `` spinning . '' 
What renders this conjecture entirely probable is that the buttoned-up man , on catching sight from the shore of a hackney-coach on the quay as it was passing along empty , made a sign to the driver ; the driver understood , evidently recognized the person with whom he had to deal , turned about and began to follow the two men at the top of the quay , at a foot-pace . 
This was not observed by the slouching and tattered personage who was in advance . 
The hackney-coach rolled along the trees of the Champs-Elysees . 
The bust of the driver , whip in hand , could be seen moving along above the parapet . 
One of the secret instructions of the police authorities to their agents contains this article : `` Always have on hand a hackney-coach , in case of emergency . '' 
While these two men were manoeuvring , each on his own side , with irreproachable strategy , they approached an inclined plane on the quay which descended to the shore , and which permitted cab-drivers arriving from Passy to come to the river and water their horses . 
This inclined plane was suppressed later on , for the sake of symmetry ; horses may die of thirst , but the eye is gratified . 
It is probable that the man in the blouse had intended to ascend this inclined plane , with a view to making his escape into the Champs-Elysees , a place ornamented with trees , but , in return , much infested with policemen , and where the other could easily exercise violence . 
This point on the quay is not very far distant from the house brought to Paris from Moret in 1824 , by Colonel Brack , and designated as `` the house of Francois I. '' A guard house is situated close at hand . 
To the great surprise of his watcher , the man who was being tracked did not mount by the inclined plane for watering . 
He continued to advance along the quay on the shore . 
His position was visibly becoming critical . 
What was he intending to do , if not to throw himself into the Seine ? 
Henceforth , there existed no means of ascending to the quay ; there was no other inclined plane , no staircase ; and they were near the spot , marked by the bend in the Seine towards the Pont de Jena , where the bank , growing constantly narrower , ended in a slender tongue , and was lost in the water . 
There he would inevitably find himself blocked between the perpendicular wall on his right , the river on his left and in front of him , and the authorities on his heels . 
It is true that this termination of the shore was hidden from sight by a heap of rubbish six or seven feet in height , produced by some demolition or other . 
But did this man hope to conceal himself effectually behind that heap of rubbish , which one need but skirt ? 
The expedient would have been puerile . 
He certainly was not dreaming of such a thing . 
The innocence of thieves does not extend to that point . 
The pile of rubbish formed a sort of projection at the water 's edge , which was prolonged in a promontory as far as the wall of the quay . 
The man who was being followed arrived at this little mound and went round it , so that he ceased to be seen by the other . 
The latter , as he did not see , could not be seen ; he took advantage of this fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly . 
In a few moments , he had reached the rubbish heap and passed round it . 
There he halted in sheer amazement . 
The man whom he had been pursuing was no longer there . 
Total eclipse of the man in the blouse . 
The shore , beginning with the rubbish heap , was only about thirty paces long , then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of the quay . 
The fugitive could not have thrown himself into the Seine without being seen by the man who was following him . 
What had become of him ? 
The man in the buttoned-up coat walked to the extremity of the shore , and remained there in thought for a moment , his fists clenched , his eyes searching . 
All at once he smote his brow . 
He had just perceived , at the point where the land came to an end and the water began , a large iron grating , low , arched , garnished with a heavy lock and with three massive hinges . 
This grating , a sort of door pierced at the base of the quay , opened on the river as well as on the shore . 
A blackish stream passed under it . 
This stream discharged into the Seine . 
Beyond the heavy , rusty iron bars , a sort of dark and vaulted corridor could be descried . 
The man folded his arms and stared at the grating with an air of reproach . 
As this gaze did not suffice , he tried to thrust it aside ; he shook it , it resisted solidly . 
It is probable that it had just been opened , although no sound had been heard , a singular circumstance in so rusty a grating ; but it is certain that it had been closed again . 
This indicated that the man before whom that door had just opened had not a hook but a key . 
This evidence suddenly burst upon the mind of the man who was trying to move the grating , and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation : `` That is too much ! 
A government key ! '' 
Then , immediately regaining his composure , he expressed a whole world of interior ideas by this outburst of monosyllables accented almost ironically : `` Come ! 
Come ! 
Come ! 
Come ! '' 
That said , and in the hope of something or other , either that he should see the man emerge or other men enter , he posted himself on the watch behind a heap of rubbish , with the patient rage of a pointer . 
The hackney-coach , which regulated all its movements on his , had , in its turn , halted on the quay above him , close to the parapet . 
The coachman , foreseeing a prolonged wait , encased his horses ' muzzles in the bag of oats which is damp at the bottom , and which is so familiar to Parisians , to whom , be it said in parenthesis , the Government sometimes applies it . 
The rare passers-by on the Pont de Jena turned their heads , before they pursued their way , to take a momentary glance at these two motionless items in the landscape , the man on the shore , the carriage on the quay . 
HE ALSO BEARS HIS CROSS Jean Valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused . 
This march became more and more laborious . 
The level of these vaults varies ; the average height is about five feet , six inches , and has been calculated for the stature of a man ; Jean Valjean was forced to bend over , in order not to strike Marius against the vault ; at every step he had to bend , then to rise , and to feel incessantly of the wall . 
The moisture of the stones , and the viscous nature of the timber framework furnished but poor supports to which to cling , either for hand or foot . 
He stumbled along in the hideous dung-heap of the city . 
The intermittent gleams from the air-holes only appeared at very long intervals , and were so wan that the full sunlight seemed like the light of the moon ; all the rest was mist , miasma , opaqueness , blackness . 
Jean Valjean was both hungry and thirsty ; especially thirsty ; and this , like the sea , was a place full of water where a man can not drink . 
His strength , which was prodigious , as the reader knows , and which had been but little decreased by age , thanks to his chaste and sober life , began to give way , nevertheless . 
Fatigue began to gain on him ; and as his strength decreased , it made the weight of his burden increase . 
Marius , who was , perhaps , dead , weighed him down as inert bodies weigh . 
Jean Valjean held him in such a manner that his chest was not oppressed , and so that respiration could proceed as well as possible . 
Between his legs he felt the rapid gliding of the rats . 
One of them was frightened to such a degree that he bit him . 
From time to time , a breath of fresh air reached him through the vent-holes of the mouths of the sewer , and re-animated him . 
It might have been three hours past midday when he reached the belt-sewer . 
He was , at first , astonished at this sudden widening . 
He found himself , all at once , in a gallery where his outstretched hands could not reach the two walls , and beneath a vault which his head did not touch . 
The Grand Sewer is , in fact , eight feet wide and seven feet high . 
At the point where the Montmartre sewer joins the Grand Sewer , two other subterranean galleries , that of the Rue de Provence , and that of the Abattoir , form a square . 
Between these four ways , a less sagacious man would have remained undecided . 
Jean Valjean selected the broadest , that is to say , the belt-sewer . 
But here the question again came up -- should he descend or ascend ? 
He thought that the situation required haste , and that he must now gain the Seine at any risk . 
In other terms , he must descend . 
He turned to the left . 
It was well that he did so , for it is an error to suppose that the belt-sewer has two outlets , the one in the direction of Bercy , the other towards Passy , and that it is , as its name indicates , the subterranean girdle of the Paris on the right bank . 
The Grand Sewer , which is , it must be remembered , nothing else than the old brook of Menilmontant , terminates , if one ascends it , in a blind sack , that is to say , at its ancient point of departure which was its source , at the foot of the knoll of Menilmontant . 
There is no direct communication with the branch which collects the waters of Paris beginning with the Quartier Popincourt , and which falls into the Seine through the Amelot sewer above the ancient Isle Louviers . 
This branch , which completes the collecting sewer , is separated from it , under the Rue Menilmontant itself , by a pile which marks the dividing point of the waters , between upstream and downstream . 
If Jean Valjean had ascended the gallery he would have arrived , after a thousand efforts , and broken down with fatigue , and in an expiring condition , in the gloom , at a wall . 
He would have been lost . 
In case of necessity , by retracing his steps a little way , and entering the passage of the Filles-du-Calvaire , on condition that he did not hesitate at the subterranean crossing of the Carrefour Boucherat , and by taking the corridor Saint-Louis , then the Saint-Gilles gut on the left , then turning to the right and avoiding the Saint-Sebastian gallery , he might have reached the Amelot sewer , and thence , provided that he did not go astray in the sort of F which lies under the Bastille , he might have attained the outlet on the Seine near the Arsenal . 
But in order to do this , he must have been thoroughly familiar with the enormous madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications and in all its openings . 
Now , we must again insist that he knew nothing of that frightful drain which he was traversing ; and had any one asked him in what he was , he would have answered : `` In the night . '' 
His instinct served him well . 
To descend was , in fact , possible safety . 
He left on his right the two narrow passages which branch out in the form of a claw under the Rue Laffitte and the Rue Saint-Georges and the long , bifurcated corridor of the Chaussee d'Antin . 
A little beyond an affluent , which was , probably , the Madeleine branch , he halted . 
He was extremely weary . 
A passably large air-hole , probably the man-hole in the Rue d'Anjou , furnished a light that was almost vivid . 
Jean Valjean , with the gentleness of movement which a brother would exercise towards his wounded brother , deposited Marius on the banquette of the sewer . 
Marius ' blood-stained face appeared under the wan light of the air-hole like the ashes at the bottom of a tomb . 
His eyes were closed , his hair was plastered down on his temples like a painter 's brushes dried in red wash ; his hands hung limp and dead . 
A clot of blood had collected in the knot of his cravat ; his limbs were cold , and blood was clotted at the corners of his mouth ; his shirt had thrust itself into his wounds , the cloth of his coat was chafing the yawning gashes in the living flesh . 
Jean Valjean , pushing aside the garments with the tips of his fingers , laid his hand upon Marius ' breast ; his heart was still beating . 
Jean Valjean tore up his shirt , bandaged the young man 's wounds as well as he was able and stopped the flowing blood ; then bending over Marius , who still lay unconscious and almost without breathing , in that half light , he gazed at him with inexpressible hatred . 
On disarranging Marius ' garments , he had found two things in his pockets , the roll which had been forgotten there on the preceding evening , and Marius ' pocketbook . 
He ate the roll and opened the pocketbook . 
On the first page he found the four lines written by Marius . 
The reader will recall them : `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
Jean Valjean read these four lines by the light of the air-hole , and remained for a moment as though absorbed in thought , repeating in a low tone : `` Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , number 6 , Monsieur Gillenormand . '' 
He replaced the pocketbook in Marius ' pocket . 
He had eaten , his strength had returned to him ; he took Marius up once more upon his back , placed the latter 's head carefully on his right shoulder , and resumed his descent of the sewer . 
The Grand Sewer , directed according to the course of the valley of Menilmontant , is about two leagues long . 
It is paved throughout a notable portion of its extent . 
This torch of the names of the streets of Paris , with which we are illuminating for the reader Jean Valjean 's subterranean march , Jean Valjean himself did not possess . 
Nothing told him what zone of the city he was traversing , nor what way he had made . 
Only the growing pallor of the pools of light which he encountered from time to time indicated to him that the sun was withdrawing from the pavement , and that the day would soon be over ; and the rolling of vehicles overhead , having become intermittent instead of continuous , then having almost ceased , he concluded that he was no longer under central Paris , and that he was approaching some solitary region , in the vicinity of the outer boulevards , or the extreme outer quays . 
Where there are fewer houses and streets , the sewer has fewer air-holes . 
The gloom deepened around Jean Valjean . 
Nevertheless , he continued to advance , groping his way in the dark . 
Suddenly this darkness became terrible . 
IN THE CASE OF SAND AS IN THAT OF WOMAN , THERE IS A FINENESS WHICH IS TREACHEROUS He felt that he was entering the water , and that he no longer had a pavement under his feet , but only mud . 
It sometimes happens , that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland a man , either a traveller or a fisherman , while walking at low tide on the beach far from shore , suddenly notices that for several minutes past , he has been walking with some difficulty . 
The beach under foot is like pitch ; his soles stick fast to it ; it is no longer sand , it is bird-lime . 
The strand is perfectly dry , but at every step that he takes , as soon as the foot is raised , the print is filled with water . 
The eye , however , has perceived no change ; the immense beach is smooth and tranquil , all the sand has the same aspect , nothing distinguishes the soil that is solid from that which is not solid ; the joyous little cloud of sand-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of the passer-by . 
The man pursues his way , he walks on , turns towards the land , endeavors to approach the shore . 
He is not uneasy . 
Uneasy about what ? 
Only he is conscious that the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing at every step that he takes . 
All at once he sinks in . 
He sinks in two or three inches . 
Decidedly , he is not on the right road ; he halts to get his bearings . 
Suddenly he glances at his feet ; his feet have disappeared . 
The sand has covered them . 
He draws his feet out of the sand , he tries to retrace his steps , he turns back , he sinks in more deeply than before . 
The sand is up to his ankles , he tears himself free from it and flings himself to the left , the sand reaches to mid-leg , he flings himself to the right , the sand comes up to his knees . 
Then , with indescribable terror , he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a quicksand , and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in which neither man can walk nor fish can swim . 
He flings away his burden , if he have one , he lightens himself , like a ship in distress ; it is too late , the sand is above his knees . 
He shouts , he waves his hat , or his handkerchief , the sand continually gains on him ; if the beach is deserted , if the land is too far away , if the bank of sand is too ill-famed , there is no hero in the neighborhood , all is over , he is condemned to be engulfed . 
He is condemned to that terrible interment , long , infallible , implacable , which it is impossible to either retard or hasten , which lasts for hours , which will not come to an end , which seizes you erect , free , in the flush of health , which drags you down by the feet , which , at every effort that you attempt , at every shout that you utter , draws you a little lower , which has the air of punishing you for your resistance by a redoubled grasp , which forces a man to return slowly to earth , while leaving him time to survey the horizon , the trees , the verdant country , the smoke of the villages on the plain , the sails of the ships on the sea , the birds which fly and sing , the sun and the sky . 
This engulfment is the sepulchre which assumes a tide , and which mounts from the depths of the earth towards a living man . 
Each minute is an inexorable layer-out of the dead . 
The wretched man tries to sit down , to lie down , to climb ; every movement that he makes buries him deeper ; he straightens himself up , he sinks ; he feels that he is being swallowed up ; he shrieks , implores , cries to the clouds , wrings his hands , grows desperate . 
Behold him in the sand up to his belly , the sand reaches to his breast , he is only a bust now . 
He uplifts his hands , utters furious groans , clenches his nails on the beach , tries to cling fast to that ashes , supports himself on his elbows in order to raise himself from that soft sheath , and sobs frantically ; the sand mounts higher . 
The sand has reached his shoulders , the sand reaches to his throat ; only his face is visible now . 
His mouth cries aloud , the sand fills it ; silence . 
His eyes still gaze forth , the sand closes them , night . 
Then his brow decreases , a little hair quivers above the sand ; a hand projects , pierces the surface of the beach , waves and disappears . 
Sinister obliteration of a man . 
Sometimes a rider is engulfed with his horse ; sometimes the carter is swallowed up with his cart ; all founders in that strand . 
It is shipwreck elsewhere than in the water . 
It is the earth drowning a man . 
The earth , permeated with the ocean , becomes a pitfall . 
It presents itself in the guise of a plain , and it yawns like a wave . 
The abyss is subject to these treacheries . 
This melancholy fate , always possible on certain sea beaches , was also possible , thirty years ago , in the sewers of Paris . 
Before the important works , undertaken in 1833 , the subterranean drain of Paris was subject to these sudden slides . 
The water filtered into certain subjacent strata , which were particularly friable ; the foot-way , which was of flag-stones , as in the ancient sewers , or of cement on concrete , as in the new galleries , having no longer an underpinning , gave way . 
A fold in a flooring of this sort means a crack , means crumbling . 
The framework crumbled away for a certain length . 
This crevice , the hiatus of a gulf of mire , was called a fontis , in the special tongue . 
What is a fontis ? 
It is the quicksands of the seashore suddenly encountered under the surface of the earth ; it is the beach of Mont Saint-Michel in a sewer . 
The soaked soil is in a state of fusion , as it were ; all its molecules are in suspension in soft medium ; it is not earth and it is not water . 
The depth is sometimes very great . 
Nothing can be more formidable than such an encounter . 
If the water predominates , death is prompt , the man is swallowed up ; if earth predominates , death is slow . 
Can any one picture to himself such a death ? 
If being swallowed by the earth is terrible on the seashore , what is it in a cess-pool ? 
Instead of the open air , the broad daylight , the clear horizon , those vast sounds , those free clouds whence rains life , instead of those barks descried in the distance , of that hope under all sorts of forms , of probable passers-by , of succor possible up to the very last moment , -- instead of all this , deafness , blindness , a black vault , the inside of a tomb already prepared , death in the mire beneath a cover ! 
slow suffocation by filth , a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire and clutches you by the throat ; fetidness mingled with the death-rattle ; slime instead of the strand , sulfuretted hydrogen in place of the hurricane , dung in place of the ocean ! 
And to shout , to gnash one 's teeth , and to writhe , and to struggle , and to agonize , with that enormous city which knows nothing of it all , over one 's head ! 
Inexpressible is the horror of dying thus ! 
Death sometimes redeems his atrocity by a certain terrible dignity . 
On the funeral pile , in shipwreck , one can be great ; in the flames as in the foam , a superb attitude is possible ; one there becomes transfigured as one perishes . 
But not here . 
Death is filthy . 
It is humiliating to expire . 
The supreme floating visions are abject . 
Mud is synonymous with shame . 
It is petty , ugly , infamous . 
To die in a butt of Malvoisie , like Clarence , is permissible ; in the ditch of a scavenger , like Escoubleau , is horrible . 
To struggle therein is hideous ; at the same time that one is going through the death agony , one is floundering about . 
There are shadows enough for hell , and mire enough to render it nothing but a slough , and the dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a spectre or a frog . 
Everywhere else the sepulchre is sinister ; here it is deformed . 
The depth of the fontis varied , as well as their length and their density , according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil . 
Sometimes a fontis was three or four feet deep , sometimes eight or ten ; sometimes the bottom was unfathomable . 
Here the mire was almost solid , there almost liquid . 
In the Luniere fontis , it would have taken a man a day to disappear , while he would have been devoured in five minutes by the Philippeaux slough . 
The mire bears up more or less , according to its density . 
A child can escape where a man will perish . 
The first law of safety is to get rid of every sort of load . 
Every sewerman who felt the ground giving way beneath him began by flinging away his sack of tools , or his back-basket , or his hod . 
The fontis were due to different causes : the friability of the soil ; some landslip at a depth beyond the reach of man ; the violent summer rains ; the incessant flooding of winter ; long , drizzling showers . 
Sometimes the weight of the surrounding houses on a marly or sandy soil forced out the vaults of the subterranean galleries and caused them to bend aside , or it chanced that a flooring vault burst and split under this crushing thrust . 
In this manner , the heaping up of the Parthenon , obliterated , a century ago , a portion of the vaults of Saint-Genevieve hill . 
When a sewer was broken in under the pressure of the houses , the mischief was sometimes betrayed in the street above by a sort of space , like the teeth of a saw , between the paving-stones ; this crevice was developed in an undulating line throughout the entire length of the cracked vault , and then , the evil being visible , the remedy could be promptly applied . 
It also frequently happened , that the interior ravages were not revealed by any external scar , and in that case , woe to the sewermen . 
When they entered without precaution into the sewer , they were liable to be lost . 
Ancient registers make mention of several scavengers who were buried in fontis in this manner . 
They give many names ; among others , that of the sewerman who was swallowed up in a quagmire under the man-hole of the Rue Careme-Prenant , a certain Blaise Poutrain ; this Blaise Poutrain was the brother of Nicholas Poutrain , who was the last grave-digger of the cemetery called the Charnier des Innocents , in 1785 , the epoch when that cemetery expired . 
There was also that young and charming Vicomte d'Escoubleau , of whom we have just spoken , one of the heroes of the siege of Lerida , where they delivered the assault in silk stockings , with violins at their head . 
D'Escoubleau , surprised one night at his cousin 's , the Duchess de Sourdis ' , was drowned in a quagmire of the Beautreillis sewer , in which he had taken refuge in order to escape from the Duke . 
Madame de Sourdis , when informed of his death , demanded her smelling-bottle , and forgot to weep , through sniffling at her salts . 
In such cases , there is no love which holds fast ; the sewer extinguishes it . 
Hero refuses to wash the body of Leander . 
Thisbe stops her nose in the presence of Pyramus and says : `` Phew ! '' 
THE FONTIS Jean Valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis . 
This sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of the Champs-Elysees , difficult to handle in the hydraulic works and a bad preservative of the subterranean constructions , on account of its excessive fluidity . 
This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of the sands of the Quartier Saint-Georges , which could only be conquered by a stone construction on a concrete foundation , and the clayey strata , infected with gas , of the Quartier des Martyrs , which are so liquid that the only way in which a passage was effected under the gallery des Martyrs was by means of a cast-iron pipe . 
When , in 1836 , the old stone sewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honore , in which we now see Jean Valjean , was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it , the quicksand , which forms the subsoil of the Champs-Elysees as far as the Seine , presented such an obstacle , that the operation lasted nearly six months , to the great clamor of the dwellers on the riverside , particularly those who had hotels and carriages . 
The work was more than unhealthy ; it was dangerous . 
It is true that they had four months and a half of rain , and three floods of the Seine . 
The fontis which Jean Valjean had encountered was caused by the downpour of the preceding day . 
The pavement , badly sustained by the subjacent sand , had given way and had produced a stoppage of the water . 
Infiltration had taken place , a slip had followed . 
The dislocated bottom had sunk into the ooze . 
To what extent ? 
Impossible to say . 
The obscurity was more dense there than elsewhere . 
It was a pit of mire in a cavern of night . 
Jean Valjean felt the pavement vanishing beneath his feet . 
He entered this slime . 
There was water on the surface , slime at the bottom . 
He must pass it . 
To retrace his steps was impossible . 
Marius was dying , and Jean Valjean exhausted . 
Besides , where was he to go ? 
Jean Valjean advanced . 
Moreover , the pit seemed , for the first few steps , not to be very deep . 
But in proportion as he advanced , his feet plunged deeper . 
Soon he had the slime up to his calves and water above his knees . 
He walked on , raising Marius in his arms , as far above the water as he could . 
The mire now reached to his knees , and the water to his waist . 
He could no longer retreat . 
This mud , dense enough for one man , could not , obviously , uphold two . 
Marius and Jean Valjean would have stood a chance of extricating themselves singly . 
Jean Valjean continued to advance , supporting the dying man , who was , perhaps , a corpse . 
The water came up to his arm-pits ; he felt that he was sinking ; it was only with difficulty that he could move in the depth of ooze which he had now reached . 
The density , which was his support , was also an obstacle . 
He still held Marius on high , and with an unheard-of expenditure of force , he advanced still ; but he was sinking . 
He had only his head above the water now and his two arms holding up Marius . 
In the old paintings of the deluge there is a mother holding her child thus . 
He sank still deeper , he turned his face to the rear , to escape the water , and in order that he might be able to breathe ; anyone who had seen him in that gloom would have thought that what he beheld was a mask floating on the shadows ; he caught a faint glimpse above him of the drooping head and livid face of Marius ; he made a desperate effort and launched his foot forward ; his foot struck something solid ; a point of support . 
It was high time . 
He straightened himself up , and rooted himself upon that point of support with a sort of fury . 
This produced upon him the effect of the first step in a staircase leading back to life . 
The point of support , thus encountered in the mire at the supreme moment , was the beginning of the other water-shed of the pavement , which had bent but had not given way , and which had curved under the water like a plank and in a single piece . 
Well built pavements form a vault and possess this sort of firmness . 
This fragment of the vaulting , partly submerged , but solid , was a veritable inclined plane , and , once on this plane , he was safe . 
Jean Valjean mounted this inclined plane and reached the other side of the quagmire . 
As he emerged from the water , he came in contact with a stone and fell upon his knees . 
He reflected that this was but just , and he remained there for some time , with his soul absorbed in words addressed to God . 
He rose to his feet , shivering , chilled , foul-smelling , bowed beneath the dying man whom he was dragging after him , all dripping with slime , and his soul filled with a strange light . 
ONE SOMETIMES RUNS AGROUND WHEN ONE FANCIES THAT ONE IS DISEMBARKING He set out on his way once more . 
However , although he had not left his life in the fontis , he seemed to have left his strength behind him there . 
That supreme effort had exhausted him . 
His lassitude was now such that he was obliged to pause for breath every three or four steps , and lean against the wall . 
Once he was forced to seat himself on the banquette in order to alter Marius ' position , and he thought that he should have to remain there . 
But if his vigor was dead , his energy was not . 
He rose again . 
He walked on desperately , almost fast , proceeded thus for a hundred paces , almost without drawing breath , and suddenly came in contact with the wall . 
He had reached an elbow of the sewer , and , arriving at the turn with head bent down , he had struck the wall . 
He raised his eyes , and at the extremity of the vault , far , very far away in front of him , he perceived a light . 
This time it was not that terrible light ; it was good , white light . 
It was daylight . 
Jean Valjean saw the outlet . 
A damned soul , who , in the midst of the furnace , should suddenly perceive the outlet of Gehenna , would experience what Jean Valjean felt . 
It would fly wildly with the stumps of its burned wings towards that radiant portal . 
Jean Valjean was no longer conscious of fatigue , he no longer felt Marius ' weight , he found his legs once more of steel , he ran rather than walked . 
As he approached , the outlet became more and more distinctly defined . 
It was a pointed arch , lower than the vault , which gradually narrowed , and narrower than the gallery , which closed in as the vault grew lower . 
The tunnel ended like the interior of a funnel ; a faulty construction , imitated from the wickets of penitentiaries , logical in a prison , illogical in a sewer , and which has since been corrected . 
Jean Valjean reached the outlet . 
There he halted . 
It certainly was the outlet , but he could not get out . 
The arch was closed by a heavy grating , and the grating , which , to all appearance , rarely swung on its rusty hinges , was clamped to its stone jamb by a thick lock , which , red with rust , seemed like an enormous brick . 
The keyhole could be seen , and the robust latch , deeply sunk in the iron staple . 
The door was plainly double-locked . 
It was one of those prison locks which old Paris was so fond of lavishing . 
Beyond the grating was the open air , the river , the daylight , the shore , very narrow but sufficient for escape . 
The distant quays , Paris , that gulf in which one so easily hides oneself , the broad horizon , liberty . 
On the right , down stream , the bridge of Jena was discernible , on the left , upstream , the bridge of the Invalides ; the place would have been a propitious one in which to await the night and to escape . 
It was one of the most solitary points in Paris ; the shore which faces the Grand-Caillou . 
Flies were entering and emerging through the bars of the grating . 
It might have been half-past eight o'clock in the evening . 
The day was declining . 
Jean Valjean laid Marius down along the wall , on the dry portion of the vaulting , then he went to the grating and clenched both fists round the bars ; the shock which he gave it was frenzied , but it did not move . 
The grating did not stir . 
Jean Valjean seized the bars one after the other , in the hope that he might be able to tear away the least solid , and to make of it a lever wherewith to raise the door or to break the lock . 
Not a bar stirred . 
The teeth of a tiger are not more firmly fixed in their sockets . 
No lever ; no prying possible . 
The obstacle was invincible . 
There was no means of opening the gate . 
Must he then stop there ? 
What was he to do ? 
What was to become of him ? 
He had not the strength to retrace his steps , to recommence the journey which he had already taken . 
Besides , how was he to again traverse that quagmire whence he had only extricated himself as by a miracle ? 
And after the quagmire , was there not the police patrol , which assuredly could not be twice avoided ? 
And then , whither was he to go ? 
What direction should he pursue ? 
To follow the incline would not conduct him to his goal . 
If he were to reach another outlet , he would find it obstructed by a plug or a grating . 
Every outlet was , undoubtedly , closed in that manner . 
Chance had unsealed the grating through which he had entered , but it was evident that all the other sewer mouths were barred . 
He had only succeeded in escaping into a prison . 
All was over . 
Everything that Jean Valjean had done was useless . 
Exhaustion had ended in failure . 
They were both caught in the immense and gloomy web of death , and Jean Valjean felt the terrible spider running along those black strands and quivering in the shadows . 
He turned his back to the grating , and fell upon the pavement , hurled to earth rather than seated , close to Marius , who still made no movement , and with his head bent between his knees . 
This was the last drop of anguish . 
Of what was he thinking during this profound depression ? 
Neither of himself nor of Marius . 
He was thinking of Cosette . 
THE TORN COAT-TAIL In the midst of this prostration , a hand was laid on his shoulder , and a low voice said to him : `` Half shares . '' 
Some person in that gloom ? 
Nothing so closely resembles a dream as despair . 
Jean Valjean thought that he was dreaming . 
He had heard no footsteps . 
Was it possible ? 
He raised his eyes . 
A man stood before him . 
This man was clad in a blouse ; his feet were bare ; he held his shoes in his left hand ; he had evidently removed them in order to reach Jean Valjean , without allowing his steps to be heard . 
Jean Valjean did not hesitate for an instant . 
Unexpected as was this encounter , this man was known to him . 
The man was Thenardier . 
Although awakened , so to speak , with a start , Jean Valjean , accustomed to alarms , and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptly parried , instantly regained possession of his presence of mind . 
Moreover , the situation could not be made worse , a certain degree of distress is no longer capable of a crescendo , and Thenardier himself could add nothing to this blackness of this night . 
A momentary pause ensued . 
