Dieu-Jesus ! 
Did you fall from heaven ? 
There is no trouble about that : if ever you do fall , it will be from there . 
And what a state you are in ! 
You have no cravat ; you have no hat ; you have no coat ! 
Do you know , you would have frightened any one who did not know you ? 
No coat ! 
Lord God ! 
Are the saints going mad nowadays ? 
But how did you get in here ? '' 
His words tumbled over each other . 
The goodman talked with a rustic volubility , in which there was nothing alarming . 
All this was uttered with a mixture of stupefaction and naive kindliness . 
`` Who are you ? 
and what house is this ? '' 
demanded Jean Valjean . 
`` Ah ! 
pardieu , this is too much ! '' 
exclaimed the old man . 
`` I am the person for whom you got the place here , and this house is the one where you had me placed . 
What ! 
You do n't recognize me ? '' 
`` No , '' said Jean Valjean ; `` and how happens it that you know me ? '' 
`` You saved my life , '' said the man . 
He turned . 
A ray of moonlight outlined his profile , and Jean Valjean recognized old Fauchelevent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , `` so it is you ? 
Yes , I recollect you . '' 
`` That is very lucky , '' said the old man , in a reproachful tone . 
`` And what are you doing here ? '' 
resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` Why , I am covering my melons , of course ! '' 
In fact , at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him , old Fauchelevent held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in spreading over the melon bed . 
During the hour or thereabouts that he had been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them . 
It was this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar movements observed from the shed by Jean Valjean . 
He continued : -- `` I said to myself , ` The moon is bright : it is going to freeze . 
What if I were to put my melons into their greatcoats ? ' 
And , '' he added , looking at Jean Valjean with a broad smile , -- `` pardieu ! 
you ought to have done the same ! 
But how do you come here ? '' 
Jean Valjean , finding himself known to this man , at least only under the name of Madeleine , thenceforth advanced only with caution . 
He multiplied his questions . 
Strange to say , their roles seemed to be reversed . 
It was he , the intruder , who interrogated . 
`` And what is this bell which you wear on your knee ? '' 
`` This , '' replied Fauchelevent , `` is so that I may be avoided . '' 
`` What ! 
so that you may be avoided ? '' 
Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air . 
`` Ah , goodness ! 
there are only women in this house -- many young girls . 
It appears that I should be a dangerous person to meet . 
The bell gives them warning . 
When I come , they go . 
`` What house is this ? '' 
`` Come , you know well enough . '' 
`` But I do not . '' 
`` Not when you got me the place here as gardener ? '' 
`` Answer me as though I knew nothing . '' 
`` Well , then , this is the Petit-Picpus convent . '' 
Memories recurred to Jean Valjean . 
Chance , that is to say , Providence , had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine where old Fauchelevent , crippled by the fall from his cart , had been admitted on his recommendation two years previously . 
He repeated , as though talking to himself : -- `` The Petit-Picpus convent . '' 
`` Exactly , '' returned old Fauchelevent . 
`` But to come to the point , how the deuce did you manage to get in here , you , Father Madeleine ? 
No matter if you are a saint ; you are a man as well , and no man enters here . '' 
`` You certainly are here . '' 
`` There is no one but me . '' 
`` Still , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I must stay here . '' 
`` Ah , good God ! '' 
cried Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean drew near to the old man , and said to him in a grave voice : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , I saved your life . '' 
`` I was the first to recall it , '' returned Fauchelevent . 
`` Well , you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the olden days . '' 
Fauchelevent took in his aged , trembling , and wrinkled hands Jean Valjean 's two robust hands , and stood for several minutes as though incapable of speaking . 
At length he exclaimed : -- `` Oh ! 
that would be a blessing from the good God , if I could make you some little return for that ! 
Save your life ! 
Monsieur le Maire , dispose of the old man ! '' 
A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man . 
His countenance seemed to emit a ray of light . 
`` What do you wish me to do ? '' 
he resumed . 
`` That I will explain to you . 
You have a chamber ? '' 
`` I have an isolated hovel yonder , behind the ruins of the old convent , in a corner which no one ever looks into . 
There are three rooms in it . '' 
The hut was , in fact , so well hidden behind the ruins , and so cleverly arranged to prevent it being seen , that Jean Valjean had not perceived it . 
`` Good , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Now I am going to ask two things of you . '' 
`` What are they , Mr. Mayor ? '' 
`` In the first place , you are not to tell any one what you know about me . 
In the second , you are not to try to find out anything more . '' 
`` As you please . 
I know that you can do nothing that is not honest , that you have always been a man after the good God 's heart . 
And then , moreover , you it was who placed me here . 
That concerns you . 
I am at your service . '' 
`` That is settled then . 
Now , come with me . 
We will go and get the child . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` so there is a child ? '' 
He added not a word further , and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows his master . 
Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette , who had grown rosy again before the flame of a good fire , was lying asleep in the old gardener 's bed . 
Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more ; his hat , which he had flung over the wall , had been found and picked up . 
While Jean Valjean was putting on his coat , Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap , which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall . 
The two men were warming themselves with their elbows resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese , black bread , a bottle of wine , and two glasses , and the old man was saying to Jean Valjean , as he laid his hand on the latter 's knee : `` Ah ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
You did not recognize me immediately ; you save people 's lives , and then you forget them ! 
That is bad ! 
But they remember you ! 
You are an ingrate ! '' 
WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side , so to speak , had come about in the simplest possible manner . 
When Jean Valjean , on the evening of the very day when Javert had arrested him beside Fantine 's death-bed , had escaped from the town jail of M. sur M. , the police had supposed that he had betaken himself to Paris . 
Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost , and everything disappears in this belly of the world , as in the belly of the sea . 
No forest hides a man as does that crowd . 
Fugitives of every sort know this . 
They go to Paris as to an abyss ; there are gulfs which save . 
The police know it also , and it is in Paris that they seek what they have lost elsewhere . 
They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to Paris to throw light on their researches . 
Javert had , in fact , rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean . 
Javert 's zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M. Chabouillet , secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles . 
M. Chabouillet , who had , moreover , already been Javert 's patron , had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris . 
There Javert rendered himself useful in divers and , though the word may seem strange for such services , honorable manners . 
He no longer thought of Jean Valjean , -- the wolf of to-day causes these dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday , -- when , in December , 1823 , he read a newspaper , he who never read newspapers ; but Javert , a monarchical man , had a desire to know the particulars of the triumphal entry of the `` Prince Generalissimo '' into Bayonne . 
Just as he was finishing the article , which interested him ; a name , the name of Jean Valjean , attracted his attention at the bottom of a page . 
The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead , and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it . 
He confined himself to the remark , `` That 's a good entry . '' 
Then he threw aside the paper , and thought no more about it . 
Some time afterwards , it chanced that a police report was transmitted from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in Paris , concerning the abduction of a child , which had taken place , under peculiar circumstances , as it was said , in the commune of Montfermeil . 
A little girl of seven or eight years of age , the report said , who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper of that neighborhood , had been stolen by a stranger ; this child answered to the name of Cosette , and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine , who had died in the hospital , it was not known where or when . 
This report came under Javert 's eye and set him to thinking . 
The name of Fantine was well known to him . 
He remembered that Jean Valjean had made him , Javert , burst into laughter , by asking him for a respite of three days , for the purpose of going to fetch that creature 's child . 
He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach for Montfermeil . 
Some signs had made him suspect at the time that this was the second occasion of his entering that coach , and that he had already , on the previous day , made an excursion to the neighborhood of that village , for he had not been seen in the village itself . 
What had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil ? 
It could not even be surmised . 
Javert understood it now . 
Fantine 's daughter was there . 
Jean Valjean was going there in search of her . 
And now this child had been stolen by a stranger ! 
Who could that stranger be ? 
Could it be Jean Valjean ? 
But Jean Valjean was dead . 
Javert , without saying anything to anybody , took the coach from the Pewter Platter , Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette , and made a trip to Montfermeil . 
He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there ; he found a great deal of obscurity . 
For the first few days the Thenardiers had chattered in their rage . 
The disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village . 
He immediately obtained numerous versions of the story , which ended in the abduction of a child . 
Hence the police report . 
But their first vexation having passed off , Thenardier , with his wonderful instinct , had very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the prosecutor of the Crown , and that his complaints with regard to the abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon himself , and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand , the glittering eye of justice . 
The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle brought to them . 
And in the first place , how explain the fifteen hundred francs which he had received ? 
He turned squarely round , put a gag on his wife 's mouth , and feigned astonishment when the stolen child was mentioned to him . 
He understood nothing about it ; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature `` taken from him '' so hastily ; he should have liked to keep her two or three days longer , out of tenderness ; but her `` grandfather '' had come for her in the most natural way in the world . 
He added the `` grandfather , '' which produced a good effect . 
This was the story that Javert hit upon when he arrived at Montfermeil . 
The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish . 
Nevertheless , Javert dropped a few questions , like plummets , into Thenardier 's history . 
`` Who was that grandfather ? 
and what was his name ? '' 
Thenardier replied with simplicity : `` He is a wealthy farmer . 
I saw his passport . 
I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert . '' 
Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name . 
Thereupon Javert returned to Paris . 
`` Jean Valjean is certainly dead , '' said he , `` and I am a ninny . '' 
He had again begun to forget this history , when , in the course of March , 1824 , he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish of Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed `` the mendicant who gives alms . '' 
This person , the story ran , was a man of means , whose name no one knew exactly , and who lived alone with a little girl of eight years , who knew nothing about herself , save that she had come from Montfermeil . 
Montfermeil ! 
that name was always coming up , and it made Javert prick up his ears . 
An old beggar police spy , an ex-beadle , to whom this person had given alms , added a few more details . 
This gentleman of property was very shy , -- never coming out except in the evening , speaking to no one , except , occasionally to the poor , and never allowing any one to approach him . 
He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat , which was worth many millions , being all wadded with bank-bills . 
This piqued Javert 's curiosity in a decided manner . 
In order to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming him , he borrowed the beadle 's outfit for a day , and the place where the old spy was in the habit of crouching every evening , whining orisons through his nose , and playing the spy under cover of prayer . 
`` The suspected individual '' did indeed approach Javert thus disguised , and bestow alms on him . 
At that moment Javert raised his head , and the shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean . 
However , the darkness might have misled him ; Jean Valjean 's death was official ; Javert cherished very grave doubts ; and when in doubt , Javert , the man of scruples , never laid a finger on any one 's collar . 
He followed his man to the Gorbeau house , and got `` the old woman '' to talking , which was no difficult matter . 
The old woman confirmed the fact regarding the coat lined with millions , and narrated to him the episode of the thousand-franc bill . 
She had seen it ! 
She had handled it ! 
Javert hired a room ; that evening he installed himself in it . 
He came and listened at the mysterious lodger 's door , hoping to catch the sound of his voice , but Jean Valjean saw his candle through the key-hole , and foiled the spy by keeping silent . 
On the following day Jean Valjean decamped ; but the noise made by the fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman , who , hearing the rattling of coin , suspected that he might be intending to leave , and made haste to warn Javert . 
At night , when Jean Valjean came out , Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two men . 
Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture , but he had not mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize ; that was his secret , and he had kept it for three reasons : in the first place , because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert ; next , because , to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead , on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort , was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert , and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict ; and lastly , because Javert , being an artist , had a taste for the unforeseen . 
He hated those well-heralded successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off . 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the last . 
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree , then from corner to corner of the street , and had not lost sight of him for a single instant ; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert 's eye had been on him . 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean ? 
Because he was still in doubt . 
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at its ease ; the free press embarrassed it ; several arbitrary arrests denounced by the newspapers , had echoed even as far as the Chambers , and had rendered the Prefecture timid . 
Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter . 
The police agents were afraid of making a mistake ; the prefect laid the blame on them ; a mistake meant dismissal . 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph , reproduced by twenty newspapers , would have caused in Paris : `` Yesterday , an aged grandfather , with white hair , a respectable and well-to-do gentleman , who was walking with his grandchild , aged eight , was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict ! '' 
Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own ; injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the prefect . 
He was really in doubt . 
Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark . 
Sadness , uneasiness , anxiety , depression , this fresh misfortune of being forced to flee by night , to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette and himself , the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace of the child -- all this , without his being aware of it , had altered Jean Valjean 's walk , and impressed on his bearing such senility , that the police themselves , incarnate in the person of Javert , might , and did in fact , make a mistake . 
The impossibility of approaching too close , his costume of an emigre preceptor , the declaration of Thenardier which made a grandfather of him , and , finally , the belief in his death in prison , added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in Javert 's mind . 
For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his papers ; but if the man was not Jean Valjean , and if this man was not a good , honest old fellow living on his income , he was probably some merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web of Parisian misdeeds , some chief of a dangerous band , who gave alms to conceal his other talents , which was an old dodge . 
He had trusty fellows , accomplices ' retreats in case of emergencies , in which he would , no doubt , take refuge . 
All these turns which he was making through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man . 
To arrest him too hastily would be `` to kill the hen that laid the golden eggs . '' 
Where was the inconvenience in waiting ? 
Javert was very sure that he would not escape . 
Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind , putting to himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage . 
It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise , that , thanks to the brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop , he decidedly recognized Jean Valjean . 
There are in this world two beings who give a profound start , -- the mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey . 
Javert gave that profound start . 
As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean , the formidable convict , he perceived that there were only three of them , and he asked for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise . 
One puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel . 
This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his agents came near causing him to lose the trail . 
He speedily divined , however , that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between his pursuers and himself . 
He bent his head and reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the right scent . 
Javert , with his powerful rectitude of instinct , went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz . 
A word with the toll-keeper furnished him with the information which he required : `` Have you seen a man with a little girl ? '' 
`` I made him pay two sous , '' replied the toll-keeper . 
Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated spot on the other side of the water , leading Cosette by the hand . 
He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine ; he remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap , and of the sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
He made sure of his back burrows , as huntsmen say ; he hastily despatched one of his agents , by a roundabout way , to guard that issue . 
A patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him , he made a requisition on it , and caused it to accompany him . 
In such games soldiers are aces . 
Moreover , the principle is , that in order to get the best of a wild boar , one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs . 
These combinations having been effected , feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind alley Genrot on the right , his agent on the left , and himself , Javert , in the rear , he took a pinch of snuff . 
Then he began the game . 
He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment ; he allowed his man to go on ahead , knowing that he had him safe , but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as possible , happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing him free , gloating over him with his gaze , with that voluptuousness of the spider which allows the fly to flutter , and of the cat which lets the mouse run . 
Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality , -- the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers . 
What a delight this strangling is ! 
Javert was enjoying himself . 
The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted . 
He was sure of success ; all he had to do now was to close his hand . 
Accompanied as he was , the very idea of resistance was impossible , however vigorous , energetic , and desperate Jean Valjean might be . 
Javert advanced slowly , sounding , searching on his way all the nooks of the street like so many pockets of thieves . 
When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there . 
His exasperation can be imagined . 
He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus ; that agent , who had remained imperturbably at his post , had not seen the man pass . 
It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns ; that is to say , he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels , and then the oldest huntsmen know not what to say . 
Duvivier , Ligniville , and Desprez halt short . 
In a discomfiture of this sort , Artonge exclaims , `` It was not a stag , but a sorcerer . '' 
Javert would have liked to utter the same cry . 
His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage . 
It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia , that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India , that Caesar made mistakes in the war in Africa , that Cyrus was at fault in the war in Scythia , and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean Valjean . 
He was wrong , perhaps , in hesitating in his recognition of the exconvict . 
The first glance should have sufficed him . 
He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old building ; he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de Pontoise . 
He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin . 
Advice is certainly useful ; it is a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogs who deserve confidence ; but the hunter can not be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict . 
Javert , by taking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail , alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart , and so made him run . 
Above all , he was wrong in that after he had picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz , he played that formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a thread . 
He thought himself stronger than he was , and believed that he could play at the game of the mouse and the lion . 
At the same time , he reckoned himself as too weak , when he judged it necessary to obtain reinforcement . 
Fatal precaution , waste of precious time ! 
Javert committed all these blunders , and none the less was one of the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed . 
He was , in the full force of the term , what is called in venery a knowing dog . 
But what is there that is perfect ? 
Great strategists have their eclipses . 
The greatest follies are often composed , like the largest ropes , of a multitude of strands . 
Take the cable thread by thread , take all the petty determining motives separately , and you can break them one after the other , and you say , `` That is all there is of it ! '' 
Braid them , twist them together ; the result is enormous : it is Attila hesitating between Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west ; it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua ; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube . 
However that may be , even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean had escaped him , Javert did not lose his head . 
Sure that the convict who had broken his ban could not be far off , he established sentinels , he organized traps and ambuscades , and beat the quarter all that night . 
The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut . 
A precious sign which , however , led him astray , since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land . 
Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction . 
The fact is , that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot , he would probably have done so and have been lost . 
Javert explored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a needle . 
At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook , and returned to the Prefecture of Police , as much ashamed as a police spy who had been captured by a robber might have been . 
NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS Nothing , half a century ago , more resembled every other carriage gate than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus . 
This entrance , which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion , permitted a view of two things , neither of which have anything very funereal about them , -- a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines , and the face of a lounging porter . 
Above the wall , at the bottom of the court , tall trees were visible . 
When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard , when a glass of wine cheered up the porter , it was difficult to pass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling impression of it . 
Nevertheless , it was a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse . 
The threshold smiled ; the house prayed and wept . 
If one succeeded in passing the porter , which was not easy , -- which was even nearly impossible for every one , for there was an open sesame ! 
which it was necessary to know , -- if , the porter once passed , one entered a little vestibule on the right , on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it at a time , if one did not allow one 's self to be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow , with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase , if one ventured to ascend it , one crossed a first landing , then a second , and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable persistency . 
Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows . 
The corridor took a turn and became dark . 
If one doubled this cape , one arrived a few paces further on , in front of a door which was all the more mysterious because it was not fastened . 
If one opened it , one found one 's self in a little chamber about six feet square , tiled , well-scrubbed , clean , cold , and hung with nankin paper with green flowers , at fifteen sous the roll . 
A white , dull light fell from a large window , with tiny panes , on the left , which usurped the whole width of the room . 
One gazed about , but saw no one ; one listened , one heard neither a footstep nor a human murmur . 
The walls were bare , the chamber was not furnished ; there was not even a chair . 
One looked again , and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular hole , about a foot square , with a grating of interlacing iron bars , black , knotted , solid , which formed squares -- I had almost said meshes -- of less than an inch and a half in diagonal length . 
The little green flowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars , without being startled or thrown into confusion by their funereal contact . 
Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole , this grating would have prevented it . 
It did not allow the passage of the body , but it did allow the passage of the eyes ; that is to say , of the mind . 
This seems to have occurred to them , for it had been re-enforced by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear , and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a strainer . 
At the bottom of this plate , an aperture had been pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box . 
A bit of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening . 
If the tape was pulled , a bell rang , and one heard a voice very near at hand , which made one start . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
the voice demanded . 
It was a woman 's voice , a gentle voice , so gentle that it was mournful . 
Here , again , there was a magical word which it was necessary to know . 
If one did not know it , the voice ceased , the wall became silent once more , as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other side of it . 
If one knew the password , the voice resumed , `` Enter on the right . '' 
One then perceived on the right , facing the window , a glass door surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray . 
On raising the latch and crossing the threshold , one experienced precisely the same impression as when one enters at the theatre into a grated baignoire , before the grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted . 
One was , in fact , in a sort of theatre-box , narrow , furnished with two old chairs , and a much-frayed straw matting , sparely illuminated by the vague light from the glass door ; a regular box , with its front just of a height to lean upon , bearing a tablet of black wood . 
This box was grated , only the grating of it was not of gilded wood , as at the opera ; it was a monstrous lattice of iron bars , hideously interlaced and riveted to the wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists . 
The first minutes passed ; when one 's eyes began to grow used to this cellar-like half-twilight , one tried to pass the grating , but got no further than six inches beyond it . 
There he encountered a barrier of black shutters , re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood painted a gingerbread yellow . 
These shutters were divided into long , narrow slats , and they masked the entire length of the grating . 
They were always closed . 
At the expiration of a few moments one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters , and saying : -- `` I am here . 
What do you wish with me ? '' 
It was a beloved , sometimes an adored , voice . 
No one was visible . 
Hardly the sound of a breath was audible . 
It seemed as though it were a spirit which had been evoked , that was speaking to you across the walls of the tomb . 
If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions , the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you ; the evoked spirit became an apparition . 
Behind the grating , behind the shutter , one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight , a head , of which only the mouth and the chin were visible ; the rest was covered with a black veil . 
One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe , and a form that was barely defined , covered with a black shroud . 
That head spoke with you , but did not look at you and never smiled at you . 
The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that you saw her in the white , and she saw you in the black . 
This light was symbolical . 
Nevertheless , your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was made in that place shut off from all glances . 
A profound vagueness enveloped that form clad in mourning . 
Your eyes searched that vagueness , and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition . 
At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could see nothing . 
What you beheld was night , emptiness , shadows , a wintry mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb , a sort of terrible peace , a silence from which you could gather nothing , not even sighs , a gloom in which you could distinguish nothing , not even phantoms . 
What you beheld was the interior of a cloister . 
It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called the Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration . 
The box in which you stood was the parlor . 
The first voice which had addressed you was that of the portress who always sat motionless and silent , on the other side of the wall , near the square opening , screened by the iron grating and the plate with its thousand holes , as by a double visor . 
The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that the parlor , which had a window on the side of the world , had none on the side of the convent . 
Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacred place . 
Nevertheless , there was something beyond that shadow ; there was a light ; there was life in the midst of that death . 
Although this was the most strictly walled of all convents , we shall endeavor to make our way into it , and to take the reader in , and to say , without transgressing the proper bounds , things which story-tellers have never seen , and have , therefore , never described . 
THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA This convent , which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the Rue Petit-Picpus , was a community of Bernardines of the obedience of Martin Verga . 
These Bernardines were attached , in consequence , not to Clairvaux , like the Bernardine monks , but to Citeaux , like the Benedictine monks . 
In other words , they were the subjects , not of Saint Bernard , but of Saint Benoit . 
Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that Martin Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines , with Salamanca for the head of the order , and Alcala as the branch establishment . 
This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic countries of Europe . 
There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one order on another . 
To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoit , which is here in question : there are attached to this order , without counting the obedience of Martin Verga , four congregations , -- two in Italy , Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua ; two in France , Cluny and Saint-Maur ; and nine orders , -- Vallombrosa , Granmont , the Celestins , the Camaldules , the Carthusians , the Humilies , the Olivateurs , the Silvestrins , and lastly , Citeaux ; for Citeaux itself , a trunk for other orders , is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoit . 
Citeaux dates from Saint Robert , Abbe de Molesme , in the diocese of Langres , in 1098 . 
Now it was in 529 that the devil , having retired to the desert of Subiaco -- he was old -- had he turned hermit ? 
-- was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo , where he dwelt , by Saint-Benoit , then aged seventeen . 
After the rule of the Carmelites , who go barefoot , wear a bit of willow on their throats , and never sit down , the harshest rule is that of the Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
They are clothed in black , with a guimpe , which , in accordance with the express command of Saint-Benoit , mounts to the chin . 
A robe of serge with large sleeves , a large woollen veil , the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square on the breast , the band which descends over their brow to their eyes , -- this is their dress . 
All is black except the band , which is white . 
The novices wear the same habit , but all in white . 
The professed nuns also wear a rosary at their side . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual Adoration , like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , who , at the beginning of this century , had two houses in Paris , -- one at the Temple , the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve . 
However , the Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus , of whom we are speaking , were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve and at the Temple . 
There were numerous differences in their rule ; there were some in their costume . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore the black guimpe , and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve wore a white one , and had , besides , on their breasts , a Holy Sacrament about three inches long , in silver gilt or gilded copper . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy Sacrament . 
The Perpetual Adoration , which was common to the house of the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple , leaves those two orders perfectly distinct . 
Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga , just as there existed a similarity in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy , the life , and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin , between the two orders , which were , nevertheless , widely separated , and on occasion even hostile . 
The Oratory of Italy , established at Florence by Philip de Neri , and the Oratory of France , established by Pierre de Berulle . 
The Oratory of France claimed the precedence , since Philip de Neri was only a saint , while Berulle was a cardinal . 
Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round , abstain from meat , fast in Lent and on many other days which are peculiar to them , rise from their first sleep , from one to three o'clock in the morning , to read their breviary and chant matins , sleep in all seasons between serge sheets and on straw , make no use of the bath , never light a fire , scourge themselves every Friday , observe the rule of silence , speak to each other only during the recreation hours , which are very brief , and wear drugget chemises for six months in the year , from September 14th , which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross , until Easter . 
These six months are a modification : the rule says all the year , but this drugget chemise , intolerable in the heat of summer , produced fevers and nervous spasms . 
The use of it had to be restricted . 
Even with this palliation , when the nuns put on this chemise on the 14th of September , they suffer from fever for three or four days . 
Obedience , poverty , chastity , perseverance in their seclusion , -- these are their vows , which the rule greatly aggravates . 
The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers , who are called meres vocales because they have a voice in the chapter . 
A prioress can only be re-elected twice , which fixes the longest possible reign of a prioress at nine years . 
They never see the officiating priest , who is always hidden from them by a serge curtain nine feet in height . 
During the sermon , when the preacher is in the chapel , they drop their veils over their faces . 
They must always speak low , walk with their eyes on the ground and their heads bowed . 
One man only is allowed to enter the convent , -- the archbishop of the diocese . 
There is really one other , -- the gardener . 
But he is always an old man , and , in order that he may always be alone in the garden , and that the nuns may be warned to avoid him , a bell is attached to his knee . 
Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive . 
It is the canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation . 
As at the voice of Christ , ut voci Christi , at a gesture , at the first sign , ad nutum , ad primum signum , immediately , with cheerfulness , with perseverance , with a certain blind obedience , prompte , hilariter , perseveranter et caeca quadam obedientia , as the file in the hand of the workman , quasi limam in manibus fabri , without power to read or to write without express permission , legere vel scribere non addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia . 
Each one of them in turn makes what they call reparation . 
The reparation is the prayer for all the sins , for all the faults , for all the dissensions , for all the violations , for all the iniquities , for all the crimes committed on earth . 
For the space of twelve consecutive hours , from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock in the morning , or from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock in the afternoon , the sister who is making reparation remains on her knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament , with hands clasped , a rope around her neck . 
When her fatigue becomes unendurable , she prostrates herself flat on her face against the earth , with her arms outstretched in the form of a cross ; this is her only relief . 
In this attitude she prays for all the guilty in the universe . 
This is great to sublimity . 
As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle , it is called without distinction , to make reparation or to be at the post . 
The nuns even prefer , out of humility , this last expression , which contains an idea of torture and abasement . 
To make reparation is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed . 
The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to fall directly behind her . 
Besides this , there is always a sister kneeling before the Holy Sacrament . 
This station lasts an hour . 
They relieve each other like soldiers on guard . 
This is the Perpetual Adoration . 
The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped with peculiar solemnity , recalling , not the saints and martyrs , but moments in the life of Jesus Christ : as Mother Nativity , Mother Conception , Mother Presentation , Mother Passion . 
But the names of saints are not interdicted . 
When one sees them , one never sees anything but their mouths . 
All their teeth are yellow . 
No tooth-brush ever entered that convent . 
Brushing one 's teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is the loss of one 's soul . 
They never say my . 
They possess nothing of their own , and they must not attach themselves to anything . 
They call everything our ; thus : our veil , our chaplet ; if they were speaking of their chemise , they would say our chemise . 
Sometimes they grow attached to some petty object , -- to a book of hours , a relic , a medal that has been blessed . 
As soon as they become aware that they are growing attached to this object , they must give it up . 
They recall the words of Saint Therese , to whom a great lady said , as she was on the point of entering her order , `` Permit me , mother , to send for a Bible to which I am greatly attached . '' 
`` Ah , you are attached to something ! 
In that case , do not enter our order ! '' 
Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up , to have a place of her own , a chamber . 
They live with their cells open . 
When they meet , one says , `` Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
The other responds , `` Forever . '' 
The same ceremony when one taps at the other 's door . 
Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard to say hastily , `` Forever ! '' 
Like all practices , this becomes mechanical by force of habit ; and one sometimes says forever before the other has had time to say the rather long sentence , `` Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar . '' 
Among the Visitandines the one who enters says : `` Ave Maria , '' and the one whose cell is entered says , `` Gratia plena . '' 
It is their way of saying good day , which is in fact full of grace . 
At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the church bell of the convent . 
At this signal prioress , vocal mothers , professed nuns , lay-sisters , novices , postulants , interrupt what they are saying , what they are doing , or what they are thinking , and all say in unison if it is five o'clock , for instance , `` At five o'clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
If it is eight o'clock , `` At eight o'clock and at all hours ! '' 
and so on , according to the hour . 
This custom , the object of which is to break the thread of thought and to lead it back constantly to God , exists in many communities ; the formula alone varies . 
Thus at The Infant Jesus they say , `` At this hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart ! '' 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga , cloistered fifty years ago at Petit-Picpus , chant the offices to a solemn psalmody , a pure Gregorian chant , and always with full voice during the whole course of the office . 
Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause , and say in a low voice , `` Jesus-Marie-Joseph . '' 
For the office of the dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a depth . 
The effect produced is striking and tragic . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar for the burial of their community . 
The Government , as they say , does not permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they die . 
This is an affliction to them , and causes them consternation as an infraction of the rules . 
They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best , -- permission to be interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient Vaugirard cemetery , which was made of land which had formerly belonged to their community . 
On Fridays the nuns hear high mass , vespers , and all the offices , as on Sunday . 
They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals unknown to people of the world , of which the Church of France was so prodigal in the olden days , and of which it is still prodigal in Spain and Italy . 
Their stations in the chapel are interminable . 
As for the number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them : `` The prayers of the postulants are frightful , the prayers of the novices are still worse , and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse . '' 
Once a week the chapter assembles : the prioress presides ; the vocal mothers assist . 
Each sister kneels in turn on the stones , and confesses aloud , in the presence of all , the faults and sins which she has committed during the week . 
The vocal mothers consult after each confession and inflict the penance aloud . 
Besides this confession in a loud tone , for which all faults in the least serious are reserved , they have for their venial offences what they call the coulpe . 
To make one 's coulpe means to prostrate one 's self flat on one 's face during the office in front of the prioress until the latter , who is never called anything but our mother , notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of her stall that she can rise . 
The coulpe or peccavi , is made for a very small matter -- a broken glass , a torn veil , an involuntary delay of a few seconds at an office , a false note in church , etc. ; this suffices , and the coulpe is made . 
The coulpe is entirely spontaneous ; it is the culpable person herself -LRB- the word is etymologically in its place here -RRB- who judges herself and inflicts it on herself . 
On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone the offices before a large reading-desk with four places . 
One day one of the mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with Ecce , and instead of Ecce she uttered aloud the three notes do si sol ; for this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a coulpe which lasted during the whole service : what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter had laughed . 
When a nun is summoned to the parlor , even were it the prioress herself , she drops her veil , as will be remembered , so that only her mouth is visible . 
The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers . 
The others can see only their immediate family , and that very rarely . 
If , by chance , an outsider presents herself to see a nun , or one whom she has known and loved in the outer world , a regular series of negotiations is required . 
If it is a woman , the authorization may sometimes be granted ; the nun comes , and they talk to her through the shutters , which are opened only for a mother or sister . 
It is unnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men . 
Such is the rule of Saint-Benoit , aggravated by Martin Verga . 
These nuns are not gay , rosy , and fresh , as the daughters of other orders often are . 
They are pale and grave . 
Between 1825 and 1830 three of them went mad . 
AUSTERITIES One is a postulant for two years at least , often for four ; a novice for four . 
It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their order . 
In their cells , they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations , of which they must never speak . 
On the day when a novice makes her profession , she is dressed in her handsomest attire , she is crowned with white roses , her hair is brushed until it shines , and curled . 
Then she prostrates herself ; a great black veil is thrown over her , and the office for the dead is sung . 
Then the nuns separate into two files ; one file passes close to her , saying in plaintive accents , `` Our sister is dead '' ; and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy , `` Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ ! '' 
At the epoch when this story takes place , a boarding-school was attached to the convent -- a boarding-school for young girls of noble and mostly wealthy families , among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen , and an English girl bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot . 
These young girls , reared by these nuns between four walls , grew up with a horror of the world and of the age . 
One of them said to us one day , `` The sight of the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot . '' 
They were dressed in blue , with a white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their breast . 
On certain grand festival days , particularly Saint Martha 's day , they were permitted , as a high favor and a supreme happiness , to dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoit for a whole day . 
In the early days the nuns were in the habit of lending them their black garments . 
This seemed profane , and the prioress forbade it . 
Only the novices were permitted to lend . 
It is remarkable that these performances , tolerated and encouraged , no doubt , in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit , were a genuine happiness and a real recreation for the scholars . 
They simply amused themselves with it . 
It was new ; it gave them a change . 
Candid reasons of childhood , which do not , however , succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one 's hand and standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk . 
The pupils conformed , with the exception of the austerities , to all the practices of the convent . 
There was a certain young woman who entered the world , and who after many years of married life had not succeeded in breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door , `` forever ! '' 
Like the nuns , the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor . 
Their very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them . 
The following illustrates to what a degree severity on that point was carried . 
One day a young girl received a visit from her mother , who was accompanied by a little sister three years of age . 
The young girl wept , for she wished greatly to embrace her sister . 
Impossible . 
She begged that , at least , the child might be permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it . 
This was almost indignantly refused . 
GAYETIES None the less , these young girls filled this grave house with charming souvenirs . 
At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister . 
The recreation hour struck . 
A door swung on its hinges . 
The birds said , `` Good ; here come the children ! '' 
An irruption of youth inundated that garden intersected with a cross like a shroud . 
Radiant faces , white foreheads , innocent eyes , full of merry light , all sorts of auroras , were scattered about amid these shadows . 
After the psalmodies , the bells , the peals , and knells and offices , the sound of these little girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees . 
The hive of joy was opened , and each one brought her honey . 
They played , they called to each other , they formed into groups , they ran about ; pretty little white teeth chattered in the corners ; the veils superintended the laughs from a distance , shades kept watch of the sunbeams , but what mattered it ? 
Still they beamed and laughed . 
Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling brilliancy . 
They looked on , vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of the hives . 
It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house of mourning . 
The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns ; the gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence . 
Thanks to these children , there was , among so many austere hours , one hour of ingenuousness . 
The little ones skipped about ; the elder ones danced . 
In this cloister play was mingled with heaven . 
Nothing is so delightful and so august as all these fresh , expanding young souls . 
