`` Yes , '' said Fantine ; `` that makes forty francs . '' 
She remained thoughtful , and began her work . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour she left her sewing and went to read the Thenardiers ' letter once more on the staircase . 
On her return , she said to Marguerite , who was at work beside her : -- `` What is a miliary fever ? 
Do you know ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered the old spinster ; `` it is a disease . '' 
`` Does it require many drugs ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
terrible drugs . '' 
`` How does one get it ? '' 
`` It is a malady that one gets without knowing how . '' 
`` Then it attacks children ? '' 
`` Children in particular . '' 
`` Do people die of it ? '' 
`` They may , '' said Marguerite . 
Fantine left the room and went to read her letter once more on the staircase . 
That evening she went out , and was seen to turn her steps in the direction of the Rue de Paris , where the inns are situated . 
The next morning , when Marguerite entered Fantine 's room before daylight , -- for they always worked together , and in this manner used only one candle for the two , -- she found Fantine seated on her bed , pale and frozen . 
She had not lain down . 
Her cap had fallen on her knees . 
Her candle had burned all night , and was almost entirely consumed . 
Marguerite halted on the threshold , petrified at this tremendous wastefulness , and exclaimed : -- `` Lord ! 
the candle is all burned out ! 
Something has happened . '' 
Then she looked at Fantine , who turned toward her her head bereft of its hair . 
Fantine had grown ten years older since the preceding night . 
`` Jesus ! '' 
said Marguerite , `` what is the matter with you , Fantine ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' replied Fantine . 
`` Quite the contrary . 
My child will not die of that frightful malady , for lack of succor . 
I am content . '' 
So saying , she pointed out to the spinster two napoleons which were glittering on the table . 
`` Ah ! 
Jesus God ! '' 
cried Marguerite . 
`` Why , it is a fortune ! 
Where did you get those louis d'or ? '' 
`` I got them , '' replied Fantine . 
At the same time she smiled . 
The candle illuminated her countenance . 
It was a bloody smile . 
A reddish saliva soiled the corners of her lips , and she had a black hole in her mouth . 
The two teeth had been extracted . 
She sent the forty francs to Montfermeil . 
After all it was a ruse of the Thenardiers to obtain money . 
Cosette was not ill . 
Fantine threw her mirror out of the window . 
She had long since quitted her cell on the second floor for an attic with only a latch to fasten it , next the roof ; one of those attics whose extremity forms an angle with the floor , and knocks you on the head every instant . 
The poor occupant can reach the end of his chamber as he can the end of his destiny , only by bending over more and more . 
She had no longer a bed ; a rag which she called her coverlet , a mattress on the floor , and a seatless chair still remained . 
A little rosebush which she had , had dried up , forgotten , in one corner . 
In the other corner was a butter-pot to hold water , which froze in winter , and in which the various levels of the water remained long marked by these circles of ice . 
She had lost her shame ; she lost her coquetry . 
A final sign . 
She went out , with dirty caps . 
Whether from lack of time or from indifference , she no longer mended her linen . 
As the heels wore out , she dragged her stockings down into her shoes . 
This was evident from the perpendicular wrinkles . 
She patched her bodice , which was old and worn out , with scraps of calico which tore at the slightest movement . 
The people to whom she was indebted made `` scenes '' and gave her no peace . 
She found them in the street , she found them again on her staircase . 
She passed many a night weeping and thinking . 
Her eyes were very bright , and she felt a steady pain in her shoulder towards the top of the left shoulder-blade . 
She coughed a great deal . 
She deeply hated Father Madeleine , but made no complaint . 
She sewed seventeen hours a day ; but a contractor for the work of prisons , who made the prisoners work at a discount , suddenly made prices fall , which reduced the daily earnings of working-women to nine sous . 
Seventeen hours of toil , and nine sous a day ! 
Her creditors were more pitiless than ever . 
The second-hand dealer , who had taken back nearly all his furniture , said to her incessantly , `` When will you pay me , you hussy ? '' 
What did they want of her , good God ! 
She felt that she was being hunted , and something of the wild beast developed in her . 
About the same time , Thenardier wrote to her that he had waited with decidedly too much amiability and that he must have a hundred francs at once ; otherwise he would turn little Cosette out of doors , convalescent as she was from her heavy illness , into the cold and the streets , and that she might do what she liked with herself , and die if she chose . 
`` A hundred francs , '' thought Fantine . 
`` But in what trade can one earn a hundred sous a day ? '' 
`` Come ! '' 
said she , `` let us sell what is left . '' 
The unfortunate girl became a woman of the town . 
CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT What is this history of Fantine ? 
It is society purchasing a slave . 
From whom ? 
From misery . 
From hunger , cold , isolation , destitution . 
A dolorous bargain . 
A soul for a morsel of bread . 
Misery offers ; society accepts . 
The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization , but it does not , as yet , permeate it ; it is said that slavery has disappeared from European civilization . 
This is a mistake . 
It still exists ; but it weighs only upon the woman , and it is called prostitution . 
It weighs upon the woman , that is to say , upon grace , weakness , beauty , maternity . 
This is not one of the least of man 's disgraces . 
At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached , nothing is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been . 
She has become marble in becoming mire . 
Whoever touches her feels cold . 
She passes ; she endures you ; she ignores you ; she is the severe and dishonored figure . 
Life and the social order have said their last word for her . 
All has happened to her that will happen to her . 
She has felt everything , borne everything , experienced everything , suffered everything , lost everything , mourned everything . 
She is resigned , with that resignation which resembles indifference , as death resembles sleep . 
She no longer avoids anything . 
Let all the clouds fall upon her , and all the ocean sweep over her ! 
What matters it to her ? 
She is a sponge that is soaked . 
At least , she believes it to be so ; but it is an error to imagine that fate can be exhausted , and that one has reached the bottom of anything whatever . 
Alas ! 
What are all these fates , driven on pell-mell ? 
Whither are they going ? 
Why are they thus ? 
He who knows that sees the whole of the shadow . 
He is alone . 
His name is God . 
M. BAMATABOIS 'S INACTIVITY There is in all small towns , and there was at M. sur M. in particular , a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred francs with the same air with which their prototypes devour two hundred thousand francs a year in Paris . 
These are beings of the great neuter species : impotent men , parasites , cyphers , who have a little land , a little folly , a little wit ; who would be rustics in a drawing-room , and who think themselves gentlemen in the dram-shop ; who say , `` My fields , my peasants , my woods '' ; who hiss actresses at the theatre to prove that they are persons of taste ; quarrel with the officers of the garrison to prove that they are men of war ; hunt , smoke , yawn , drink , smell of tobacco , play billiards , stare at travellers as they descend from the diligence , live at the cafe , dine at the inn , have a dog which eats the bones under the table , and a mistress who eats the dishes on the table ; who stick at a sou , exaggerate the fashions , admire tragedy , despise women , wear out their old boots , copy London through Paris , and Paris through the medium of Pont-A-Mousson , grow old as dullards , never work , serve no use , and do no great harm . 
M. Felix Tholomyes , had he remained in his own province and never beheld Paris , would have been one of these men . 
If they were richer , one would say , `` They are dandies ; '' if they were poorer , one would say , `` They are idlers . '' 
They are simply men without employment . 
Among these unemployed there are bores , the bored , dreamers , and some knaves . 
At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar , a big cravat , a watch with trinkets , three vests of different colors , worn one on top of the other -- the red and blue inside ; of a short-waisted olive coat , with a codfish tail , a double row of silver buttons set close to each other and running up to the shoulder ; and a pair of trousers of a lighter shade of olive , ornamented on the two seams with an indefinite , but always uneven , number of lines , varying from one to eleven -- a limit which was never exceeded . 
Add to this , high shoes with little irons on the heels , a tall hat with a narrow brim , hair worn in a tuft , an enormous cane , and conversation set off by puns of Potier . 
Over all , spurs and a mustache . 
At that epoch mustaches indicated the bourgeois , and spurs the pedestrian . 
The provincial dandy wore the longest of spurs and the fiercest of mustaches . 
It was the period of the conflict of the republics of South America with the King of Spain , of Bolivar against Morillo . 
Narrow-brimmed hats were royalist , and were called morillos ; liberals wore hats with wide brims , which were called bolivars . 
Eight or ten months , then , after that which is related in the preceding pages , towards the first of January , 1823 , on a snowy evening , one of these dandies , one of these unemployed , a `` right thinker , '' for he wore a morillo , and was , moreover , warmly enveloped in one of those large cloaks which completed the fashionable costume in cold weather , was amusing himself by tormenting a creature who was prowling about in a ball-dress , with neck uncovered and flowers in her hair , in front of the officers ' cafe . 
This dandy was smoking , for he was decidedly fashionable . 
Each time that the woman passed in front of him , he bestowed on her , together with a puff from his cigar , some apostrophe which he considered witty and mirthful , such as , `` How ugly you are ! 
-- Will you get out of my sight ? 
-- You have no teeth ! '' 
etc. , etc. . 
This gentleman was known as M. Bamatabois . 
The woman , a melancholy , decorated spectre which went and came through the snow , made him no reply , did not even glance at him , and nevertheless continued her promenade in silence , and with a sombre regularity , which brought her every five minutes within reach of this sarcasm , like the condemned soldier who returns under the rods . 
The small effect which he produced no doubt piqued the lounger ; and taking advantage of a moment when her back was turned , he crept up behind her with the gait of a wolf , and stifling his laugh , bent down , picked up a handful of snow from the pavement , and thrust it abruptly into her back , between her bare shoulders . 
The woman uttered a roar , whirled round , gave a leap like a panther , and hurled herself upon the man , burying her nails in his face , with the most frightful words which could fall from the guard-room into the gutter . 
These insults , poured forth in a voice roughened by brandy , did , indeed , proceed in hideous wise from a mouth which lacked its two front teeth . 
It was Fantine . 
At the noise thus produced , the officers ran out in throngs from the cafe , passers-by collected , and a large and merry circle , hooting and applauding , was formed around this whirlwind composed of two beings , whom there was some difficulty in recognizing as a man and a woman : the man struggling , his hat on the ground ; the woman striking out with feet and fists , bareheaded , howling , minus hair and teeth , livid with wrath , horrible . 
Suddenly a man of lofty stature emerged vivaciously from the crowd , seized the woman by her satin bodice , which was covered with mud , and said to her , `` Follow me ! '' 
The woman raised her head ; her furious voice suddenly died away . 
Her eyes were glassy ; she turned pale instead of livid , and she trembled with a quiver of terror . 
She had recognized Javert . 
The dandy took advantage of the incident to make his escape . 
THE SOLUTION OF SOME QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE MUNICIPAL POLICE Javert thrust aside the spectators , broke the circle , and set out with long strides towards the police station , which is situated at the extremity of the square , dragging the wretched woman after him . 
She yielded mechanically . 
Neither he nor she uttered a word . 
The cloud of spectators followed , jesting , in a paroxysm of delight . 
Supreme misery an occasion for obscenity . 
On arriving at the police station , which was a low room , warmed by a stove , with a glazed and grated door opening on the street , and guarded by a detachment , Javert opened the door , entered with Fantine , and shut the door behind him , to the great disappointment of the curious , who raised themselves on tiptoe , and craned their necks in front of the thick glass of the station-house , in their effort to see . 
Curiosity is a sort of gluttony . 
To see is to devour . 
On entering , Fantine fell down in a corner , motionless and mute , crouching down like a terrified dog . 
The sergeant of the guard brought a lighted candle to the table . 
Javert seated himself , drew a sheet of stamped paper from his pocket , and began to write . 
This class of women is consigned by our laws entirely to the discretion of the police . 
The latter do what they please , punish them , as seems good to them , and confiscate at their will those two sorry things which they entitle their industry and their liberty . 
Javert was impassive ; his grave face betrayed no emotion whatever . 
Nevertheless , he was seriously and deeply preoccupied . 
It was one of those moments when he was exercising without control , but subject to all the scruples of a severe conscience , his redoubtable discretionary power . 
At that moment he was conscious that his police agent 's stool was a tribunal . 
He was entering judgment . 
He judged and condemned . 
He summoned all the ideas which could possibly exist in his mind , around the great thing which he was doing . 
The more he examined the deed of this woman , the more shocked he felt . 
It was evident that he had just witnessed the commission of a crime . 
He had just beheld , yonder , in the street , society , in the person of a freeholder and an elector , insulted and attacked by a creature who was outside all pales . 
A prostitute had made an attempt on the life of a citizen . 
He had seen that , he , Javert . 
He wrote in silence . 
When he had finished he signed the paper , folded it , and said to the sergeant of the guard , as he handed it to him , `` Take three men and conduct this creature to jail . '' 
Then , turning to Fantine , `` You are to have six months of it . '' 
The unhappy woman shuddered . 
`` Six months ! 
six months of prison ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` Six months in which to earn seven sous a day ! 
But what will become of Cosette ? 
My daughter ! 
my daughter ! 
But I still owe the Thenardiers over a hundred francs ; do you know that , Monsieur Inspector ? '' 
She dragged herself across the damp floor , among the muddy boots of all those men , without rising , with clasped hands , and taking great strides on her knees . 
`` Monsieur Javert , '' said she , `` I beseech your mercy . 
I assure you that I was not in the wrong . 
If you had seen the beginning , you would have seen . 
I swear to you by the good God that I was not to blame ! 
That gentleman , the bourgeois , whom I do not know , put snow in my back . 
Has any one the right to put snow down our backs when we are walking along peaceably , and doing no harm to any one ? 
I am rather ill , as you see . 
And then , he had been saying impertinent things to me for a long time : ` You are ugly ! 
you have no teeth ! ' 
I know well that I have no longer those teeth . 
I did nothing ; I said to myself , ` The gentleman is amusing himself . ' 
I was honest with him ; I did not speak to him . 
It was at that moment that he put the snow down my back . 
Monsieur Javert , good Monsieur Inspector ! 
is there not some person here who saw it and can tell you that this is quite true ? 
Perhaps I did wrong to get angry . 
You know that one is not master of one 's self at the first moment . 
One gives way to vivacity ; and then , when some one puts something cold down your back just when you are not expecting it ! 
I did wrong to spoil that gentleman 's hat . 
Why did he go away ? 
I would ask his pardon . 
Oh , my God ! 
It makes no difference to me whether I ask his pardon . 
Do me the favor to-day , for this once , Monsieur Javert . 
Hold ! 
you do not know that in prison one can earn only seven sous a day ; it is not the government 's fault , but seven sous is one 's earnings ; and just fancy , I must pay one hundred francs , or my little girl will be sent to me . 
Oh , my God ! 
I can not have her with me . 
What I do is so vile ! 
Oh , my Cosette ! 
Oh , my little angel of the Holy Virgin ! 
what will become of her , poor creature ? 
I will tell you : it is the Thenardiers , inn-keepers , peasants ; and such people are unreasonable . 
They want money . 
Do n't put me in prison ! 
You see , there is a little girl who will be turned out into the street to get along as best she may , in the very heart of the winter ; and you must have pity on such a being , my good Monsieur Javert . 
If she were older , she might earn her living ; but it can not be done at that age . 
I am not a bad woman at bottom . 
It is not cowardliness and gluttony that have made me what I am . 
If I have drunk brandy , it was out of misery . 
I do not love it ; but it benumbs the senses . 
When I was happy , it was only necessary to glance into my closets , and it would have been evident that I was not a coquettish and untidy woman . 
I had linen , a great deal of linen . 
Have pity on me , Monsieur Javert ! '' 
She spoke thus , rent in twain , shaken with sobs , blinded with tears , her neck bare , wringing her hands , and coughing with a dry , short cough , stammering softly with a voice of agony . 
Great sorrow is a divine and terrible ray , which transfigures the unhappy . 
At that moment Fantine had become beautiful once more . 
From time to time she paused , and tenderly kissed the police agent 's coat . 
She would have softened a heart of granite ; but a heart of wood can not be softened . 
`` Come ! '' 
said Javert , `` I have heard you out . 
Have you entirely finished ? 
You will get six months . 
Now march ! 
The Eternal Father in person could do nothing more . '' 
At these solemn words , `` the Eternal Father in person could do nothing more , '' she understood that her fate was sealed . 
She sank down , murmuring , `` Mercy ! '' 
Javert turned his back . 
The soldiers seized her by the arms . 
A few moments earlier a man had entered , but no one had paid any heed to him . 
He shut the door , leaned his back against it , and listened to Fantine 's despairing supplications . 
At the instant when the soldiers laid their hands upon the unfortunate woman , who would not rise , he emerged from the shadow , and said : -- `` One moment , if you please . '' 
Javert raised his eyes and recognized M. Madeleine . 
He removed his hat , and , saluting him with a sort of aggrieved awkwardness : -- `` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor -- '' The words `` Mr. Mayor '' produced a curious effect upon Fantine . 
She rose to her feet with one bound , like a spectre springing from the earth , thrust aside the soldiers with both arms , walked straight up to M. Madeleine before any one could prevent her , and gazing intently at him , with a bewildered air , she cried : -- `` Ah ! 
so it is you who are M. le Maire ! '' 
Then she burst into a laugh , and spit in his face . 
M. Madeleine wiped his face , and said : -- `` Inspector Javert , set this woman at liberty . '' 
Javert felt that he was on the verge of going mad . 
He experienced at that moment , blow upon blow and almost simultaneously , the most violent emotions which he had ever undergone in all his life . 
To see a woman of the town spit in the mayor 's face was a thing so monstrous that , in his most daring flights of fancy , he would have regarded it as a sacrilege to believe it possible . 
On the other hand , at the very bottom of his thought , he made a hideous comparison as to what this woman was , and as to what this mayor might be ; and then he , with horror , caught a glimpse of I know not what simple explanation of this prodigious attack . 
But when he beheld that mayor , that magistrate , calmly wipe his face and say , `` Set this woman at liberty , '' he underwent a sort of intoxication of amazement ; thought and word failed him equally ; the sum total of possible astonishment had been exceeded in his case . 
He remained mute . 
The words had produced no less strange an effect on Fantine . 
She raised her bare arm , and clung to the damper of the stove , like a person who is reeling . 
Nevertheless , she glanced about her , and began to speak in a low voice , as though talking to herself : -- `` At liberty ! 
I am to be allowed to go ! 
I am not to go to prison for six months ! 
Who said that ? 
It is not possible that any one could have said that . 
I did not hear aright . 
It can not have been that monster of a mayor ! 
Was it you , my good Monsieur Javert , who said that I was to be set free ? 
Oh , see here ! 
I will tell you about it , and you will let me go . 
That monster of a mayor , that old blackguard of a mayor , is the cause of all . 
Just imagine , Monsieur Javert , he turned me out ! 
all because of a pack of rascally women , who gossip in the workroom . 
If that is not a horror , what is ? 
To dismiss a poor girl who is doing her work honestly ! 
Then I could no longer earn enough , and all this misery followed . 
In the first place , there is one improvement which these gentlemen of the police ought to make , and that is , to prevent prison contractors from wronging poor people . 
I will explain it to you , you see : you are earning twelve sous at shirt-making , the price falls to nine sous ; and it is not enough to live on . 
Then one has to become whatever one can . 
As for me , I had my little Cosette , and I was actually forced to become a bad woman . 
Now you understand how it is that that blackguard of a mayor caused all the mischief . 
After that I stamped on that gentleman 's hat in front of the officers ' cafe ; but he had spoiled my whole dress with snow . 
We women have but one silk dress for evening wear . 
You see that I did not do wrong deliberately -- truly , Monsieur Javert ; and everywhere I behold women who are far more wicked than I , and who are much happier . 
O Monsieur Javert ! 
it was you who gave orders that I am to be set free , was it not ? 
Make inquiries , speak to my landlord ; I am paying my rent now ; they will tell you that I am perfectly honest . 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
I beg your pardon ; I have unintentionally touched the damper of the stove , and it has made it smoke . '' 
M. Madeleine listened to her with profound attention . 
While she was speaking , he fumbled in his waistcoat , drew out his purse and opened it . 
It was empty . 
He put it back in his pocket . 
He said to Fantine , `` How much did you say that you owed ? '' 
Fantine , who was looking at Javert only , turned towards him : -- `` Was I speaking to you ? '' 
Then , addressing the soldiers : -- `` Say , you fellows , did you see how I spit in his face ? 
Ah ! 
you old wretch of a mayor , you came here to frighten me , but I 'm not afraid of you . 
I am afraid of Monsieur Javert . 
I am afraid of my good Monsieur Javert ! '' 
So saying , she turned to the inspector again : -- `` And yet , you see , Mr. Inspector , it is necessary to be just . 
I understand that you are just , Mr. Inspector ; in fact , it is perfectly simple : a man amuses himself by putting snow down a woman 's back , and that makes the officers laugh ; one must divert themselves in some way ; and we -- well , we are here for them to amuse themselves with , of course ! 
And then , you , you come ; you are certainly obliged to preserve order , you lead off the woman who is in the wrong ; but on reflection , since you are a good man , you say that I am to be set at liberty ; it is for the sake of the little one , for six months in prison would prevent my supporting my child . 
` Only , do n't do it again , you hussy ! ' 
Oh ! 
I wo n't do it again , Monsieur Javert ! 
They may do whatever they please to me now ; I will not stir . 
But to-day , you see , I cried because it hurt me . 
I was not expecting that snow from the gentleman at all ; and then as I told you , I am not well ; I have a cough ; I seem to have a burning ball in my stomach , and the doctor tells me , ` Take care of yourself . ' 
Here , feel , give me your hand ; do n't be afraid -- it is here . '' 
She no longer wept , her voice was caressing ; she placed Javert 's coarse hand on her delicate , white throat and looked smilingly at him . 
All at once she rapidly adjusted her disordered garments , dropped the folds of her skirt , which had been pushed up as she dragged herself along , almost to the height of her knee , and stepped towards the door , saying to the soldiers in a low voice , and with a friendly nod : -- `` Children , Monsieur l'Inspecteur has said that I am to be released , and I am going . '' 
She laid her hand on the latch of the door . 
One step more and she would be in the street . 
Javert up to that moment had remained erect , motionless , with his eyes fixed on the ground , cast athwart this scene like some displaced statue , which is waiting to be put away somewhere . 
The sound of the latch roused him . 
He raised his head with an expression of sovereign authority , an expression all the more alarming in proportion as the authority rests on a low level , ferocious in the wild beast , atrocious in the man of no estate . 
`` Sergeant ! '' 
he cried , `` do n't you see that that jade is walking off ! 
Who bade you let her go ? '' 
`` I , '' said Madeleine . 
Fantine trembled at the sound of Javert 's voice , and let go of the latch as a thief relinquishes the article which he has stolen . 
At the sound of Madeleine 's voice she turned around , and from that moment forth she uttered no word , nor dared so much as to breathe freely , but her glance strayed from Madeleine to Javert , and from Javert to Madeleine in turn , according to which was speaking . 
It was evident that Javert must have been exasperated beyond measure before he would permit himself to apostrophize the sergeant as he had done , after the mayor 's suggestion that Fantine should be set at liberty . 
Had he reached the point of forgetting the mayor 's presence ? 
Had he finally declared to himself that it was impossible that any `` authority '' should have given such an order , and that the mayor must certainly have said one thing by mistake for another , without intending it ? 
Or , in view of the enormities of which he had been a witness for the past two hours , did he say to himself , that it was necessary to recur to supreme resolutions , that it was indispensable that the small should be made great , that the police spy should transform himself into a magistrate , that the policeman should become a dispenser of justice , and that , in this prodigious extremity , order , law , morality , government , society in its entirety , was personified in him , Javert ? 
However that may be , when M. Madeleine uttered that word , I , as we have just heard , Police Inspector Javert was seen to turn toward the mayor , pale , cold , with blue lips , and a look of despair , his whole body agitated by an imperceptible quiver and an unprecedented occurrence , and say to him , with downcast eyes but a firm voice : -- `` Mr. Mayor , that can not be . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
said M. Madeleine . 
`` This miserable woman has insulted a citizen . '' 
`` Inspector Javert , '' replied the mayor , in a calm and conciliating tone , `` listen . 
You are an honest man , and I feel no hesitation in explaining matters to you . 
Here is the true state of the case : I was passing through the square just as you were leading this woman away ; there were still groups of people standing about , and I made inquiries and learned everything ; it was the townsman who was in the wrong and who should have been arrested by properly conducted police . '' 
Javert retorted : -- `` This wretch has just insulted Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` That concerns me , '' said M. Madeleine . 
`` My own insult belongs to me , I think . 
I can do what I please about it . '' 
`` I beg Monsieur le Maire 's pardon . 
The insult is not to him but to the law . '' 
`` Inspector Javert , '' replied M. Madeleine , `` the highest law is conscience . 
I have heard this woman ; I know what I am doing . '' 
`` And I , Mr. Mayor , do not know what I see . '' 
`` Then content yourself with obeying . '' 
`` I am obeying my duty . 
My duty demands that this woman shall serve six months in prison . '' 
M. Madeleine replied gently : -- `` Heed this well ; she will not serve a single day . '' 
At this decisive word , Javert ventured to fix a searching look on the mayor and to say , but in a tone of voice that was still profoundly respectful : -- `` I am sorry to oppose Monsieur le Maire ; it is for the first time in my life , but he will permit me to remark that I am within the bounds of my authority . 
I confine myself , since Monsieur le Maire desires it , to the question of the gentleman . 
I was present . 
This woman flung herself on Monsieur Bamatabnois , who is an elector and the proprietor of that handsome house with a balcony , which forms the corner of the esplanade , three stories high and entirely of cut stone . 
Such things as there are in the world ! 
In any case , Monsieur le Maire , this is a question of police regulations in the streets , and concerns me , and I shall detain this woman Fantine . '' 
Then M. Madeleine folded his arms , and said in a severe voice which no one in the town had heard hitherto : -- `` The matter to which you refer is one connected with the municipal police . 
According to the terms of articles nine , eleven , fifteen , and sixty-six of the code of criminal examination , I am the judge . 
I order that this woman shall be set at liberty . '' 
Javert ventured to make a final effort . 
`` But , Mr. Mayor -- '' `` I refer you to article eighty-one of the law of the 13th of December , 1799 , in regard to arbitrary detention . '' 
`` Monsieur le Maire , permit me -- '' `` Not another word . '' 
`` But -- '' `` Leave the room , '' said M. Madeleine . 
Javert received the blow erect , full in the face , in his breast , like a Russian soldier . 
He bowed to the very earth before the mayor and left the room . 
Fantine stood aside from the door and stared at him in amazement as he passed . 
Nevertheless , she also was the prey to a strange confusion . 
She had just seen herself a subject of dispute between two opposing powers . 
She had seen two men who held in their hands her liberty , her life , her soul , her child , in combat before her very eyes ; one of these men was drawing her towards darkness , the other was leading her back towards the light . 
In this conflict , viewed through the exaggerations of terror , these two men had appeared to her like two giants ; the one spoke like her demon , the other like her good angel . 
The angel had conquered the demon , and , strange to say , that which made her shudder from head to foot was the fact that this angel , this liberator , was the very man whom she abhorred , that mayor whom she had so long regarded as the author of all her woes , that Madeleine ! 
And at the very moment when she had insulted him in so hideous a fashion , he had saved her ! 
Had she , then , been mistaken ? 
Must she change her whole soul ? 
She did not know ; she trembled . 
She listened in bewilderment , she looked on in affright , and at every word uttered by M. Madeleine she felt the frightful shades of hatred crumble and melt within her , and something warm and ineffable , indescribable , which was both joy , confidence and love , dawn in her heart . 
When Javert had taken his departure , M. Madeleine turned to her and said to her in a deliberate voice , like a serious man who does not wish to weep and who finds some difficulty in speaking : -- `` I have heard you . 
I knew nothing about what you have mentioned . 
I believe that it is true , and I feel that it is true . 
I was even ignorant of the fact that you had left my shop . 
Why did you not apply to me ? 
But here ; I will pay your debts , I will send for your child , or you shall go to her . 
You shall live here , in Paris , or where you please . 
I undertake the care of your child and yourself . 
You shall not work any longer if you do not like . 
I will give all the money you require . 
You shall be honest and happy once more . 
And listen ! 
I declare to you that if all is as you say , -- and I do not doubt it , -- you have never ceased to be virtuous and holy in the sight of God . 
Oh ! 
poor woman . '' 
This was more than Fantine could bear . 
To have Cosette ! 
To leave this life of infamy . 
To live free , rich , happy , respectable with Cosette ; to see all these realities of paradise blossom of a sudden in the midst of her misery . 
She stared stupidly at this man who was talking to her , and could only give vent to two or three sobs , `` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
Her limbs gave way beneath her , she knelt in front of M. Madeleine , and before he could prevent her he felt her grasp his hand and press her lips to it . 
Then she fainted . 
THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he had established in his own house . 
He confided her to the sisters , who put her to bed . 
A burning fever had come on . 
She passed a part of the night in delirium and raving . 
At length , however , she fell asleep . 
On the morrow , towards midday , Fantine awoke . 
She heard some one breathing close to her bed ; she drew aside the curtain and saw M. Madeleine standing there and looking at something over her head . 
His gaze was full of pity , anguish , and supplication . 
She followed its direction , and saw that it was fixed on a crucifix which was nailed to the wall . 
Thenceforth , M. Madeleine was transfigured in Fantine 's eyes . 
He seemed to her to be clothed in light . 
He was absorbed in a sort of prayer . 
She gazed at him for a long time without daring to interrupt him . 
At last she said timidly : -- `` What are you doing ? '' 
M. Madeleine had been there for an hour . 
He had been waiting for Fantine to awake . 
He took her hand , felt of her pulse , and replied : -- `` How do you feel ? '' 
`` Well , I have slept , '' she replied ; `` I think that I am better , It is nothing . '' 
He answered , responding to the first question which she had put to him as though he had just heard it : -- `` I was praying to the martyr there on high . '' 
And he added in his own mind , `` For the martyr here below . '' 
M. Madeleine had passed the night and the morning in making inquiries . 
He knew all now . 
He knew Fantine 's history in all its heart-rending details . 
He went on : -- `` You have suffered much , poor mother . 
Oh ! 
do not complain ; you now have the dowry of the elect . 
It is thus that men are transformed into angels . 
It is not their fault they do not know how to go to work otherwise . 
You see this hell from which you have just emerged is the first form of heaven . 
It was necessary to begin there . '' 
He sighed deeply . 
But she smiled on him with that sublime smile in which two teeth were lacking . 
That same night , Javert wrote a letter . 
The next morning be posted it himself at the office of M. sur M . 
It was addressed to Paris , and the superscription ran : To Monsieur Chabouillet , Secretary of Monsieur le Prefet of Police . 
As the affair in the station-house had been bruited about , the post-mistress and some other persons who saw the letter before it was sent off , and who recognized Javert 's handwriting on the cover , thought that he was sending in his resignation . 
M.Madeleine made haste to write to the Thenardiers . 
Fantine owed them one hundred and twenty francs . 
He sent them three hundred francs , telling them to pay themselves from that sum , and to fetch the child instantly to M. sur M. , where her sick mother required her presence . 
This dazzled Thenardier . 
`` The devil ! '' 
said the man to his wife ; `` do n't let 's allow the child to go . 
This lark is going to turn into a milch cow . 
I see through it . 
Some ninny has taken a fancy to the mother . '' 
He replied with a very well drawn-up bill for five hundred and some odd francs . 
In this memorandum two indisputable items figured up over three hundred francs , -- one for the doctor , the other for the apothecary who had attended and physicked Eponine and Azelma through two long illnesses . 
Cosette , as we have already said , had not been ill . 
It was only a question of a trifling substitution of names . 
At the foot of the memorandum Thenardier wrote , Received on account , three hundred francs . 
M. Madeleine immediately sent three hundred francs more , and wrote , `` Make haste to bring Cosette . '' 
`` Christi ! '' 
said Thenardier , `` let 's not give up the child . '' 
In the meantime , Fantine did not recover . 
She still remained in the infirmary . 
The sisters had at first only received and nursed `` that woman '' with repugnance . 
Those who have seen the bas-reliefs of Rheims will recall the inflation of the lower lip of the wise virgins as they survey the foolish virgins . 
The ancient scorn of the vestals for the ambubajae is one of the most profound instincts of feminine dignity ; the sisters felt it with the double force contributed by religion . 
But in a few days Fantine disarmed them . 
She said all kinds of humble and gentle things , and the mother in her provoked tenderness . 
One day the sisters heard her say amid her fever : `` I have been a sinner ; but when I have my child beside me , it will be a sign that God has pardoned me . 
While I was leading a bad life , I should not have liked to have my Cosette with me ; I could not have borne her sad , astonished eyes . 
It was for her sake that I did evil , and that is why God pardons me . 
I shall feel the benediction of the good God when Cosette is here . 
I shall gaze at her ; it will do me good to see that innocent creature . 
She knows nothing at all . 
She is an angel , you see , my sisters . 
At that age the wings have not fallen off . '' 
M. Madeleine went to see her twice a day , and each time she asked him : -- `` Shall I see my Cosette soon ? '' 
He answered : -- `` To-morrow , perhaps . 
She may arrive at any moment . 
I am expecting her . '' 
And the mother 's pale face grew radiant . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she said , `` how happy I am going to be ! '' 
We have just said that she did not recover her health . 
On the contrary , her condition seemed to become more grave from week to week . 
That handful of snow applied to her bare skin between her shoulder-blades had brought about a sudden suppression of perspiration , as a consequence of which the malady which had been smouldering within her for many years was violently developed at last . 
At that time people were beginning to follow the fine Laennec 's fine suggestions in the study and treatment of chest maladies . 
The doctor sounded Fantine 's chest and shook his head . 
M. Madeleine said to the doctor : -- `` Well ? '' 
`` Has she not a child which she desires to see ? '' 
said the doctor . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well ! 
Make haste and get it here ! '' 
M. Madeleine shuddered . 
Fantine inquired : -- `` What did the doctor say ? '' 
M. Madeleine forced himself to smile . 
`` He said that your child was to be brought speedily . 
That that would restore your health . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
she rejoined , `` he is right ! 
But what do those Thenardiers mean by keeping my Cosette from me ! 
Oh ! 
she is coming . 
At last I behold happiness close beside me ! '' 
In the meantime Thenardier did not `` let go of the child , '' and gave a hundred insufficient reasons for it . 
Cosette was not quite well enough to take a journey in the winter . 
And then , there still remained some petty but pressing debts in the neighborhood , and they were collecting the bills for them , etc. , etc. `` I shall send some one to fetch Cosette ! '' 
said Father Madeleine . 
`` If necessary , I will go myself . '' 
He wrote the following letter to Fantine 's dictation , and made her sign it : -- `` MONSIEUR THENARDIER : -- You will deliver Cosette to this person . 
You will be paid for all the little things . 
I have the honor to salute you with respect . 
`` FANTINE . '' 
