to you , my dearly beloved , my children , to you , my innocent creatures ! 
Is it nothing to hold one 's peace ? 
is it a simple matter to keep silence ? 
No , it is not simple . 
There is a silence which lies . 
And my lie , and my fraud and my indignity , and my cowardice and my treason and my crime , I should have drained drop by drop , I should have spit it out , then swallowed it again , I should have finished at midnight and have begun again at midday , and my ` good morning ' would have lied , and my ` good night ' would have lied , and I should have slept on it , I should have eaten it , with my bread , and I should have looked Cosette in the face , and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile of the damned soul , and I should have been an abominable villain ! 
Why should I do it ? 
in order to be happy . 
In order to be happy . 
Have I the right to be happy ? 
I stand outside of life , Sir . '' 
Jean Valjean paused . 
Marius listened . 
Such chains of ideas and of anguishes can not be interrupted . 
Jean Valjean lowered his voice once more , but it was no longer a dull voice -- it was a sinister voice . 
`` You ask why I speak ? 
I am neither denounced , nor pursued , nor tracked , you say . 
Yes ! 
I am denounced ! 
yes ! 
I am tracked ! 
By whom ? 
By myself . 
It is I who bar the passage to myself , and I drag myself , and I push myself , and I arrest myself , and I execute myself , and when one holds oneself , one is firmly held . '' 
And , seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and extending it towards Marius : `` Do you see that fist ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Do n't you think that it holds that collar in such a wise as not to release it ? 
Well ! 
conscience is another grasp ! 
If one desires to be happy , sir , one must never understand duty ; for , as soon as one has comprehended it , it is implacable . 
One would say that it punished you for comprehending it ; but no , it rewards you ; for it places you in a hell , where you feel God beside you . 
One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is at peace with himself . '' 
And , with a poignant accent , he added : `` Monsieur Pontmercy , this is not common sense , I am an honest man . 
It is by degrading myself in your eyes that I elevate myself in my own . 
This has happened to me once before , but it was less painful then ; it was a mere nothing . 
Yes , an honest man . 
I should not be so if , through my fault , you had continued to esteem me ; now that you despise me , I am so . 
I have that fatality hanging over me that , not being able to ever have anything but stolen consideration , that consideration humiliates me , and crushes me inwardly , and , in order that I may respect myself , it is necessary that I should be despised . 
Then I straighten up again . 
I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience . 
I know well that that is most improbable . 
But what would you have me do about it ? 
it is the fact . 
I have entered into engagements with myself ; I keep them . 
There are encounters which bind us , there are chances which involve us in duties . 
You see , Monsieur Pontmercy , various things have happened to me in the course of my life . '' 
Again Jean Valjean paused , swallowing his saliva with an effort , as though his words had a bitter after-taste , and then he went on : `` When one has such a horror hanging over one , one has not the right to make others share it without their knowledge , one has not the right to make them slip over one 's own precipice without their perceiving it , one has not the right to let one 's red blouse drag upon them , one has no right to slyly encumber with one 's misery the happiness of others . 
It is hideous to approach those who are healthy , and to touch them in the dark with one 's ulcer . 
In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lent me his name , I have no right to use it ; he could give it to me , but I could not take it . 
A name is an I . 
You see , sir , that I have thought somewhat , I have read a little , although I am a peasant ; and you see that I express myself properly . 
I understand things . 
I have procured myself an education . 
Well , yes , to abstract a name and to place oneself under it is dishonest . 
Letters of the alphabet can be filched , like a purse or a watch . 
To be a false signature in flesh and blood , to be a living false key , to enter the house of honest people by picking their lock , never more to look straightforward , to forever eye askance , to be infamous within the I , no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
It is better to suffer , to bleed , to weep , to tear one 's skin from the flesh with one 's nails , to pass nights writhing in anguish , to devour oneself body and soul . 
That is why I have just told you all this . 
Wantonly , as you say . '' 
He drew a painful breath , and hurled this final word : `` In days gone by , I stole a loaf of bread in order to live ; to-day , in order to live , I will not steal a name . '' 
`` To live ! '' 
interrupted Marius . 
`` You do not need that name in order to live ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I understand the matter , '' said Jean Valjean , raising and lowering his head several times in succession . 
A silence ensued . 
Both held their peace , each plunged in a gulf of thoughts . 
Marius was sitting near a table and resting the corner of his mouth on one of his fingers , which was folded back . 
Jean Valjean was pacing to and fro . 
He paused before a mirror , and remained motionless . 
Then , as though replying to some inward course of reasoning , he said , as he gazed at the mirror , which he did not see : `` While , at present , I am relieved . '' 
He took up his march again , and walked to the other end of the drawing-room . 
At the moment when he turned round , he perceived that Marius was watching his walk . 
Then he said , with an inexpressible intonation : `` I drag my leg a little . 
Now you understand why ! '' 
Then he turned fully round towards Marius : `` And now , sir , imagine this : I have said nothing , I have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , I have taken my place in your house , I am one of you , I am in my chamber , I come to breakfast in the morning in slippers , in the evening all three of us go to the play , I accompany Madame Pontmercy to the Tuileries , and to the Place Royale , we are together , you think me your equal ; one fine day you are there , and I am there , we are conversing , we are laughing ; all at once , you hear a voice shouting this name : ` Jean Valjean ! ' 
and behold , that terrible hand , the police , darts from the darkness , and abruptly tears off my mask ! '' 
Again he paused ; Marius had sprung to his feet with a shudder . 
Jean Valjean resumed : `` What do you say to that ? '' 
Marius ' silence answered for him . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` You see that I am right in not holding my peace . 
Be happy , be in heaven , be the angel of an angel , exist in the sun , be content therewith , and do not trouble yourself about the means which a poor damned wretch takes to open his breast and force his duty to come forth ; you have before you , sir , a wretched man . '' 
Marius slowly crossed the room , and , when he was quite close to Jean Valjean , he offered the latter his hand . 
But Marius was obliged to step up and take that hand which was not offered , Jean Valjean let him have his own way , and it seemed to Marius that he pressed a hand of marble . 
`` My grandfather has friends , '' said Marius ; `` I will procure your pardon . '' 
`` It is useless , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` I am believed to be dead , and that suffices . 
The dead are not subjected to surveillance . 
They are supposed to rot in peace . 
Death is the same thing as pardon . '' 
And , disengaging the hand which Marius held , he added , with a sort of inexorable dignity : `` Moreover , the friend to whom I have recourse is the doing of my duty ; and I need but one pardon , that of my conscience . '' 
At that moment , a door at the other end of the drawing-room opened gently half way , and in the opening Cosette 's head appeared . 
They saw only her sweet face , her hair was in charming disorder , her eyelids were still swollen with sleep . 
She made the movement of a bird , which thrusts its head out of its nest , glanced first at her husband , then at Jean Valjean , and cried to them with a smile , so that they seemed to behold a smile at the heart of a rose : `` I will wager that you are talking politics . 
How stupid that is , instead of being with me ! '' 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
`` Cosette ! 
... '' stammered Marius . 
And he paused . 
One would have said that they were two criminals . 
Cosette , who was radiant , continued to gaze at both of them . 
There was something in her eyes like gleams of paradise . 
`` I have caught you in the very act , '' said Cosette . 
`` Just now , I heard my father Fauchelevent through the door saying : ` Conscience ... doing my duty ... ' That is politics , indeed it is . 
I will not have it . 
People should not talk politics the very next day . 
It is not right . '' 
`` You are mistaken . 
Cosette , '' said Marius , `` we are talking business . 
We are discussing the best investment of your six hundred thousand francs ... '' `` That is not it at all '' interrupted Cosette . 
`` I am coming . 
Does any body want me here ? '' 
And , passing resolutely through the door , she entered the drawing-room . 
She was dressed in a voluminous white dressing-gown , with a thousand folds and large sleeves which , starting from the neck , fell to her feet . 
In the golden heavens of some ancient gothic pictures , there are these charming sacks fit to clothe the angels . 
She contemplated herself from head to foot in a long mirror , then exclaimed , in an outburst of ineffable ecstasy : `` There was once a King and a Queen . 
Oh ! 
how happy I am ! '' 
That said , she made a curtsey to Marius and to Jean Valjean . 
`` There , '' said she , `` I am going to install myself near you in an easy-chair , we breakfast in half an hour , you shall say anything you like , I know well that men must talk , and I will be very good . '' 
Marius took her by the arm and said lovingly to her : `` We are talking business . '' 
`` By the way , '' said Cosette , `` I have opened my window , a flock of pierrots has arrived in the garden , -- Birds , not maskers . 
To-day is Ash-Wednesday ; but not for the birds . '' 
`` I tell you that we are talking business , go , my little Cosette , leave us alone for a moment . 
We are talking figures . 
That will bore you . '' 
`` You have a charming cravat on this morning , Marius . 
You are very dandified , monseigneur . 
No , it will not bore me . '' 
`` I assure you that it will bore you . '' 
`` No . 
Since it is you . 
I shall not understand you , but I shall listen to you . 
When one hears the voices of those whom one loves , one does not need to understand the words that they utter . 
That we should be here together -- that is all that I desire . 
I shall remain with you , bah ! '' 
`` You are my beloved Cosette ! 
Impossible . '' 
`` Impossible ! '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Very good , '' said Cosette . 
`` I was going to tell you some news . 
I could have told you that your grandfather is still asleep , that your aunt is at mass , that the chimney in my father Fauchelevent 's room smokes , that Nicolette has sent for the chimney-sweep , that Toussaint and Nicolette have already quarrelled , that Nicolette makes sport of Toussaint 's stammer . 
Well , you shall know nothing . 
Ah ! 
it is impossible ? 
you shall see , gentlemen , that I , in my turn , can say : It is impossible . 
Then who will be caught ? 
I beseech you , my little Marius , let me stay here with you two . '' 
`` I swear to you , that it is indispensable that we should be alone . '' 
`` Well , am I anybody ? '' 
Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word . 
Cosette turned to him : `` In the first place , father , I want you to come and embrace me . 
What do you mean by not saying anything instead of taking my part ? 
who gave me such a father as that ? 
You must perceive that my family life is very unhappy . 
My husband beats me . 
Come , embrace me instantly . '' 
Jean Valjean approached . 
Cosette turned toward Marius . 
`` As for you , I shall make a face at you . '' 
Then she presented her brow to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean advanced a step toward her . 
Cosette recoiled . 
`` Father , you are pale . 
Does your arm hurt you ? '' 
`` It is well , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Did you sleep badly ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Are you sad ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Embrace me if you are well , if you sleep well , if you are content , I will not scold you . '' 
And again she offered him her brow . 
Jean Valjean dropped a kiss upon that brow whereon rested a celestial gleam . 
`` Smile . '' 
Jean Valjean obeyed . 
It was the smile of a spectre . 
`` Now , defend me against my husband . '' 
`` Cosette ! 
... '' ejaculated Marius . 
`` Get angry , father . 
Say that I must stay . 
You can certainly talk before me . 
So you think me very silly . 
What you say is astonishing ! 
business , placing money in a bank a great matter truly . 
Men make mysteries out of nothing . 
I am very pretty this morning . 
Look at me , Marius . '' 
And with an adorable shrug of the shoulders , and an indescribably exquisite pout , she glanced at Marius . 
`` I love you ! '' 
said Marius . 
`` I adore you ! '' 
said Cosette . 
And they fell irresistibly into each other 's arms . 
`` Now , '' said Cosette , adjusting a fold of her dressing-gown , with a triumphant little grimace , `` I shall stay . '' 
`` No , not that , '' said Marius , in a supplicating tone . 
`` We have to finish something . '' 
`` Still no ? '' 
Marius assumed a grave tone : `` I assure you , Cosette , that it is impossible . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you put on your man 's voice , sir . 
That is well , I go . 
You , father , have not upheld me . 
Monsieur my father , monsieur my husband , you are tyrants . 
I shall go and tell grandpapa . 
If you think that I am going to return and talk platitudes to you , you are mistaken . 
I am proud . 
I shall wait for you now . 
You shall see , that it is you who are going to be bored without me . 
I am going , it is well . '' 
And she left the room . 
Two seconds later , the door opened once more , her fresh and rosy head was again thrust between the two leaves , and she cried to them : `` I am very angry indeed . '' 
The door closed again , and the shadows descended once more . 
It was as though a ray of sunlight should have suddenly traversed the night , without itself being conscious of it . 
Marius made sure that the door was securely closed . 
`` Poor Cosette ! '' 
he murmured , `` when she finds out ... '' At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb . 
He fixed on Marius a bewildered eye . 
`` Cosette ! 
oh yes , it is true , you are going to tell Cosette about this . 
That is right . 
Stay , I had not thought of that . 
One has the strength for one thing , but not for another . 
Sir , I conjure you , I entreat now , sir , give me your most sacred word of honor , that you will not tell her . 
Is it not enough that you should know it ? 
I have been able to say it myself without being forced to it , I could have told it to the universe , to the whole world , -- it was all one to me . 
But she , she does not know what it is , it would terrify her . 
What , a convict ! 
we should be obliged to explain matters to her , to say to her : ` He is a man who has been in the galleys . ' 
She saw the chain-gang pass by one day . 
Oh ! 
My God ! '' 
... He dropped into an arm-chair and hid his face in his hands . 
His grief was not audible , but from the quivering of his shoulders it was evident that he was weeping . 
Silent tears , terrible tears . 
There is something of suffocation in the sob . 
He was seized with a sort of convulsion , he threw himself against the back of the chair as though to gain breath , letting his arms fall , and allowing Marius to see his face inundated with tears , and Marius heard him murmur , so low that his voice seemed to issue from fathomless depths : `` Oh ! 
would that I could die ! '' 
`` Be at your ease , '' said Marius , `` I will keep your secret for myself alone . '' 
x And , less touched , perhaps , than he ought to have been , but forced , for the last hour , to familiarize himself with something as unexpected as it was dreadful , gradually beholding the convict superposed before his very eyes , upon M. Fauchelevent , overcome , little by little , by that lugubrious reality , and led , by the natural inclination of the situation , to recognize the space which had just been placed between that man and himself , Marius added : `` It is impossible that I should not speak a word to you with regard to the deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted . 
That is an act of probity . 
It is just that some recompense should be bestowed on you . 
Fix the sum yourself , it shall be counted out to you . 
Do not fear to set it very high . '' 
`` I thank you , sir , '' replied Jean Valjean , gently . 
He remained in thought for a moment , mechanically passing the tip of his fore-finger across his thumb-nail , then he lifted up his voice : `` All is nearly over . 
But one last thing remains for me ... '' `` What is it ? '' 
Jean Valjean struggled with what seemed a last hesitation , and , without voice , without breath , he stammered rather than said : `` Now that you know , do you think , sir , you , who are the master , that I ought not to see Cosette any more ? '' 
`` I think that would be better , '' replied Marius coldly . 
`` I shall never see her more , '' murmured Jean Valjean . 
And he directed his steps towards the door . 
He laid his hand on the knob , the latch yielded , the door opened . 
Jean Valjean pushed it open far enough to pass through , stood motionless for a second , then closed the door again and turned to Marius . 
He was no longer pale , he was livid . 
There were no longer any tears in his eyes , but only a sort of tragic flame . 
His voice had regained a strange composure . 
`` Stay , sir , '' he said . 
`` If you will allow it , I will come to see her . 
I assure you that I desire it greatly . 
If I had not cared to see Cosette , I should not have made to you the confession that I have made , I should have gone away ; but , as I desired to remain in the place where Cosette is , and to continue to see her , I had to tell you about it honestly . 
You follow my reasoning , do you not ? 
it is a matter easily understood . 
You see , I have had her with me for more than nine years . 
We lived first in that hut on the boulevard , then in the convent , then near the Luxembourg . 
That was where you saw her for the first time . 
You remember her blue plush hat . 
Then we went to the Quartier des Invalides , where there was a railing on a garden , the Rue Plumet . 
I lived in a little back court-yard , whence I could hear her piano . 
That was my life . 
We never left each other . 
That lasted for nine years and some months . 
I was like her own father , and she was my child . 
I do not know whether you understand , Monsieur Pontmercy , but to go away now , never to see her again , never to speak to her again , to no longer have anything , would be hard . 
If you do not disapprove of it , I will come to see Cosette from time to time . 
I will not come often . 
I will not remain long . 
You shall give orders that I am to be received in the little waiting-room . 
On the ground floor . 
I could enter perfectly well by the back door , but that might create surprise perhaps , and it would be better , I think , for me to enter by the usual door . 
Truly , sir , I should like to see a little more of Cosette . 
As rarely as you please . 
Put yourself in my place , I have nothing left but that . 
And then , we must be cautious . 
If I no longer come at all , it would produce a bad effect , it would be considered singular . 
What I can do , by the way , is to come in the afternoon , when night is beginning to fall . '' 
`` You shall come every evening , '' said Marius , `` and Cosette will be waiting for you . '' 
`` You are kind , sir , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Marius saluted Jean Valjean , happiness escorted despair to the door , and these two men parted . 
THE OBSCURITIES WHICH A REVELATION CAN CONTAIN Marius was quite upset . 
The sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the man beside whom he had seen Cosette , was now explained to him . 
There was something enigmatic about that person , of which his instinct had warned him . 
This enigma was the most hideous of disgraces , the galleys . 
This M. Fauchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean . 
To abruptly find such a secret in the midst of one 's happiness resembles the discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves . 
Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such a neighborhood ? 
Was this an accomplished fact ? 
Did the acceptance of that man form a part of the marriage now consummated ? 
Was there nothing to be done ? 
Had Marius wedded the convict as well ? 
In vain may one be crowned with light and joy , in vain may one taste the grand purple hour of life , happy love , such shocks would force even the archangel in his ecstasy , even the demigod in his glory , to shudder . 
As is always the case in changes of view of this nature , Marius asked himself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
Had he been wanting in divination ? 
Had he been wanting in prudence ? 
Had he involuntarily dulled his wits ? 
A little , perhaps . 
Had he entered upon this love affair , which had ended in his marriage to Cosette , without taking sufficient precautions to throw light upon the surroundings ? 
He admitted , -- it is thus , by a series of successive admissions of ourselves in regard to ourselves , that life amends us , little by little , -- he admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature , a sort of internal cloud peculiar to many organizations , and which , in paroxysms of passion and sorrow , dilates as the temperature of the soul changes , and invades the entire man , to such a degree as to render him nothing more than a conscience bathed in a mist . 
We have more than once indicated this characteristic element of Marius ' individuality . 
He recalled that , in the intoxication of his love , in the Rue Plumet , during those six or seven ecstatic weeks , he had not even spoke to Cosette of that drama in the Gorbeau hovel , where the victim had taken up such a singular line of silence during the struggle and the ensuing flight . 
How had it happened that he had not mentioned this to Cosette ? 
Yet it was so near and so terrible ! 
How had it come to pass that he had not even named the Thenardiers , and , particularly , on the day when he had encountered Eponine ? 
He now found it almost difficult to explain his silence of that time . 
Nevertheless , he could account for it . 
He recalled his benumbed state , his intoxication with Cosette , love absorbing everything , that catching away of each other into the ideal , and perhaps also , like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled with this violent and charming state of the soul , a vague , dull instinct impelling him to conceal and abolish in his memory that redoubtable adventure , contact with which he dreaded , in which he did not wish to play any part , his agency in which he had kept secret , and in which he could be neither narrator nor witness without being an accuser . 
Moreover , these few weeks had been a flash of lightning ; there had been no time for anything except love . 
In short , having weighed everything , turned everything over in his mind , examined everything , whatever might have been the consequences if he had told Cosette about the Gorbeau ambush , even if he had discovered that Jean Valjean was a convict , would that have changed him , Marius ? 
Would that have changed her , Cosette ? 
Would he have drawn back ? 
Would he have adored her any the less ? 
Would he have refrained from marrying her ? 
No . 
Then there was nothing to regret , nothing with which he need reproach himself . 
All was well . 
There is a deity for those drunken men who are called lovers . 
Marius blind , had followed the path which he would have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight . 
Love had bandaged his eyes , in order to lead him whither ? 
To paradise . 
But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernal accompaniment . 
Marius ' ancient estrangement towards this man , towards this Fauchelevent who had turned into Jean Valjean , was at present mingled with horror . 
In this horror , let us state , there was some pity , and even a certain surprise . 
This thief , this thief guilty of a second offence , had restored that deposit . 
And what a deposit ! 
Six hundred thousand francs . 
He alone was in the secret of that deposit . 
He might have kept it all , he had restored it all . 
Moreover , he had himself revealed his situation . 
Nothing forced him to this . 
If any one learned who he was , it was through himself . 
In this avowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation , there was acceptance of peril . 
For a condemned man , a mask is not a mask , it is a shelter . 
A false name is security , and he had rejected that false name . 
He , the galley-slave , might have hidden himself forever in an honest family ; he had withstood this temptation . 
And with what motive ? 
Through a conscientious scruple . 
He himself explained this with the irresistible accents of truth . 
In short , whatever this Jean Valjean might be , he was , undoubtedly , a conscience which was awakening . 
There existed some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun ; and , to all appearances , scruples had for a long time already controlled this man . 
Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar natures . 
An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul . 
Jean Valjean was sincere . 
This sincerity , visible , palpable , irrefragable , evident from the very grief that it caused him , rendered inquiries useless , and conferred authority on all that that man had said . 
Here , for Marius , there was a strange reversal of situations . 
What breathed from M. Fauchelevent ? 
distrust . 
What did Jean Valjean inspire ? 
confidence . 
In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Marius struck , he admitted the active principle , he admitted the passive principle , and he tried to reach a balance . 
But all this went on as in a storm . 
Marius , while endeavoring to form a clear idea of this man , and while pursuing Jean Valjean , so to speak , in the depths of his thought , lost him and found him again in a fatal mist . 
The deposit honestly restored , the probity of the confession -- these were good . 
This produced a lightening of the cloud , then the cloud became black once more . 
Troubled as were Marius ' memories , a shadow of them returned to him . 
After all , what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic ? 
Why had that man taken to flight on the arrival of the police , instead of entering a complaint ? 
Here Marius found the answer . 
Because that man was a fugitive from justice , who had broken his ban . 
Another question : Why had that man come to the barricade ? 
For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which had re-appeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application of heat . 
This man had been in the barricade . 
He had not fought there . 
What had he come there for ? 
In the presence of this question a spectre sprang up and replied : `` Javert . '' 
Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjean dragging the pinioned Javert out of the barricade , and he still heard behind the corner of the little Rue Mondetour that frightful pistol shot . 
Obviously , there was hatred between that police spy and the galley-slave . 
The one was in the other 's way . 
Jean Valjean had gone to the barricade for the purpose of revenging himself . 
He had arrived late . 
He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there . 
The Corsican vendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the law there ; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are but half turned towards good ; and those hearts are so constituted that a criminal , who is in the path of repentance , may be scrupulous in the matter of theft and unscrupulous in the matter of vengeance . 
Jean Valjean had killed Javert . 
At least , that seemed to be evident . 
This was the final question , to be sure ; but to this there was no reply . 
This question Marius felt like pincers . 
How had it come to pass that Jean Valjean 's existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a period ? 
What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed that child in contact with that man ? 
Are there then chains for two which are forged on high ? 
and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel with the demon ? 
So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in the mysterious galleys of wretchedness ? 
In that defiling of condemned persons which is called human destiny , can two brows pass side by side , the one ingenuous , the other formidable , the one all bathed in the divine whiteness of dawn , the other forever blemished by the flash of an eternal lightning ? 
Who could have arranged that inexplicable pairing off ? 
In what manner , in consequence of what prodigy , had any community of life been established between this celestial little creature and that old criminal ? 
Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf , and , what was still more incomprehensible , have attached the wolf to the lamb ? 
For the wolf loved the lamb , for the fierce creature adored the feeble one , for , during the space of nine years , the angel had had the monster as her point of support . 
Cosette 's childhood and girlhood , her advent in the daylight , her virginal growth towards life and light , had been sheltered by that hideous devotion . 
Here questions exfoliated , so to speak , into innumerable enigmas , abysses yawned at the bottoms of abysses , and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without becoming dizzy . 
What was this man-precipice ? 
The old symbols of Genesis are eternal ; in human society , such as it now exists , and until a broader day shall effect a change in it , there will always be two men , the one superior , the other subterranean ; the one which is according to good is Abel ; the other which is according to evil is Cain . 
What was this tender Cain ? 
What was this ruffian religiously absorbed in the adoration of a virgin , watching over her , rearing her , guarding her , dignifying her , and enveloping her , impure as he was himself , with purity ? 
What was that cess-pool which had venerated that innocence to such a point as not to leave upon it a single spot ? 
What was this Jean Valjean educating Cosette ? 
What was this figure of the shadows which had for its only object the preservation of the rising of a star from every shadow and from every cloud ? 
That was Jean Valjean 's secret ; that was also God 's secret . 
In the presence of this double secret , Marius recoiled . 
The one , in some sort , reassured him as to the other . 
God was as visible in this affair as was Jean Valjean . 
God has his instruments . 
He makes use of the tool which he wills . 
He is not responsible to men . 
Do we know how God sets about the work ? 
Jean Valjean had labored over Cosette . 
He had , to some extent , made that soul . 
That was incontestable . 
Well , what then ? 
The workman was horrible ; but the work was admirable . 
God produces his miracles as seems good to him . 
He had constructed that charming Cosette , and he had employed Jean Valjean . 
It had pleased him to choose this strange collaborator for himself . 
What account have we to demand of him ? 
Is this the first time that the dung-heap has aided the spring to create the rose ? 
Marius made himself these replies , and declared to himself that they were good . 
He had not dared to press Jean Valjean on all the points which we have just indicated , but he did not confess to himself that he did not dare to do it . 
He adored Cosette , he possessed Cosette , Cosette was splendidly pure . 
That was sufficient for him . 
What enlightenment did he need ? 
Cosette was a light . 
Does light require enlightenment ? 
He had everything ; what more could he desire ? 
All , -- is not that enough ? 
Jean Valjean 's personal affairs did not concern him . 
And bending over the fatal shadow of that man , he clung fast , convulsively , to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch : `` I am nothing to Cosette . 
Ten years ago I did not know that she was in existence . '' 
Jean Valjean was a passer-by . 
He had said so himself . 
Well , he had passed . 
Whatever he was , his part was finished . 
Henceforth , there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence to Cosette . 
Cosette had sought the azure in a person like herself , in her lover , her husband , her celestial male . 
Cosette , as she took her flight , winged and transfigured , left behind her on the earth her hideous and empty chrysalis , Jean Valjean . 
In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved , he always returned to a certain horror for Jean Valjean . 
A sacred horror , perhaps , for , as we have just pointed out , he felt a quid divinum in that man . 
But do what he would , and seek what extenuation he would , he was certainly forced to fall back upon this : the man was a convict ; that is to say , a being who has not even a place in the social ladder , since he is lower than the very lowest rung . 
After the very last of men comes the convict . 
The convict is no longer , so to speak , in the semblance of the living . 
The law has deprived him of the entire quantity of humanity of which it can deprive a man . 
Marius , on penal questions , still held to the inexorable system , though he was a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on the subject of those whom the law strikes . 
He had not yet accomplished all progress , we admit . 
He had not yet come to distinguish between that which is written by man and that which is written by God , between law and right . 
He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes to dispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable . 
He was not shocked by the word vindicte . 
He found it quite simple that certain breaches of the written law should be followed by eternal suffering , and he accepted , as the process of civilization , social damnation . 
He still stood at this point , though safe to advance infallibly later on , since his nature was good , and , at bottom , wholly formed of latent progress . 
In this stage of his ideas , Jean Valjean appeared to him hideous and repulsive . 
He was a man reproved , he was the convict . 
That word was for him like the sound of the trump on the Day of Judgment ; and , after having reflected upon Jean Valjean for a long time , his final gesture had been to turn away his head . 
Vade retro . 
Marius , if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact , while interrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said : `` You are confessing me , '' had not , nevertheless , put to him two or three decisive questions . 
It was not that they had not presented themselves to his mind , but that he had been afraid of them . 
The Jondrette attic ? 
The barricade ? 
Javert ? 
Who knows where these revelations would have stopped ? 
Jean Valjean did not seem like a man who would draw back , and who knows whether Marius , after having urged him on , would not have himself desired to hold him back ? 
Has it not happened to all of us , in certain supreme conjunctures , to stop our ears in order that we may not hear the reply , after we have asked a question ? 
It is especially when one loves that one gives way to these exhibitions of cowardice . 
It is not wise to question sinister situations to the last point , particularly when the indissoluble side of our life is fatally intermingled with them . 
What a terrible light might have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean , and who knows whether that hideous glare would not have darted forth as far as Cosette ? 
Who knows whether a sort of infernal glow would not have lingered behind it on the brow of that angel ? 
The spattering of a lightning-flash is of the thunder also . 
Fatality has points of juncture where innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of the reflections which give color . 
The purest figures may forever preserve the reflection of a horrible association . 
Rightly or wrongly , Marius had been afraid . 
He already knew too much . 
He sought to dull his senses rather than to gain further light . 
In dismay he bore off Cosette in his arms and shut his eyes to Jean Valjean . 
That man was the night , the living and horrible night . 
How should he dare to seek the bottom of it ? 
It is a terrible thing to interrogate the shadow . 
Who knows what its reply will be ? 
The dawn may be blackened forever by it . 
In this state of mind the thought that that man would , henceforth , come into any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity to Marius . 
He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidable questions , before which he had recoiled , and from which an implacable and definitive decision might have sprung . 
He felt that he was too good , too gentle , too weak , if we must say the word . 
This weakness had led him to an imprudent concession . 
He had allowed himself to be touched . 
He had been in the wrong . 
He ought to have simply and purely rejected Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean played the part of fire , and that is what he should have done , and have freed his house from that man . 
He was vexed with himself , he was angry with that whirlwind of emotions which had deafened , blinded , and carried him away . 
He was displeased with himself . 
What was he to do now ? 
Jean Valjean 's visits were profoundly repugnant to him . 
What was the use in having that man in his house ? 
What did the man want ? 
