The fire-pot allowed him to distinguish a blouse , torn trousers of coarse velvet , bare feet , and something which resembled a pool of blood . 
Marius indistinctly made out a pale head which was lifted towards him and which was saying to him : -- `` You do not recognize me ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Eponine . '' 
Marius bent hastily down . 
It was , in fact , that unhappy child . 
She was dressed in men 's clothes . 
`` How come you here ? 
What are you doing here ? '' 
`` I am dying , '' said she . 
There are words and incidents which arouse dejected beings . 
Marius cried out with a start : -- `` You are wounded ! 
Wait , I will carry you into the room ! 
They will attend to you there . 
Is it serious ? 
How must I take hold of you in order not to hurt you ? 
Where do you suffer ? 
Help ! 
My God ! 
But why did you come hither ? '' 
And he tried to pass his arm under her , in order to raise her . 
She uttered a feeble cry . 
`` Have I hurt you ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` A little . '' 
`` But I only touched your hand . '' 
She raised her hand to Marius , and in the middle of that hand Marius saw a black hole . 
`` What is the matter with your hand ? '' 
said he . 
`` It is pierced . '' 
`` Pierced ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` What with ? '' 
`` A bullet . '' 
`` How ? '' 
`` Did you see a gun aimed at you ? '' 
`` Yes , and a hand stopping it . '' 
`` It was mine . '' 
Marius was seized with a shudder . 
`` What madness ! 
Poor child ! 
But so much the better , if that is all , it is nothing , let me carry you to a bed . 
They will dress your wound ; one does not die of a pierced hand . '' 
She murmured : -- `` The bullet traversed my hand , but it came out through my back . 
It is useless to remove me from this spot . 
I will tell you how you can care for me better than any surgeon . 
Sit down near me on this stone . '' 
He obeyed ; she laid her head on Marius ' knees , and , without looking at him , she said : -- `` Oh ! 
How good this is ! 
How comfortable this is ! 
There ; I no longer suffer . '' 
She remained silent for a moment , then she turned her face with an effort , and looked at Marius . 
`` Do you know what , Monsieur Marius ? 
It puzzled me because you entered that garden ; it was stupid , because it was I who showed you that house ; and then , I ought to have said to myself that a young man like you -- '' She paused , and overstepping the sombre transitions that undoubtedly existed in her mind , she resumed with a heartrending smile : -- `` You thought me ugly , did n't you ? '' 
She continued : -- `` You see , you are lost ! 
Now , no one can get out of the barricade . 
It was I who led you here , by the way ! 
You are going to die , I count upon that . 
And yet , when I saw them taking aim at you , I put my hand on the muzzle of the gun . 
How queer it is ! 
But it was because I wanted to die before you . 
When I received that bullet , I dragged myself here , no one saw me , no one picked me up , I was waiting for you , I said : ` So he is not coming ! ' 
Oh , if you only knew . 
I bit my blouse , I suffered so ! 
Now I am well . 
Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and when I looked at myself in your mirror , and the day when I came to you on the boulevard near the washerwomen ? 
How the birds sang ! 
That was a long time ago . 
You gave me a hundred sous , and I said to you : ` I do n't want your money . ' 
I hope you picked up your coin ? 
You are not rich . 
I did not think to tell you to pick it up . 
The sun was shining bright , and it was not cold . 
Do you remember , Monsieur Marius ? 
Oh ! 
How happy I am ! 
Every one is going to die . '' 
She had a mad , grave , and heart-breaking air . 
Her torn blouse disclosed her bare throat . 
As she talked , she pressed her pierced hand to her breast , where there was another hole , and whence there spurted from moment to moment a stream of blood , like a jet of wine from an open bung-hole . 
Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is coming again , I am stifling ! '' 
She caught up her blouse and bit it , and her limbs stiffened on the pavement . 
At that moment the young cock 's crow executed by little Gavroche resounded through the barricade . 
The child had mounted a table to load his gun , and was singing gayly the song then so popular : -- `` En voyant Lafayette , `` On beholding Lafayette , Le gendarme repete : -- The gendarme repeats : -- Sauvons nous ! 
sauvons nous ! 
Let us flee ! 
let us flee ! 
sauvons nous ! '' 
let us flee ! 
Eponine raised herself and listened ; then she murmured : -- `` It is he . '' 
And turning to Marius : -- `` My brother is here . 
He must not see me . 
He would scold me . '' 
`` Your brother ? '' 
inquired Marius , who was meditating in the most bitter and sorrowful depths of his heart on the duties to the Thenardiers which his father had bequeathed to him ; `` who is your brother ? '' 
`` That little fellow . '' 
`` The one who is singing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Marius made a movement . 
`` Oh ! 
do n't go away , '' said she , `` it will not be long now . '' 
She was sitting almost upright , but her voice was very low and broken by hiccoughs . 
At intervals , the death rattle interrupted her . 
She put her face as near that of Marius as possible . 
She added with a strange expression : -- `` Listen , I do not wish to play you a trick . 
I have a letter in my pocket for you . 
I was told to put it in the post . 
I kept it . 
I did not want to have it reach you . 
But perhaps you will be angry with me for it when we meet again presently ? 
Take your letter . '' 
She grasped Marius ' hand convulsively with her pierced hand , but she no longer seemed to feel her sufferings . 
She put Marius ' hand in the pocket of her blouse . 
There , in fact , Marius felt a paper . 
`` Take it , '' said she . 
Marius took the letter . 
She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment . 
`` Now , for my trouble , promise me -- '' And she stopped . 
`` What ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` Promise me ! '' 
`` I promise . '' 
`` Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead . 
-- I shall feel it . '' 
She dropped her head again on Marius ' knees , and her eyelids closed . 
He thought the poor soul had departed . 
Eponine remained motionless . 
All at once , at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever , she slowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity of death , and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already to proceed from another world : -- `` And by the way , Monsieur Marius , I believe that I was a little bit in love with you . '' 
She tried to smile once more and expired . 
GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES Marius kept his promise . 
He dropped a kiss on that livid brow , where the icy perspiration stood in beads . 
This was no infidelity to Cosette ; it was a gentle and pensive farewell to an unhappy soul . 
It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Eponine had given him . 
He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight . 
He was impatient to read it . 
The heart of man is so constituted that the unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of unfolding this paper . 
He laid her gently on the ground , and went away . 
Something told him that he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body . 
He drew near to a candle in the tap-room . 
It was a small note , folded and sealed with a woman 's elegant care . 
The address was in a woman 's hand and ran : -- `` To Monsieur , Monsieur Marius Pontmercy , at M. Courfeyrac 's , Rue de la Verrerie , No. 16 . '' 
He broke the seal and read : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even acquainted with Cosette 's handwriting . 
What had taken place may be related in a few words . 
Eponine had been the cause of everything . 
After the evening of the 3d of June she had cherished a double idea , to defeat the projects of her father and the ruffians on the house of the Rue Plumet , and to separate Marius and Cosette . 
She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she came across who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman , while Eponine disguised herself like a man . 
It was she who had conveyed to Jean Valjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning : `` Leave your house . '' 
Jean Valjean had , in fact , returned home , and had said to Cosette : `` We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l'Homme Arme with Toussaint . 
Next week , we shall be in London . '' 
Cosette , utterly overwhelmed by this unexpected blow , had hastily penned a couple of lines to Marius . 
But how was she to get the letter to the post ? 
She never went out alone , and Toussaint , surprised at such a commission , would certainly show the letter to M. Fauchelevent . 
In this dilemma , Cosette had caught sight through the fence of Eponine in man 's clothes , who now prowled incessantly around the garden . 
Cosette had called to `` this young workman '' and had handed him five francs and the letter , saying : `` Carry this letter immediately to its address . '' 
Eponine had put the letter in her pocket . 
The next day , on the 5th of June , she went to Courfeyrac 's quarters to inquire for Marius , not for the purpose of delivering the letter , but , -- a thing which every jealous and loving soul will comprehend , -- `` to see . '' 
There she had waited for Marius , or at least for Courfeyrac , still for the purpose of seeing . 
When Courfeyrac had told her : `` We are going to the barricades , '' an idea flashed through her mind , to fling herself into that death , as she would have done into any other , and to thrust Marius into it also . 
She had followed Courfeyrac , had made sure of the locality where the barricade was in process of construction ; and , quite certain , since Marius had received no warning , and since she had intercepted the letter , that he would go at dusk to his trysting place for every evening , she had betaken herself to the Rue Plumet , had there awaited Marius , and had sent him , in the name of his friends , the appeal which would , she thought , lead him to the barricade . 
She reckoned on Marius ' despair when he should fail to find Cosette ; she was not mistaken . 
She had returned to the Rue de la Chanvrerie herself . 
What she did there the reader has just seen . 
She died with the tragic joy of jealous hearts who drag the beloved being into their own death , and who say : `` No one shall have him ! '' 
Marius covered Cosette 's letter with kisses . 
So she loved him ! 
For one moment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now . 
Then he said to himself : `` She is going away . 
Her father is taking her to England , and my grandfather refuses his consent to the marriage . 
Nothing is changed in our fates . '' 
Dreamers like Marius are subject to supreme attacks of dejection , and desperate resolves are the result . 
The fatigue of living is insupportable ; death is sooner over with . 
Then he reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil : to inform Cosette of his death and send her a final farewell , and to save from the impending catastrophe which was in preparation , that poor child , Eponine 's brother and Thenardier 's son . 
He had a pocket-book about him ; the same one which had contained the note-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love for Cosette . 
He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil : -- `` Our marriage was impossible . 
I asked my grandfather , he refused ; I have no fortune , neither hast thou . 
I hastened to thee , thou wert no longer there . 
Thou knowest the promise that I gave thee , I shall keep it . 
I die . 
I love thee . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee , and thou wilt smile . '' 
Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter , he contented himself with folding the paper in four , and added the address : -- `` To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Having folded the letter , he stood in thought for a moment , drew out his pocket-book again , opened it , and wrote , with the same pencil , these four lines on the first page : -- `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
He put his pocketbook back in his pocket , then he called Gavroche . 
The gamin , at the sound of Marius ' voice , ran up to him with his merry and devoted air . 
`` Will you do something for me ? '' 
`` Anything , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Good God ! 
if it had not been for you , I should have been done for . '' 
`` Do you see this letter ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Take it . 
Leave the barricade instantly '' -LRB- Gavroche began to scratch his ear uneasily -RRB- `` and to-morrow morning , you will deliver it at its address to Mademoiselle Cosette , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
The heroic child replied `` Well , but ! 
in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken , and I shall not be there . '' 
`` The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak , according to all appearances , and will not be taken before to-morrow noon . '' 
The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade had , in fact , been prolonged . 
It was one of those intermissions which frequently occur in nocturnal combats , which are always followed by an increase of rage . 
`` Well , '' said Gavroche , `` what if I were to go and carry your letter to-morrow ? '' 
`` It will be too late . 
The barricade will probably be blockaded , all the streets will be guarded , and you will not be able to get out . 
Go at once . '' 
Gavroche could think of no reply to this , and stood there in indecision , scratching his ear sadly . 
All at once , he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements which were common with him . 
`` All right , '' said he . 
And he started off at a run through Mondetour lane . 
An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision , but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some objection to it . 
This was the idea : -- `` It is barely midnight , the Rue de l'Homme Arme is not far off ; I will go and deliver the letter at once , and I shall get back in time . '' 
A DRINKER IS A BABBLER What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of the soul ? 
Man is a depth still greater than the people . 
Jean Valjean at that very moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval . 
Every sort of gulf had opened again within him . 
He also was trembling , like Paris , on the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution . 
A few hours had sufficed to bring this about . 
His destiny and his conscience had suddenly been covered with gloom . 
Of him also , as well as of Paris , it might have been said : `` Two principles are face to face . 
The white angel and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of the abyss . 
Which of the two will hurl the other over ? 
Who will carry the day ? '' 
On the evening preceding this same 5th of June , Jean Valjean , accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
A change awaited him there . 
Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort at resistance . 
For the first time since they had lived side by side , Cosette 's will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct , and had been in opposition , at least , if they had not clashed . 
There had been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other . 
The abrupt advice : `` Leave your house , '' hurled at Jean Valjean by a stranger , had alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory . 
He thought that he had been traced and followed . 
Cosette had been obliged to give way . 
Both had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme without opening their lips , and without uttering a word , each being absorbed in his own personal preoccupation ; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette 's sadness , Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean 's uneasiness . 
Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him , a thing which he had never done in his previous absences . 
He perceived the possibility of not returning to the Rue Plumet , and he could neither leave Toussaint behind nor confide his secret to her . 
Besides , he felt that she was devoted and trustworthy . 
Treachery between master and servant begins in curiosity . 
Now Toussaint , as though she had been destined to be Jean Valjean 's servant , was not curious . 
She stammered in her peasant dialect of Barneville : `` I am made so ; I do my work ; the rest is no affair of mine . '' 
In this departure from the Rue Plumet , which had been almost a flight , Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise , baptized by Cosette `` the inseparable . '' 
Full trunks would have required porters , and porters are witnesses . 
A fiacre had been summoned to the door on the Rue de Babylone , and they had taken their departure . 
It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack up a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles . 
Cosette had taken only her portfolio and her blotting-book . 
Jean Valjean , with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery of this departure , had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumet only at dusk , which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to Marius . 
They had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme after night had fully fallen . 
They had gone to bed in silence . 
The lodgings in the Rue de l'Homme Arme were situated on a back court , on the second floor , and were composed of two sleeping-rooms , a dining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room , with a garret where there was a folding-bed , and which fell to Toussaint 's share . 
The dining-room was an antechamber as well , and separated the two bedrooms . 
The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils . 
People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it ; human nature is so constituted . 
Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l'Homme Arme when his anxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated . 
There are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind . 
An obscure street , peaceable inhabitants . 
Jean Valjean experienced an indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris , which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transverse beam placed on two posts , which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the clamorous city , dimly lighted at mid-day , and is , so to speak , incapable of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old , which hold their peace like ancients as they are . 
There was a touch of stagnant oblivion in that street . 
Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there . 
How could he be found there ? 
His first care was to place the inseparable beside him . 
He slept well . 
Night brings wisdom ; we may add , night soothes . 
On the following morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay . 
He thought the dining-room charming , though it was hideous , furnished with an old round table , a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror , a dilapidated arm-chair , and several plain chairs which were encumbered with Toussaint 's packages . 
In one of these packages Jean Valjean 's uniform of a National Guard was visible through a rent . 
As for Cosette , she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room , and did not make her appearance until evening . 
About five o'clock , Toussaint , who was going and coming and busying herself with the tiny establishment , set on the table a cold chicken , which Cosette , out of deference to her father , consented to glance at . 
That done , Cosette , under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache , had bade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in her chamber . 
Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good appetite , and with his elbows on the table , having gradually recovered his serenity , had regained possession of his sense of security . 
While he was discussing this modest dinner , he had , twice or thrice , noticed in a confused way , Toussaint 's stammering words as she said to him : `` Monsieur , there is something going on , they are fighting in Paris . '' 
But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations , he had paid no heed to it . 
To tell the truth , he had not heard her . 
He rose and began to pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door , growing ever more serene . 
With this calm , Cosette , his sole anxiety , recurred to his thoughts . 
Not that he was troubled by this headache , a little nervous crisis , a young girl 's fit of sulks , the cloud of a moment , there would be nothing left of it in a day or two ; but he meditated on the future , and , as was his habit , he thought of it with pleasure . 
After all , he saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course . 
At certain hours , everything seems impossible , at others everything appears easy ; Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours . 
They generally succeed the bad ones , as day follows night , by virtue of that law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature , and which superficial minds call antithesis . 
In this peaceful street where he had taken refuge , Jean Valjean got rid of all that had been troubling him for some time past . 
This very fact , that he had seen many shadows , made him begin to perceive a little azure . 
To have quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one good step already accomplished . 
Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad , if only for a few months , and to set out for London . 
Well , they would go . 
What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in England , provided he had Cosette beside him ? 
Cosette was his nation . 
Cosette sufficed for his happiness ; the idea that he , perhaps , did not suffice for Cosette 's happiness , that idea which had formerly been the cause of his fever and sleeplessness , did not even present itself to his mind . 
He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings , and he was fully entered on optimism . 
Cosette was by his side , she seemed to be his ; an optical illusion which every one has experienced . 
He arranged in his own mind , with all sorts of felicitous devices , his departure for England with Cosette , and he beheld his felicity reconstituted wherever he pleased , in the perspective of his revery . 
As he paced to and fro with long strides , his glance suddenly encountered something strange . 
In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard , he saw the four lines which follow : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Jean Valjean halted , perfectly haggard . 
Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in front of the mirror , and , utterly absorbed in her agony of grief , had forgotten it and left it there , without even observing that she had left it wide open , and open at precisely the page on which she had laid to dry the four lines which she had penned , and which she had given in charge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet . 
The writing had been printed off on the blotter . 
The mirror reflected the writing . 
The result was , what is called in geometry , the symmetrical image ; so that the writing , reversed on the blotter , was righted in the mirror and presented its natural appearance ; and Jean Valjean had beneath his eyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening . 
It was simple and withering . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror . 
He read the four lines again , but he did not believe them . 
They produced on him the effect of appearing in a flash of lightning . 
It was a hallucination , it was impossible . 
It was not so . 
Little by little , his perceptions became more precise ; he looked at Cosette 's blotting-book , and the consciousness of the reality returned to him . 
He caught up the blotter and said : `` It comes from there . '' 
He feverishly examined the four lines imprinted on the blotter , the reversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl , and he saw no sense in it . 
Then he said to himself : `` But this signifies nothing ; there is nothing written here . '' 
And he drew a long breath with inexpressible relief . 
Who has not experienced those foolish joys in horrible instants ? 
The soul does not surrender to despair until it has exhausted all illusions . 
He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight , almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the dupe . 
All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again , and again he beheld the vision . 
There were the four lines outlined with inexorable clearness . 
This time it was no mirage . 
The recurrence of a vision is a reality ; it was palpable , it was the writing restored in the mirror . 
He understood . 
Jean Valjean tottered , dropped the blotter , and fell into the old arm-chair beside the buffet , with drooping head , and glassy eyes , in utter bewilderment . 
He told himself that it was plain , that the light of the world had been eclipsed forever , and that Cosette had written that to some one . 
Then he heard his soul , which had become terrible once more , give vent to a dull roar in the gloom . 
Try then the effect of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage ! 
Strange and sad to say , at that very moment , Marius had not yet received Cosette 's letter ; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean Valjean before delivering it to Marius . 
Up to that day , Jean Valjean had not been vanquished by trial . 
He had been subjected to fearful proofs ; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him ; the ferocity of fate , armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn , had taken him for her prey and had raged against him . 
He had accepted every extremity when it had been necessary ; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a reformed man , had yielded up his liberty , risked his head , lost everything , suffered everything , and he had remained disinterested and stoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent from himself like a martyr . 
His conscience inured to every assault of destiny , might have appeared to be forever impregnable . 
Well , any one who had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concede that it weakened at that moment . 
It was because , of all the tortures which he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to which destiny had doomed him , this was the most terrible . 
Never had such pincers seized him hitherto . 
He felt the mysterious stirring of all his latent sensibilities . 
He felt the plucking at the strange chord . 
Alas ! 
the supreme trial , let us say rather , the only trial , is the loss of the beloved being . 
Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as a father ; but we have already remarked , above , that into this paternity the widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love ; he loved Cosette as his daughter , and he loved her as his mother , and he loved her as his sister ; and , as he had never had either a woman to love or a wife , as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest , that sentiment also , the most impossible to lose , was mingled with the rest , vague , ignorant , pure with the purity of blindness , unconscious , celestial , angelic , divine ; less like a sentiment than like an instinct , less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible but real attraction ; and love , properly speaking , was , in his immense tenderness for Cosette , like the thread of gold in the mountain , concealed and virgin . 
Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already indicated . 
No marriage was possible between them ; not even that of souls ; and yet , it is certain that their destinies were wedded . 
With the exception of Cosette , that is to say , with the exception of a childhood , Jean Valjean had never , in the whole of his long life , known anything of that which may be loved . 
The passions and loves which succeed each other had not produced in him those successive green growths , tender green or dark green , which can be seen in foliage which passes through the winter and in men who pass fifty . 
In short , and we have insisted on it more than once , all this interior fusion , all this whole , of which the sum total was a lofty virtue , ended in rendering Jean Valjean a father to Cosette . 
A strange father , forged from the grandfather , the son , the brother , and the husband , that existed in Jean Valjean ; a father in whom there was included even a mother ; a father who loved Cosette and adored her , and who held that child as his light , his home , his family , his country , his paradise . 
Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come , that she was escaping from him , that she was slipping from his hands , that she was gliding from him , like a cloud , like water , when he had before his eyes this crushing proof : `` another is the goal of her heart , another is the wish of her life ; there is a dearest one , I am no longer anything but her father , I no longer exist '' ; when he could no longer doubt , when he said to himself : `` She is going away from me ! '' 
the grief which he felt surpassed the bounds of possibility . 
To have done all that he had done for the purpose of ending like this ! 
And the very idea of being nothing ! 
Then , as we have just said , a quiver of revolt ran through him from head to foot . 
He felt , even in the very roots of his hair , the immense reawakening of egotism , and the I in this man 's abyss howled . 
There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil . 
A despairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting aside and breaking certain profound elements which , in some cases , are the very man himself . 
Grief , when it attains this shape , is a headlong flight of all the forces of the conscience . 
These are fatal crises . 
Few among us emerge from them still like ourselves and firm in duty . 
When the limit of endurance is overstepped , the most imperturbable virtue is disconcerted . 
Jean Valjean took the blotter again , and convinced himself afresh ; he remained bowed and as though petrified and with staring eyes , over those four unobjectionable lines ; and there arose within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything in this soul was crumbling away . 
He examined this revelation , athwart the exaggerations of revery , with an apparent and terrifying calmness , for it is a fearful thing when a man 's calmness reaches the coldness of the statue . 
He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his having a suspicion of the fact ; he recalled his fears of the preceding summer , so foolishly dissipated ; he recognized the precipice , it was still the same ; only , Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink , he was at the bottom of it . 
The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had fallen without perceiving it . 
All the light of his life had departed , while he still fancied that he beheld the sun . 
His instinct did not hesitate . 
He put together certain circumstances , certain dates , certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette 's part , and he said to himself : `` It is he . '' 
The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never misses its aim . 
He struck Marius with his first conjecture . 
He did not know the name , but he found the man instantly . 
He distinctly perceived , in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories , the unknown prowler of the Luxembourg , that wretched seeker of love adventures , that idler of romance , that idiot , that coward , for it is cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a father who loves them . 
After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at the bottom of this situation , and that everything proceeded from that quarter , he , Jean Valjean , the regenerated man , the man who had so labored over his soul , the man who had made so many efforts to resolve all life , all misery , and all unhappiness into love , looked into his own breast and there beheld a spectre , Hate . 
Great griefs contain something of dejection . 
They discourage one with existence . 
The man into whom they enter feels something within him withdraw from him . 
In his youth , their visits are lugubrious ; later on they are sinister . 
Alas , if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is hot , when the hair is black , when the head is erect on the body like the flame on the torch , when the roll of destiny still retains its full thickness , when the heart , full of desirable love , still possesses beats which can be returned to it , when one has time for redress , when all women and all smiles and all the future and all the horizon are before one , when the force of life is complete , what is it in old age , when the years hasten on , growing ever paler , to that twilight hour when one begins to behold the stars of the tomb ? 
While he was meditating , Toussaint entered . 
Jean Valjean rose and asked her : -- `` In what quarter is it ? 
Do you know ? '' 
Toussaint was struck dumb , and could only answer him : -- `` What is it , sir ? '' 
Jean Valjean began again : `` Did you not tell me that just now that there is fighting going on ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , sir , '' replied Toussaint . 
`` It is in the direction of Saint-Merry . '' 
There is a mechanical movement which comes to us , unconsciously , from the most profound depths of our thought . 
It was , no doubt , under the impulse of a movement of this sort , and of which he was hardly conscious , that Jean Valjean , five minutes later , found himself in the street . 
Bareheaded , he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house . 
He seemed to be listening . 
Night had come . 
THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT How long did he remain thus ? 
What was the ebb and flow of this tragic meditation ? 
Did he straighten up ? 
Did he remain bowed ? 
Had he been bent to breaking ? 
Could he still rise and regain his footing in his conscience upon something solid ? 
He probably would not have been able to tell himself . 
The street was deserted . 
A few uneasy bourgeois , who were rapidly returning home , hardly saw him . 
Each one for himself in times of peril . 
The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situated precisely opposite the door of No. 7 , and then went away . 
Jean Valjean would not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examined him in that shadow . 
He sat there on the post of his door , motionless as a form of ice . 
There is congealment in despair . 
The alarm bells and a vague and stormy uproar were audible . 
In the midst of all these convulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt , the clock of Saint-Paul struck eleven , gravely and without haste ; for the tocsin is man ; the hour is God . 
The passage of the hour produced no effect on Jean Valjean ; Jean Valjean did not stir . 
Still , at about that moment , a brusque report burst forth in the direction of the Halles , a second yet more violent followed ; it was probably that attack on the barricade in the Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen repulsed by Marius . 
At this double discharge , whose fury seemed augmented by the stupor of the night , Jean Valjean started ; he rose , turning towards the quarter whence the noise proceeded ; then he fell back upon the post again , folded his arms , and his head slowly sank on his bosom again . 
He resumed his gloomy dialogue with himself . 
All at once , he raised his eyes ; some one was walking in the street , he heard steps near him . 
He looked , and by the light of the lanterns , in the direction of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives , he perceived a young , livid , and beaming face . 
Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue l'Homme Arme . 
Gavroche was staring into the air , apparently in search of something . 
He saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him . 
Gavroche after staring into the air , stared below ; he raised himself on tiptoe , and felt of the doors and windows of the ground floor ; they were all shut , bolted , and padlocked . 
After having authenticated the fronts of five or six barricaded houses in this manner , the urchin shrugged his shoulders , and took himself to task in these terms : -- `` Pardi ! '' 
Then he began to stare into the air again . 
Jean Valjean , who , an instant previously , in his then state of mind , would not have spoken to or even answered any one , felt irresistibly impelled to accost that child . 
`` What is the matter with you , my little fellow ? '' 
he said . 
`` The matter with me is that I am hungry , '' replied Gavroche frankly . 
And he added : `` Little fellow yourself . '' 
Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece . 
But Gavroche , who was of the wagtail species , and who skipped vivaciously from one gesture to another , had just picked up a stone . 
He had caught sight of the lantern . 
`` See here , '' said he , `` you still have your lanterns here . 
You are disobeying the regulations , my friend . 
This is disorderly . 
Smash that for me . '' 
And he flung the stone at the lantern , whose broken glass fell with such a clatter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains in the opposite house cried : `` There is ` Ninety-three ' come again . '' 
The lantern oscillated violently , and went out . 
The street had suddenly become black . 
`` That 's right , old street , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` put on your night-cap . '' 
And turning to Jean Valjean : -- `` What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the end of the street ? 
It 's the Archives , is n't it ? 
I must crumble up those big stupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them . '' 
Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche . 
`` Poor creature , '' he said in a low tone , and speaking to himself , `` he is hungry . '' 
And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand . 
Gavroche raised his face , astonished at the size of this sou ; he stared at it in the darkness , and the whiteness of the big sou dazzled him . 
He knew five-franc pieces by hearsay ; their reputation was agreeable to him ; he was delighted to see one close to . 
He said : -- `` Let us contemplate the tiger . '' 
He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy ; then , turning to Jean Valjean , he held out the coin to him , and said majestically to him : -- `` Bourgeois , I prefer to smash lanterns . 
Take back your ferocious beast . 
You ca n't bribe me . 
That has got five claws ; but it does n't scratch me . '' 
`` Have you a mother ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche replied : -- `` More than you have , perhaps . '' 
`` Well , '' returned Jean Valjean , `` keep the money for your mother ! '' 
Gavroche was touched . 
Moreover , he had just noticed that the man who was addressing him had no hat , and this inspired him with confidence . 
`` Truly , '' said he , `` so it was n't to keep me from breaking the lanterns ? '' 
`` Break whatever you please . '' 
`` You 're a fine man , '' said Gavroche . 
And he put the five-franc piece into one of his pockets . 
His confidence having increased , he added : -- `` Do you belong in this street ? '' 
`` Yes , why ? '' 
`` Can you tell me where No. 7 is ? '' 
`` What do you want with No. 7 ? '' 
Here the child paused , he feared that he had said too much ; he thrust his nails energetically into his hair and contented himself with replying : -- `` Ah ! 
Here it is . '' 
An idea flashed through Jean Valjean 's mind . 
Anguish does have these gleams . 
He said to the lad : -- `` Are you the person who is bringing a letter that I am expecting ? '' 
`` You ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` You are not a woman . '' 
`` The letter is for Mademoiselle Cosette , is it not ? '' 
`` Cosette , '' muttered Gavroche . 
`` Yes , I believe that is the queer name . '' 
`` Well , '' resumed Jean Valjean , `` I am the person to whom you are to deliver the letter . 
Give it here . '' 
`` In that case , you must know that I was sent from the barricade . '' 
`` Of course , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out a paper folded in four . 
Then he made the military salute . 
`` Respect for despatches , '' said he . 
`` It comes from the Provisional Government . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche held the paper elevated above his head . 
`` Do n't go and fancy it 's a love letter . 
It is for a woman , but it 's for the people . 
We men fight and we respect the fair sex . 
We are not as they are in fine society , where there are lions who send chickens -LSB- 55 -RSB- to camels . '' 
-LSB- 55 -RSB- Love letters . 
`` Give it to me . '' 
`` After all , '' continued Gavroche , `` you have the air of an honest man . '' 
`` Give it to me quick . '' 
`` Catch hold of it . '' 
And he handed the paper to Jean Valjean . 
`` And make haste , Monsieur What 's - your-name , for Mamselle Cosette is waiting . '' 
Gavroche was satisfied with himself for having produced this remark . 
Jean Valjean began again : -- `` Is it to Saint-Merry that the answer is to be sent ? '' 
`` There you are making some of those bits of pastry vulgarly called brioches -LSB- blunders -RSB- . 
This letter comes from the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and I 'm going back there . 
Good evening , citizen . '' 
That said , Gavroche took himself off , or , to describe it more exactly , fluttered away in the direction whence he had come with a flight like that of an escaped bird . 
He plunged back into the gloom as though he made a hole in it , with the rigid rapidity of a projectile ; the alley of l'Homme Arme became silent and solitary once more ; in a twinkling , that strange child , who had about him something of the shadow and of the dream , had buried himself in the mists of the rows of black houses , and was lost there , like smoke in the dark ; and one might have thought that he had dissipated and vanished , had there not taken place , a few minutes after his disappearance , a startling shiver of glass , and had not the magnificent crash of a lantern rattling down on the pavement once more abruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois . 
It was Gavroche upon his way through the Rue du Chaume . 
WHILE COSETTE AND TOUSSAINT ARE ASLEEP Jean Valjean went into the house with Marius ' letter . 
He groped his way up the stairs , as pleased with the darkness as an owl who grips his prey , opened and shut his door softly , listened to see whether he could hear any noise , -- made sure that , to all appearances , Cosette and Toussaint were asleep , and plunged three or four matches into the bottle of the Fumade lighter before he could evoke a spark , so greatly did his hand tremble . 
