She inquired of Toussaint : -- `` Has my father returned yet ? '' 
`` Not yet , Mademoiselle . '' 
-LSB- We have already noted once for all the fact that Toussaint stuttered . 
May we be permitted to dispense with it for the future . 
The musical notation of an infirmity is repugnant to us . -RSB- 
Jean Valjean , a thoughtful man , and given to nocturnal strolls , often returned quite late at night . 
`` Toussaint , '' went on Cosette , `` are you careful to thoroughly barricade the shutters opening on the garden , at least with bars , in the evening , and to put the little iron things in the little rings that close them ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
be easy on that score , Miss. '' Toussaint did not fail in her duty , and Cosette was well aware of the fact , but she could not refrain from adding : -- `` It is so solitary here . '' 
`` So far as that is concerned , '' said Toussaint , `` it is true . 
We might be assassinated before we had time to say ouf ! 
And Monsieur does not sleep in the house , to boot . 
But fear nothing , Miss , I fasten the shutters up like prisons . 
Lone women ! 
That is enough to make one shudder , I believe you ! 
Just imagine , what if you were to see men enter your chamber at night and say : ` Hold your tongue ! ' 
and begin to cut your throat . 
It 's not the dying so much ; you die , for one must die , and that 's all right ; it 's the abomination of feeling those people touch you . 
And then , their knives ; they ca n't be able to cut well with them ! 
Ah , good gracious ! '' 
`` Be quiet , '' said Cosette . 
`` Fasten everything thoroughly . '' 
Cosette , terrified by the melodrama improvised by Toussaint , and possibly , also , by the recollection of the apparitions of the past week , which recurred to her memory , dared not even say to her : `` Go and look at the stone which has been placed on the bench ! '' 
for fear of opening the garden gate and allowing `` the men '' to enter . 
She saw that all the doors and windows were carefully fastened , made Toussaint go all over the house from garret to cellar , locked herself up in her own chamber , bolted her door , looked under her couch , went to bed and slept badly . 
All night long she saw that big stone , as large as a mountain and full of caverns . 
At sunrise , -- the property of the rising sun is to make us laugh at all our terrors of the past night , and our laughter is in direct proportion to our terror which they have caused , -- at sunrise Cosette , when she woke , viewed her fright as a nightmare , and said to herself : `` What have I been thinking of ? 
It is like the footsteps that I thought I heard a week or two ago in the garden at night ! 
It is like the shadow of the chimney-pot ! 
Am I becoming a coward ? '' 
The sun , which was glowing through the crevices in her shutters , and turning the damask curtains crimson , reassured her to such an extent that everything vanished from her thoughts , even the stone . 
`` There was no more a stone on the bench than there was a man in a round hat in the garden ; I dreamed about the stone , as I did all the rest . '' 
She dressed herself , descended to the garden , ran to the bench , and broke out in a cold perspiration . 
The stone was there . 
But this lasted only for a moment . 
That which is terror by night is curiosity by day . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she , `` come , let us see what it is . '' 
She lifted the stone , which was tolerably large . 
Beneath it was something which resembled a letter . 
It was a white envelope . 
Cosette seized it . 
There was no address on one side , no seal on the other . 
Yet the envelope , though unsealed , was not empty . 
Papers could be seen inside . 
Cosette examined it . 
It was no longer alarm , it was no longer curiosity ; it was a beginning of anxiety . 
Cosette drew from the envelope its contents , a little notebook of paper , each page of which was numbered and bore a few lines in a very fine and rather pretty handwriting , as Cosette thought . 
Cosette looked for a name ; there was none . 
To whom was this addressed ? 
To her , probably , since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench . 
From whom did it come ? 
An irresistible fascination took possession of her ; she tried to turn away her eyes from the leaflets which were trembling in her hand , she gazed at the sky , the street , the acacias all bathed in light , the pigeons fluttering over a neighboring roof , and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript , and she said to herself that she must know what it contained . 
This is what she read . 
A HEART BENEATH A STONE The reduction of the universe to a single being , the expansion of a single being even to God , that is love . 
Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars . 
How sad is the soul , when it is sad through love ! 
What a void in the absence of the being who , by herself alone fills the world ! 
Oh ! 
how true it is that the beloved being becomes God . 
One could comprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father of all evidently made creation for the soul , and the soul for love . 
The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilac curtain is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of dreams . 
God is behind everything , but everything hides God . 
Things are black , creatures are opaque . 
To love a being is to render that being transparent . 
Certain thoughts are prayers . 
There are moments when , whatever the attitude of the body may be , the soul is on its knees . 
Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices , which possess , however , a reality of their own . 
They are prevented from seeing each other , they can not write to each other ; they discover a multitude of mysterious means to correspond . 
They send each other the song of the birds , the perfume of the flowers , the smiles of children , the light of the sun , the sighings of the breeze , the rays of stars , all creation . 
And why not ? 
All the works of God are made to serve love . 
Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages . 
Oh Spring ! 
Thou art a letter that I write to her . 
The future belongs to hearts even more than it does to minds . 
Love , that is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity . 
In the infinite , the inexhaustible is requisite . 
Love participates of the soul itself . 
It is of the same nature . 
Like it , it is the divine spark ; like it , it is incorruptible , indivisible , imperishable . 
It is a point of fire that exists within us , which is immortal and infinite , which nothing can confine , and which nothing can extinguish . 
We feel it burning even to the very marrow of our bones , and we see it beaming in the very depths of heaven . 
Oh Love ! 
Adorations ! 
voluptuousness of two minds which understand each other , of two hearts which exchange with each other , of two glances which penetrate each other ! 
You will come to me , will you not , bliss ! 
strolls by twos in the solitudes ! 
Blessed and radiant days ! 
I have sometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves from the lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destinies of men . 
God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love , except to give them endless duration . 
After a life of love , an eternity of love is , in fact , an augmentation ; but to increase in intensity even the ineffable felicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world , is impossible , even to God . 
God is the plenitude of heaven ; love is the plenitude of man . 
You look at a star for two reasons , because it is luminous , and because it is impenetrable . 
You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a greater mystery , woman . 
All of us , whoever we may be , have our respirable beings . 
We lack air and we stifle . 
Then we die . 
To die for lack of love is horrible . 
Suffocation of the soul . 
When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic unity , the secret of life has been discovered so far as they are concerned ; they are no longer anything more than the two boundaries of the same destiny ; they are no longer anything but the two wings of the same spirit . 
Love , soar . 
On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as she walks , you are lost , you love . 
But one thing remains for you to do : to think of her so intently that she is constrained to think of you . 
What love commences can be finished by God alone . 
True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a handkerchief found , and eternity is required for its devotion and its hopes . 
It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely little . 
If you are a stone , be adamant ; if you are a plant , be the sensitive plant ; if you are a man , be love . 
Nothing suffices for love . 
We have happiness , we desire paradise ; we possess paradise , we desire heaven . 
Oh ye who love each other , all this is contained in love . 
Understand how to find it there . 
Love has contemplation as well as heaven , and more than heaven , it has voluptuousness . 
`` Does she still come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
`` No , sir . '' 
`` This is the church where she attends mass , is it not ? '' 
`` She no longer comes here . '' 
`` Does she still live in this house ? '' 
`` She has moved away . '' 
`` Where has she gone to dwell ? '' 
`` She did not say . '' 
What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one 's soul ! 
Love has its childishness , other passions have their pettinesses . 
Shame on the passions which belittle man ! 
Honor to the one which makes a child of him ! 
There is one strange thing , do you know it ? 
I dwell in the night . 
There is a being who carried off my sky when she went away . 
Oh ! 
would that we were lying side by side in the same grave , hand in hand , and from time to time , in the darkness , gently caressing a finger , -- that would suffice for my eternity ! 
Ye who suffer because ye love , love yet more . 
To die of love , is to live in it . 
Love . 
A sombre and starry transfiguration is mingled with this torture . 
There is ecstasy in agony . 
Oh joy of the birds ! 
It is because they have nests that they sing . 
Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise . 
Deep hearts , sage minds , take life as God has made it ; it is a long trial , an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny . 
This destiny , the true one , begins for a man with the first step inside the tomb . 
Then something appears to him , and he begins to distinguish the definitive . 
The definitive , meditate upon that word . 
The living perceive the infinite ; the definitive permits itself to be seen only by the dead . 
In the meanwhile , love and suffer , hope and contemplate . 
Woe , alas ! 
to him who shall have loved only bodies , forms , appearances ! 
Death will deprive him of all . 
Try to love souls , you will find them again . 
I encountered in the street , a very poor young man who was in love . 
His hat was old , his coat was worn , his elbows were in holes ; water trickled through his shoes , and the stars through his soul . 
What a grand thing it is to be loved ! 
What a far grander thing it is to love ! 
The heart becomes heroic , by dint of passion . 
It is no longer composed of anything but what is pure ; it no longer rests on anything that is not elevated and great . 
An unworthy thought can no more germinate in it , than a nettle on a glacier . 
The serene and lofty soul , inaccessible to vulgar passions and emotions , dominating the clouds and the shades of this world , its follies , its lies , its hatreds , its vanities , its miseries , inhabits the blue of heaven , and no longer feels anything but profound and subterranean shocks of destiny , as the crests of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake . 
If there did not exist some one who loved , the sun would become extinct . 
COSETTE AFTER THE LETTER As Cosette read , she gradually fell into thought . 
At the very moment when she raised her eyes from the last line of the note-book , the handsome officer passed triumphantly in front of the gate , -- it was his hour ; Cosette thought him hideous . 
She resumed her contemplation of the book . 
It was written in the most charming of chirography , thought Cosette ; in the same hand , but with divers inks , sometimes very black , again whitish , as when ink has been added to the inkstand , and consequently on different days . 
It was , then , a mind which had unfolded itself there , sigh by sigh , irregularly , without order , without choice , without object , hap-hazard . 
Cosette had never read anything like it . 
This manuscript , in which she already perceived more light than obscurity , produced upon her the effect of a half-open sanctuary . 
Each one of these mysterious lines shone before her eyes and inundated her heart with a strange radiance . 
The education which she had received had always talked to her of the soul , and never of love , very much as one might talk of the firebrand and not of the flame . 
This manuscript of fifteen pages suddenly and sweetly revealed to her all of love , sorrow , destiny , life , eternity , the beginning , the end . 
It was as if a hand had opened and suddenly flung upon her a handful of rays of light . 
In these few lines she felt a passionate , ardent , generous , honest nature , a sacred will , an immense sorrow , and an immense despair , a suffering heart , an ecstasy fully expanded . 
What was this manuscript ? 
A letter . 
A letter without name , without address , without date , without signature , pressing and disinterested , an enigma composed of truths , a message of love made to be brought by an angel and read by a virgin , an appointment made beyond the bounds of earth , the love-letter of a phantom to a shade . 
It was an absent one , tranquil and dejected , who seemed ready to take refuge in death and who sent to the absent love , his lady , the secret of fate , the key of life , love . 
This had been written with one foot in the grave and one finger in heaven . 
These lines , which had fallen one by one on the paper , were what might be called drops of soul . 
Now , from whom could these pages come ? 
Who could have penned them ? 
Cosette did not hesitate a moment . 
One man only . 
He ! 
Day had dawned once more in her spirit ; all had reappeared . 
She felt an unheard-of joy , and a profound anguish . 
It was he ! 
he who had written ! 
he was there ! 
it was he whose arm had been thrust through that railing ! 
While she was forgetful of him , he had found her again ! 
But had she forgotten him ? 
No , never ! 
She was foolish to have thought so for a single moment . 
She had always loved him , always adored him . 
The fire had been smothered , and had smouldered for a time , but she saw all plainly now ; it had but made headway , and now it had burst forth afresh , and had inflamed her whole being . 
This note-book was like a spark which had fallen from that other soul into hers . 
She felt the conflagration starting up once more . 
She imbued herself thoroughly with every word of the manuscript : `` Oh yes ! '' 
said she , `` how perfectly I recognize all that ! 
That is what I had already read in his eyes . '' 
As she was finishing it for the third time , Lieutenant Theodule passed the gate once more , and rattled his spurs upon the pavement . 
Cosette was forced to raise her eyes . 
She thought him insipid , silly , stupid , useless , foppish , displeasing , impertinent , and extremely ugly . 
The officer thought it his duty to smile at her . 
She turned away as in shame and indignation . 
She would gladly have thrown something at his head . 
She fled , re-entered the house , and shut herself up in her chamber to peruse the manuscript once more , to learn it by heart , and to dream . 
When she had thoroughly mastered it she kissed it and put it in her bosom . 
All was over , Cosette had fallen back into deep , seraphic love . 
The abyss of Eden had yawned once more . 
All day long , Cosette remained in a sort of bewilderment . 
She scarcely thought , her ideas were in the state of a tangled skein in her brain , she could not manage to conjecture anything , she hoped through a tremor , what ? 
vague things . 
She dared make herself no promises , and she did not wish to refuse herself anything . 
Flashes of pallor passed over her countenance , and shivers ran through her frame . 
It seemed to her , at intervals , that she was entering the land of chimaeras ; she said to herself : `` Is this reality ? '' 
Then she felt of the dear paper within her bosom under her gown , she pressed it to her heart , she felt its angles against her flesh ; and if Jean Valjean had seen her at the moment , he would have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown joy , which overflowed from beneath her eyelids . 
-- `` Oh yes ! '' 
she thought , `` it is certainly he ! 
This comes from him , and is for me ! '' 
And she told herself that an intervention of the angels , a celestial chance , had given him back to her . 
Oh transfiguration of love ! 
Oh dreams ! 
That celestial chance , that intervention of the angels , was a pellet of bread tossed by one thief to another thief , from the Charlemagne Courtyard to the Lion 's Ditch , over the roofs of La Force . 
OLD PEOPLE ARE MADE TO GO OUT OPPORTUNELY When evening came , Jean Valjean went out ; Cosette dressed herself . 
She arranged her hair in the most becoming manner , and she put on a dress whose bodice had received one snip of the scissors too much , and which , through this slope , permitted a view of the beginning of her throat , and was , as young girls say , `` a trifle indecent . '' 
It was not in the least indecent , but it was prettier than usual . 
She made her toilet thus without knowing why she did so . 
Did she mean to go out ? 
No . 
Was she expecting a visitor ? 
No . 
At dusk , she went down to the garden . 
Toussaint was busy in her kitchen , which opened on the back yard . 
She began to stroll about under the trees , thrusting aside the branches from time to time with her hand , because there were some which hung very low . 
In this manner she reached the bench . 
The stone was still there . 
She sat down , and gently laid her white hand on this stone as though she wished to caress and thank it . 
All at once , she experienced that indefinable impression which one undergoes when there is some one standing behind one , even when she does not see the person . 
She turned her head and rose to her feet . 
It was he . 
His head was bare . 
He appeared to have grown thin and pale . 
His black clothes were hardly discernible . 
The twilight threw a wan light on his fine brow , and covered his eyes in shadows . 
Beneath a veil of incomparable sweetness , he had something about him that suggested death and night . 
His face was illuminated by the light of the dying day , and by the thought of a soul that is taking flight . 
He seemed to be not yet a ghost , and he was no longer a man . 
He had flung away his hat in the thicket , a few paces distant . 
Cosette , though ready to swoon , uttered no cry . 
She retreated slowly , for she felt herself attracted . 
He did not stir . 
By virtue of something ineffable and melancholy which enveloped him , she felt the look in his eyes which she could not see . 
Cosette , in her retreat , encountered a tree and leaned against it . 
Had it not been for this tree , she would have fallen . 
Then she heard his voice , that voice which she had really never heard , barely rising above the rustle of the leaves , and murmuring : -- `` Pardon me , here I am . 
My heart is full . 
I could not live on as I was living , and I have come . 
Have you read what I placed there on the bench ? 
Do you recognize me at all ? 
Have no fear of me . 
It is a long time , you remember the day , since you looked at me at the Luxembourg , near the Gladiator . 
And the day when you passed before me ? 
It was on the 16th of June and the 2d of July . 
It is nearly a year ago . 
I have not seen you for a long time . 
I inquired of the woman who let the chairs , and she told me that she no longer saw you . 
You lived in the Rue de l'Ouest , on the third floor , in the front apartments of a new house , -- you see that I know ! 
I followed you . 
What else was there for me to do ? 
And then you disappeared . 
I thought I saw you pass once , while I was reading the newspapers under the arcade of the Odeon . 
I ran after you . 
But no . 
It was a person who had a bonnet like yours . 
At night I came hither . 
Do not be afraid , no one sees me . 
I come to gaze upon your windows near at hand . 
I walk very softly , so that you may not hear , for you might be alarmed . 
The other evening I was behind you , you turned round , I fled . 
Once , I heard you singing . 
I was happy . 
Did it affect you because I heard you singing through the shutters ? 
That could not hurt you . 
No , it is not so ? 
You see , you are my angel ! 
Let me come sometimes ; I think that I am going to die . 
If you only knew ! 
I adore you . 
Forgive me , I speak to you , but I do not know what I am saying ; I may have displeased you ; have I displeased you ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
my mother ! '' 
said she . 
And she sank down as though on the point of death . 
He grasped her , she fell , he took her in his arms , he pressed her close , without knowing what he was doing . 
He supported her , though he was tottering himself . 
It was as though his brain were full of smoke ; lightnings darted between his lips ; his ideas vanished ; it seemed to him that he was accomplishing some religious act , and that he was committing a profanation . 
Moreover , he had not the least passion for this lovely woman whose force he felt against his breast . 
He was beside himself with love . 
She took his hand and laid it on her heart . 
He felt the paper there , he stammered : -- `` You love me , then ? '' 
She replied in a voice so low that it was no longer anything more than a barely audible breath : -- `` Hush ! 
Thou knowest it ! '' 
And she hid her blushing face on the breast of the superb and intoxicated young man . 
He fell upon the bench , and she beside him . 
They had no words more . 
The stars were beginning to gleam . 
How did it come to pass that their lips met ? 
How comes it to pass that the birds sing , that snow melts , that the rose unfolds , that May expands , that the dawn grows white behind the black trees on the shivering crest of the hills ? 
A kiss , and that was all . 
Both started , and gazed into the darkness with sparkling eyes . 
They felt neither the cool night , nor the cold stone , nor the damp earth , nor the wet grass ; they looked at each other , and their hearts were full of thoughts . 
They had clasped hands unconsciously . 
She did not ask him , she did not even wonder , how he had entered there , and how he had made his way into the garden . 
It seemed so simple to her that he should be there ! 
From time to time , Marius ' knee touched Cosette 's knee , and both shivered . 
At intervals , Cosette stammered a word . 
Her soul fluttered on her lips like a drop of dew on a flower . 
Little by little they began to talk to each other . 
Effusion followed silence , which is fulness . 
The night was serene and splendid overhead . 
These two beings , pure as spirits , told each other everything , their dreams , their intoxications , their ecstasies , their chimaeras , their weaknesses , how they had adored each other from afar , how they had longed for each other , their despair when they had ceased to see each other . 
They confided to each other in an ideal intimacy , which nothing could augment , their most secret and most mysterious thoughts . 
They related to each other , with candid faith in their illusions , all that love , youth , and the remains of childhood which still lingered about them , suggested to their minds . 
Their two hearts poured themselves out into each other in such wise , that at the expiration of a quarter of an hour , it was the young man who had the young girl 's soul , and the young girl who had the young man 's soul . 
Each became permeated with the other , they were enchanted with each other , they dazzled each other . 
When they had finished , when they had told each other everything , she laid her head on his shoulder and asked him : -- `` What is your name ? '' 
`` My name is Marius , '' said he . 
`` And yours ? '' 
`` My name is Cosette . '' 
THE MALICIOUS PLAYFULNESS OF THE WIND Since 1823 , when the tavern of Montfermeil was on the way to shipwreck and was being gradually engulfed , not in the abyss of a bankruptcy , but in the cesspool of petty debts , the Thenardier pair had had two other children ; both males . 
That made five ; two girls and three boys . 
Madame Thenardier had got rid of the last two , while they were still young and very small , with remarkable luck . 
Got rid of is the word . 
There was but a mere fragment of nature in that woman . 
A phenomenon , by the way , of which there is more than one example extant . 
Like the Marechale de La Mothe-Houdancourt , the Thenardier was a mother to her daughters only . 
There her maternity ended . 
Her hatred of the human race began with her own sons . 
In the direction of her sons her evil disposition was uncompromising , and her heart had a lugubrious wall in that quarter . 
As the reader has seen , she detested the eldest ; she cursed the other two . 
Why ? 
Because . 
The most terrible of motives , the most unanswerable of retorts -- Because . 
`` I have no need of a litter of squalling brats , '' said this mother . 
Let us explain how the Thenardiers had succeeded in getting rid of their last two children ; and even in drawing profit from the operation . 
The woman Magnon , who was mentioned a few pages further back , was the same one who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the two children which she had had . 
She lived on the Quai des Celestins , at the corner of this ancient street of the Petit-Musc which afforded her the opportunity of changing her evil repute into good odor . 
The reader will remember the great epidemic of croup which ravaged the river districts of the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago , and of which science took advantage to make experiments on a grand scale as to the efficacy of inhalations of alum , so beneficially replaced at the present day by the external tincture of iodine . 
During this epidemic , the Magnon lost both her boys , who were still very young , one in the morning , the other in the evening of the same day . 
This was a blow . 
These children were precious to their mother ; they represented eighty francs a month . 
These eighty francs were punctually paid in the name of M. Gillenormand , by collector of his rents , M. Barge , a retired tip-staff , in the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile . 
The children dead , the income was at an end . 
The Magnon sought an expedient . 
In that dark free-masonry of evil of which she formed a part , everything is known , all secrets are kept , and all lend mutual aid . 
Magnon needed two children ; the Thenardiers had two . 
The same sex , the same age . 
A good arrangement for the one , a good investment for the other . 
The little Thenardiers became little Magnons . 
Magnon quitted the Quai des Celestins and went to live in the Rue Clocheperce . 
In Paris , the identity which binds an individual to himself is broken between one street and another . 
The registry office being in no way warned , raised no objections , and the substitution was effected in the most simple manner in the world . 
Only , the Thenardier exacted for this loan of her children , ten francs a month , which Magnon promised to pay , and which she actually did pay . 
It is unnecessary to add that M. Gillenormand continued to perform his compact . 
He came to see the children every six months . 
He did not perceive the change . 
`` Monsieur , '' Magnon said to him , `` how much they resemble you ! '' 
Thenardier , to whom avatars were easy , seized this occasion to become Jondrette . 
His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time to discover that they had two little brothers . 
When a certain degree of misery is reached , one is overpowered with a sort of spectral indifference , and one regards human beings as though they were spectres . 
Your nearest relations are often no more for you than vague shadowy forms , barely outlined against a nebulous background of life and easily confounded again with the invisible . 
On the evening of the day when she had handed over her two little ones to Magnon , with express intention of renouncing them forever , the Thenardier had felt , or had appeared to feel , a scruple . 
She said to her husband : `` But this is abandoning our children ! '' 
Thenardier , masterful and phlegmatic , cauterized the scruple with this saying : `` Jean Jacques Rousseau did even better ! '' 
From scruples , the mother proceeded to uneasiness : `` But what if the police were to annoy us ? 
Tell me , Monsieur Thenardier , is what we have done permissible ? '' 
Thenardier replied : `` Everything is permissible . 
No one will see anything but true blue in it . 
Besides , no one has any interest in looking closely after children who have not a sou . '' 
Magnon was a sort of fashionable woman in the sphere of crime . 
She was careful about her toilet . 
She shared her lodgings , which were furnished in an affected and wretched style , with a clever gallicized English thief . 
This English woman , who had become a naturalized Parisienne , recommended by very wealthy relations , intimately connected with the medals in the Library and Mademoiselle Mar 's diamonds , became celebrated later on in judicial accounts . 
She was called Mamselle Miss. . 
The two little creatures who had fallen to Magnon had no reason to complain of their lot . 
Recommended by the eighty francs , they were well cared for , as is everything from which profit is derived ; they were neither badly clothed , nor badly fed ; they were treated almost like `` little gentlemen , '' -- better by their false mother than by their real one . 
Magnon played the lady , and talked no thieves ' slang in their presence . 
Thus passed several years . 
Thenardier augured well from the fact . 
One day , he chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipend of ten francs : `` The father must give them some education . '' 
All at once , these two poor children , who had up to that time been protected tolerably well , even by their evil fate , were abruptly hurled into life and forced to begin it for themselves . 
A wholesale arrest of malefactors , like that in the Jondrette garret , necessarily complicated by investigations and subsequent incarcerations , is a veritable disaster for that hideous and occult counter-society which pursues its existence beneath public society ; an adventure of this description entails all sorts of catastrophes in that sombre world . 
The Thenardier catastrophe involved the catastrophe of Magnon . 
One day , a short time after Magnon had handed to Eponine the note relating to the Rue Plumet , a sudden raid was made by the police in the Rue Clocheperce ; Magnon was seized , as was also Mamselle Miss ; and all the inhabitants of the house , which was of a suspicious character , were gathered into the net . 
While this was going on , the two little boys were playing in the back yard , and saw nothing of the raid . 
When they tried to enter the house again , they found the door fastened and the house empty . 
A cobbler opposite called them to him , and delivered to them a paper which `` their mother '' had left for them . 
On this paper there was an address : M. Barge , collector of rents , Rue du Roi-de-Sicile , No. 8 . 
The proprietor of the stall said to them : `` You can not live here any longer . 
Go there . 
It is near by . 
The first street on the left . 
Ask your way from this paper . '' 
The children set out , the elder leading the younger , and holding in his hand the paper which was to guide them . 
It was cold , and his benumbed little fingers could not close very firmly , and they did not keep a very good hold on the paper . 
At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce , a gust of wind tore it from him , and as night was falling , the child was not able to find it again . 
They began to wander aimlessly through the streets . 
IN WHICH LITTLE GAVROCHE EXTRACTS PROFIT FROM NAPOLEON THE GREAT Spring in Paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes which do not precisely chill but freeze one ; these north winds which sadden the most beautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs of cold air which enter a warm room through the cracks of a badly fitting door or window . 
It seems as though the gloomy door of winter had remained ajar , and as though the wind were pouring through it . 
In the spring of 1832 , the epoch when the first great epidemic of this century broke out in Europe , these north gales were more harsh and piercing than ever . 
It was a door even more glacial than that of winter which was ajar . 
It was the door of the sepulchre . 
In these winds one felt the breath of the cholera . 
From a meteorological point of view , these cold winds possessed this peculiarity , that they did not preclude a strong electric tension . 
Frequent storms , accompanied by thunder and lightning , burst forth at this epoch . 
One evening , when these gales were blowing rudely , to such a degree that January seemed to have returned and that the bourgeois had resumed their cloaks , Little Gavroche , who was always shivering gayly under his rags , was standing as though in ecstasy before a wig-maker 's shop in the vicinity of the Orme-Saint-Gervais . 
He was adorned with a woman 's woollen shawl , picked up no one knows where , and which he had converted into a neck comforter . 
Little Gavroche appeared to be engaged in intent admiration of a wax bride , in a low-necked dress , and crowned with orange-flowers , who was revolving in the window , and displaying her smile to passers-by , between two argand lamps ; but in reality , he was taking an observation of the shop , in order to discover whether he could not `` prig '' from the shop-front a cake of soap , which he would then proceed to sell for a sou to a `` hair-dresser '' in the suburbs . 
He had often managed to breakfast off of such a roll . 
He called his species of work , for which he possessed special aptitude , `` shaving barbers . '' 
While contemplating the bride , and eyeing the cake of soap , he muttered between his teeth : `` Tuesday . 
It was not Tuesday . 
Was it Tuesday ? 
Perhaps it was Tuesday . 
Yes , it was Tuesday . '' 
No one has ever discovered to what this monologue referred . 
Yes , perchance , this monologue had some connection with the last occasion on which he had dined , three days before , for it was now Friday . 
The barber in his shop , which was warmed by a good stove , was shaving a customer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy , that freezing and impudent street urchin both of whose hands were in his pockets , but whose mind was evidently unsheathed . 
While Gavroche was scrutinizing the shop-window and the cakes of windsor soap , two children of unequal stature , very neatly dressed , and still smaller than himself , one apparently about seven years of age , the other five , timidly turned the handle and entered the shop , with a request for something or other , alms possibly , in a plaintive murmur which resembled a groan rather than a prayer . 
They both spoke at once , and their words were unintelligible because sobs broke the voice of the younger , and the teeth of the elder were chattering with cold . 
The barber wheeled round with a furious look , and without abandoning his razor , thrust back the elder with his left hand and the younger with his knee , and slammed his door , saying : `` The idea of coming in and freezing everybody for nothing ! '' 
The two children resumed their march in tears . 
In the meantime , a cloud had risen ; it had begun to rain . 
Little Gavroche ran after them and accosted them : -- `` What 's the matter with you , brats ? '' 
`` We do n't know where we are to sleep , '' replied the elder . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` A great matter , truly . 
The idea of bawling about that . 
They must be greenies ! '' 
And adopting , in addition to his superiority , which was rather bantering , an accent of tender authority and gentle patronage : -- `` Come along with me , young ` uns ! '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the elder . 
And the two children followed him as they would have followed an archbishop . 
They had stopped crying . 
Gavroche led them up the Rue Saint-Antoine in the direction of the Bastille . 
As Gavroche walked along , he cast an indignant backward glance at the barber 's shop . 
`` That fellow has no heart , the whiting , '' -LSB- 35 -RSB- he muttered . 
`` He 's an Englishman . '' 
-LSB- 35 -RSB- Merlan : a sobriquet given to hairdressers because they are white with powder . 
A woman who caught sight of these three marching in a file , with Gavroche at their head , burst into noisy laughter . 
This laugh was wanting in respect towards the group . 
`` Good day , Mamselle Omnibus , '' said Gavroche to her . 
An instant later , the wig-maker occurred to his mind once more , and he added : -- `` I am making a mistake in the beast ; he 's not a whiting , he 's a serpent . 
Barber , I 'll go and fetch a locksmith , and I 'll have a bell hung to your tail . '' 
This wig-maker had rendered him aggressive . 
As he strode over a gutter , he apostrophized a bearded portress who was worthy to meet Faust on the Brocken , and who had a broom in her hand . 
`` Madam , '' said he , `` so you are going out with your horse ? '' 
And thereupon , he spattered the polished boots of a pedestrian . 
`` You scamp ! '' 
shouted the furious pedestrian . 
Gavroche elevated his nose above his shawl . 
`` Is Monsieur complaining ? '' 
`` Of you ! '' 
ejaculated the man . 
`` The office is closed , '' said Gavroche , `` I do not receive any more complaints . '' 
In the meanwhile , as he went on up the street , he perceived a beggar-girl , thirteen or fourteen years old , and clad in so short a gown that her knees were visible , lying thoroughly chilled under a porte-cochere . 
The little girl was getting to be too old for such a thing . 
Growth does play these tricks . 
The petticoat becomes short at the moment when nudity becomes indecent . 
`` Poor girl ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` She has n't even trousers . 
Hold on , take this . '' 
And unwinding all the comfortable woollen which he had around his neck , he flung it on the thin and purple shoulders of the beggar-girl , where the scarf became a shawl once more . 
The child stared at him in astonishment , and received the shawl in silence . 
When a certain stage of distress has been reached in his misery , the poor man no longer groans over evil , no longer returns thanks for good . 
That done : `` Brrr ! '' 
said Gavroche , who was shivering more than Saint Martin , for the latter retained one-half of his cloak . 
At this brrr ! 
the downpour of rain , redoubled in its spite , became furious . 
The wicked skies punish good deeds . 
`` Ah , come now ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche , `` what 's the meaning of this ? 
It 's re-raining ! 
Good Heavens , if it goes on like this , I shall stop my subscription . '' 
And he set out on the march once more . 
`` It 's all right , '' he resumed , casting a glance at the beggar-girl , as she coiled up under the shawl , `` she 's got a famous peel . '' 
And looking up at the clouds he exclaimed : -- `` Caught ! '' 
The two children followed close on his heels . 
As they were passing one of these heavy grated lattices , which indicate a baker 's shop , for bread is put behind bars like gold , Gavroche turned round : -- `` Ah , by the way , brats , have we dined ? '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the elder , `` we have had nothing to eat since this morning . '' 
`` So you have neither father nor mother ? '' 
resumed Gavroche majestically . 
`` Excuse us , sir , we have a papa and a mamma , but we do n't know where they are . '' 
`` Sometimes that 's better than knowing where they are , '' said Gavroche , who was a thinker . 
`` We have been wandering about these two hours , '' continued the elder , `` we have hunted for things at the corners of the streets , but we have found nothing . '' 
`` I know , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` it 's the dogs who eat everything . '' 
He went on , after a pause : -- `` Ah ! 
we have lost our authors . 
We do n't know what we have done with them . 
This should not be , gamins . 
It 's stupid to let old people stray off like that . 
