The whole family was in the garret . 
Only , it had been silent in the master 's absence , like wolf whelps in the absence of the wolf . 
`` It 's I , '' said he . 
`` Good evening , daddy , '' yelped the girls . 
`` Well ? '' 
said the mother . 
`` All 's going first-rate , '' responded Jondrette , `` but my feet are beastly cold . 
Good ! 
You have dressed up . 
You have done well ! 
You must inspire confidence . '' 
`` All ready to go out . '' 
`` Do n't forget what I told you . 
You will do everything sure ? '' 
`` Rest easy . '' 
`` Because -- '' said Jondrette . 
And he left the phrase unfinished . 
Marius heard him lay something heavy on the table , probably the chisel which he had purchased . 
`` By the way , '' said Jondrette , `` have you been eating here ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said the mother . 
`` I got three large potatoes and some salt . 
I took advantage of the fire to cook them . '' 
`` Good , '' returned Jondrette . 
`` To-morrow I will take you out to dine with me . 
We will have a duck and fixings . 
You shall dine like Charles the Tenth ; all is going well ! '' 
Then he added : -- `` The mouse-trap is open . 
The cats are there . '' 
He lowered his voice still further , and said : -- `` Put this in the fire . '' 
Marius heard a sound of charcoal being knocked with the tongs or some iron utensil , and Jondrette continued : -- `` Have you greased the hinges of the door so that they will not squeak ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the mother . 
`` What time is it ? '' 
`` Nearly six . 
The half-hour struck from Saint-Medard a while ago . '' 
`` The devil ! '' 
ejaculated Jondrette ; `` the children must go and watch . 
Come you , do you listen here . '' 
A whispering ensued . 
Jondrette 's voice became audible again : -- `` Has old Bougon left ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said the mother . 
`` Are you sure that there is no one in our neighbor 's room ? '' 
`` He has not been in all day , and you know very well that this is his dinner hour . '' 
`` You are sure ? '' 
`` Sure . '' 
`` All the same , '' said Jondrette , `` there 's no harm in going to see whether he is there . 
Here , my girl , take the candle and go there . '' 
Marius fell on his hands and knees and crawled silently under his bed . 
Hardly had he concealed himself , when he perceived a light through the crack of his door . 
`` P'pa , '' cried a voice , `` he is not in here . '' 
He recognized the voice of the eldest daughter . 
`` Did you go in ? '' 
demanded her father . 
`` No , '' replied the girl , `` but as his key is in the door , he must be out . '' 
The father exclaimed : -- `` Go in , nevertheless . '' 
The door opened , and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with a candle in her hand . 
She was as she had been in the morning , only still more repulsive in this light . 
She walked straight up to the bed . 
Marius endured an indescribable moment of anxiety ; but near the bed there was a mirror nailed to the wall , and it was thither that she was directing her steps . 
She raised herself on tiptoe and looked at herself in it . 
In the neighboring room , the sound of iron articles being moved was audible . 
She smoothed her hair with the palm of her hand , and smiled into the mirror , humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice : -- Nos amours ont dure toute une semaine , -LSB- 28 -RSB- Mais que du bonheur les instants sont courts ! 
S'adorer huit jours , c ' etait bien la peine ! 
Le temps des amours devait durer toujours ! 
Devrait durer toujours ! 
devrait durer toujours ! 
-LSB- 28 -RSB- Our love has lasted a whole week , but how short are the instants of happiness ! 
To adore each other for eight days was hardly worth the while ! 
The time of love should last forever . 
In the meantime , Marius trembled . 
It seemed impossible to him that she should not hear his breathing . 
She stepped to the window and looked out with the half-foolish way she had . 
`` How ugly Paris is when it has put on a white chemise ! '' 
said she . 
She returned to the mirror and began again to put on airs before it , scrutinizing herself full-face and three-quarters face in turn . 
`` Well ! '' 
cried her father , `` what are you about there ? '' 
`` I am looking under the bed and the furniture , '' she replied , continuing to arrange her hair ; `` there 's no one here . '' 
`` Booby ! '' 
yelled her father . 
`` Come here this minute ! 
And do n't waste any time about it ! '' 
`` Coming ! 
Coming ! '' 
said she . 
`` One has no time for anything in this hovel ! '' 
She hummed : -- Vous me quittez pour aller a la gloire ; -LSB- 29 -RSB- Mon triste coeur suivra partout . 
-LSB- 29 -RSB- You leave me to go to glory ; my sad heart will follow you everywhere . 
She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out , shutting the door behind her . 
A moment more , and Marius heard the sound of the two young girls ' bare feet in the corridor , and Jondrette 's voice shouting to them : -- `` Pay strict heed ! 
One on the side of the barrier , the other at the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
Do n't lose sight for a moment of the door of this house , and the moment you see anything , rush here on the instant ! 
as hard as you can go ! 
You have a key to get in . '' 
The eldest girl grumbled : -- `` The idea of standing watch in the snow barefoot ! '' 
`` To-morrow you shall have some dainty little green silk boots ! '' 
said the father . 
They ran down stairs , and a few seconds later the shock of the outer door as it banged to announced that they were outside . 
There now remained in the house only Marius , the Jondrettes and probably , also , the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a glimpse in the twilight , behind the door of the unused attic . 
THE USE MADE OF MARIUS ' FIVE-FRANC PIECE Marius decided that the moment had now arrived when he must resume his post at his observatory . 
In a twinkling , and with the agility of his age , he had reached the hole in the partition . 
He looked . 
The interior of the Jondrette apartment presented a curious aspect , and Marius found an explanation of the singular light which he had noticed . 
A candle was burning in a candlestick covered with verdigris , but that was not what really lighted the chamber . 
The hovel was completely illuminated , as it were , by the reflection from a rather large sheet-iron brazier standing in the fireplace , and filled with burning charcoal , the brazier prepared by the Jondrette woman that morning . 
The charcoal was glowing hot and the brazier was red ; a blue flame flickered over it , and helped him to make out the form of the chisel purchased by Jondrette in the Rue Pierre-Lombard , where it had been thrust into the brazier to heat . 
In one corner , near the door , and as though prepared for some definite use , two heaps were visible , which appeared to be , the one a heap of old iron , the other a heap of ropes . 
All this would have caused the mind of a person who knew nothing of what was in preparation , to waver between a very sinister and a very simple idea . 
The lair thus lighted up more resembled a forge than a mouth of hell , but Jondrette , in this light , had rather the air of a demon than of a smith . 
The heat of the brazier was so great , that the candle on the table was melting on the side next the chafing-dish , and was drooping over . 
An old dark-lantern of copper , worthy of Diogenes turned Cartouche , stood on the chimney-piece . 
The brazier , placed in the fireplace itself , beside the nearly extinct brands , sent its vapors up the chimney , and gave out no odor . 
The moon , entering through the four panes of the window , cast its whiteness into the crimson and flaming garret ; and to the poetic spirit of Marius , who was dreamy even in the moment of action , it was like a thought of heaven mingled with the misshapen reveries of earth . 
A breath of air which made its way in through the open pane , helped to dissipate the smell of the charcoal and to conceal the presence of the brazier . 
The Jondrette lair was , if the reader recalls what we have said of the Gorbeau building , admirably chosen to serve as the theatre of a violent and sombre deed , and as the envelope for a crime . 
It was the most retired chamber in the most isolated house on the most deserted boulevard in Paris . 
If the system of ambush and traps had not already existed , they would have been invented there . 
The whole thickness of a house and a multitude of uninhabited rooms separated this den from the boulevard , and the only window that existed opened on waste lands enclosed with walls and palisades . 
Jondrette had lighted his pipe , seated himself on the seatless chair , and was engaged in smoking . 
His wife was talking to him in a low tone . 
If Marius had been Courfeyrac , that is to say , one of those men who laugh on every occasion in life , he would have burst with laughter when his gaze fell on the Jondrette woman . 
She had on a black bonnet with plumes not unlike the hats of the heralds-at-arms at the coronation of Charles X. , an immense tartan shawl over her knitted petticoat , and the man 's shoes which her daughter had scorned in the morning . 
It was this toilette which had extracted from Jondrette the exclamation : `` Good ! 
You have dressed up . 
You have done well . 
You must inspire confidence ! '' 
As for Jondrette , he had not taken off the new surtout , which was too large for him , and which M. Leblanc had given him , and his costume continued to present that contrast of coat and trousers which constituted the ideal of a poet in Courfeyrac 's eyes . 
All at once , Jondrette lifted up his voice : -- `` By the way ! 
Now that I think of it . 
In this weather , he will come in a carriage . 
Light the lantern , take it and go down stairs . 
You will stand behind the lower door . 
The very moment that you hear the carriage stop , you will open the door , instantly , he will come up , you will light the staircase and the corridor , and when he enters here , you will go down stairs again as speedily as possible , you will pay the coachman , and dismiss the fiacre . 
`` And the money ? '' 
inquired the woman . 
Jondrette fumbled in his trousers pocket and handed her five francs . 
`` What 's this ? '' 
she exclaimed . 
Jondrette replied with dignity : -- `` That is the monarch which our neighbor gave us this morning . '' 
And he added : -- `` Do you know what ? 
Two chairs will be needed here . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` To sit on . '' 
Marius felt a cold chill pass through his limbs at hearing this mild answer from Jondrette . 
`` Pardieu ! 
I 'll go and get one of our neighbor 's . '' 
And with a rapid movement , she opened the door of the den , and went out into the corridor . 
Marius absolutely had not the time to descend from the commode , reach his bed , and conceal himself beneath it . 
`` Take the candle , '' cried Jondrette . 
`` No , '' said she , `` it would embarrass me , I have the two chairs to carry . 
There is moonlight . '' 
Marius heard Mother Jondrette 's heavy hand fumbling at his lock in the dark . 
The door opened . 
He remained nailed to the spot with the shock and with horror . 
The Jondrette entered . 
The dormer window permitted the entrance of a ray of moonlight between two blocks of shadow . 
One of these blocks of shadow entirely covered the wall against which Marius was leaning , so that he disappeared within it . 
Mother Jondrette raised her eyes , did not see Marius , took the two chairs , the only ones which Marius possessed , and went away , letting the door fall heavily to behind her . 
She re-entered the lair . 
`` Here are the two chairs . '' 
`` And here is the lantern . 
Go down as quick as you can . '' 
She hastily obeyed , and Jondrette was left alone . 
He placed the two chairs on opposite sides of the table , turned the chisel in the brazier , set in front of the fireplace an old screen which masked the chafing-dish , then went to the corner where lay the pile of rope , and bent down as though to examine something . 
Marius then recognized the fact , that what he had taken for a shapeless mass was a very well-made rope-ladder , with wooden rungs and two hooks with which to attach it . 
This ladder , and some large tools , veritable masses of iron , which were mingled with the old iron piled up behind the door , had not been in the Jondrette hovel in the morning , and had evidently been brought thither in the afternoon , during Marius ' absence . 
`` Those are the utensils of an edge-tool maker , '' thought Marius . 
Had Marius been a little more learned in this line , he would have recognized in what he took for the engines of an edge-tool maker , certain instruments which will force a lock or pick a lock , and others which will cut or slice , the two families of tools which burglars call cadets and fauchants . 
The fireplace and the two chairs were exactly opposite Marius . 
The brazier being concealed , the only light in the room was now furnished by the candle ; the smallest bit of crockery on the table or on the chimney-piece cast a large shadow . 
There was something indescribably calm , threatening , and hideous about this chamber . 
One felt that there existed in it the anticipation of something terrible . 
Jondrette had allowed his pipe to go out , a serious sign of preoccupation , and had again seated himself . 
The candle brought out the fierce and the fine angles of his countenance . 
He indulged in scowls and in abrupt unfoldings of the right hand , as though he were responding to the last counsels of a sombre inward monologue . 
In the course of one of these dark replies which he was making to himself , he pulled the table drawer rapidly towards him , took out a long kitchen knife which was concealed there , and tried the edge of its blade on his nail . 
That done , he put the knife back in the drawer and shut it . 
Marius , on his side , grasped the pistol in his right pocket , drew it out and cocked it . 
The pistol emitted a sharp , clear click , as he cocked it . 
Jondrette started , half rose , listened a moment , then began to laugh and said : -- `` What a fool I am ! 
It 's the partition cracking ! '' 
Marius kept the pistol in his hand . 
MARIUS ' TWO CHAIRS FORM A VIS-A-VIS Suddenly , the distant and melancholy vibration of a clock shook the panes . 
Six o'clock was striking from Saint-Medard . 
Jondrette marked off each stroke with a toss of his head . 
When the sixth had struck , he snuffed the candle with his fingers . 
Then he began to pace up and down the room , listened at the corridor , walked on again , then listened once more . 
`` Provided only that he comes ! '' 
he muttered , then he returned to his chair . 
He had hardly reseated himself when the door opened . 
Mother Jondrette had opened it , and now remained in the corridor making a horrible , amiable grimace , which one of the holes of the dark-lantern illuminated from below . 
`` Enter , sir , '' she said . 
`` Enter , my benefactor , '' repeated Jondrette , rising hastily . 
M. Leblanc made his appearance . 
He wore an air of serenity which rendered him singularly venerable . 
He laid four louis on the table . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , '' said he , `` this is for your rent and your most pressing necessities . 
We will attend to the rest hereafter . '' 
`` May God requite it to you , my generous benefactor ! '' 
said Jondrette . 
And rapidly approaching his wife : -- `` Dismiss the carriage ! '' 
She slipped out while her husband was lavishing salutes and offering M. Leblanc a chair . 
An instant later she returned and whispered in his ear : -- '' 'T is done . '' 
The snow , which had not ceased falling since the morning , was so deep that the arrival of the fiacre had not been audible , and they did not now hear its departure . 
Meanwhile , M. Leblanc had seated himself . 
Jondrette had taken possession of the other chair , facing M. Leblanc . 
Now , in order to form an idea of the scene which is to follow , let the reader picture to himself in his own mind , a cold night , the solitudes of the Salpetriere covered with snow and white as winding-sheets in the moonlight , the taper-like lights of the street lanterns which shone redly here and there along those tragic boulevards , and the long rows of black elms , not a passer-by for perhaps a quarter of a league around , the Gorbeau hovel , at its highest pitch of silence , of horror , and of darkness ; in that building , in the midst of those solitudes , in the midst of that darkness , the vast Jondrette garret lighted by a single candle , and in that den two men seated at a table , M. Leblanc tranquil , Jondrette smiling and alarming , the Jondrette woman , the female wolf , in one corner , and , behind the partition , Marius , invisible , erect , not losing a word , not missing a single movement , his eye on the watch , and pistol in hand . 
However , Marius experienced only an emotion of horror , but no fear . 
He clasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured . 
`` I shall be able to stop that wretch whenever I please , '' he thought . 
He felt that the police were there somewhere in ambuscade , waiting for the signal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm . 
Moreover , he was in hopes , that this violent encounter between Jondrette and M. Leblanc would cast some light on all the things which he was interested in learning . 
OCCUPYING ONE 'S SELF WITH OBSCURE DEPTHS Hardly was M. Leblanc seated , when he turned his eyes towards the pallets , which were empty . 
`` How is the poor little wounded girl ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` Bad , '' replied Jondrette with a heart-broken and grateful smile , `` very bad , my worthy sir . 
Her elder sister has taken her to the Bourbe to have her hurt dressed . 
You will see them presently ; they will be back immediately . '' 
`` Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better , '' went on M. Leblanc , casting his eyes on the eccentric costume of the Jondrette woman , as she stood between him and the door , as though already guarding the exit , and gazed at him in an attitude of menace and almost of combat . 
`` She is dying , '' said Jondrette . 
`` But what do you expect , sir ! 
She has so much courage , that woman has ! 
She 's not a woman , she 's an ox . '' 
The Jondrette , touched by his compliment , deprecated it with the affected airs of a flattered monster . 
`` You are always too good to me , Monsieur Jondrette ! '' 
`` Jondrette ! '' 
said M. Leblanc , `` I thought your name was Fabantou ? '' 
`` Fabantou , alias Jondrette ! '' 
replied the husband hurriedly . 
`` An artistic sobriquet ! '' 
And launching at his wife a shrug of the shoulders which M. Leblanc did not catch , he continued with an emphatic and caressing inflection of voice : -- `` Ah ! 
we have had a happy life together , this poor darling and I ! 
What would there be left for us if we had not that ? 
We are so wretched , my respectable sir ! 
We have arms , but there is no work ! 
We have the will , no work ! 
I do n't know how the government arranges that , but , on my word of honor , sir , I am not Jacobin , sir , I am not a bousingot . 
-LSB- 30 -RSB- I do n't wish them any evil , but if I were the ministers , on my most sacred word , things would be different . 
Here , for instance , I wanted to have my girls taught the trade of paper-box makers . 
You will say to me : ` What ! 
a trade ? ' 
Yes ! 
A trade ! 
A simple trade ! 
A bread-winner ! 
What a fall , my benefactor ! 
What a degradation , when one has been what we have been ! 
Alas ! 
There is nothing left to us of our days of prosperity ! 
One thing only , a picture , of which I think a great deal , but which I am willing to part with , for I must live ! 
Item , one must live ! '' 
-LSB- 30 -RSB- A democrat . 
While Jondrette thus talked , with an apparent incoherence which detracted nothing from the thoughtful and sagacious expression of his physiognomy , Marius raised his eyes , and perceived at the other end of the room a person whom he had not seen before . 
A man had just entered , so softly that the door had not been heard to turn on its hinges . 
This man wore a violet knitted vest , which was old , worn , spotted , cut and gaping at every fold , wide trousers of cotton velvet , wooden shoes on his feet , no shirt , had his neck bare , his bare arms tattooed , and his face smeared with black . 
He had seated himself in silence on the nearest bed , and , as he was behind Jondrette , he could only be indistinctly seen . 
That sort of magnetic instinct which turns aside the gaze , caused M. Leblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius . 
He could not refrain from a gesture of surprise which did not escape Jondrette . 
`` Ah ! 
I see ! '' 
exclaimed Jondrette , buttoning up his coat with an air of complaisance , `` you are looking at your overcoat ? 
It fits me ! 
My faith , but it fits me ! '' 
`` Who is that man ? '' 
said M. Leblanc . 
`` Him ? '' 
ejaculated Jondrette , `` he 's a neighbor of mine . 
Do n't pay any attention to him . '' 
The neighbor was a singular-looking individual . 
However , manufactories of chemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Many of the workmen might have black faces . 
Besides this , M. Leblanc 's whole person was expressive of candid and intrepid confidence . 
He went on : -- `` Excuse me ; what were you saying , M. Fabantou ? '' 
`` I was telling you , sir , and dear protector , '' replied Jondrette placing his elbows on the table and contemplating M. Leblanc with steady and tender eyes , not unlike the eyes of the boa-constrictor , `` I was telling you , that I have a picture to sell . '' 
A slight sound came from the door . 
A second man had just entered and seated himself on the bed , behind Jondrette . 
Like the first , his arms were bare , and he had a mask of ink or lampblack . 
Although this man had , literally , glided into the room , he had not been able to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him . 
`` Do n't mind them , '' said Jondrette , `` they are people who belong in the house . 
So I was saying , that there remains in my possession a valuable picture . 
But stop , sir , take a look at it . '' 
He rose , went to the wall at the foot of which stood the panel which we have already mentioned , and turned it round , still leaving it supported against the wall . 
It really was something which resembled a picture , and which the candle illuminated , somewhat . 
Marius could make nothing out of it , as Jondrette stood between the picture and him ; he only saw a coarse daub , and a sort of principal personage colored with the harsh crudity of foreign canvasses and screen paintings . 
`` What is that ? '' 
asked M. Leblanc . 
Jondrette exclaimed : -- `` A painting by a master , a picture of great value , my benefactor ! 
I am as much attached to it as I am to my two daughters ; it recalls souvenirs to me ! 
But I have told you , and I will not take it back , that I am so wretched that I will part with it . '' 
Either by chance , or because he had begun to feel a dawning uneasiness , M. Leblanc 's glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examined the picture . 
There were now four men , three seated on the bed , one standing near the door-post , all four with bare arms and motionless , with faces smeared with black . 
One of those on the bed was leaning against the wall , with closed eyes , and it might have been supposed that he was asleep . 
He was old ; his white hair contrasting with his blackened face produced a horrible effect . 
The other two seemed to be young ; one wore a beard , the other wore his hair long . 
None of them had on shoes ; those who did not wear socks were barefooted . 
Jondrette noticed that M. Leblanc 's eye was fixed on these men . 
`` They are friends . 
They are neighbors , '' said he . 
`` Their faces are black because they work in charcoal . 
They are chimney-builders . 
Do n't trouble yourself about them , my benefactor , but buy my picture . 
Have pity on my misery . 
I will not ask you much for it . 
How much do you think it is worth ? '' 
`` Well , '' said M. Leblanc , looking Jondrette full in the eye , and with the manner of a man who is on his guard , `` it is some signboard for a tavern , and is worth about three francs . '' 
Jondrette replied sweetly : -- `` Have you your pocket-book with you ? 
I should be satisfied with a thousand crowns . '' 
M. Leblanc sprang up , placed his back against the wall , and cast a rapid glance around the room . 
He had Jondrette on his left , on the side next the window , and the Jondrette woman and the four men on his right , on the side next the door . 
The four men did not stir , and did not even seem to be looking on . 
Jondrette had again begun to speak in a plaintive tone , with so vague an eye , and so lamentable an intonation , that M. Leblanc might have supposed that what he had before him was a man who had simply gone mad with misery . 
`` If you do not buy my picture , my dear benefactor , '' said Jondrette , `` I shall be left without resources ; there will be nothing left for me but to throw myself into the river . 
When I think that I wanted to have my two girls taught the middle-class paper-box trade , the making of boxes for New Year 's gifts ! 
Well ! 
A table with a board at the end to keep the glasses from falling off is required , then a special stove is needed , a pot with three compartments for the different degrees of strength of the paste , according as it is to be used for wood , paper , or stuff , a paring-knife to cut the cardboard , a mould to adjust it , a hammer to nail the steels , pincers , how the devil do I know what all ? 
And all that in order to earn four sous a day ! 
And you have to work fourteen hours a day ! 
And each box passes through the workwoman 's hands thirteen times ! 
And you ca n't wet the paper ! 
And you must n't spot anything ! 
And you must keep the paste hot . 
The devil , I tell you ! 
Four sous a day ! 
How do you suppose a man is to live ? '' 
As he spoke , Jondrette did not look at M. Leblanc , who was observing him . 
M. Leblanc 's eye was fixed on Jondrette , and Jondrette 's eye was fixed on the door . 
Marius ' eager attention was transferred from one to the other . 
M. Leblanc seemed to be asking himself : `` Is this man an idiot ? '' 
Jondrette repeated two or three distinct times , with all manner of varying inflections of the whining and supplicating order : `` There is nothing left for me but to throw myself into the river ! 
I went down three steps at the side of the bridge of Austerlitz the other day for that purpose . '' 
All at once his dull eyes lighted up with a hideous flash ; the little man drew himself up and became terrible , took a step toward M. Leblanc and cried in a voice of thunder : `` That has nothing to do with the question ! 
Do you know me ? '' 
THE TRAP The door of the garret had just opened abruptly , and allowed a view of three men clad in blue linen blouses , and masked with masks of black paper . 
The first was thin , and had a long , iron-tipped cudgel ; the second , who was a sort of colossus , carried , by the middle of the handle , with the blade downward , a butcher 's pole-axe for slaughtering cattle . 
The third , a man with thick-set shoulders , not so slender as the first , held in his hand an enormous key stolen from the door of some prison . 
It appeared that the arrival of these men was what Jondrette had been waiting for . 
A rapid dialogue ensued between him and the man with the cudgel , the thin one . 
`` Is everything ready ? '' 
said Jondrette . 
`` Yes , '' replied the thin man . 
`` Where is Montparnasse ? '' 
`` The young principal actor stopped to chat with your girl . '' 
`` Which ? '' 
`` The eldest . '' 
`` Is there a carriage at the door ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Is the team harnessed ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` With two good horses ? '' 
`` Excellent . '' 
`` Is it waiting where I ordered ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Good , '' said Jondrette . 
M. Leblanc was very pale . 
He was scrutinizing everything around him in the den , like a man who understands what he has fallen into , and his head , directed in turn toward all the heads which surrounded him , moved on his neck with an astonished and attentive slowness , but there was nothing in his air which resembled fear . 
He had improvised an intrenchment out of the table ; and the man , who but an instant previously , had borne merely the appearance of a kindly old man , had suddenly become a sort of athlete , and placed his robust fist on the back of his chair , with a formidable and surprising gesture . 
This old man , who was so firm and so brave in the presence of such a danger , seemed to possess one of those natures which are as courageous as they are kind , both easily and simply . 
The father of a woman whom we love is never a stranger to us . 
Marius felt proud of that unknown man . 
Three of the men , of whom Jondrette had said : `` They are chimney-builders , '' had armed themselves from the pile of old iron , one with a heavy pair of shears , the second with weighing-tongs , the third with a hammer , and had placed themselves across the entrance without uttering a syllable . 
The old man had remained on the bed , and had merely opened his eyes . 
The Jondrette woman had seated herself beside him . 
Marius decided that in a few seconds more the moment for intervention would arrive , and he raised his right hand towards the ceiling , in the direction of the corridor , in readiness to discharge his pistol . 
Jondrette having terminated his colloquy with the man with the cudgel , turned once more to M. Leblanc , and repeated his question , accompanying it with that low , repressed , and terrible laugh which was peculiar to him : -- `` So you do not recognize me ? '' 
M. Leblanc looked him full in the face , and replied : -- `` No . '' 
Then Jondrette advanced to the table . 
He leaned across the candle , crossing his arms , putting his angular and ferocious jaw close to M. Leblanc 's calm face , and advancing as far as possible without forcing M. Leblanc to retreat , and , in this posture of a wild beast who is about to bite , he exclaimed : -- `` My name is not Fabantou , my name is not Jondrette , my name is Thenardier . 
I am the inn-keeper of Montfermeil ! 
Do you understand ? 
Thenardier ! 
Now do you know me ? '' 
An almost imperceptible flush crossed M. Leblanc 's brow , and he replied with a voice which neither trembled nor rose above its ordinary level , with his accustomed placidity : -- `` No more than before . '' 
Marius did not hear this reply . 
Any one who had seen him at that moment through the darkness would have perceived that he was haggard , stupid , thunder-struck . 
At the moment when Jondrette said : `` My name is Thenardier , '' Marius had trembled in every limb , and had leaned against the wall , as though he felt the cold of a steel blade through his heart . 
Then his right arm , all ready to discharge the signal shot , dropped slowly , and at the moment when Jondrette repeated , `` Thenardier , do you understand ? '' 
Marius 's faltering fingers had come near letting the pistol fall . 
Jondrette , by revealing his identity , had not moved M. Leblanc , but he had quite upset Marius . 
That name of Thenardier , with which M. Leblanc did not seem to be acquainted , Marius knew well . 
Let the reader recall what that name meant to him ! 
That name he had worn on his heart , inscribed in his father 's testament ! 
He bore it at the bottom of his mind , in the depths of his memory , in that sacred injunction : `` A certain Thenardier saved my life . 
If my son encounters him , he will do him all the good that lies in his power . '' 
That name , it will be remembered , was one of the pieties of his soul ; he mingled it with the name of his father in his worship . 
What ! 
This man was that Thenardier , that inn-keeper of Montfermeil whom he had so long and so vainly sought ! 
He had found him at last , and how ? 
His father 's saviour was a ruffian ! 
That man , to whose service Marius was burning to devote himself , was a monster ! 
That liberator of Colonel Pontmercy was on the point of committing a crime whose scope Marius did not , as yet , clearly comprehend , but which resembled an assassination ! 
And against whom , great God ! 
what a fatality ! 
What a bitter mockery of fate ! 
His father had commanded him from the depths of his coffin to do all the good in his power to this Thenardier , and for four years Marius had cherished no other thought than to acquit this debt of his father 's , and at the moment when he was on the eve of having a brigand seized in the very act of crime by justice , destiny cried to him : `` This is Thenardier ! '' 
He could at last repay this man for his father 's life , saved amid a hail-storm of grape-shot on the heroic field of Waterloo , and repay it with the scaffold ! 
He had sworn to himself that if ever he found that Thenardier , he would address him only by throwing himself at his feet ; and now he actually had found him , but it was only to deliver him over to the executioner ! 
His father said to him : `` Succor Thenardier ! '' 
And he replied to that adored and sainted voice by crushing Thenardier ! 
He was about to offer to his father in his grave the spectacle of that man who had torn him from death at the peril of his own life , executed on the Place Saint-Jacques through the means of his son , of that Marius to whom he had entrusted that man by his will ! 
And what a mockery to have so long worn on his breast his father 's last commands , written in his own hand , only to act in so horribly contrary a sense ! 
But , on the other hand , now look on that trap and not prevent it ! 
Condemn the victim and to spare the assassin ! 
Could one be held to any gratitude towards so miserable a wretch ? 
All the ideas which Marius had cherished for the last four years were pierced through and through , as it were , by this unforeseen blow . 
He shuddered . 
Everything depended on him . 
Unknown to themselves , he held in his hand all those beings who were moving about there before his eyes . 
If he fired his pistol , M. Leblanc was saved , and Thenardier lost ; if he did not fire , M. Leblanc would be sacrificed , and , who knows ? 
Thenardier would escape . 
Should he dash down the one or allow the other to fall ? 
Remorse awaited him in either case . 
What was he to do ? 
What should he choose ? 
Be false to the most imperious souvenirs , to all those solemn vows to himself , to the most sacred duty , to the most venerated text ! 
Should he ignore his father 's testament , or allow the perpetration of a crime ! 
On the one hand , it seemed to him that he heard `` his Ursule '' supplicating for her father and on the other , the colonel commending Thenardier to his care . 
He felt that he was going mad . 
His knees gave way beneath him . 
And he had not even the time for deliberation , so great was the fury with which the scene before his eyes was hastening to its catastrophe . 
It was like a whirlwind of which he had thought himself the master , and which was now sweeping him away . 
He was on the verge of swooning . 
In the meantime , Thenardier , whom we shall henceforth call by no other name , was pacing up and down in front of the table in a sort of frenzy and wild triumph . 
He seized the candle in his fist , and set it on the chimney-piece with so violent a bang that the wick came near being extinguished , and the tallow bespattered the wall . 
Then he turned to M. Leblanc with a horrible look , and spit out these words : -- `` Done for ! 
Smoked brown ! 
Cooked ! 
Spitchcocked ! '' 
And again he began to march back and forth , in full eruption . 
`` Ah ! '' 
he cried , `` so I 've found you again at last , Mister philanthropist ! 
Mister threadbare millionnaire ! 
Mister giver of dolls ! 
you old ninny ! 
Ah ! 
so you do n't recognize me ! 
No , it was n't you who came to Montfermeil , to my inn , eight years ago , on Christmas eve , 1823 ! 
It was n't you who carried off that Fantine 's child from me ! 
The Lark ! 
It was n't you who had a yellow great-coat ! 
No ! 
Nor a package of duds in your hand , as you had this morning here ! 
Say , wife , it seems to be his mania to carry packets of woollen stockings into houses ! 
Old charity monger , get out with you ! 
Are you a hosier , Mister millionnaire ? 
You give away your stock in trade to the poor , holy man ! 
What bosh ! 
merry Andrew ! 
Ah ! 
and you do n't recognize me ? 
Well , I recognize you , that I do ! 
I recognized you the very moment you poked your snout in here . 
Ah ! 
you 'll find out presently , that it is n't all roses to thrust yourself in that fashion into people 's houses , under the pretext that they are taverns , in wretched clothes , with the air of a poor man , to whom one would give a sou , to deceive persons , to play the generous , to take away their means of livelihood , and to make threats in the woods , and you ca n't call things quits because afterwards , when people are ruined , you bring a coat that is too large , and two miserable hospital blankets , you old blackguard , you child-stealer ! '' 
He paused , and seemed to be talking to himself for a moment . 
One would have said that his wrath had fallen into some hole , like the Rhone ; then , as though he were concluding aloud the things which he had been saying to himself in a whisper , he smote the table with his fist , and shouted : -- `` And with his goody-goody air ! '' 
And , apostrophizing M. Leblanc : -- `` Parbleu ! 
You made game of me in the past ! 
You are the cause of all my misfortunes ! 
For fifteen hundred francs you got a girl whom I had , and who certainly belonged to rich people , and who had already brought in a great deal of money , and from whom I might have extracted enough to live on all my life ! 
A girl who would have made up to me for everything that I lost in that vile cook-shop , where there was nothing but one continual row , and where , like a fool , I ate up my last farthing ! 
Oh ! 
I wish all the wine folks drank in my house had been poison to those who drank it ! 
Well , never mind ! 
Say , now ! 
You must have thought me ridiculous when you went off with the Lark ! 
You had your cudgel in the forest . 
You were the stronger . 
Revenge . 
I 'm the one to hold the trumps to-day ! 
You 're in a sorry case , my good fellow ! 
Oh , but I can laugh ! 
Really , I laugh ! 
Did n't he fall into the trap ! 
I told him that I was an actor , that my name was Fabantou , that I had played comedy with Mamselle Mars , with Mamselle Muche , that my landlord insisted on being paid tomorrow , the 4th of February , and he did n't even notice that the 8th of January , and not the 4th of February is the time when the quarter runs out ! 
Absurd idiot ! 
And the four miserable Philippes which he has brought me ! 
Scoundrel ! 
He had n't the heart even to go as high as a hundred francs ! 
And how he swallowed my platitudes ! 
That did amuse me . 
I said to myself : ` Blockhead ! 
Come , I 've got you ! 
I lick your paws this morning , but I 'll gnaw your heart this evening ! ' '' 
Thenardier paused . 
He was out of breath . 
His little , narrow chest panted like a forge bellows . 
His eyes were full of the ignoble happiness of a feeble , cruel , and cowardly creature , which finds that it can , at last , harass what it has feared , and insult what it has flattered , the joy of a dwarf who should be able to set his heel on the head of Goliath , the joy of a jackal which is beginning to rend a sick bull , so nearly dead that he can no longer defend himself , but sufficiently alive to suffer still . 
M. Leblanc did not interrupt him , but said to him when he paused : -- `` I do not know what you mean to say . 
You are mistaken in me . 
I am a very poor man , and anything but a millionnaire . 
I do not know you . 
You are mistaking me for some other person . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
roared Thenardier hoarsely , `` a pretty lie ! 
You stick to that pleasantry , do you ! 
You 're floundering , my old buck ! 
Ah ! 
You do n't remember ! 
You do n't see who I am ? '' 
`` Excuse me , sir , '' said M. Leblanc with a politeness of accent , which at that moment seemed peculiarly strange and powerful , `` I see that you are a villain ! '' 
Who has not remarked the fact that odious creatures possess a susceptibility of their own , that monsters are ticklish ! 
