The man who was walking in a bent attitude was an ex-convict , and what he was dragging on his shoulders was a corpse . 
Assassination caught in the very act , if ever there was such a thing . 
As for the theft , that is understood ; one does not kill a man gratis . 
This convict was on his way to fling the body into the river . 
One fact is to be noticed , that before reaching the exit grating , this convict , who had come a long distance in the sewer , must , necessarily , have encountered a frightful quagmire where it seems as though he might have left the body , but the sewermen would have found the assassinated man the very next day , while at work on the quagmire , and that did not suit the assassin 's plans . 
He had preferred to traverse that quagmire with his burden , and his exertions must have been terrible , for it is impossible to risk one 's life more completely ; I do n't understand how he could have come out of that alive . '' 
Marius ' chair approached still nearer . 
Thenardier took advantage of this to draw a long breath . 
He went on : `` Monsieur le Baron , a sewer is not the Champ de Mars . 
One lacks everything there , even room . 
When two men are there , they must meet . 
That is what happened . 
The man domiciled there and the passer-by were forced to bid each other good-day , greatly to the regret of both . 
The passer-by said to the inhabitant : -- `` You see what I have on my back , I must get out , you have the key , give it to me . '' 
That convict was a man of terrible strength . 
There was no way of refusing . 
Nevertheless , the man who had the key parleyed , simply to gain time . 
He examined the dead man , but he could see nothing , except that the latter was young , well dressed , with the air of being rich , and all disfigured with blood . 
While talking , the man contrived to tear and pull off behind , without the assassin perceiving it , a bit of the assassinated man 's coat . 
A document for conviction , you understand ; a means of recovering the trace of things and of bringing home the crime to the criminal . 
He put this document for conviction in his pocket . 
After which he opened the grating , made the man go out with his embarrassment on his back , closed the grating again , and ran off , not caring to be mixed up with the remainder of the adventure and above all , not wishing to be present when the assassin threw the assassinated man into the river . 
Now you comprehend . 
The man who was carrying the corpse was Jean Valjean ; the one who had the key is speaking to you at this moment ; and the piece of the coat ... '' Thenardier completed his phrase by drawing from his pocket , and holding , on a level with his eyes , nipped between his two thumbs and his two forefingers , a strip of torn black cloth , all covered with dark spots . 
Marius had sprung to his feet , pale , hardly able to draw his breath , with his eyes riveted on the fragment of black cloth , and , without uttering a word , without taking his eyes from that fragment , he retreated to the wall and fumbled with his right hand along the wall for a key which was in the lock of a cupboard near the chimney . 
He found the key , opened the cupboard , plunged his arm into it without looking , and without his frightened gaze quitting the rag which Thenardier still held outspread . 
But Thenardier continued : `` Monsieur le Baron , I have the strongest of reasons for believing that the assassinated young man was an opulent stranger lured into a trap by Jean Valjean , and the bearer of an enormous sum of money . '' 
`` The young man was myself , and here is the coat ! '' 
cried Marius , and he flung upon the floor an old black coat all covered with blood . 
Then , snatching the fragment from the hands of Thenardier , he crouched down over the coat , and laid the torn morsel against the tattered skirt . 
The rent fitted exactly , and the strip completed the coat . 
Thenardier was petrified . 
This is what he thought : `` I 'm struck all of a heap . '' 
Marius rose to his feet trembling , despairing , radiant . 
He fumbled in his pocket and stalked furiously to Thenardier , presenting to him and almost thrusting in his face his fist filled with bank-notes for five hundred and a thousand francs . 
`` You are an infamous wretch ! 
you are a liar , a calumniator , a villain . 
You came to accuse that man , you have only justified him ; you wanted to ruin him , you have only succeeded in glorifying him . 
And it is you who are the thief ! 
And it is you who are the assassin ! 
I saw you , Thenardier Jondrette , in that lair on the Rue de l'Hopital . 
I know enough about you to send you to the galleys and even further if I choose . 
Here are a thousand francs , bully that you are ! '' 
And he flung a thousand franc note at Thenardier . 
`` Ah ! 
Jondrette Thenardier , vile rascal ! 
Let this serve you as a lesson , you dealer in second-hand secrets , merchant of mysteries , rummager of the shadows , wretch ! 
Take these five hundred francs and get out of here ! 
Waterloo protects you . '' 
`` Waterloo ! '' 
growled Thenardier , pocketing the five hundred francs along with the thousand . 
`` Yes , assassin ! 
You there saved the life of a Colonel ... '' `` Of a General , '' said Thenardier , elevating his head . 
`` Of a Colonel ! '' 
repeated Marius in a rage . 
`` I would n't give a ha ` penny for a general . 
And you come here to commit infamies ! 
I tell you that you have committed all crimes . 
Go ! 
disappear ! 
Only be happy , that is all that I desire . 
Ah ! 
monster ! 
here are three thousand francs more . 
Take them . 
You will depart to-morrow , for America , with your daughter ; for your wife is dead , you abominable liar . 
I shall watch over your departure , you ruffian , and at that moment I will count out to you twenty thousand francs . 
Go get yourself hung elsewhere ! '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron ! '' 
replied Thenardier , bowing to the very earth , `` eternal gratitude . '' 
And Thenardier left the room , understanding nothing , stupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacks of gold , and with that thunder which had burst forth over his head in bank-bills . 
Struck by lightning he was , but he was also content ; and he would have been greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off such lightning as that . 
Let us finish with this man at once . 
Two days after the events which we are at this moment narrating , he set out , thanks to Marius ' care , for America under a false name , with his daughter Azelma , furnished with a draft on New York for twenty thousand francs . 
The moral wretchedness of Thenardier , the bourgeois who had missed his vocation , was irremediable . 
He was in America what he had been in Europe . 
Contact with an evil man sometimes suffices to corrupt a good action and to cause evil things to spring from it . 
With Marius ' money , Thenardier set up as a slave-dealer . 
As soon as Thenardier had left the house , Marius rushed to the garden , where Cosette was still walking . 
`` Cosette ! 
Cosette ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Come ! 
come quick ! 
Let us go . 
Basque , a carriage ! 
Cosette , come . 
Ah ! 
My God ! 
It was he who saved my life ! 
Let us not lose a minute ! 
Put on your shawl . '' 
Cosette thought him mad and obeyed . 
He could not breathe , he laid his hand on his heart to restrain its throbbing . 
He paced back and forth with huge strides , he embraced Cosette : `` Ah ! 
Cosette ! 
I am an unhappy wretch ! '' 
said he . 
Marius was bewildered . 
He began to catch a glimpse in Jean Valjean of some indescribably lofty and melancholy figure . 
An unheard-of virtue , supreme and sweet , humble in its immensity , appeared to him . 
The convict was transfigured into Christ . 
Marius was dazzled by this prodigy . 
He did not know precisely what he beheld , but it was grand . 
In an instant , a hackney-carriage stood in front of the door . 
Marius helped Cosette in and darted in himself . 
`` Driver , '' said he , `` Rue de l'Homme Arme , Number 7 . '' 
The carriage drove off . 
`` Ah ! 
what happiness ! '' 
ejaculated Cosette . 
`` Rue de l'Homme Arme , I did not dare to speak to you of that . 
We are going to see M. Jean . '' 
`` Thy father ! 
Cosette , thy father more than ever . 
Cosette , I guess it . 
You told me that you had never received the letter that I sent you by Gavroche . 
It must have fallen into his hands . 
Cosette , he went to the barricade to save me . 
As it is a necessity with him to be an angel , he saved others also ; he saved Javert . 
He rescued me from that gulf to give me to you . 
He carried me on his back through that frightful sewer . 
Ah ! 
I am a monster of ingratitude . 
Cosette , after having been your providence , he became mine . 
Just imagine , there was a terrible quagmire enough to drown one a hundred times over , to drown one in mire . 
Cosette ! 
he made me traverse it . 
I was unconscious ; I saw nothing , I heard nothing , I could know nothing of my own adventure . 
We are going to bring him back , to take him with us , whether he is willing or not , he shall never leave us again . 
If only he is at home ! 
Provided only that we can find him , I will pass the rest of my life in venerating him . 
Yes , that is how it should be , do you see , Cosette ? 
Gavroche must have delivered my letter to him . 
All is explained . 
You understand . '' 
Cosette did not understand a word . 
`` You are right , '' she said to him . 
Meanwhile the carriage rolled on . 
A NIGHT BEHIND WHICH THERE IS DAY Jean Valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door . 
`` Come in , '' he said feebly . 
The door opened . 
Cosette and Marius made their appearance . 
Cosette rushed into the room . 
Marius remained on the threshold , leaning against the jamb of the door . 
`` Cosette ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
And he sat erect in his chair , his arms outstretched and trembling , haggard , livid , gloomy , an immense joy in his eyes . 
Cosette , stifling with emotion , fell upon Jean Valjean 's breast . 
`` Father ! '' 
said she . 
Jean Valjean , overcome , stammered : `` Cosette ! 
she ! 
you ! 
Madame ! 
it is thou ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! '' 
And , pressed close in Cosette 's arms , he exclaimed : `` It is thou ! 
thou art here ! 
Thou dost pardon me then ! '' 
Marius , lowering his eyelids , in order to keep his tears from flowing , took a step forward and murmured between lips convulsively contracted to repress his sobs : `` My father ! '' 
`` And you also , you pardon me ! '' 
Jean Valjean said to him . 
Marius could find no words , and Jean Valjean added : `` Thanks . '' 
Cosette tore off her shawl and tossed her hat on the bed . 
`` It embarrasses me , '' said she . 
And , seating herself on the old man 's knees , she put aside his white locks with an adorable movement , and kissed his brow . 
Jean Valjean , bewildered , let her have her own way . 
Cosette , who only understood in a very confused manner , redoubled her caresses , as though she desired to pay Marius ' debt . 
Jean Valjean stammered : `` How stupid people are ! 
I thought that I should never see her again . 
Imagine , Monsieur Pontmercy , at the very moment when you entered , I was saying to myself : ` All is over . 
Here is her little gown , I am a miserable man , I shall never see Cosette again , ' and I was saying that at the very moment when you were mounting the stairs . 
Was not I an idiot ? 
Just see how idiotic one can be ! 
One reckons without the good God . 
The good God says : '' ` You fancy that you are about to be abandoned , stupid ! 
No . 
No , things will not go so . 
Come , there is a good man yonder who is in need of an angel . ' 
And the angel comes , and one sees one 's Cosette again ! 
and one sees one 's little Cosette once more ! 
Ah ! 
I was very unhappy . '' 
For a moment he could not speak , then he went on : `` I really needed to see Cosette a little bit now and then . 
A heart needs a bone to gnaw . 
But I was perfectly conscious that I was in the way . 
I gave myself reasons : ` They do not want you , keep in your own course , one has not the right to cling eternally . ' 
Ah ! 
God be praised , I see her once more ! 
Dost thou know , Cosette , thy husband is very handsome ? 
Ah ! 
what a pretty embroidered collar thou hast on , luckily . 
I am fond of that pattern . 
It was thy husband who chose it , was it not ? 
And then , thou shouldst have some cashmere shawls . 
Let me call her thou , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
It will not be for long . '' 
And Cosette began again : `` How wicked of you to have left us like that ! 
Where did you go ? 
Why have you stayed away so long ? 
Formerly your journeys only lasted three or four days . 
I sent Nicolette , the answer always was : ` He is absent . ' 
How long have you been back ? 
Why did you not let us know ? 
Do you know that you are very much changed ? 
Ah ! 
what a naughty father ! 
he has been ill , and we have not known it ! 
Stay , Marius , feel how cold his hand is ! '' 
`` So you are here ! 
Monsieur Pontmercy , you pardon me ! '' 
repeated Jean Valjean . 
At that word which Jean Valjean had just uttered once more , all that was swelling Marius ' heart found vent . 
He burst forth : `` Cosette , do you hear ? 
he has come to that ! 
he asks my forgiveness ! 
And do you know what he has done for me , Cosette ? 
He has saved my life . 
He has done more -- he has given you to me . 
And after having saved me , and after having given you to me , Cosette , what has he done with himself ? 
He has sacrificed himself . 
Behold the man . 
And he says to me the ingrate , to me the forgetful , to me the pitiless , to me the guilty one : Thanks ! 
Cosette , my whole life passed at the feet of this man would be too little . 
That barricade , that sewer , that furnace , that cesspool , -- all that he traversed for me , for thee , Cosette ! 
He carried me away through all the deaths which he put aside before me , and accepted for himself . 
Every courage , every virtue , every heroism , every sanctity he possesses ! 
Cosette , that man is an angel ! '' 
`` Hush ! 
hush ! '' 
said Jean Valjean in a low voice . 
`` Why tell all that ? '' 
`` But you ! '' 
cried Marius with a wrath in which there was veneration , `` why did you not tell it to me ? 
It is your own fault , too . 
You save people 's lives , and you conceal it from them ! 
You do more , under the pretext of unmasking yourself , you calumniate yourself . 
It is frightful . '' 
`` I told the truth , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` No , '' retorted Marius , `` the truth is the whole truth ; and that you did not tell . 
You were Monsieur Madeleine , why not have said so ? 
You saved Javert , why not have said so ? 
I owed my life to you , why not have said so ? '' 
`` Because I thought as you do . 
I thought that you were in the right . 
It was necessary that I should go away . 
If you had known about that affair , of the sewer , you would have made me remain near you . 
I was therefore forced to hold my peace . 
If I had spoken , it would have caused embarrassment in every way . '' 
`` It would have embarrassed what ? 
embarrassed whom ? '' 
retorted Marius . 
`` Do you think that you are going to stay here ? 
We shall carry you off . 
Ah ! 
good heavens ! 
when I reflect that it was by an accident that I have learned all this . 
You form a part of ourselves . 
You are her father , and mine . 
You shall not pass another day in this dreadful house . 
Do not imagine that you will be here to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I shall not be here , but I shall not be with you . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
replied Marius . 
`` Ah ! 
come now , we are not going to permit any more journeys . 
You shall never leave us again . 
You belong to us . 
We shall not loose our hold of you . '' 
`` This time it is for good , '' added Cosette . 
`` We have a carriage at the door . 
I shall run away with you . 
If necessary , I shall employ force . '' 
And she laughingly made a movement to lift the old man in her arms . 
`` Your chamber still stands ready in our house , '' she went on . 
`` If you only knew how pretty the garden is now ! 
The azaleas are doing very well there . 
The walks are sanded with river sand ; there are tiny violet shells . 
You shall eat my strawberries . 
I water them myself . 
And no more ` madame , ' no more ` Monsieur Jean , ' we are living under a Republic , everybody says thou , do n't they , Marius ? 
The programme is changed . 
If you only knew , father , I have had a sorrow , there was a robin redbreast which had made her nest in a hole in the wall , and a horrible cat ate her . 
My poor , pretty , little robin red-breast which used to put her head out of her window and look at me ! 
I cried over it . 
I should have liked to kill the cat . 
But now nobody cries any more . 
Everybody laughs , everybody is happy . 
You are going to come with us . 
How delighted grandfather will be ! 
You shall have your plot in the garden , you shall cultivate it , and we shall see whether your strawberries are as fine as mine . 
And , then , I shall do everything that you wish , and then , you will obey me prettily . '' 
Jean Valjean listened to her without hearing her . 
He heard the music of her voice rather than the sense of her words ; one of those large tears which are the sombre pearls of the soul welled up slowly in his eyes . 
He murmured : `` The proof that God is good is that she is here . '' 
`` Father ! '' 
said Cosette . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` It is quite true that it would be charming for us to live together . 
Their trees are full of birds . 
I would walk with Cosette . 
It is sweet to be among living people who bid each other ` good-day , ' who call to each other in the garden . 
People see each other from early morning . 
We should each cultivate our own little corner . 
She would make me eat her strawberries . 
I would make her gather my roses . 
That would be charming . 
Only ... '' He paused and said gently : `` It is a pity . '' 
The tear did not fall , it retreated , and Jean Valjean replaced it with a smile . 
Cosette took both the old man 's hands in hers . 
`` My God ! '' 
said she , `` your hands are still colder than before . 
Are you ill ? 
Do you suffer ? '' 
`` I ? 
No , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` I am very well . 
Only ... '' He paused . 
`` Only what ? '' 
`` I am going to die presently . '' 
Cosette and Marius shuddered . 
`` To die ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
`` Yes , but that is nothing , '' said Jean Valjean . 
He took breath , smiled and resumed : `` Cosette , thou wert talking to me , go on , so thy little robin red-breast is dead ? 
Speak , so that I may hear thy voice . '' 
Marius gazed at the old man in amazement . 
Cosette uttered a heartrending cry . 
`` Father ! 
my father ! 
you will live . 
You are going to live . 
I insist upon your living , do you hear ? '' 
Jean Valjean raised his head towards her with adoration . 
`` Oh ! 
yes , forbid me to die . 
Who knows ? 
Perhaps I shall obey . 
I was on the verge of dying when you came . 
That stopped me , it seemed to me that I was born again . '' 
`` You are full of strength and life , '' cried Marius . 
`` Do you imagine that a person can die like this ? 
You have had sorrow , you shall have no more . 
It is I who ask your forgiveness , and on my knees ! 
You are going to live , and to live with us , and to live a long time . 
We take possession of you once more . 
There are two of us here who will henceforth have no other thought than your happiness . '' 
`` You see , '' resumed Cosette , all bathed in tears , `` that Marius says that you shall not die . '' 
Jean Valjean continued to smile . 
`` Even if you were to take possession of me , Monsieur Pontmercy , would that make me other than I am ? 
No , God has thought like you and myself , and he does not change his mind ; it is useful for me to go . 
Death is a good arrangement . 
God knows better than we what we need . 
May you be happy , may Monsieur Pontmercy have Cosette , may youth wed the morning , may there be around you , my children , lilacs and nightingales ; may your life be a beautiful , sunny lawn , may all the enchantments of heaven fill your souls , and now let me , who am good for nothing , die ; it is certain that all this is right . 
Come , be reasonable , nothing is possible now , I am fully conscious that all is over . 
And then , last night , I drank that whole jug of water . 
How good thy husband is , Cosette ! 
Thou art much better off with him than with me . '' 
A noise became audible at the door . 
It was the doctor entering . 
`` Good-day , and farewell , doctor , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Here are my poor children . '' 
Marius stepped up to the doctor . 
He addressed to him only this single word : `` Monsieur ? 
... '' But his manner of pronouncing it contained a complete question . 
The doctor replied to the question by an expressive glance . 
`` Because things are not agreeable , '' said Jean Valjean , `` that is no reason for being unjust towards God . '' 
A silence ensued . 
All breasts were oppressed . 
Jean Valjean turned to Cosette . 
He began to gaze at her as though he wished to retain her features for eternity . 
In the depths of the shadow into which he had already descended , ecstasy was still possible to him when gazing at Cosette . 
The reflection of that sweet face lighted up his pale visage . 
The doctor felt of his pulse . 
`` Ah ! 
it was you that he wanted ! '' 
he murmured , looking at Cosette and Marius . 
And bending down to Marius ' ear , he added in a very low voice : `` Too late . '' 
Jean Valjean surveyed the doctor and Marius serenely , almost without ceasing to gaze at Cosette . 
These barely articulate words were heard to issue from his mouth : `` It is nothing to die ; it is dreadful not to live . '' 
All at once he rose to his feet . 
These accesses of strength are sometimes the sign of the death agony . 
He walked with a firm step to the wall , thrusting aside Marius and the doctor who tried to help him , detached from the wall a little copper crucifix which was suspended there , and returned to his seat with all the freedom of movement of perfect health , and said in a loud voice , as he laid the crucifix on the table : `` Behold the great martyr . '' 
Then his chest sank in , his head wavered , as though the intoxication of the tomb were seizing hold upon him . 
His hands , which rested on his knees , began to press their nails into the stuff of his trousers . 
Cosette supported his shoulders , and sobbed , and tried to speak to him , but could not . 
Among the words mingled with that mournful saliva which accompanies tears , they distinguished words like the following : `` Father , do not leave us . 
Is it possible that we have found you only to lose you again ? '' 
It might be said that agony writhes . 
It goes , comes , advances towards the sepulchre , and returns towards life . 
There is groping in the action of dying . 
Jean Valjean rallied after this semi-swoon , shook his brow as though to make the shadows fall away from it and became almost perfectly lucid once more . 
He took a fold of Cosette 's sleeve and kissed it . 
`` He is coming back ! 
doctor , he is coming back , '' cried Marius . 
`` You are good , both of you , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` I am going to tell you what has caused me pain . 
What has pained me , Monsieur Pontmercy , is that you have not been willing to touch that money . 
That money really belongs to your wife . 
I will explain to you , my children , and for that reason , also , I am glad to see you . 
Black jet comes from England , white jet comes from Norway . 
All this is in this paper , which you will read . 
For bracelets , I invented a way of substituting for slides of soldered sheet iron , slides of iron laid together . 
It is prettier , better and less costly . 
You will understand how much money can be made in that way . 
So Cosette 's fortune is really hers . 
I give you these details , in order that your mind may be set at rest . '' 
The portress had come upstairs and was gazing in at the half-open door . 
The doctor dismissed her . 
But he could not prevent this zealous woman from exclaiming to the dying man before she disappeared : `` Would you like a priest ? '' 
`` I have had one , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
And with his finger he seemed to indicate a point above his head where one would have said that he saw some one . 
It is probable , in fact , that the Bishop was present at this death agony . 
Cosette gently slipped a pillow under his loins . 
Jean Valjean resumed : `` Have no fear , Monsieur Pontmercy , I adjure you . 
The six hundred thousand francs really belong to Cosette . 
My life will have been wasted if you do not enjoy them ! 
We managed to do very well with those glass goods . 
We rivalled what is called Berlin jewellery . 
However , we could not equal the black glass of England . 
A gross , which contains twelve hundred very well cut grains , only costs three francs . '' 
When a being who is dear to us is on the point of death , we gaze upon him with a look which clings convulsively to him and which would fain hold him back . 
Cosette gave her hand to Marius , and both , mute with anguish , not knowing what to say to the dying man , stood trembling and despairing before him . 
Jean Valjean sank moment by moment . 
He was failing ; he was drawing near to the gloomy horizon . 
His breath had become intermittent ; a little rattling interrupted it . 
He found some difficulty in moving his forearm , his feet had lost all movement , and in proportion as the wretchedness of limb and feebleness of body increased , all the majesty of his soul was displayed and spread over his brow . 
The light of the unknown world was already visible in his eyes . 
His face paled and smiled . 
Life was no longer there , it was something else . 
His breath sank , his glance grew grander . 
He was a corpse on which the wings could be felt . 
He made a sign to Cosette to draw near , then to Marius ; the last minute of the last hour had , evidently , arrived . 
He began to speak to them in a voice so feeble that it seemed to come from a distance , and one would have said that a wall now rose between them and him . 
`` Draw near , draw near , both of you . 
I love you dearly . 
Oh ! 
how good it is to die like this ! 
And thou lovest me also , my Cosette . 
I knew well that thou still felt friendly towards thy poor old man . 
How kind it was of thee to place that pillow under my loins ! 
Thou wilt weep for me a little , wilt thou not ? 
Not too much . 
I do not wish thee to have any real griefs . 
You must enjoy yourselves a great deal , my children . 
I forgot to tell you that the profit was greater still on the buckles without tongues than on all the rest . 
A gross of a dozen dozens cost ten francs and sold for sixty . 
It really was a good business . 
So there is no occasion for surprise at the six hundred thousand francs , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
It is honest money . 
You may be rich with a tranquil mind . 
Thou must have a carriage , a box at the theatres now and then , and handsome ball dresses , my Cosette , and then , thou must give good dinners to thy friends , and be very happy . 
I was writing to Cosette a while ago . 
She will find my letter . 
I bequeath to her the two candlesticks which stand on the chimney-piece . 
They are of silver , but to me they are gold , they are diamonds ; they change candles which are placed in them into wax-tapers . 
I do not know whether the person who gave them to me is pleased with me yonder on high . 
I have done what I could . 
My children , you will not forget that I am a poor man , you will have me buried in the first plot of earth that you find , under a stone to mark the spot . 
This is my wish . 
No name on the stone . 
If Cosette cares to come for a little while now and then , it will give me pleasure . 
And you too , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
I must admit that I have not always loved you . 
I ask your pardon for that . 
Now she and you form but one for me . 
I feel very grateful to you . 
I am sure that you make Cosette happy . 
If you only knew , Monsieur Pontmercy , her pretty rosy cheeks were my delight ; when I saw her in the least pale , I was sad . 
In the chest of drawers , there is a bank-bill for five hundred francs . 
I have not touched it . 
It is for the poor . 
Cosette , dost thou see thy little gown yonder on the bed ? 
dost thou recognize it ? 
That was ten years ago , however . 
How time flies ! 
We have been very happy . 
All is over . 
Do not weep , my children , I am not going very far , I shall see you from there , you will only have to look at night , and you will see me smile . 
Cosette , dost thou remember Montfermeil ? 
Thou wert in the forest , thou wert greatly terrified ; dost thou remember how I took hold of the handle of the water-bucket ? 
That was the first time that I touched thy poor , little hand . 
It was so cold ! 
Ah ! 
your hands were red then , mademoiselle , they are very white now . 
And the big doll ! 
dost thou remember ? 
Thou didst call her Catherine . 
Thou regrettedest not having taken her to the convent ! 
How thou didst make me laugh sometimes , my sweet angel ! 
When it had been raining , thou didst float bits of straw on the gutters , and watch them pass away . 
One day I gave thee a willow battledore and a shuttlecock with yellow , blue and green feathers . 
Thou hast forgotten it . 
Thou wert roguish so young ! 
Thou didst play . 
Thou didst put cherries in thy ears . 
Those are things of the past . 
The forests through which one has passed with one 's child , the trees under which one has strolled , the convents where one has concealed oneself , the games , the hearty laughs of childhood , are shadows . 
I imagined that all that belonged to me . 
