Homer would have come thither to laugh with Perrault ; and there was in that black garden , youth , health , noise , cries , giddiness , pleasure , happiness enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses , those of the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale , those of the throne as well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand . 
In that house more than anywhere else , perhaps , arise those children 's sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of thoughtfulness . 
It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of five years exclaimed one day : `` Mother ! 
one of the big girls has just told me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remain here . 
What happiness ! '' 
It was here , too , that this memorable dialogue took place : -- A Vocal Mother . 
Why are you weeping , my child ? 
The child -LRB- aged six -RRB- . 
I told Alix that I knew my French history . 
She says that I do not know it , but I do . 
Alix , the big girl -LRB- aged nine -RRB- . 
No ; she does not know it . 
The Mother . 
How is that , my child ? 
Alix . 
She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any question in the book , and she would answer it . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` She did not answer it . '' 
`` Let us see about it . 
What did you ask her ? '' 
`` I opened the book at random , as she proposed , and I put the first question that I came across . '' 
`` And what was the question ? '' 
`` It was , ` What happened after that ? ' '' 
It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder : -- `` How well bred ! 
it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just like a person ! '' 
It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once picked up a confession which had been written out in advance , in order that she might not forget it , by a sinner of seven years : -- `` Father , I accuse myself of having been avaricious . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having been an adulteress . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen . '' 
It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six years of age improvised the following tale , which was listened to by blue eyes aged four and five years : -- `` There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a great many flowers . 
They plucked the flowers and put them in their pockets . 
After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their playthings . 
There was a wolf in that country ; there was a great deal of forest ; and the wolf was in the forest ; and he ate the little cocks . '' 
And this other poem : -- `` There came a blow with a stick . 
`` It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat . 
`` It was not good for her ; it hurt her . 
`` Then a lady put Punchinello in prison . '' 
It was there that a little abandoned child , a foundling whom the convent was bringing up out of charity , uttered this sweet and heart-breaking saying . 
She heard the others talking of their mothers , and she murmured in her corner : -- `` As for me , my mother was not there when I was born ! '' 
There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through the corridors with her bunch of keys , and whose name was Sister Agatha . 
The big big girls -- those over ten years of age -- called her Agathocles . 
The refectory , a large apartment of an oblong square form , which received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden , was dark and damp , and , as the children say , full of beasts . 
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects . 
Each of its four corners had received , in the language of the pupils , a special and expressive name . 
There was Spider corner , Caterpillar corner , Wood-louse corner , and Cricket corner . 
Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed . 
It was not so cold there as elsewhere . 
From the refectory the names had passed to the boarding-school , and there served as in the old College Mazarin to distinguish four nations . 
Every pupil belonged to one of these four nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at meals . 
One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he was passing . 
He inquired of another pupil , a charming brunette with rosy cheeks , who stood near him : -- `` Who is that ? '' 
`` She is a spider , Monseigneur . '' 
`` Bah ! 
And that one yonder ? '' 
`` She is a cricket . '' 
`` And that one ? '' 
`` She is a caterpillar . '' 
`` Really ! 
and yourself ? '' 
`` I am a wood-louse , Monseigneur . '' 
Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities . 
At the beginning of this century Ecouen was one of those strict and graceful places where young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august . 
At Ecouen , in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament , a distinction was made between virgins and florists . 
There were also the `` dais '' and the `` censors , '' -- the first who held the cords of the dais , and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament . 
The flowers belonged by right to the florists . 
Four `` virgins '' walked in advance . 
On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory , `` Who is a virgin ? '' 
Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a `` little one '' of seven years , to a `` big girl '' of sixteen , who took the head of the procession , while she , the little one , remained at the rear , `` You are a virgin , but I am not . '' 
DISTRACTIONS Above the door of the refectory this prayer , which was called the white Paternoster , and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to paradise , was inscribed in large black letters : -- `` Little white Paternoster , which God made , which God said , which God placed in paradise . 
In the evening , when I went to bed , I found three angels sitting on my bed , one at the foot , two at the head , the good Virgin Mary in the middle , who told me to lie down without hesitation . 
The good God is my father , the good Virgin is my mother , the three apostles are my brothers , the three virgins are my sisters . 
The shirt in which God was born envelopes my body ; Saint Margaret 's cross is written on my breast . 
Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows , weeping for God , when she met M. Saint John . 
` Monsieur Saint John , whence come you ? ' 
` I come from Ave Salus . ' 
` You have not seen the good God ; where is he ? ' 
` He is on the tree of the Cross , his feet hanging , his hands nailed , a little cap of white thorns on his head . ' 
Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide , thrice in the morning , shall win paradise at the last . '' 
In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under a triple coating of daubing paint . 
At the present time it is finally disappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then , and who are old women now . 
A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this refectory , whose only door , as we think we have mentioned , opened on the garden . 
Two narrow tables , each flanked by two wooden benches , formed two long parallel lines from one end to the other of the refectory . 
The walls were white , the tables were black ; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety in convents . 
The meals were plain , and the food of the children themselves severe . 
A single dish of meat and vegetables combined , or salt fish -- such was their luxury . 
This meagre fare , which was reserved for the pupils alone , was , nevertheless , an exception . 
The children ate in silence , under the eye of the mother whose turn it was , who , if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against the rule , opened and shut a wooden book from time to time . 
This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints , read aloud from a little pulpit with a desk , which was situated at the foot of the crucifix . 
The reader was one of the big girls , in weekly turn . 
At regular distances , on the bare tables , there were large , varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives and forks , and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or spoiled fish ; this was punished . 
These bowls were called ronds d'eau . 
The child who broke the silence `` made a cross with her tongue . '' 
Where ? 
On the ground . 
She licked the pavement . 
The dust , that end of all joys , was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of chirping . 
There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as a unique copy , and which it is forbidden to read . 
It is the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate . 
Nemo regulas , seu constitutiones nostras , externis communicabit . 
The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book , and set to reading it with avidity , a reading which was often interrupted by the fear of being caught , which caused them to close the volume precipitately . 
From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate amount of pleasure . 
The most `` interesting thing '' they found were some unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys . 
They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby fruit-trees . 
In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of the punishments administered , when the wind had shaken the trees , they sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or an inhabited pear on the sly . 
I will now cede the privilege of speech to a letter which lies before me , a letter written five and twenty years ago by an old pupil , now Madame la Duchesse de -- one of the most elegant women in Paris . 
I quote literally : `` One hides one 's pear or one 's apple as best one may . 
When one goes up stairs to put the veil on the bed before supper , one stuffs them under one 's pillow and at night one eats them in bed , and when one can not do that , one eats them in the closet . '' 
That was one of their greatest luxuries . 
Once -- it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the convent -- one of the young girls , Mademoiselle Bouchard , who was connected with the Montmorency family , laid a wager that she would ask for a day 's leave of absence -- an enormity in so austere a community . 
The wager was accepted , but not one of those who bet believed that she would do it . 
When the moment came , as the archbishop was passing in front of the pupils , Mademoiselle Bouchard , to the indescribable terror of her companions , stepped out of the ranks , and said , `` Monseigneur , a day 's leave of absence . '' 
Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall , blooming , with the prettiest little rosy face in the world . 
M. de Quelen smiled and said , `` What , my dear child , a day 's leave of absence ! 
Three days if you like . 
I grant you three days . '' 
The prioress could do nothing ; the archbishop had spoken . 
Horror of the convent , but joy of the pupil . 
The effect may be imagined . 
This stern cloister was not so well walled off , however , but that the life of the passions of the outside world , drama , and even romance , did not make their way in . 
To prove this , we will confine ourselves to recording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact , which , however , bears no reference in itself to , and is not connected by any thread whatever with the story which we are relating . 
We mention the fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in the reader 's mind . 
About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was not a nun , who was treated with great respect , and who was addressed as Madame Albertine . 
Nothing was known about her , save that she was mad , and that in the world she passed for dead . 
Beneath this history it was said there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a great marriage . 
This woman , hardly thirty years of age , of dark complexion and tolerably pretty , had a vague look in her large black eyes . 
Could she see ? 
There was some doubt about this . 
She glided rather than walked , she never spoke ; it was not quite known whether she breathed . 
Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh . 
To touch her hand was like touching snow . 
She possessed a strange spectral grace . 
Wherever she entered , people felt cold . 
One day a sister , on seeing her pass , said to another sister , `` She passes for a dead woman . '' 
`` Perhaps she is one , '' replied the other . 
A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine . 
This arose from the eternal curiosity of the pupils . 
In the chapel there was a gallery called L'OEil de Boeuf . 
It was in this gallery , which had only a circular bay , an oeil de boeuf , that Madame Albertine listened to the offices . 
She always occupied it alone because this gallery , being on the level of the first story , the preacher or the officiating priest could be seen , which was interdicted to the nuns . 
One day the pulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank , M. Le Duc de Rohan , peer of France , officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de Leon , and who died afterward , in 1830 , as cardinal and Archbishop of Besancon . 
It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent . 
Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services . 
That day , as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan , she half rose , and said , in a loud voice , amid the silence of the chapel , `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
The whole community turned their heads in amazement , the preacher raised his eyes , but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility . 
A breath from the outer world , a flash of life , had passed for an instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished , and the mad woman had become a corpse again . 
Those two words , however , had set every one in the convent who had the privilege of speech to chattering . 
How many things were contained in that `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
what revelations ! 
M. de Rohan 's name really was Auguste . 
It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very highest society , since she knew M. de Rohan , and that her own rank there was of the highest , since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a lord , and that there existed between them some connection , of relationship , perhaps , but a very close one in any case , since she knew his `` pet name . '' 
Two very severe duchesses , Mesdames de Choiseul and de Serent , often visited the community , whither they penetrated , no doubt , in virtue of the privilege Magnates mulieres , and caused great consternation in the boarding-school . 
When these two old ladies passed by , all the poor young girls trembled and dropped their eyes . 
Moreover , M. de Rohan , quite unknown to himself , was an object of attention to the school-girls . 
At that epoch he had just been made , while waiting for the episcopate , vicar-general of the Archbishop of Paris . 
It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus . 
Not one of the young recluses could see him , because of the serge curtain , but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice , which they had come to know and to distinguish . 
He had been a mousquetaire , and then , he was said to be very coquettish , that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed in a roll around his head , and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent moire , and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the world . 
He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen years . 
Not a sound from without made its way into the convent . 
But there was one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither . 
This was an event , and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall it . 
It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood . 
This flute always played the same air , an air which is very far away nowadays , -- `` My Zetulbe , come reign o'er my soul , '' -- and it was heard two or three times a day . 
The young girls passed hours in listening to it , the vocal mothers were upset by it , brains were busy , punishments descended in showers . 
This lasted for several months . 
The girls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician . 
Each one dreamed that she was Zetulbe . 
The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the Rue Droit-Mur ; and they would have given anything , compromised everything , attempted anything for the sake of seeing , of catching a glance , if only for a second , of the `` young man '' who played that flute so deliciously , and who , no doubt , played on all these souls at the same time . 
There were some who made their escape by a back door , and ascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side , in order to attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps . 
Impossible ! 
One even went so far as to thrust her arm through the grating , and to wave her white handkerchief . 
Two were still bolder . 
They found means to climb on a roof , and risked their lives there , and succeeded at last in seeing `` the young man . '' 
He was an old emigre gentleman , blind and penniless , who was playing his flute in his attic , in order to pass the time . 
THE LITTLE CONVENT In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly distinct buildings , -- the Great Convent , inhabited by the nuns , the Boarding-school , where the scholars were lodged ; and lastly , what was called the Little Convent . 
It was a building with a garden , in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders , the relics of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution ; a reunion of all the black , gray , and white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties ; what might be called , if such a coupling of words is permissible , a sort of harlequin convent . 
When the Empire was established , all these poor old dispersed and exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines . 
The government paid them a small pension , the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received them cordially . 
It was a singular pell-mell . 
Each followed her own rule , Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed , as a great recreation , to pay them a visit ; the result is , that all those young memories have retained among other souvenirs that of Mother Sainte-Bazile , Mother Sainte-Scolastique , and Mother Jacob . 
One of these refugees found herself almost at home . 
She was a nun of Sainte-Aure , the only one of her order who had survived . 
The ancient convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied , at the beginning of the eighteenth century , this very house of the Petit-Picpus , which belonged later to the Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
This holy woman , too poor to wear the magnificent habit of her order , which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary , had piously put it on a little manikin , which she exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her death . 
In 1824 , only one nun of this order remained ; to-day , there remains only a doll . 
In addition to these worthy mothers , some old society women had obtained permission of the prioress , like Madame Albertine , to retire into the Little Convent . 
Among the number were Madame Beaufort d'Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne . 
Another was never known in the convent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew her nose . 
The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini -LRB- hubbub -RRB- . 
About 1820 or 1821 , Madame de Genlis , who was at that time editing a little periodical publication called l'Intrepide , asked to be allowed to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident . 
The Duc d'Orleans recommended her . 
Uproar in the hive ; the vocal-mothers were all in a flutter ; Madame de Genlis had made romances . 
But she declared that she was the first to detest them , and then , she had reached her fierce stage of devotion . 
With the aid of God , and of the Prince , she entered . 
She departed at the end of six or eight months , alleging as a reason , that there was no shade in the garden . 
The nuns were delighted . 
Although very old , she still played the harp , and did it very well . 
When she went away she left her mark in her cell . 
Madame de Genlis was superstitious and a Latinist . 
These two words furnish a tolerably good profile of her . 
A few years ago , there were still to be seen , pasted in the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her silverware and her jewels , these five lines in Latin , written with her own hand in red ink on yellow paper , and which , in her opinion , possessed the property of frightening away robbers : -- Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis : -LSB- 15 -RSB- Dismas et Gesmas , media est divina potestas ; Alta petit Dismas , infelix , infima , Gesmas ; Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas . 
Hos versus dicas , ne tu furto tua perdas . 
-LSB- 15 -RSB- On the boughs hang three bodies of unequal merits : Dismas and Gesmas , between is the divine power . 
Dismas seeks the heights , Gesmas , unhappy man , the lowest regions ; the highest power will preserve us and our effects . 
If you repeat this verse , you will not lose your things by theft . 
These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the two thieves of Calvary were named , as is commonly believed , Dismas and Gestas , or Dismas and Gesmas . 
This orthography might have confounded the pretensions put forward in the last century by the Vicomte de Gestas , of a descent from the wicked thief . 
However , the useful virtue attached to these verses forms an article of faith in the order of the Hospitallers . 
The church of the house , constructed in such a manner as to separate the Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable intrenchment , was , of course , common to the Boarding-school , the Great Convent , and the Little Convent . 
The public was even admitted by a sort of lazaretto entrance on the street . 
But all was so arranged , that none of the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face from the outside world . 
Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand , and folded in such a manner as to form , not , as in ordinary churches , a prolongation behind the altar , but a sort of hall , or obscure cellar , to the right of the officiating priest ; suppose this hall to be shut off by a curtain seven feet in height , of which we have already spoken ; in the shadow of that curtain , pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the choir on the left , the school-girls on the right , the lay-sisters and the novices at the bottom , and you will have some idea of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus assisting at divine service . 
That cavern , which was called the choir , communicated with the cloister by a lobby . 
The church was lighted from the garden . 
When the nuns were present at services where their rule enjoined silence , the public was warned of their presence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and falling . 
SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825 , the prioress of the Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur , whose name , in religion , was Mother Innocente . 
She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur , author of Lives of the Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoit . 
She had been re-elected . 
She was a woman about sixty years of age , short , thick , `` singing like a cracked pot , '' says the letter which we have already quoted ; an excellent woman , moreover , and the only merry one in the whole convent , and for that reason adored . 
She was learned , erudite , wise , competent , curiously proficient in history , crammed with Latin , stuffed with Greek , full of Hebrew , and more of a Benedictine monk than a Benedictine nun . 
The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun , Mother Cineres , who was almost blind . 
The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine ; the treasurer , Mother Sainte-Gertrude , the chief mistress of the novices ; Mother-Saint-Ange , the assistant mistress ; Mother Annonciation , the sacristan ; Mother Saint-Augustin , the nurse , the only one in the convent who was malicious ; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde -LRB- Mademoiselle Gauvain -RRB- , very young and with a beautiful voice ; Mother des Anges -LRB- Mademoiselle Drouet -RRB- , who had been in the convent of the Filles-Dieu , and in the convent du Tresor , between Gisors and Magny ; Mother Saint-Joseph -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cogolludo -RRB- , Mother Sainte-Adelaide -LRB- Mademoiselle d'Auverney -RRB- , Mother Misericorde -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cifuentes , who could not resist austerities -RRB- , Mother Compassion -LRB- Mademoiselle de la Miltiere , received at the age of sixty in defiance of the rule , and very wealthy -RRB- ; Mother Providence -LRB- Mademoiselle de Laudiniere -RRB- , Mother Presentation -LRB- Mademoiselle de Siguenza -RRB- , who was prioress in 1847 ; and finally , Mother Sainte-Celigne -LRB- sister of the sculptor Ceracchi -RRB- , who went mad ; Mother Sainte-Chantal -LRB- Mademoiselle de Suzon -RRB- , who went mad . 
There was also , among the prettiest of them , a charming girl of three and twenty , who was from the Isle de Bourbon , a descendant of the Chevalier Roze , whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze , and who was called Mother Assumption . 
Mother Sainte-Mechtilde , intrusted with the singing and the choir , was fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter . 
She usually took a complete scale of them , that is to say , seven , from ten to sixteen years of age , inclusive , of assorted voices and sizes , whom she made sing standing , drawn up in a line , side by side , according to age , from the smallest to the largest . 
This presented to the eye , something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls , a sort of living Pan-pipe made of angels . 
Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister Euphrasie , Sister Sainte-Marguerite , Sister Sainte-Marthe , who was in her dotage , and Sister Sainte-Michel , whose long nose made them laugh . 
All these women were gentle with the children . 
The nuns were severe only towards themselves . 
No fire was lighted except in the school , and the food was choice compared to that in the convent . 
Moreover , they lavished a thousand cares on their scholars . 
Only , when a child passed near a nun and addressed her , the nun never replied . 
This rule of silence had had this effect , that throughout the whole convent , speech had been withdrawn from human creatures , and bestowed on inanimate objects . 
Now it was the church-bell which spoke , now it was the gardener 's bell . 
A very sonorous bell , placed beside the portress , and which was audible throughout the house , indicated by its varied peals , which formed a sort of acoustic telegraph , all the actions of material life which were to be performed , and summoned to the parlor , in case of need , such or such an inhabitant of the house . 
Each person and each thing had its own peal . 
The prioress had one and one , the sub-prioress one and two . 
Six-five announced lessons , so that the pupils never said `` to go to lessons , '' but `` to go to six-five . '' 
Four-four was Madame de Genlis 's signal . 
It was very often heard . 
`` C'est le diable a quatre , -- it 's the very deuce -- said the uncharitable . 
Tennine strokes announced a great event . 
It was the opening of the door of seclusion , a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts which only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop . 
With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener , no man entered the convent , as we have already said . 
The schoolgirls saw two others : one , the chaplain , the Abbe Banes , old and ugly , whom they were permitted to contemplate in the choir , through a grating ; the other the drawing-master , M. Ansiaux , whom the letter , of which we have perused a few lines , calls M. Anciot , and describes as a frightful old hunchback . 
It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen . 
Such was this curious house . 
POST CORDA LAPIDES After having sketched its moral face , it will not prove unprofitable to point out , in a few words , its material configuration . 
The reader already has some idea of it . 
The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue Polonceau , the Rue Droit-Mur , the Rue Petit-Picpus , and the unused lane , called Rue Aumarais on old plans . 
These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat . 
The convent was composed of several buildings and a garden . 
The principal building , taken in its entirety , was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which , viewed from a bird 's - eye view , outlined , with considerable exactness , a gibbet laid flat on the ground . 
The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau ; the lesser arm was a lofty , gray , severe grated facade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus ; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its extremity . 
Towards the centre of this facade was a low , arched door , whitened with dust and ashes , where the spiders wove their webs , and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays , and on rare occasions , when the coffin of a nun left the convent . 
This was the public entrance of the church . 
The elbow of the gibbet was a square hall which was used as the servants ' hall , and which the nuns called the buttery . 
In the main arm were the cells of the mothers , the sisters , and the novices . 
In the lesser arm lay the kitchens , the refectory , backed up by the cloisters and the church . 
Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed lane Aumarais , was the school , which was not visible from without . 
The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden , which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau , which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside . 
The garden , which was slightly arched , had in its centre , on the summit of a hillock , a fine pointed and conical fir-tree , whence ran , as from the peaked boss of a shield , four grand alleys , and , ranged by twos in between the branchings of these , eight small ones , so that , if the enclosure had been circular , the geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel . 
As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of the garden , they were of unequal length . 
They were bordered with currant bushes . 
At the bottom , an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent , which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house of the Little Convent , which was at the angle of the Aumarais lane . 
In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little garden . 
To this whole , let the reader add a courtyard , all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings , prison walls , the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood , and he will be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago . 
This holy house had been built on the precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century , which was called the `` tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils . '' 
All these streets , moreover , were more ancient than Paris . 
These names , Droit-Mur and Aumarais , are very ancient ; the streets which bear them are very much more ancient still . 
Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane ; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers , for God opened flowers before man cut stones . 
A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in former times , and since we have ventured to open a window on that discreet retreat , the reader will permit us one other little digression , utterly foreign to this book , but characteristic and useful , since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures . 
In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey of Fontevrault . 
She had even been in society before the Revolution . 
She talked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil , Keeper of the Seals under Louis XVI . 
and of a Presidentess Duplat , with whom she had been very intimate . 
It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these names on every pretext . 
She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault , -- that it was like a city , and that there were streets in the monastery . 
She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils . 
Every year , she solemnly renewed her vows , and at the moment of taking the oath , she said to the priest , `` Monseigneur Saint-Francois gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Julien , Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius , Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius , etc. , etc. ; and thus I give it to you , father . '' 
And the school-girls would begin to laugh , not in their sleeves , but under their veils ; charming little stifled laughs which made the vocal mothers frown . 
On another occasion , the centenarian was telling stories . 
She said that in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as the mousquetaires . 
It was a century which spoke through her , but it was the eighteenth century . 
She told about the custom of the four wines , which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne . 
When a great personage , a marshal of France , a prince , a duke , and a peer , traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne , the city fathers came out to harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which they had poured four different sorts of wine . 
On the first goblet this inscription could be read , monkey wine ; on the second , lion wine ; on the third , sheep wine ; on the fourth , hog wine . 
These four legends express the four stages descended by the drunkard ; the first , intoxication , which enlivens ; the second , that which irritates ; the third , that which dulls ; and the fourth , that which brutalizes . 
In a cupboard , under lock and key , she kept a mysterious object of which she thought a great deal . 
The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid this . 
She would not show this object to anyone . 
She shut herself up , which her rule allowed her to do , and hid herself , every time that she desired to contemplate it . 
If she heard a footstep in the corridor , she closed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her aged hands . 
As soon as it was mentioned to her , she became silent , she who was so fond of talking . 
The most curious were baffled by her silence and the most tenacious by her obstinacy . 
Thus it furnished a subject of comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent . 
What could that treasure of the centenarian be , which was so precious and so secret ? 
Some holy book , no doubt ? 
Some unique chaplet ? 
Some authentic relic ? 
They lost themselves in conjectures . 
When the poor old woman died , they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting , perhaps , and opened it . 
They found the object beneath a triple linen cloth , like some consecrated paten . 
It was a Faenza platter representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary lads armed with enormous syringes . 
The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures . 
One of the charming little Loves is already fairly spitted . 
He is resisting , fluttering his tiny wings , and still making an effort to fly , but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air . 
Moral : Love conquered by the colic . 
This platter , which is very curious , and which had , possibly , the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea , was still in existence in September , 1845 ; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais . 
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because , said she , the parlor is too gloomy . 
ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION However , this almost sepulchral parlor , of which we have sought to convey an idea , is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in other convents . 
At the convent of the Rue du Temple , in particular , which belonged , in truth , to another order , the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains , and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor , whose windows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames , a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face , painted bouquets , and even the head of a Turk . 
It is in that garden of the Temple convent , that stood that famous chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France , and which bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm . 
As we have said , this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration , Benedictines quite different from those who depended on Citeaux . 
This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years . 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart , in two churches in Paris , at Saint-Sulpice and at Saint-Jean en Greve , a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town in an uproar . 
M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy , in which the Pope 's Nuncio officiated . 
But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted women , Madame Courtin , Marquise de Boucs , and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux . 
This outrage committed on `` the most holy sacrament of the altar , '' though but temporary , would not depart from these holy souls , and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a `` Perpetual Adoration '' in some female monastery . 
Both of them , one in 1652 , the other in 1653 , made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine de Bar , called of the Holy Sacrament , a Benedictine nun , for the purpose of founding , to this pious end , a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoit ; the first permission for this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz , Abbe of Saint-Germain , `` on condition that no woman could be received unless she contributed three hundred livres income , which amounts to six thousand livres , to the principal . '' 
After the Abbe of Saint-Germain , the king accorded letters-patent ; and all the rest , abbatial charter , and royal letters , was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament . 
Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at Paris . 
Their first convent was `` a new building '' in the Rue Cassette , out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux . 
This order , as it will be seen , was not to be confounded with the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux . 
It mounted back to the Abbe of Saint-Germain des Pres , in the same manner that the ladies of the Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits , and the sisters of charity to the general of the Lazarists . 
It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus , whose interior we have just shown . 
In 1657 , Pope Alexander VII . 
had authorized , by a special brief , the Bernardines of the Rue Petit-Picpus , to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine nuns of the Holy Sacrament . 
But the two orders remained distinct none the less . 
END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS At the beginning of the Restoration , the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in its decay ; this forms a part of the general death of the order , which , after the eighteenth century , has been disappearing like all the religious orders . 
Contemplation is , like prayer , one of humanity 's needs ; but , like everything which the Revolution touched , it will be transformed , and from being hostile to social progress , it will become favorable to it . 
The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated . 
In 1840 , the Little Convent had disappeared , the school had disappeared . 
There were no longer any old women , nor young girls ; the first were dead , the latter had taken their departure . 
Volaverunt . 
The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that it alarms , vocations recoil before it , the order receives no recruits . 
In 1845 , it still obtained lay-sisters here and there . 
But of professed nuns , none at all . 
Forty years ago , the nuns numbered nearly a hundred ; fifteen years ago there were not more than twenty-eight of them . 
How many are there to-day ? 
In 1847 , the prioress was young , a sign that the circle of choice was restricted . 
She was not forty years old . 
In proportion as the number diminishes , the fatigue increases , the service of each becomes more painful ; the moment could then be seen drawing near when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy rule of Saint-Benoit . 
The burden is implacable , and remains the same for the few as for the many . 
It weighs down , it crushes . 
Thus they die . 
At the period when the author of this book still lived in Paris , two died . 
One was twenty-five years old , the other twenty-three . 
This latter can say , like Julia Alpinula : `` Hic jaceo . 
Vixi annos viginti et tres . '' 
It is in consequence of this decay that the convent gave up the education of girls . 
We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house without entering it , and without introducing the minds which accompany us , and which are listening to our tale , to the profit of some , perchance , of the melancholy history of Jean Valjean . 
We have penetrated into this community , full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day . 
It is the closed garden , hortus conclusus . 
We have spoken of this singular place in detail , but with respect , in so far , at least , as detail and respect are compatible . 
We do not understand all , but we insult nothing . 
We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre , who wound up by anointing the executioner , and from the sneer of Voltaire , who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross . 
An illogical act on Voltaire 's part , we may remark , by the way ; for Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas ; and even for those who deny superhuman incarnations , what does the crucifix represent ? 
The assassinated sage . 
In this nineteenth century , the religious idea is undergoing a crisis . 
People are unlearning certain things , and they do well , provided that , while unlearning them they learn this : There is no vacuum in the human heart . 
Certain demolitions take place , and it is well that they do , but on condition that they are followed by reconstructions . 
In the meantime , let us study things which are no more . 
It is necessary to know them , if only for the purpose of avoiding them . 
The counterfeits of the past assume false names , and gladly call themselves the future . 
This spectre , this past , is given to falsifying its own passport . 
Let us inform ourselves of the trap . 
Let us be on our guard . 
The past has a visage , superstition , and a mask , hypocrisy . 
Let us denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask . 
As for convents , they present a complex problem , -- a question of civilization , which condemns them ; a question of liberty , which protects them . 
THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA This book is a drama , whose leading personage is the Infinite . 
Man is the second . 
Such being the case , and a convent having happened to be on our road , it has been our duty to enter it . 
Why ? 
Because the convent , which is common to the Orient as well as to the Occident , to antiquity as well as to modern times , to paganism , to Buddhism , to Mahometanism , as well as to Christianity , is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite . 
This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain ideas ; nevertheless , while absolutely maintaining our reserves , our restrictions , and even our indignations , we must say that every time we encounter man in the Infinite , either well or ill understood , we feel ourselves overpowered with respect . 
There is , in the synagogue , in the mosque , in the pagoda , in the wigwam , a hideous side which we execrate , and a sublime side , which we adore . 
What a contemplation for the mind , and what endless food for thought , is the reverberation of God upon the human wall ! 
THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT From the point of view of history , of reason , and of truth , monasticism is condemned . 
Monasteries , when they abound in a nation , are clogs in its circulation , cumbrous establishments , centres of idleness where centres of labor should exist . 
Monastic communities are to the great social community what the mistletoe is to the oak , what the wart is to the human body . 
Their prosperity and their fatness mean the impoverishment of the country . 
The monastic regime , good at the beginning of civilization , useful in the reduction of the brutal by the spiritual , is bad when peoples have reached their manhood . 
Moreover , when it becomes relaxed , and when it enters into its period of disorder , it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity , because it still continues to set the example . 
Claustration has had its day . 
Cloisters , useful in the early education of modern civilization , have embarrassed its growth , and are injurious to its development . 
So far as institution and formation with relation to man are concerned , monasteries , which were good in the tenth century , questionable in the fifteenth , are detestable in the nineteenth . 
The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton two wonderful nations , Italy and Spain ; the one the light , the other the splendor of Europe for centuries ; and , at the present day , these two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce , thanks to the healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone . 
The convent -- the ancient female convent in particular , such as it still presents itself on the threshold of this century , in Italy , in Austria , in Spain -- is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages . 
The cloister , that cloister , is the point of intersection of horrors . 
The Catholic cloister , properly speaking , is wholly filled with the black radiance of death . 
The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all . 
There rise , in obscurity , beneath vaults filled with gloom , beneath domes vague with shadow , massive altars of Babel , as high as cathedrals ; there immense white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark ; there are extended , all nude on the ebony , great Christs of ivory ; more than bleeding , -- bloody ; hideous and magnificent , with their elbows displaying the bones , their knee-pans showing their integuments , their wounds showing their flesh , crowned with silver thorns , nailed with nails of gold , with blood drops of rubies on their brows , and diamond tears in their eyes . 
The diamonds and rubies seem wet , and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep , their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges , their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles , their knees excoriated with prayer ; women who think themselves wives , spectres who think themselves seraphim . 
Do these women think ? 
No . 
Have they any will ? 
No . 
Do they love ? 
No . 
Do they live ? 
No . 
Their nerves have turned to bone ; their bones have turned to stone . 
Their veil is of woven night . 
Their breath under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration of death . 
The abbess , a spectre , sanctifies them and terrifies them . 
The immaculate one is there , and very fierce . 
Such are the ancient monasteries of Spain . 
Liars of terrible devotion , caverns of virgins , ferocious places . 
Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself . 
The Spanish convent was , above all others , the Catholic convent . 
There was a flavor of the Orient about it . 
The archbishop , the kislar-aga of heaven , locked up and kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved for God . 
The nun was the odalisque , the priest was the eunuch . 
The fervent were chosen in dreams and possessed Christ . 
At night , the beautiful , nude young man descended from the cross and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one . 
Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana , who had the crucified for her sultan , from all living distraction . 
A glance on the outer world was infidelity . 
The in pace replaced the leather sack . 
That which was cast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West . 
In both quarters , women wrung their hands ; the waves for the first , the grave for the last ; here the drowned , there the buried . 
Monstrous parallel . 
To-day the upholders of the past , unable to deny these things , have adopted the expedient of smiling at them . 
There has come into fashion a strange and easy manner of suppressing the revelations of history , of invalidating the commentaries of philosophy , of eliding all embarrassing facts and all gloomy questions . 
A matter for declamations , say the clever . 
Declamations , repeat the foolish . 
Jean-Jacques a declaimer ; Diderot a declaimer ; Voltaire on Calas , Labarre , and Sirven , declaimers . 
I know not who has recently discovered that Tacitus was a declaimer , that Nero was a victim , and that pity is decidedly due to `` that poor Holofernes . '' 
Facts , however , are awkward things to disconcert , and they are obstinate . 
The author of this book has seen , with his own eyes , eight leagues distant from Brussels , -- there are relics of the Middle Ages there which are attainable for everybody , -- at the Abbey of Villers , the hole of the oubliettes , in the middle of the field which was formerly the courtyard of the cloister , and on the banks of the Thil , four stone dungeons , half under ground , half under the water . 
They were in pace . 
Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door , a vault , and a grated opening which , on the outside , is two feet above the level of the river , and on the inside , six feet above the level of the ground . 
Four feet of river flow past along the outside wall . 
The ground is always soaked . 
The occupant of the in pace had this wet soil for his bed . 
In one of these dungeons , there is a fragment of an iron necklet riveted to the wall ; in another , there can be seen a square box made of four slabs of granite , too short for a person to lie down in , too low for him to stand upright in . 
A human being was put inside , with a coverlid of stone on top . 
This exists . 
It can be seen . 
It can be touched . 
These in pace , these dungeons , these iron hinges , these necklets , that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river 's current , that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb , with this difference , that the dead man here was a living being , that soil which is but mud , that vault hole , those oozing walls , -- what declaimers ! 
ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST Monasticism , such as it existed in Spain , and such as it still exists in Thibet , is a sort of phthisis for civilization . 
It stops life short . 
It simply depopulates . 
Claustration , castration . 
It has been the scourge of Europe . 
Add to this the violence so often done to the conscience , the forced vocations , feudalism bolstered up by the cloister , the right of the first-born pouring the excess of the family into monasticism , the ferocities of which we have just spoken , the in pace , the closed mouths , the walled-up brains , so many unfortunate minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows , the taking of the habit , the interment of living souls . 
Add individual tortures to national degradations , and , whoever you may be , you will shudder before the frock and the veil , -- those two winding-sheets of human devising . 
Nevertheless , at certain points and in certain places , in spite of philosophy , in spite of progress , the spirit of the cloister persists in the midst of the nineteenth century , and a singular ascetic recrudescence is , at this moment , astonishing the civilized world . 
The obstinacy of antiquated institutions in perpetuating themselves resembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume which should claim our hair , the pretensions of the spoiled fish which should persist in being eaten , the persecution of the child 's garment which should insist on clothing the man , the tenderness of corpses which should return to embrace the living . 
`` Ingrates ! '' 
says the garment , `` I protected you in inclement weather . 
Why will you have nothing to do with me ? '' 
`` I have just come from the deep sea , '' says the fish . 
`` I have been a rose , '' says the perfume . 
`` I have loved you , '' says the corpse . 
`` I have civilized you , '' says the convent . 
To this there is but one reply : `` In former days . '' 
To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things , and of the government of men by embalming , to restore dogmas in a bad condition , to regild shrines , to patch up cloisters , to rebless reliquaries , to refurnish superstitions , to revictual fanaticisms , to put new handles on holy water brushes and militarism , to reconstitute monasticism and militarism , to believe in the salvation of society by the multiplication of parasites , to force the past on the present , -- this seems strange . 
Still , there are theorists who hold such theories . 
These theorists , who are in other respects people of intelligence , have a very simple process ; they apply to the past a glazing which they call social order , divine right , morality , family , the respect of elders , antique authority , sacred tradition , legitimacy , religion ; and they go about shouting , `` Look ! 
take this , honest people . '' 
This logic was known to the ancients . 
The soothsayers practise it . 
They rubbed a black heifer over with chalk , and said , `` She is white , Bos cretatus . '' 
As for us , we respect the past here and there , and we spare it , above all , provided that it consents to be dead . 
If it insists on being alive , we attack it , and we try to kill it . 
Superstitions , bigotries , affected devotion , prejudices , those forms all forms as they are , are tenacious of life ; they have teeth and nails in their smoke , and they must be clasped close , body to body , and war must be made on them , and that without truce ; for it is one of the fatalities of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat with phantoms . 
It is difficult to seize darkness by the throat , and to hurl it to the earth . 
A convent in France , in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century , is a college of owls facing the light . 
A cloister , caught in the very act of asceticism , in the very heart of the city of '89 and of 1830 and of 1848 , Rome blossoming out in Paris , is an anachronism . 
In ordinary times , in order to dissolve an anachronism and to cause it to vanish , one has only to make it spell out the date . 
But we are not in ordinary times . 
Let us fight . 
Let us fight , but let us make a distinction . 
The peculiar property of truth is never to commit excesses . 
What need has it of exaggeration ? 
There is that which it is necessary to destroy , and there is that which it is simply necessary to elucidate and examine . 
What a force is kindly and serious examination ! 
Let us not apply a flame where only a light is required . 
So , given the nineteenth century , we are opposed , as a general proposition , and among all peoples , in Asia as well as in Europe , in India as well as in Turkey , to ascetic claustration . 
Whoever says cloister , says marsh . 
Their putrescence is evident , their stagnation is unhealthy , their fermentation infects people with fever , and etiolates them ; their multiplication becomes a plague of Egypt . 
We can not think without affright of those lands where fakirs , bonzes , santons , Greek monks , marabouts , talapoins , and dervishes multiply even like swarms of vermin . 
This said , the religious question remains . 
This question has certain mysterious , almost formidable sides ; may we be permitted to look at it fixedly . 
THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES Men unite themselves and dwell in communities . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right of association . 
They shut themselves up at home . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right which every man has to open or shut his door . 
They do not come forth . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right to go and come , which implies the right to remain at home . 
There , at home , what do they do ? 
They speak in low tones ; they drop their eyes ; they toil . 
