When he cried , ` Sinite parvulos , ' he made no distinction between the little children . 
It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod . 
Innocence , Monsieur , is its own crown . 
Innocence has no need to be a highness . 
It is as august in rags as in fleurs de lys . '' 
`` That is true , '' said the Bishop in a low voice . 
`` I persist , '' continued the conventionary G -- `` You have mentioned Louis XVII . 
to me . 
Let us come to an understanding . 
Shall we weep for all the innocent , all martyrs , all children , the lowly as well as the exalted ? 
I agree to that . 
But in that case , as I have told you , we must go back further than ' 93 , and our tears must begin before Louis XVII . 
I will weep with you over the children of kings , provided that you will weep with me over the children of the people . '' 
`` I weep for all , '' said the Bishop . 
`` Equally ! '' 
exclaimed conventionary G -- ; `` and if the balance must incline , let it be on the side of the people . 
They have been suffering longer . '' 
Another silence ensued . 
The conventionary was the first to break it . 
He raised himself on one elbow , took a bit of his cheek between his thumb and his forefinger , as one does mechanically when one interrogates and judges , and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of the death agony . 
It was almost an explosion . 
`` Yes , sir , the people have been suffering a long while . 
And hold ! 
that is not all , either ; why have you just questioned me and talked to me about Louis XVII . ? 
I know you not . 
Ever since I have been in these parts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone , never setting foot outside , and seeing no one but that child who helps me . 
Your name has reached me in a confused manner , it is true , and very badly pronounced , I must admit ; but that signifies nothing : clever men have so many ways of imposing on that honest goodman , the people . 
By the way , I did not hear the sound of your carriage ; you have left it yonder , behind the coppice at the fork of the roads , no doubt . 
I do not know you , I tell you . 
You have told me that you are the Bishop ; but that affords me no information as to your moral personality . 
In short , I repeat my question . 
Who are you ? 
You are a bishop ; that is to say , a prince of the church , one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings and revenues , who have vast prebends , -- the bishopric of D -- fifteen thousand francs settled income , ten thousand in perquisites ; total , twenty-five thousand francs , -- who have kitchens , who have liveries , who make good cheer , who eat moor-hens on Friday , who strut about , a lackey before , a lackey behind , in a gala coach , and who have palaces , and who roll in their carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot ! 
You are a prelate , -- revenues , palace , horses , servants , good table , all the sensualities of life ; you have this like the rest , and like the rest , you enjoy it ; it is well ; but this says either too much or too little ; this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me . 
To whom do I speak ? 
Who are you ? '' 
The Bishop hung his head and replied , `` Vermis sum -- I am a worm . '' 
`` A worm of the earth in a carriage ? '' 
growled the conventionary . 
It was the conventionary 's turn to be arrogant , and the Bishop 's to be humble . 
The Bishop resumed mildly : -- `` So be it , sir . 
But explain to me how my carriage , which is a few paces off behind the trees yonder , how my good table and the moor-hens which I eat on Friday , how my twenty-five thousand francs income , how my palace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty , and that '93 was not inexorable . 
The conventionary passed his hand across his brow , as though to sweep away a cloud . 
`` Before replying to you , '' he said , `` I beseech you to pardon me . 
I have just committed a wrong , sir . 
You are at my house , you are my guest , I owe you courtesy . 
You discuss my ideas , and it becomes me to confine myself to combating your arguments . 
Your riches and your pleasures are advantages which I hold over you in the debate ; but good taste dictates that I shall not make use of them . 
I promise you to make no use of them in the future . '' 
`` I thank you , '' said the Bishop . 
G -- resumed . 
`` Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me . 
Where were we ? 
What were you saying to me ? 
That '93 was inexorable ? '' 
`` Inexorable ; yes , '' said the Bishop . 
`` What think you of Marat clapping his hands at the guillotine ? '' 
`` What think you of Bossuet chanting the Te Deum over the dragonnades ? '' 
The retort was a harsh one , but it attained its mark with the directness of a point of steel . 
The Bishop quivered under it ; no reply occurred to him ; but he was offended by this mode of alluding to Bossuet . 
The best of minds will have their fetiches , and they sometimes feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic . 
The conventionary began to pant ; the asthma of the agony which is mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice ; still , there was a perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes . 
He went on : -- `` Let me say a few words more in this and that direction ; I am willing . 
Apart from the Revolution , which , taken as a whole , is an immense human affirmation , '93 is , alas ! 
a rejoinder . 
You think it inexorable , sir ; but what of the whole monarchy , sir ? 
Carrier is a bandit ; but what name do you give to Montrevel ? 
Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal ; but what is your opinion as to Lamoignon-Baville ? 
Maillard is terrible ; but Saulx-Tavannes , if you please ? 
Duchene senior is ferocious ; but what epithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier ? 
Jourdan-Coupe-Tete is a monster ; but not so great a one as M. the Marquis de Louvois . 
Sir , sir , I am sorry for Marie Antoinette , archduchess and queen ; but I am also sorry for that poor Huguenot woman , who , in 1685 , under Louis the Great , sir , while with a nursing infant , was bound , naked to the waist , to a stake , and the child kept at a distance ; her breast swelled with milk and her heart with anguish ; the little one , hungry and pale , beheld that breast and cried and agonized ; the executioner said to the woman , a mother and a nurse , ` Abjure ! ' 
giving her her choice between the death of her infant and the death of her conscience . 
What say you to that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother ? 
Bear this well in mind sir : the French Revolution had its reasons for existence ; its wrath will be absolved by the future ; its result is the world made better . 
From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the human race . 
I abridge , I stop , I have too much the advantage ; moreover , I am dying . '' 
And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop , the conventionary concluded his thoughts in these tranquil words : -- `` Yes , the brutalities of progress are called revolutions . 
When they are over , this fact is recognized , -- that the human race has been treated harshly , but that it has progressed . '' 
The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop . 
One remained , however , and from this intrenchment , the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu 's resistance , came forth this reply , wherein appeared nearly all the harshness of the beginning : -- `` Progress should believe in God . 
Good can not have an impious servitor . 
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race . '' 
The former representative of the people made no reply . 
He was seized with a fit of trembling . 
He looked towards heaven , and in his glance a tear gathered slowly . 
When the eyelid was full , the tear trickled down his livid cheek , and he said , almost in a stammer , quite low , and to himself , while his eyes were plunged in the depths : -- `` O thou ! 
O ideal ! 
Thou alone existest ! '' 
The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock . 
After a pause , the old man raised a finger heavenward and said : -- `` The infinite is . 
He is there . 
If the infinite had no person , person would be without limit ; it would not be infinite ; in other words , it would not exist . 
There is , then , an I . 
That I of the infinite is God . '' 
The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice , and with the shiver of ecstasy , as though he beheld some one . 
When he had spoken , his eyes closed . 
The effort had exhausted him . 
It was evident that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been left to him . 
That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in death . 
The supreme moment was approaching . 
The Bishop understood this ; time pressed ; it was as a priest that he had come : from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion ; he gazed at those closed eyes , he took that wrinkled , aged and ice-cold hand in his , and bent over the dying man . 
`` This hour is the hour of God . 
Do you not think that it would be regrettable if we had met in vain ? '' 
The conventionary opened his eyes again . 
A gravity mingled with gloom was imprinted on his countenance . 
`` Bishop , '' said he , with a slowness which probably arose more from his dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength , `` I have passed my life in meditation , study , and contemplation . 
I was sixty years of age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with its affairs . 
I obeyed . 
Abuses existed , I combated them ; tyrannies existed , I destroyed them ; rights and principles existed , I proclaimed and confessed them . 
Our territory was invaded , I defended it ; France was menaced , I offered my breast . 
I was not rich ; I am poor . 
I have been one of the masters of the state ; the vaults of the treasury were encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the walls , which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and silver ; I dined in Dead Tree Street , at twenty-two sous . 
I have succored the oppressed , I have comforted the suffering . 
I tore the cloth from the altar , it is true ; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country . 
I have always upheld the march forward of the human race , forward towards the light , and I have sometimes resisted progress without pity . 
I have , when the occasion offered , protected my own adversaries , men of your profession . 
And there is at Peteghem , in Flanders , at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer palace , a convent of Urbanists , the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu , which I saved in 1793 . 
I have done my duty according to my powers , and all the good that I was able . 
After which , I was hunted down , pursued , persecuted , blackened , jeered at , scorned , cursed , proscribed . 
For many years past , I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they have the right to despise me ; to the poor ignorant masses I present the visage of one damned . 
And I accept this isolation of hatred , without hating any one myself . 
Now I am eighty-six years old ; I am on the point of death . 
What is it that you have come to ask of me ? '' 
`` Your blessing , '' said the Bishop . 
And he knelt down . 
When the Bishop raised his head again , the face of the conventionary had become august . 
He had just expired . 
The Bishop returned home , deeply absorbed in thoughts which can not be known to us . 
He passed the whole night in prayer . 
On the following morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about member of the Convention G -- ; he contented himself with pointing heavenward . 
From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling towards all children and sufferers . 
Any allusion to `` that old wretch of a G -- '' caused him to fall into a singular preoccupation . 
No one could say that the passage of that soul before his , and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his , did not count for something in his approach to perfection . 
This `` pastoral visit '' naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of comment in all the little local coteries . 
`` Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a bishop ? 
There was evidently no conversion to be expected . 
All those revolutionists are backsliders . 
Then why go there ? 
What was there to be seen there ? 
He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried off by the devil . '' 
One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself spiritual , addressed this sally to him , `` Monseigneur , people are inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap ! '' 
-- `` Oh ! 
oh ! 
that 's a coarse color , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in a hat . '' 
A RESTRICTION We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves , were we to conclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was `` a philosophical bishop , '' or a `` patriotic cure . '' 
His meeting , which may almost be designated as his union , with conventionary G -- , left behind it in his mind a sort of astonishment , which rendered him still more gentle . 
That is all . 
Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician , this is , perhaps , the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the events of that epoch , supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an attitude . 
Let us , then , go back a few years . 
Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate , the Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire , in company with many other bishops . 
The arrest of the Pope took place , as every one knows , on the night of the 5th to the 6th of July , 1809 ; on this occasion , M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and Italy convened at Paris . 
This synod was held at Notre-Dame , and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June , 1811 , under the presidency of Cardinal Fesch . 
M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five bishops who attended it . 
But he was present only at one sitting and at three or four private conferences . 
Bishop of a mountain diocese , living so very close to nature , in rusticity and deprivation , it appeared that he imported among these eminent personages , ideas which altered the temperature of the assembly . 
He very soon returned to D -- He was interrogated as to this speedy return , and he replied : `` I embarrassed them . 
The outside air penetrated to them through me . 
I produced on them the effect of an open door . '' 
On another occasion he said , `` What would you have ? 
Those gentlemen are princes . 
I am only a poor peasant bishop . '' 
The fact is that he displeased them . 
Among other strange things , it is said that he chanced to remark one evening , when he found himself at the house of one of his most notable colleagues : `` What beautiful clocks ! 
What beautiful carpets ! 
What beautiful liveries ! 
They must be a great trouble . 
I would not have all those superfluities , crying incessantly in my ears : ` There are people who are hungry ! 
There are people who are cold ! 
There are poor people ! 
There are poor people ! ' '' 
Let us remark , by the way , that the hatred of luxury is not an intelligent hatred . 
This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts . 
Nevertheless , in churchmen , luxury is wrong , except in connection with representations and ceremonies . 
It seems to reveal habits which have very little that is charitable about them . 
An opulent priest is a contradiction . 
The priest must keep close to the poor . 
Now , can one come in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress , all these misfortunes , and this poverty , without having about one 's own person a little of that misery , like the dust of labor ? 
Is it possible to imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm ? 
Can one imagine a workman who is working near a furnace , and who has neither a singed hair , nor blackened nails , nor a drop of sweat , nor a speck of ashes on his face ? 
The first proof of charity in the priest , in the bishop especially , is poverty . 
This is , no doubt , what the Bishop of D -- thought . 
It must not be supposed , however , that he shared what we call the `` ideas of the century '' on certain delicate points . 
He took very little part in the theological quarrels of the moment , and maintained silence on questions in which Church and State were implicated ; but if he had been strongly pressed , it seems that he would have been found to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican . 
Since we are making a portrait , and since we do not wish to conceal anything , we are forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline . 
Beginning with 1813 , he gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations . 
He refused to see him , as he passed through on his return from the island of Elba , and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor in his diocese during the Hundred Days . 
Besides his sister , Mademoiselle Baptistine , he had two brothers , one a general , the other a prefect . 
He wrote to both with tolerable frequency . 
He was harsh for a time towards the former , because , holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes , the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape . 
His correspondence with the other brother , the ex-prefect , a fine , worthy man who lived in retirement at Paris , Rue Cassette , remained more affectionate . 
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit , his hour of bitterness , his cloud . 
The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things . 
Certainly , such a man would have done well not to entertain any political opinions . 
Let there be no mistake as to our meaning : we are not confounding what is called `` political opinions '' with the grand aspiration for progress , with the sublime faith , patriotic , democratic , humane , which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous intellect . 
Without going deeply into questions which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book , we will simply say this : It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist , and if his glance had never been , for a single instant , turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly discernible , above the fictions and the hatreds of this world , above the stormy vicissitudes of human things , the beaming of those three pure radiances , truth , justice , and charity . 
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur Welcome , we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right and liberty , his proud opposition , his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon . 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling . 
We only love the fray so long as there is danger , and in any case , the combatants of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last . 
He who has not been a stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of ruin . 
The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall . 
As for us , when Providence intervenes and strikes , we let it work . 
1812 commenced to disarm us . 
In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn legislative body , emboldened by catastrophe , possessed only traits which aroused indignation . 
And it was a crime to applaud , in 1814 , in the presence of those marshals who betrayed ; in the presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill to another , insulting after having deified ; in the presence of that idolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol , -- it was a duty to turn aside the head . 
In 1815 , when the supreme disasters filled the air , when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach , when Waterloo could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon , the mournful acclamation of the army and the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable in it , and , after making all allowance for the despot , a heart like that of the Bishop of D -- , ought not perhaps to have failed to recognize the august and touching features presented by the embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink of the abyss . 
With this exception , he was in all things just , true , equitable , intelligent , humble and dignified , beneficent and kindly , which is only another sort of benevolence . 
He was a priest , a sage , and a man . 
It must be admitted , that even in the political views with which we have just reproached him , and which we are disposed to judge almost with severity , he was tolerant and easy , more so , perhaps , than we who are speaking here . 
The porter of the town-hall had been placed there by the Emperor . 
He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard , a member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz , as much of a Bonapartist as the eagle . 
This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate remarks , which the law then stigmatized as seditious speeches . 
After the imperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor , he never dressed himself in his regimentals , as he said , so that he should not be obliged to wear his cross . 
He had himself devoutly removed the imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him ; this made a hole , and he would not put anything in its place . 
`` I will die , '' he said , `` rather than wear the three frogs upon my heart ! '' 
He liked to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII . 
`` The gouty old creature in English gaiters ! '' 
he said ; `` let him take himself off to Prussia with that queue of his . '' 
He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two things which he most detested , Prussia and England . 
He did it so often that he lost his place . 
There he was , turned out of the house , with his wife and children , and without bread . 
The Bishop sent for him , reproved him gently , and appointed him beadle in the cathedral . 
In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had , by dint of holy deeds and gentle manners , filled the town of D -- with a sort of tender and filial reverence . 
Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been accepted and tacitly pardoned , as it were , by the people , the good and weakly flock who adored their emperor , but loved their bishop . 
THE SOLITUDE OF MONSEIGNEUR WELCOME A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbes , just as a general is by a covey of young officers . 
This is what that charming Saint Francois de Sales calls somewhere `` les pretres blancs-becs , '' callow priests . 
Every career has its aspirants , who form a train for those who have attained eminence in it . 
There is no power which has not its dependents . 
There is no fortune which has not its court . 
The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present . 
Every metropolis has its staff of officials . 
Every bishop who possesses the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the seminary , which goes the round , and maintains good order in the episcopal palace , and mounts guard over monseigneur 's smile . 
To please a bishop is equivalent to getting one 's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate . 
It is necessary to walk one 's path discreetly ; the apostleship does not disdain the canonship . 
Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere , there are big mitres in the Church . 
These are the bishops who stand well at Court , who are rich , well endowed , skilful , accepted by the world , who know how to pray , no doubt , but who know also how to beg , who feel little scruple at making a whole diocese dance attendance in their person , who are connecting links between the sacristy and diplomacy , who are abbes rather than priests , prelates rather than bishops . 
Happy those who approach them ! 
Being persons of influence , they create a shower about them , upon the assiduous and the favored , and upon all the young men who understand the art of pleasing , of large parishes , prebends , archidiaconates , chaplaincies , and cathedral posts , while awaiting episcopal honors . 
As they advance themselves , they cause their satellites to progress also ; it is a whole solar system on the march . 
Their radiance casts a gleam of purple over their suite . 
Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the scenes , into nice little promotions . 
The larger the diocese of the patron , the fatter the curacy for the favorite . 
And then , there is Rome . 
A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop , an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal , carries you with him as conclavist ; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction , you receive the pallium , and behold ! 
you are an auditor , then a papal chamberlain , then monsignor , and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step , and between the Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot . 
Every skull-cap may dream of the tiara . 
The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a king in a regular manner ; and what a king ! 
the supreme king . 
Then what a nursery of aspirations is a seminary ! 
How many blushing choristers , how many youthful abbes bear on their heads Perrette 's pot of milk ! 
Who knows how easy it is for ambition to call itself vocation ? 
in good faith , perchance , and deceiving itself , devotee that it is . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu , poor , humble , retiring , was not accounted among the big mitres . 
This was plain from the complete absence of young priests about him . 
We have seen that he `` did not take '' in Paris . 
Not a single future dreamed of engrafting itself on this solitary old man . 
Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forth its foliage in his shadow . 
His canons and grand-vicars were good old men , rather vulgar like himself , walled up like him in this diocese , without exit to a cardinalship , and who resembled their bishop , with this difference , that they were finished and he was completed . 
The impossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well understood , that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix or of Auch , and went off in a great hurry . 
For , in short , we repeat it , men wish to be pushed . 
A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation is a dangerous neighbor ; he might communicate to you , by contagion , an incurable poverty , an anchylosis of the joints , which are useful in advancement , and in short , more renunciation than you desire ; and this infectious virtue is avoided . 
Hence the isolation of Monseigneur Bienvenu . 
We live in the midst of a gloomy society . 
Success ; that is the lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption . 
Be it said in passing , that success is a very hideous thing . 
Its false resemblance to merit deceives men . 
For the masses , success has almost the same profile as supremacy . 
Success , that Menaechmus of talent , has one dupe , -- history . 
Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it . 
In our day , a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service , wears the livery of success , and performs the service of its antechamber . 
Succeed : theory . 
Prosperity argues capacity . 
Win in the lottery , and behold ! 
you are a clever man . 
He who triumphs is venerated . 
Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth ! 
everything lies in that . 
Be lucky , and you will have all the rest ; be happy , and people will think you great . 
Outside of five or six immense exceptions , which compose the splendor of a century , contemporary admiration is nothing but short-sightedness . 
Gilding is gold . 
It does no harm to be the first arrival by pure chance , so long as you do arrive . 
The common herd is an old Narcissus who adores himself , and who applauds the vulgar herd . 
That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses , Aeschylus , Dante , Michael Angelo , or Napoleon , the multitude awards on the spot , and by acclamation , to whomsoever attains his object , in whatsoever it may consist . 
Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy : let a false Corneille compose Tiridate ; let a eunuch come to possess a harem ; let a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch ; let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the Sambre-and-Meuse , and construct for himself , out of this cardboard , sold as leather , four hundred thousand francs of income ; let a pork-packer espouse usury , and cause it to bring forth seven or eight millions , of which he is the father and of which it is the mother ; let a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl ; let the steward of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made minister of finances , -- and men call that Genius , just as they call the face of Mousqueton Beauty , and the mien of Claude Majesty . 
With the constellations of space they confound the stars of the abyss which are made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks . 
WHAT HE BELIEVED We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D -- on the score of orthodoxy . 
In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect . 
The conscience of the just man should be accepted on his word . 
Moreover , certain natures being given , we admit the possible development of all beauties of human virtue in a belief that differs from our own . 
What did he think of this dogma , or of that mystery ? 
These secrets of the inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb , where souls enter naked . 
The point on which we are certain is , that the difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his case . 
No decay is possible to the diamond . 
He believed to the extent of his powers . 
`` Credo in Patrem , '' he often exclaimed . 
Moreover , he drew from good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to the conscience , and which whispers to a man , `` Thou art with God ! '' 
The point which we consider it our duty to note is , that outside of and beyond his faith , as it were , the Bishop possessed an excess of love . 
In was in that quarter , quia multum amavit , -- because he loved much -- that he was regarded as vulnerable by `` serious men , '' `` grave persons '' and `` reasonable people '' ; favorite locutions of our sad world where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry . 
What was this excess of love ? 
It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men , as we have already pointed out , and which , on occasion , extended even to things . 
He lived without disdain . 
He was indulgent towards God 's creation . 
Every man , even the best , has within him a thoughtless harshness which he reserves for animals . 
The Bishop of D -- had none of that harshness , which is peculiar to many priests , nevertheless . 
He did not go as far as the Brahmin , but he seemed to have weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes : `` Who knoweth whither the soul of the animal goeth ? '' 
Hideousness of aspect , deformity of instinct , troubled him not , and did not arouse his indignation . 
He was touched , almost softened by them . 
It seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond the bounds of life which is apparent , the cause , the explanation , or the excuse for them . 
He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties . 
He examined without wrath , and with the eye of a linguist who is deciphering a palimpsest , that portion of chaos which still exists in nature . 
This revery sometimes caused him to utter odd sayings . 
One morning he was in his garden , and thought himself alone , but his sister was walking behind him , unseen by him : suddenly he paused and gazed at something on the ground ; it was a large , black , hairy , frightful spider . 
His sister heard him say : -- `` Poor beast ! 
It is not its fault ! '' 
Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness ? 
Puerile they may be ; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar to Saint Francis d'Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius . 
One day he sprained his ankle in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant . 
Thus lived this just man . 
Sometimes he fell asleep in his garden , and then there was nothing more venerable possible . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been , if the stories anent his youth , and even in regard to his manhood , were to be believed , a passionate , and , possibly , a violent man . 
His universal suavity was less an instinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction which had filtered into his heart through the medium of life , and had trickled there slowly , thought by thought ; for , in a character , as in a rock , there may exist apertures made by drops of water . 
These hollows are uneffaceable ; these formations are indestructible . 
In 1815 , as we think we have already said , he reached his seventy-fifth birthday , but he did not appear to be more than sixty . 
He was not tall ; he was rather plump ; and , in order to combat this tendency , he was fond of taking long strolls on foot ; his step was firm , and his form was but slightly bent , a detail from which we do not pretend to draw any conclusion . 
Gregory XVI. , at the age of eighty , held himself erect and smiling , which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop . 
Monseigneur Welcome had what the people term a `` fine head , '' but so amiable was he that they forgot that it was fine . 
When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his charms , and of which we have already spoken , people felt at their ease with him , and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person . 
His fresh and ruddy complexion , his very white teeth , all of which he had preserved , and which were displayed by his smile , gave him that open and easy air which cause the remark to be made of a man , `` He 's a good fellow '' ; and of an old man , `` He is a fine man . '' 
That , it will be recalled , was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon . 
On the first encounter , and to one who saw him for the first time , he was nothing , in fact , but a fine man . 
But if one remained near him for a few hours , and beheld him in the least degree pensive , the fine man became gradually transfigured , and took on some imposing quality , I know not what ; his broad and serious brow , rendered august by his white locks , became august also by virtue of meditation ; majesty radiated from his goodness , though his goodness ceased not to be radiant ; one experienced something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling angel slowly unfold his wings , without ceasing to smile . 
Respect , an unutterable respect , penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart , and one felt that one had before him one of those strong , thoroughly tried , and indulgent souls where thought is so grand that it can no longer be anything but gentle . 
As we have seen , prayer , the celebration of the offices of religion , alms-giving , the consolation of the afflicted , the cultivation of a bit of land , fraternity , frugality , hospitality , renunciation , confidence , study , work , filled every day of his life . 
Filled is exactly the word ; certainly the Bishop 's day was quite full to the brim , of good words and good deeds . 
Nevertheless , it was not complete if cold or rainy weather prevented his passing an hour or two in his garden before going to bed , and after the two women had retired . 
It seemed to be a sort of rite with him , to prepare himself for slumber by meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens . 
Sometimes , if the two old women were not asleep , they heard him pacing slowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night . 
He was there alone , communing with himself , peaceful , adoring , comparing the serenity of his heart with the serenity of the ether , moved amid the darkness by the visible splendor of the constellations and the invisible splendor of God , opening his heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown . 
At such moments , while he offered his heart at the hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume , illuminated like a lamp amid the starry night , as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst of the universal radiance of creation , he could not have told himself , probably , what was passing in his spirit ; he felt something take its flight from him , and something descend into him . 
Mysterious exchange of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe ! 
He thought of the grandeur and presence of God ; of the future eternity , that strange mystery ; of the eternity past , a mystery still more strange ; of all the infinities , which pierced their way into all his senses , beneath his eyes ; and , without seeking to comprehend the incomprehensible , he gazed upon it . 
He did not study God ; he was dazzled by him . 
He considered those magnificent conjunctions of atoms , which communicate aspects to matter , reveal forces by verifying them , create individualities in unity , proportions in extent , the innumerable in the infinite , and , through light , produce beauty . 
These conjunctions are formed and dissolved incessantly ; hence life and death . 
He seated himself on a wooden bench , with his back against a decrepit vine ; he gazed at the stars , past the puny and stunted silhouettes of his fruit-trees . 
This quarter of an acre , so poorly planted , so encumbered with mean buildings and sheds , was dear to him , and satisfied his wants . 
What more was needed by this old man , who divided the leisure of his life , where there was so little leisure , between gardening in the daytime and contemplation at night ? 
Was not this narrow enclosure , with the heavens for a ceiling , sufficient to enable him to adore God in his most divine works , in turn ? 
Does not this comprehend all , in fact ? 
and what is there left to desire beyond it ? 
A little garden in which to walk , and immensity in which to dream . 
At one 's feet that which can be cultivated and plucked ; over head that which one can study and meditate upon : some flowers on earth , and all the stars in the sky . 
WHAT HE THOUGHT One last word . 
Since this sort of details might , particularly at the present moment , and to use an expression now in fashion , give to the Bishop of D -- a certain `` pantheistical '' physiognomy , and induce the belief , either to his credit or discredit , that he entertained one of those personal philosophies which are peculiar to our century , which sometimes spring up in solitary spirits , and there take on a form and grow until they usurp the place of religion , we insist upon it , that not one of those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have thought himself authorized to think anything of the sort . 
That which enlightened this man was his heart . 
His wisdom was made of the light which comes from there . 
No systems ; many works . 
Abstruse speculations contain vertigo ; no , there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses . 
The apostle may be daring , but the bishop must be timid . 
He would probably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certain problems which are , in a manner , reserved for terrible great minds . 
There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the enigma ; those gloomy openings stand yawning there , but something tells you , you , a passer-by in life , that you must not enter . 
Woe to him who penetrates thither ! 
Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and pure speculation , situated , so to speak , above all dogmas , propose their ideas to God . 
Their prayer audaciously offers discussion . 
Their adoration interrogates . 
This is direct religion , which is full of anxiety and responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs . 
Human meditation has no limits . 
At his own risk and peril , it analyzes and digs deep into its own bedazzlement . 
One might almost say , that by a sort of splendid reaction , it with it dazzles nature ; the mysterious world which surrounds us renders back what it has received ; it is probable that the contemplators are contemplated . 
However that may be , there are on earth men who -- are they men ? 
-- perceive distinctly at the verge of the horizons of revery the heights of the absolute , and who have the terrible vision of the infinite mountain . 
Monseigneur Welcome was one of these men ; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius . 
He would have feared those sublimities whence some very great men even , like Swedenborg and Pascal , have slipped into insanity . 
Certainly , these powerful reveries have their moral utility , and by these arduous paths one approaches to ideal perfection . 
As for him , he took the path which shortens , -- the Gospel 's . 
He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah 's mantle ; he projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of events ; he did not see to condense in flame the light of things ; he had nothing of the prophet and nothing of the magician about him . 
This humble soul loved , and that was all . 
That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is probable : but one can no more pray too much than one can love too much ; and if it is a heresy to pray beyond the texts , Saint Theresa and Saint Jerome would be heretics . 
He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates . 
The universe appeared to him like an immense malady ; everywhere he felt fever , everywhere he heard the sound of suffering , and , without seeking to solve the enigma , he strove to dress the wound . 
The terrible spectacle of created things developed tenderness in him ; he was occupied only in finding for himself , and in inspiring others with the best way to compassionate and relieve . 
That which exists was for this good and rare priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation . 
There are men who toil at extracting gold ; he toiled at the extraction of pity . 
Universal misery was his mine . 
The sadness which reigned everywhere was but an excuse for unfailing kindness . 
Love each other ; he declared this to be complete , desired nothing further , and that was the whole of his doctrine . 
One day , that man who believed himself to be a `` philosopher , '' the senator who has already been alluded to , said to the Bishop : `` Just survey the spectacle of the world : all war against all ; the strongest has the most wit . 
Your love each other is nonsense . '' 
-- `` Well , '' replied Monseigneur Welcome , without contesting the point , `` if it is nonsense , the soul should shut itself up in it , as the pearl in the oyster . '' 
Thus he shut himself up , he lived there , he was absolutely satisfied with it , leaving on one side the prodigious questions which attract and terrify , the fathomless perspectives of abstraction , the precipices of metaphysics -- all those profundities which converge , for the apostle in God , for the atheist in nothingness ; destiny , good and evil , the way of being against being , the conscience of man , the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal , the transformation in death , the recapitulation of existences which the tomb contains , the incomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent I , the essence , the substance , the Nile , and the Ens , the soul , nature , liberty , necessity ; perpendicular problems , sinister obscurities , where lean the gigantic archangels of the human mind ; formidable abysses , which Lucretius , Manou , Saint Paul , Dante , contemplate with eyes flashing lightning , which seems by its steady gaze on the infinite to cause stars to blaze forth there . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior of mysterious questions without scrutinizing them , and without troubling his own mind with them , and who cherished in his own soul a grave respect for darkness . 
THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING Early in the month of October , 1815 , about an hour before sunset , a man who was travelling on foot entered the little town of D -- The few inhabitants who were at their windows or on their thresholds at the moment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness . 
It was difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance . 
He was a man of medium stature , thickset and robust , in the prime of life . 
He might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old . 
A cap with a drooping leather visor partly concealed his face , burned and tanned by sun and wind , and dripping with perspiration . 
His shirt of coarse yellow linen , fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor , permitted a view of his hairy breast : he had a cravat twisted into a string ; trousers of blue drilling , worn and threadbare , white on one knee and torn on the other ; an old gray , tattered blouse , patched on one of the elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine ; a tightly packed soldier knapsack , well buckled and perfectly new , on his back ; an enormous , knotty stick in his hand ; iron-shod shoes on his stockingless feet ; a shaved head and a long beard . 
The sweat , the heat , the journey on foot , the dust , added I know not what sordid quality to this dilapidated whole . 
His hair was closely cut , yet bristling , for it had begun to grow a little , and did not seem to have been cut for some time . 
No one knew him . 
He was evidently only a chance passer-by . 
Whence came he ? 
From the south ; from the seashore , perhaps , for he made his entrance into D -- by the same street which , seven months previously , had witnessed the passage of the Emperor Napoleon on his way from Cannes to Paris . 
This man must have been walking all day . 
He seemed very much fatigued . 
Some women of the ancient market town which is situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of the boulevard Gassendi , and drink at the fountain which stands at the end of the promenade . 
He must have been very thirsty : for the children who followed him saw him stop again for a drink , two hundred paces further on , at the fountain in the market-place . 
On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert , he turned to the left , and directed his steps toward the town-hall . 
He entered , then came out a quarter of an hour later . 
A gendarme was seated near the door , on the stone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March to read to the frightened throng of the inhabitants of D -- the proclamation of the Gulf Juan . 
The man pulled off his cap and humbly saluted the gendarme . 
The gendarme , without replying to his salute , stared attentively at him , followed him for a while with his eyes , and then entered the town-hall . 
There then existed at D -- a fine inn at the sign of the Cross of Colbas . 
This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre , a man of consideration in the town on account of his relationship to another Labarre , who kept the inn of the Three Dauphins in Grenoble , and had served in the Guides . 
At the time of the Emperor 's landing , many rumors had circulated throughout the country with regard to this inn of the Three Dauphins . 
It was said that General Bertrand , disguised as a carter , had made frequent trips thither in the month of January , and that he had distributed crosses of honor to the soldiers and handfuls of gold to the citizens . 
The truth is , that when the Emperor entered Grenoble he had refused to install himself at the hotel of the prefecture ; he had thanked the mayor , saying , `` I am going to the house of a brave man of my acquaintance '' ; and he had betaken himself to the Three Dauphins . 
This glory of the Labarre of the Three Dauphins was reflected upon the Labarre of the Cross of Colbas , at a distance of five and twenty leagues . 
It was said of him in the town , `` That is the cousin of the man of Grenoble . '' 
The man bent his steps towards this inn , which was the best in the country-side . 
He entered the kitchen , which opened on a level with the street . 
All the stoves were lighted ; a huge fire blazed gayly in the fireplace . 
The host , who was also the chief cook , was going from one stew-pan to another , very busily superintending an excellent dinner designed for the wagoners , whose loud talking , conversation , and laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment . 
Any one who has travelled knows that there is no one who indulges in better cheer than wagoners . 
A fat marmot , flanked by white partridges and heather-cocks , was turning on a long spit before the fire ; on the stove , two huge carps from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking . 
The host , hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter , said , without raising his eyes from his stoves : -- `` What do you wish , sir ? '' 
`` Food and lodging , '' said the man . 
`` Nothing easier , '' replied the host . 
At that moment he turned his head , took in the traveller 's appearance with a single glance , and added , `` By paying for it . '' 
The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse , and answered , `` I have money . '' 
`` In that case , we are at your service , '' said the host . 
The man put his purse back in his pocket , removed his knapsack from his back , put it on the ground near the door , retained his stick in his hand , and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire . 
D -- is in the mountains . 
The evenings are cold there in October . 
But as the host went back and forth , he scrutinized the traveller . 
`` Will dinner be ready soon ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Immediately , '' replied the landlord . 
While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire , with his back turned , the worthy host , Jacquin Labarre , drew a pencil from his pocket , then tore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying on a small table near the window . 
On the white margin he wrote a line or two , folded it without sealing , and then intrusted this scrap of paper to a child who seemed to serve him in the capacity both of scullion and lackey . 
The landlord whispered a word in the scullion 's ear , and the child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall . 
The traveller saw nothing of all this . 
Once more he inquired , `` Will dinner be ready soon ? '' 
`` Immediately , '' responded the host . 
The child returned . 
He brought back the paper . 
The host unfolded it eagerly , like a person who is expecting a reply . 
He seemed to read it attentively , then tossed his head , and remained thoughtful for a moment . 
Then he took a step in the direction of the traveller , who appeared to be immersed in reflections which were not very serene . 
`` I can not receive you , sir , '' said he . 
The man half rose . 
`` What ! 
Are you afraid that I will not pay you ? 
Do you want me to pay you in advance ? 
I have money , I tell you . '' 
`` It is not that . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` You have money -- '' `` Yes , '' said the man . 
`` And I , '' said the host , `` have no room . '' 
The man resumed tranquilly , `` Put me in the stable . '' 
`` I can not . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` The horses take up all the space . '' 
`` Very well ! '' 
retorted the man ; `` a corner of the loft then , a truss of straw . 
We will see about that after dinner . '' 
`` I can not give you any dinner . '' 
This declaration , made in a measured but firm tone , struck the stranger as grave . 
He rose . 
`` Ah ! 
bah ! 
But I am dying of hunger . 
I have been walking since sunrise . 
I have travelled twelve leagues . 
I pay . 
I wish to eat . '' 
`` I have nothing , '' said the landlord . 
The man burst out laughing , and turned towards the fireplace and the stoves : `` Nothing ! 
and all that ? '' 
`` All that is engaged . '' 
`` By whom ? '' 
`` By messieurs the wagoners . '' 
`` How many are there of them ? '' 
`` Twelve . '' 
`` There is enough food there for twenty . '' 
`` They have engaged the whole of it and paid for it in advance . '' 
The man seated himself again , and said , without raising his voice , `` I am at an inn ; I am hungry , and I shall remain . '' 
Then the host bent down to his ear , and said in a tone which made him start , `` Go away ! '' 
At that moment the traveller was bending forward and thrusting some brands into the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff ; he turned quickly round , and as he opened his mouth to reply , the host gazed steadily at him and added , still in a low voice : `` Stop ! 
there 's enough of that sort of talk . 
Do you want me to tell you your name ? 
Your name is Jean Valjean . 
Now do you want me to tell you who you are ? 
When I saw you come in I suspected something ; I sent to the town-hall , and this was the reply that was sent to me . 
Can you read ? '' 
So saying , he held out to the stranger , fully unfolded , the paper which had just travelled from the inn to the town-hall , and from the town-hall to the inn . 
The man cast a glance upon it . 
The landlord resumed after a pause . 
`` I am in the habit of being polite to every one . 
Go away ! '' 
The man dropped his head , picked up the knapsack which he had deposited on the ground , and took his departure . 
He chose the principal street . 
He walked straight on at a venture , keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man . 
He did not turn round a single time . 
Had he done so , he would have seen the host of the Cross of Colbas standing on his threshold , surrounded by all the guests of his inn , and all the passers-by in the street , talking vivaciously , and pointing him out with his finger ; and , from the glances of terror and distrust cast by the group , he might have divined that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town . 
He saw nothing of all this . 
People who are crushed do not look behind them . 
They know but too well the evil fate which follows them . 
Thus he proceeded for some time , walking on without ceasing , traversing at random streets of which he knew nothing , forgetful of his fatigue , as is often the case when a man is sad . 
All at once he felt the pangs of hunger sharply . 
Night was drawing near . 
He glanced about him , to see whether he could not discover some shelter . 
The fine hostelry was closed to him ; he was seeking some very humble public house , some hovel , however lowly . 
Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets ; a pine branch suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky of the twilight . 
He proceeded thither . 
It proved to be , in fact , a public house . 
The public house which is in the Rue de Chaffaut . 
The wayfarer halted for a moment , and peeped through the window into the interior of the low-studded room of the public house , illuminated by a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth . 
Some men were engaged in drinking there . 
The landlord was warming himself . 
An iron pot , suspended from a crane , bubbled over the flame . 
The entrance to this public house , which is also a sort of an inn , is by two doors . 
One opens on the street , the other upon a small yard filled with manure . 
The traveller dare not enter by the street door . 
He slipped into the yard , halted again , then raised the latch timidly and opened the door . 
`` Who goes there ? '' 
said the master . 
`` Some one who wants supper and bed . '' 
`` Good . 
We furnish supper and bed here . '' 
He entered . 
All the men who were drinking turned round . 
The lamp illuminated him on one side , the firelight on the other . 
They examined him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack . 
The host said to him , `` There is the fire . 
The supper is cooking in the pot . 
Come and warm yourself , comrade . '' 
He approached and seated himself near the hearth . 
He stretched out his feet , which were exhausted with fatigue , to the fire ; a fine odor was emitted by the pot . 
All that could be distinguished of his face , beneath his cap , which was well pulled down , assumed a vague appearance of comfort , mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitual suffering bestows . 
It was , moreover , a firm , energetic , and melancholy profile . 
This physiognomy was strangely composed ; it began by seeming humble , and ended by seeming severe . 
The eye shone beneath its lashes like a fire beneath brushwood . 
One of the men seated at the table , however , was a fishmonger who , before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut , had been to stable his horse at Labarre 's . 
It chanced that he had that very morning encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras d'Asse and -- I have forgotten the name . 
I think it was Escoublon . 
Now , when he met him , the man , who then seemed already extremely weary , had requested him to take him on his crupper ; to which the fishmonger had made no reply except by redoubling his gait . 
This fishmonger had been a member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin Labarre , and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the morning to the people at the Cross of Colbas . 
From where he sat he made an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper . 
The tavern-keeper went to him . 
They exchanged a few words in a low tone . 
The man had again become absorbed in his reflections . 
The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace , laid his hand abruptly on the shoulder of the man , and said to him : -- `` You are going to get out of here . '' 
The stranger turned round and replied gently , `` Ah ! 
You know ? 
-- '' `` Yes . '' 
`` I was sent away from the other inn . '' 
`` And you are to be turned out of this one . '' 
`` Where would you have me go ? '' 
`` Elsewhere . '' 
The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed . 
As he went out , some children who had followed him from the Cross of Colbas , and who seemed to be lying in wait for him , threw stones at him . 
He retraced his steps in anger , and threatened them with his stick : the children dispersed like a flock of birds . 
He passed before the prison . 
At the door hung an iron chain attached to a bell . 
He rang . 
The wicket opened . 
`` Turnkey , '' said he , removing his cap politely , `` will you have the kindness to admit me , and give me a lodging for the night ? '' 
A voice replied : -- `` The prison is not an inn . 
Get yourself arrested , and you will be admitted . '' 
The wicket closed again . 
He entered a little street in which there were many gardens . 
Some of them are enclosed only by hedges , which lends a cheerful aspect to the street . 
In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a small house of a single story , the window of which was lighted up . 
He peered through the pane as he had done at the public house . 
Within was a large whitewashed room , with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff , and a cradle in one corner , a few wooden chairs , and a double-barrelled gun hanging on the wall . 
A table was spread in the centre of the room . 
A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen , the pewter jug shining like silver , and filled with wine , and the brown , smoking soup-tureen . 
At this table sat a man of about forty , with a merry and open countenance , who was dandling a little child on his knees . 
Close by a very young woman was nursing another child . 
The father was laughing , the child was laughing , the mother was smiling . 
The stranger paused a moment in revery before this tender and calming spectacle . 
What was taking place within him ? 
He alone could have told . 
It is probable that he thought that this joyous house would be hospitable , and that , in a place where he beheld so much happiness , he would find perhaps a little pity . 
He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock . 
They did not hear him . 
He tapped again . 
He heard the woman say , `` It seems to me , husband , that some one is knocking . '' 
`` No , '' replied the husband . 
He tapped a third time . 
The husband rose , took the lamp , and went to the door , which he opened . 
He was a man of lofty stature , half peasant , half artisan . 
He wore a huge leather apron , which reached to his left shoulder , and which a hammer , a red handkerchief , a powder-horn , and all sorts of objects which were upheld by the girdle , as in a pocket , caused to bulge out . 
He carried his head thrown backwards ; his shirt , widely opened and turned back , displayed his bull neck , white and bare . 
He had thick eyelashes , enormous black whiskers , prominent eyes , the lower part of his face like a snout ; and besides all this , that air of being on his own ground , which is indescribable . 
`` Pardon me , sir , '' said the wayfarer , `` Could you , in consideration of payment , give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder in the garden , in which to sleep ? 
Tell me ; can you ? 
For money ? '' 
`` Who are you ? '' 
demanded the master of the house . 
The man replied : `` I have just come from Puy-Moisson . 
I have walked all day long . 
I have travelled twelve leagues . 
Can you ? 
-- if I pay ? '' 
`` I would not refuse , '' said the peasant , `` to lodge any respectable man who would pay me . 
But why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` There is no room . '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible . 
This is neither a fair nor a market day . 
Have you been to Labarre ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
The traveller replied with embarrassment : `` I do not know . 
He did not receive me . '' 
`` Have you been to What 's - his-name 's , in the Rue Chaffaut ? '' 
The stranger 's embarrassment increased ; he stammered , `` He did not receive me either . '' 
The peasant 's countenance assumed an expression of distrust ; he surveyed the newcomer from head to feet , and suddenly exclaimed , with a sort of shudder : -- `` Are you the man ? 
-- '' He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger , took three steps backwards , placed the lamp on the table , and took his gun down from the wall . 
Meanwhile , at the words , Are you the man ? 
the woman had risen , had clasped her two children in her arms , and had taken refuge precipitately behind her husband , staring in terror at the stranger , with her bosom uncovered , and with frightened eyes , as she murmured in a low tone , `` Tso-maraude . '' 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- Patois of the French Alps : chat de maraude , rascally marauder . 
All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it to one 's self . 
After having scrutinized the man for several moments , as one scrutinizes a viper , the master of the house returned to the door and said : -- `` Clear out ! '' 
`` For pity 's sake , a glass of water , '' said the man . 
`` A shot from my gun ! '' 
said the peasant . 
Then he closed the door violently , and the man heard him shoot two large bolts . 
A moment later , the window-shutter was closed , and the sound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside . 
Night continued to fall . 
A cold wind from the Alps was blowing . 
By the light of the expiring day the stranger perceived , in one of the gardens which bordered the street , a sort of hut , which seemed to him to be built of sods . 
He climbed over the wooden fence resolutely , and found himself in the garden . 
He approached the hut ; its door consisted of a very low and narrow aperture , and it resembled those buildings which road-laborers construct for themselves along the roads . 
He thought without doubt , that it was , in fact , the dwelling of a road-laborer ; he was suffering from cold and hunger , but this was , at least , a shelter from the cold . 
This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night . 
He threw himself flat on his face , and crawled into the hut . 
It was warm there , and he found a tolerably good bed of straw . 
He lay , for a moment , stretched out on this bed , without the power to make a movement , so fatigued was he . 
Then , as the knapsack on his back was in his way , and as it furnished , moreover , a pillow ready to his hand , he set about unbuckling one of the straps . 
At that moment , a ferocious growl became audible . 
He raised his eyes . 
The head of an enormous dog was outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut . 
It was a dog 's kennel . 
He was himself vigorous and formidable ; he armed himself with his staff , made a shield of his knapsack , and made his way out of the kennel in the best way he could , not without enlarging the rents in his rags . 
He left the garden in the same manner , but backwards , being obliged , in order to keep the dog respectful , to have recourse to that manoeuvre with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as la rose couverte . 
When he had , not without difficulty , repassed the fence , and found himself once more in the street , alone , without refuge , without shelter , without a roof over his head , chased even from that bed of straw and from that miserable kennel , he dropped rather than seated himself on a stone , and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim , `` I am not even a dog ! '' 
He soon rose again and resumed his march . 
He went out of the town , hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford him shelter . 
He walked thus for some time , with his head still drooping . 
When he felt himself far from every human habitation , he raised his eyes and gazed searchingly about him . 
He was in a field . 
Before him was one of those low hills covered with close-cut stubble , which , after the harvest , resemble shaved heads . 
The horizon was perfectly black . 
This was not alone the obscurity of night ; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to rest upon the hill itself , and which were mounting and filling the whole sky . 
Meanwhile , as the moon was about to rise , and as there was still floating in the zenith a remnant of the brightness of twilight , these clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch , whence a gleam of light fell upon the earth . 
The earth was thus better lighted than the sky , which produces a particularly sinister effect , and the hill , whose contour was poor and mean , was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon . 
The whole effect was hideous , petty , lugubrious , and narrow . 
There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree , which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer . 
This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits of intelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious aspects of things ; nevertheless , there was something in that sky , in that hill , in that plain , in that tree , which was so profoundly desolate , that after a moment of immobility and revery he turned back abruptly . 
There are instants when nature seems hostile . 
He retraced his steps ; the gates of D -- were closed . 
D -- , which had sustained sieges during the wars of religion , was still surrounded in 1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been demolished since . 
He passed through a breach and entered the town again . 
It might have been eight o'clock in the evening . 
As he was not acquainted with the streets , he recommenced his walk at random . 
In this way he came to the prefecture , then to the seminary . 
As he passed through the Cathedral Square , he shook his fist at the church . 
At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment . 
It is there that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guard to the army , brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleon himself , were printed for the first time . 
Worn out with fatigue , and no longer entertaining any hope , he lay down on a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office . 
At that moment an old woman came out of the church . 
She saw the man stretched out in the shadow . 
`` What are you doing there , my friend ? '' 
said she . 
He answered harshly and angrily : `` As you see , my good woman , I am sleeping . '' 
The good woman , who was well worthy the name , in fact , was the Marquise de R -- `` On this bench ? '' 
she went on . 
`` I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years , '' said the man ; `` to-day I have a mattress of stone . '' 
`` You have been a soldier ? '' 
`` Yes , my good woman , a soldier . '' 
`` Why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` Because I have no money . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
said Madame de R -- , `` I have only four sous in my purse . '' 
`` Give it to me all the same . '' 
The man took the four sous . 
Madame de R -- continued : `` You can not obtain lodgings in an inn for so small a sum . 
But have you tried ? 
It is impossible for you to pass the night thus . 
You are cold and hungry , no doubt . 
Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity . '' 
`` I have knocked at all doors . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` I have been driven away everywhere . '' 
The `` good woman '' touched the man 's arm , and pointed out to him on the other side of the street a small , low house , which stood beside the Bishop 's palace . 
`` You have knocked at all doors ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Have you knocked at that one ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Knock there . '' 
PRUDENCE COUNSELLED TO WISDOM . 
That evening , the Bishop of D -- , after his promenade through the town , remained shut up rather late in his room . 
He was busy over a great work on Duties , which was never completed , unfortunately . 
He was carefully compiling everything that the Fathers and the doctors have said on this important subject . 
His book was divided into two parts : firstly , the duties of all ; secondly , the duties of each individual , according to the class to which he belongs . 
The duties of all are the great duties . 
There are four of these . 
Saint Matthew points them out : duties towards God -LRB- Matt . 
vi . -RRB- 
; duties towards one 's self -LRB- Matt . 
v. 29 , 30 -RRB- ; duties towards one 's neighbor -LRB- Matt . 
vii . 
12 -RRB- ; duties towards animals -LRB- Matt . 
vi . 
20 , 25 -RRB- . 
As for the other duties the Bishop found them pointed out and prescribed elsewhere : to sovereigns and subjects , in the Epistle to the Romans ; to magistrates , to wives , to mothers , to young men , by Saint Peter ; to husbands , fathers , children and servants , in the Epistle to the Ephesians ; to the faithful , in the Epistle to the Hebrews ; to virgins , in the Epistle to the Corinthians . 
Out of these precepts he was laboriously constructing a harmonious whole , which he desired to present to souls . 
At eight o'clock he was still at work , writing with a good deal of inconvenience upon little squares of paper , with a big book open on his knees , when Madame Magloire entered , according to her wont , to get the silver-ware from the cupboard near his bed . 
A moment later , the Bishop , knowing that the table was set , and that his sister was probably waiting for him , shut his book , rose from his table , and entered the dining-room . 
The dining-room was an oblong apartment , with a fireplace , which had a door opening on the street -LRB- as we have said -RRB- , and a window opening on the garden . 
Madame Magloire was , in fact , just putting the last touches to the table . 
As she performed this service , she was conversing with Mademoiselle Baptistine . 
A lamp stood on the table ; the table was near the fireplace . 
A wood fire was burning there . 
One can easily picture to one 's self these two women , both of whom were over sixty years of age . 
Madame Magloire small , plump , vivacious ; Mademoiselle Baptistine gentle , slender , frail , somewhat taller than her brother , dressed in a gown of puce-colored silk , of the fashion of 1806 , which she had purchased at that date in Paris , and which had lasted ever since . 
To borrow vulgar phrases , which possess the merit of giving utterance in a single word to an idea which a whole page would hardly suffice to express , Madame Magloire had the air of a peasant , and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a lady . 
Madame Magloire wore a white quilted cap , a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon her neck , the only bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house , a very white fichu puffing out from a gown of coarse black woollen stuff , with large , short sleeves , an apron of cotton cloth in red and green checks , knotted round the waist with a green ribbon , with a stomacher of the same attached by two pins at the upper corners , coarse shoes on her feet , and yellow stockings , like the women of Marseilles . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine 's gown was cut on the patterns of 1806 , with a short waist , a narrow , sheath-like skirt , puffed sleeves , with flaps and buttons . 
She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known as the baby wig . 
Madame Magloire had an intelligent , vivacious , and kindly air ; the two corners of her mouth unequally raised , and her upper lip , which was larger than the lower , imparted to her a rather crabbed and imperious look . 
So long as Monseigneur held his peace , she talked to him resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom ; but as soon as Monseigneur began to speak , as we have seen , she obeyed passively like her mistress . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine did not even speak . 
She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him . 
She had never been pretty , even when she was young ; she had large , blue , prominent eyes , and a long arched nose ; but her whole visage , her whole person , breathed forth an ineffable goodness , as we stated in the beginning . 
She had always been predestined to gentleness ; but faith , charity , hope , those three virtues which mildly warm the soul , had gradually elevated that gentleness to sanctity . 
Nature had made her a lamb , religion had made her an angel . 
Poor sainted virgin ! 
Sweet memory which has vanished ! 
Mademoiselle Baptistine has so often narrated what passed at the episcopal residence that evening , that there are many people now living who still recall the most minute details . 
At the moment when the Bishop entered , Madame Magloire was talking with considerable vivacity . 
She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on a subject which was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was also accustomed . 
The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door . 
It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper , Madame Magloire had heard things in divers places . 
People had spoken of a prowler of evil appearance ; a suspicious vagabond had arrived who must be somewhere about the town , and those who should take it into their heads to return home late that night might be subjected to unpleasant encounters . 
The police was very badly organized , moreover , because there was no love lost between the Prefect and the Mayor , who sought to injure each other by making things happen . 
It behooved wise people to play the part of their own police , and to guard themselves well , and care must be taken to duly close , bar and barricade their houses , and to fasten the doors well . 
Madame Magloire emphasized these last words ; but the Bishop had just come from his room , where it was rather cold . 
He seated himself in front of the fire , and warmed himself , and then fell to thinking of other things . 
He did not take up the remark dropped with design by Madame Magloire . 
She repeated it . 
Then Mademoiselle Baptistine , desirous of satisfying Madame Magloire without displeasing her brother , ventured to say timidly : -- `` Did you hear what Madame Magloire is saying , brother ? '' 
`` I have heard something of it in a vague way , '' replied the Bishop . 
Then half-turning in his chair , placing his hands on his knees , and raising towards the old servant woman his cordial face , which so easily grew joyous , and which was illuminated from below by the firelight , -- `` Come , what is the matter ? 
What is the matter ? 
Are we in any great danger ? '' 
Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh , exaggerating it a little without being aware of the fact . 
It appeared that a Bohemian , a bare-footed vagabond , a sort of dangerous mendicant , was at that moment in the town . 
He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre 's to obtain lodgings , but the latter had not been willing to take him in . 
He had been seen to arrive by the way of the boulevard Gassendi and roam about the streets in the gloaming . 
A gallows-bird with a terrible face . 
`` Really ! '' 
said the Bishop . 
This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire ; it seemed to her to indicate that the Bishop was on the point of becoming alarmed ; she pursued triumphantly : -- `` Yes , Monseigneur . 
That is how it is . 
There will be some sort of catastrophe in this town to-night . 
Every one says so . 
And withal , the police is so badly regulated '' -LRB- a useful repetition -RRB- . 
`` The idea of living in a mountainous country , and not even having lights in the streets at night ! 
One goes out . 
Black as ovens , indeed ! 
And I say , Monseigneur , and Mademoiselle there says with me -- '' `` I , '' interrupted his sister , `` say nothing . 
What my brother does is well done . '' 
Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest : -- `` We say that this house is not safe at all ; that if Monseigneur will permit , I will go and tell Paulin Musebois , the locksmith , to come and replace the ancient locks on the doors ; we have them , and it is only the work of a moment ; for I say that nothing is more terrible than a door which can be opened from the outside with a latch by the first passer-by ; and I say that we need bolts , Monseigneur , if only for this night ; moreover , Monseigneur has the habit of always saying ` come in ' ; and besides , even in the middle of the night , O mon Dieu ! 
there is no need to ask permission . '' 
At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
THE HEROISM OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE . 
The door opened . 
It opened wide with a rapid movement , as though some one had given it an energetic and resolute push . 
A man entered . 
We already know the man . 
It was the wayfarer whom we have seen wandering about in search of shelter . 
He entered , advanced a step , and halted , leaving the door open behind him . 
He had his knapsack on his shoulders , his cudgel in his hand , a rough , audacious , weary , and violent expression in his eyes . 
The fire on the hearth lighted him up . 
He was hideous . 
It was a sinister apparition . 
Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry . 
She trembled , and stood with her mouth wide open . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine turned round , beheld the man entering , and half started up in terror ; then , turning her head by degrees towards the fireplace again , she began to observe her brother , and her face became once more profoundly calm and serene . 
The Bishop fixed a tranquil eye on the man . 
As he opened his mouth , doubtless to ask the new-comer what he desired , the man rested both hands on his staff , directed his gaze at the old man and the two women , and without waiting for the Bishop to speak , he said , in a loud voice : -- `` See here . 
My name is Jean Valjean . 
I am a convict from the galleys . 
I have passed nineteen years in the galleys . 
I was liberated four days ago , and am on my way to Pontarlier , which is my destination . 
I have been walking for four days since I left Toulon . 
I have travelled a dozen leagues to-day on foot . 
This evening , when I arrived in these parts , I went to an inn , and they turned me out , because of my yellow passport , which I had shown at the town-hall . 
I had to do it . 
I went to an inn . 
They said to me , ` Be off , ' at both places . 
No one would take me . 
I went to the prison ; the jailer would not admit me . 
I went into a dog 's kennel ; the dog bit me and chased me off , as though he had been a man . 
One would have said that he knew who I was . 
I went into the fields , intending to sleep in the open air , beneath the stars . 
There were no stars . 
I thought it was going to rain , and I re-entered the town , to seek the recess of a doorway . 
Yonder , in the square , I meant to sleep on a stone bench . 
A good woman pointed out your house to me , and said to me , ` Knock there ! ' 
I have knocked . 
What is this place ? 
Do you keep an inn ? 
I have money -- savings . 
One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which I earned in the galleys by my labor , in the course of nineteen years . 
I will pay . 
What is that to me ? 
I have money . 
I am very weary ; twelve leagues on foot ; I am very hungry . 
Are you willing that I should remain ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will set another place . '' 
The man advanced three paces , and approached the lamp which was on the table . 
`` Stop , '' he resumed , as though he had not quite understood ; `` that 's not it . 
Did you hear ? 
I am a galley-slave ; a convict . 
I come from the galleys . '' 
He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow paper , which he unfolded . 
`` Here 's my passport . 
Yellow , as you see . 
This serves to expel me from every place where I go . 
Will you read it ? 
I know how to read . 
I learned in the galleys . 
There is a school there for those who choose to learn . 
Hold , this is what they put on this passport : ` Jean Valjean , discharged convict , native of ' -- that is nothing to you -- ` has been nineteen years in the galleys : five years for house-breaking and burglary ; fourteen years for having attempted to escape on four occasions . 
He is a very dangerous man . ' 
There ! 
Every one has cast me out . 
Are you willing to receive me ? 
Is this an inn ? 
Will you give me something to eat and a bed ? 
Have you a stable ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will put white sheets on the bed in the alcove . '' 
We have already explained the character of the two women 's obedience . 
Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders . 
The Bishop turned to the man . 
`` Sit down , sir , and warm yourself . 
We are going to sup in a few moments , and your bed will be prepared while you are supping . '' 
At this point the man suddenly comprehended . 
The expression of his face , up to that time sombre and harsh , bore the imprint of stupefaction , of doubt , of joy , and became extraordinary . 
He began stammering like a crazy man : -- `` Really ? 
What ! 
You will keep me ? 
You do not drive me forth ? 
A convict ! 
You call me sir ! 
You do not address me as thou ? 
` Get out of here , you dog ! ' 
is what people always say to me . 
I felt sure that you would expel me , so I told you at once who I am . 
Oh , what a good woman that was who directed me hither ! 
I am going to sup ! 
A bed with a mattress and sheets , like the rest of the world ! 
a bed ! 
It is nineteen years since I have slept in a bed ! 
You actually do not want me to go ! 
You are good people . 
Besides , I have money . 
I will pay well . 
Pardon me , monsieur the inn-keeper , but what is your name ? 
I will pay anything you ask . 
You are a fine man . 
You are an inn-keeper , are you not ? '' 
`` I am , '' replied the Bishop , `` a priest who lives here . '' 
`` A priest ! '' 
said the man . 
`` Oh , what a fine priest ! 
Then you are not going to demand any money of me ? 
You are the cure , are you not ? 
the cure of this big church ? 
Well ! 
I am a fool , truly ! 
I had not perceived your skull-cap . '' 
As he spoke , he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner , replaced his passport in his pocket , and seated himself . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine gazed mildly at him . 
He continued : `` You are humane , Monsieur le Cure ; you have not scorned me . 
A good priest is a very good thing . 
Then you do not require me to pay ? '' 
`` No , '' said the Bishop ; `` keep your money . 
How much have you ? 
Did you not tell me one hundred and nine francs ? '' 
`` And fifteen sous , '' added the man . 
`` One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous . 
And how long did it take you to earn that ? '' 
`` Nineteen years . '' 
`` Nineteen years ! '' 
The Bishop sighed deeply . 
The man continued : `` I have still the whole of my money . 
In four days I have spent only twenty-five sous , which I earned by helping unload some wagons at Grasse . 
Since you are an abbe , I will tell you that we had a chaplain in the galleys . 
And one day I saw a bishop there . 
Monseigneur is what they call him . 
He was the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles . 
He is the cure who rules over the other cures , you understand . 
Pardon me , I say that very badly ; but it is such a far-off thing to me ! 
You understand what we are ! 
He said mass in the middle of the galleys , on an altar . 
He had a pointed thing , made of gold , on his head ; it glittered in the bright light of midday . 
We were all ranged in lines on the three sides , with cannons with lighted matches facing us . 
We could not see very well . 
He spoke ; but he was too far off , and we did not hear . 
That is what a bishop is like . '' 
While he was speaking , the Bishop had gone and shut the door , which had remained wide open . 
Madame Magloire returned . 
She brought a silver fork and spoon , which she placed on the table . 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` place those things as near the fire as possible . '' 
And turning to his guest : `` The night wind is harsh on the Alps . 
You must be cold , sir . '' 
Each time that he uttered the word sir , in his voice which was so gently grave and polished , the man 's face lighted up . 
Monsieur to a convict is like a glass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the Medusa . 
Ignominy thirsts for consideration . 
`` This lamp gives a very bad light , '' said the Bishop . 
Madame Magloire understood him , and went to get the two silver candlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur 's bed-chamber , and placed them , lighted , on the table . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , '' said the man , `` you are good ; you do not despise me . 
You receive me into your house . 
You light your candles for me . 
Yet I have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunate man . '' 
The Bishop , who was sitting close to him , gently touched his hand . 
`` You could not help telling me who you were . 
This is not my house ; it is the house of Jesus Christ . 
This door does not demand of him who enters whether he has a name , but whether he has a grief . 
You suffer , you are hungry and thirsty ; you are welcome . 
And do not thank me ; do not say that I receive you in my house . 
No one is at home here , except the man who needs a refuge . 
I say to you , who are passing by , that you are much more at home here than I am myself . 
Everything here is yours . 
What need have I to know your name ? 
Besides , before you told me you had one which I knew . '' 
The man opened his eyes in astonishment . 
`` Really ? 
You knew what I was called ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the Bishop , `` you are called my brother . '' 
`` Stop , Monsieur le Cure , '' exclaimed the man . 
`` I was very hungry when I entered here ; but you are so good , that I no longer know what has happened to me . '' 
The Bishop looked at him , and said , -- `` You have suffered much ? '' 
`` Oh , the red coat , the ball on the ankle , a plank to sleep on , heat , cold , toil , the convicts , the thrashings , the double chain for nothing , the cell for one word ; even sick and in bed , still the chain ! 
Dogs , dogs are happier ! 
Nineteen years ! 
I am forty-six . 
Now there is the yellow passport . 
That is what it is like . '' 
`` Yes , '' resumed the Bishop , `` you have come from a very sad place . 
Listen . 
There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of a repentant sinner than over the white robes of a hundred just men . 
If you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath against mankind , you are deserving of pity ; if you emerge with thoughts of good-will and of peace , you are more worthy than any one of us . '' 
In the meantime , Madame Magloire had served supper : soup , made with water , oil , bread , and salt ; a little bacon , a bit of mutton , figs , a fresh cheese , and a large loaf of rye bread . 
She had , of her own accord , added to the Bishop 's ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves wine . 
The Bishop 's face at once assumed that expression of gayety which is peculiar to hospitable natures . 
`` To table ! '' 
he cried vivaciously . 
As was his custom when a stranger supped with him , he made the man sit on his right . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine , perfectly peaceable and natural , took her seat at his left . 
The Bishop asked a blessing ; then helped the soup himself , according to his custom . 
The man began to eat with avidity . 
All at once the Bishop said : `` It strikes me there is something missing on this table . '' 
Madame Magloire had , in fact , only placed the three sets of forks and spoons which were absolutely necessary . 
Now , it was the usage of the house , when the Bishop had any one to supper , to lay out the whole six sets of silver on the table-cloth -- an innocent ostentation . 
This graceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child 's play , which was full of charm in that gentle and severe household , which raised poverty into dignity . 
Madame Magloire understood the remark , went out without saying a word , and a moment later the three sets of silver forks and spoons demanded by the Bishop were glittering upon the cloth , symmetrically arranged before the three persons seated at the table . 
DETAILS CONCERNING THE CHEESE-DAIRIES OF PONTARLIER . 
Now , in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table , we can not do better than to transcribe here a passage from one of Mademoiselle Baptistine 's letters to Madame Boischevron , wherein the conversation between the convict and the Bishop is described with ingenious minuteness . '' 
... This man paid no attention to any one . 
He ate with the voracity of a starving man . 
However , after supper he said : '' ` Monsieur le Cure of the good God , all this is far too good for me ; but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with them keep a better table than you do . ' 
`` Between ourselves , the remark rather shocked me . 
My brother replied : -- '' ` They are more fatigued than I. ' '' ` No , ' returned the man , ` they have more money . 
You are poor ; I see that plainly . 
You can not be even a curate . 
Are you really a cure ? 
Ah , if the good God were but just , you certainly ought to be a cure ! ' '' 
` The good God is more than just , ' said my brother . 
`` A moment later he added : -- '' ` Monsieur Jean Valjean , is it to Pontarlier that you are going ? ' '' 
` With my road marked out for me . ' 
`` I think that is what the man said . 
Then he went on : -- '' ` I must be on my way by daybreak to-morrow . 
Travelling is hard . 
If the nights are cold , the days are hot . ' '' 
` You are going to a good country , ' said my brother . 
` During the Revolution my family was ruined . 
I took refuge in Franche-Comte at first , and there I lived for some time by the toil of my hands . 
My will was good . 
I found plenty to occupy me . 
One has only to choose . 
There are paper mills , tanneries , distilleries , oil factories , watch factories on a large scale , steel mills , copper works , twenty iron foundries at least , four of which , situated at Lods , at Chatillon , at Audincourt , and at Beure , are tolerably large . ' 
