The fire-pot allowed him to distinguish a blouse , torn trousers of coarse velvet , bare feet , and something which resembled a pool of blood . 
Marius indistinctly made out a pale head which was lifted towards him and which was saying to him : -- `` You do not recognize me ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Eponine . '' 
Marius bent hastily down . 
It was , in fact , that unhappy child . 
She was dressed in men 's clothes . 
`` How come you here ? 
What are you doing here ? '' 
`` I am dying , '' said she . 
There are words and incidents which arouse dejected beings . 
Marius cried out with a start : -- `` You are wounded ! 
Wait , I will carry you into the room ! 
They will attend to you there . 
Is it serious ? 
How must I take hold of you in order not to hurt you ? 
Where do you suffer ? 
Help ! 
My God ! 
But why did you come hither ? '' 
And he tried to pass his arm under her , in order to raise her . 
She uttered a feeble cry . 
`` Have I hurt you ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` A little . '' 
`` But I only touched your hand . '' 
She raised her hand to Marius , and in the middle of that hand Marius saw a black hole . 
`` What is the matter with your hand ? '' 
said he . 
`` It is pierced . '' 
`` Pierced ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` What with ? '' 
`` A bullet . '' 
`` How ? '' 
`` Did you see a gun aimed at you ? '' 
`` Yes , and a hand stopping it . '' 
`` It was mine . '' 
Marius was seized with a shudder . 
`` What madness ! 
Poor child ! 
But so much the better , if that is all , it is nothing , let me carry you to a bed . 
They will dress your wound ; one does not die of a pierced hand . '' 
She murmured : -- `` The bullet traversed my hand , but it came out through my back . 
It is useless to remove me from this spot . 
I will tell you how you can care for me better than any surgeon . 
Sit down near me on this stone . '' 
He obeyed ; she laid her head on Marius ' knees , and , without looking at him , she said : -- `` Oh ! 
How good this is ! 
How comfortable this is ! 
There ; I no longer suffer . '' 
She remained silent for a moment , then she turned her face with an effort , and looked at Marius . 
`` Do you know what , Monsieur Marius ? 
It puzzled me because you entered that garden ; it was stupid , because it was I who showed you that house ; and then , I ought to have said to myself that a young man like you -- '' She paused , and overstepping the sombre transitions that undoubtedly existed in her mind , she resumed with a heartrending smile : -- `` You thought me ugly , did n't you ? '' 
She continued : -- `` You see , you are lost ! 
Now , no one can get out of the barricade . 
It was I who led you here , by the way ! 
You are going to die , I count upon that . 
And yet , when I saw them taking aim at you , I put my hand on the muzzle of the gun . 
How queer it is ! 
But it was because I wanted to die before you . 
When I received that bullet , I dragged myself here , no one saw me , no one picked me up , I was waiting for you , I said : ` So he is not coming ! ' 
Oh , if you only knew . 
I bit my blouse , I suffered so ! 
Now I am well . 
Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and when I looked at myself in your mirror , and the day when I came to you on the boulevard near the washerwomen ? 
How the birds sang ! 
That was a long time ago . 
You gave me a hundred sous , and I said to you : ` I do n't want your money . ' 
I hope you picked up your coin ? 
You are not rich . 
I did not think to tell you to pick it up . 
The sun was shining bright , and it was not cold . 
Do you remember , Monsieur Marius ? 
Oh ! 
How happy I am ! 
Every one is going to die . '' 
She had a mad , grave , and heart-breaking air . 
Her torn blouse disclosed her bare throat . 
As she talked , she pressed her pierced hand to her breast , where there was another hole , and whence there spurted from moment to moment a stream of blood , like a jet of wine from an open bung-hole . 
Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is coming again , I am stifling ! '' 
She caught up her blouse and bit it , and her limbs stiffened on the pavement . 
At that moment the young cock 's crow executed by little Gavroche resounded through the barricade . 
The child had mounted a table to load his gun , and was singing gayly the song then so popular : -- `` En voyant Lafayette , `` On beholding Lafayette , Le gendarme repete : -- The gendarme repeats : -- Sauvons nous ! 
sauvons nous ! 
Let us flee ! 
let us flee ! 
sauvons nous ! '' 
let us flee ! 
Eponine raised herself and listened ; then she murmured : -- `` It is he . '' 
And turning to Marius : -- `` My brother is here . 
He must not see me . 
He would scold me . '' 
`` Your brother ? '' 
inquired Marius , who was meditating in the most bitter and sorrowful depths of his heart on the duties to the Thenardiers which his father had bequeathed to him ; `` who is your brother ? '' 
`` That little fellow . '' 
`` The one who is singing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Marius made a movement . 
`` Oh ! 
do n't go away , '' said she , `` it will not be long now . '' 
She was sitting almost upright , but her voice was very low and broken by hiccoughs . 
At intervals , the death rattle interrupted her . 
She put her face as near that of Marius as possible . 
She added with a strange expression : -- `` Listen , I do not wish to play you a trick . 
I have a letter in my pocket for you . 
I was told to put it in the post . 
I kept it . 
I did not want to have it reach you . 
But perhaps you will be angry with me for it when we meet again presently ? 
Take your letter . '' 
She grasped Marius ' hand convulsively with her pierced hand , but she no longer seemed to feel her sufferings . 
She put Marius ' hand in the pocket of her blouse . 
There , in fact , Marius felt a paper . 
`` Take it , '' said she . 
Marius took the letter . 
She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment . 
`` Now , for my trouble , promise me -- '' And she stopped . 
`` What ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` Promise me ! '' 
`` I promise . '' 
`` Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead . 
-- I shall feel it . '' 
She dropped her head again on Marius ' knees , and her eyelids closed . 
He thought the poor soul had departed . 
Eponine remained motionless . 
All at once , at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever , she slowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity of death , and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already to proceed from another world : -- `` And by the way , Monsieur Marius , I believe that I was a little bit in love with you . '' 
She tried to smile once more and expired . 
GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES Marius kept his promise . 
He dropped a kiss on that livid brow , where the icy perspiration stood in beads . 
This was no infidelity to Cosette ; it was a gentle and pensive farewell to an unhappy soul . 
It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Eponine had given him . 
He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight . 
He was impatient to read it . 
The heart of man is so constituted that the unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of unfolding this paper . 
He laid her gently on the ground , and went away . 
Something told him that he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body . 
He drew near to a candle in the tap-room . 
It was a small note , folded and sealed with a woman 's elegant care . 
The address was in a woman 's hand and ran : -- `` To Monsieur , Monsieur Marius Pontmercy , at M. Courfeyrac 's , Rue de la Verrerie , No. 16 . '' 
He broke the seal and read : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even acquainted with Cosette 's handwriting . 
What had taken place may be related in a few words . 
Eponine had been the cause of everything . 
After the evening of the 3d of June she had cherished a double idea , to defeat the projects of her father and the ruffians on the house of the Rue Plumet , and to separate Marius and Cosette . 
She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she came across who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman , while Eponine disguised herself like a man . 
It was she who had conveyed to Jean Valjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning : `` Leave your house . '' 
Jean Valjean had , in fact , returned home , and had said to Cosette : `` We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l'Homme Arme with Toussaint . 
Next week , we shall be in London . '' 
Cosette , utterly overwhelmed by this unexpected blow , had hastily penned a couple of lines to Marius . 
But how was she to get the letter to the post ? 
She never went out alone , and Toussaint , surprised at such a commission , would certainly show the letter to M. Fauchelevent . 
In this dilemma , Cosette had caught sight through the fence of Eponine in man 's clothes , who now prowled incessantly around the garden . 
Cosette had called to `` this young workman '' and had handed him five francs and the letter , saying : `` Carry this letter immediately to its address . '' 
Eponine had put the letter in her pocket . 
The next day , on the 5th of June , she went to Courfeyrac 's quarters to inquire for Marius , not for the purpose of delivering the letter , but , -- a thing which every jealous and loving soul will comprehend , -- `` to see . '' 
There she had waited for Marius , or at least for Courfeyrac , still for the purpose of seeing . 
When Courfeyrac had told her : `` We are going to the barricades , '' an idea flashed through her mind , to fling herself into that death , as she would have done into any other , and to thrust Marius into it also . 
She had followed Courfeyrac , had made sure of the locality where the barricade was in process of construction ; and , quite certain , since Marius had received no warning , and since she had intercepted the letter , that he would go at dusk to his trysting place for every evening , she had betaken herself to the Rue Plumet , had there awaited Marius , and had sent him , in the name of his friends , the appeal which would , she thought , lead him to the barricade . 
She reckoned on Marius ' despair when he should fail to find Cosette ; she was not mistaken . 
She had returned to the Rue de la Chanvrerie herself . 
What she did there the reader has just seen . 
She died with the tragic joy of jealous hearts who drag the beloved being into their own death , and who say : `` No one shall have him ! '' 
Marius covered Cosette 's letter with kisses . 
So she loved him ! 
For one moment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now . 
Then he said to himself : `` She is going away . 
Her father is taking her to England , and my grandfather refuses his consent to the marriage . 
Nothing is changed in our fates . '' 
Dreamers like Marius are subject to supreme attacks of dejection , and desperate resolves are the result . 
The fatigue of living is insupportable ; death is sooner over with . 
Then he reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil : to inform Cosette of his death and send her a final farewell , and to save from the impending catastrophe which was in preparation , that poor child , Eponine 's brother and Thenardier 's son . 
He had a pocket-book about him ; the same one which had contained the note-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love for Cosette . 
He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil : -- `` Our marriage was impossible . 
I asked my grandfather , he refused ; I have no fortune , neither hast thou . 
I hastened to thee , thou wert no longer there . 
Thou knowest the promise that I gave thee , I shall keep it . 
I die . 
I love thee . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee , and thou wilt smile . '' 
Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter , he contented himself with folding the paper in four , and added the address : -- `` To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Having folded the letter , he stood in thought for a moment , drew out his pocket-book again , opened it , and wrote , with the same pencil , these four lines on the first page : -- `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
He put his pocketbook back in his pocket , then he called Gavroche . 
The gamin , at the sound of Marius ' voice , ran up to him with his merry and devoted air . 
`` Will you do something for me ? '' 
`` Anything , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Good God ! 
if it had not been for you , I should have been done for . '' 
`` Do you see this letter ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Take it . 
Leave the barricade instantly '' -LRB- Gavroche began to scratch his ear uneasily -RRB- `` and to-morrow morning , you will deliver it at its address to Mademoiselle Cosette , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
The heroic child replied `` Well , but ! 
in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken , and I shall not be there . '' 
`` The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak , according to all appearances , and will not be taken before to-morrow noon . '' 
The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade had , in fact , been prolonged . 
It was one of those intermissions which frequently occur in nocturnal combats , which are always followed by an increase of rage . 
`` Well , '' said Gavroche , `` what if I were to go and carry your letter to-morrow ? '' 
`` It will be too late . 
The barricade will probably be blockaded , all the streets will be guarded , and you will not be able to get out . 
Go at once . '' 
Gavroche could think of no reply to this , and stood there in indecision , scratching his ear sadly . 
All at once , he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements which were common with him . 
`` All right , '' said he . 
And he started off at a run through Mondetour lane . 
An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision , but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some objection to it . 
This was the idea : -- `` It is barely midnight , the Rue de l'Homme Arme is not far off ; I will go and deliver the letter at once , and I shall get back in time . '' 
A DRINKER IS A BABBLER What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of the soul ? 
Man is a depth still greater than the people . 
Jean Valjean at that very moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval . 
Every sort of gulf had opened again within him . 
He also was trembling , like Paris , on the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution . 
A few hours had sufficed to bring this about . 
His destiny and his conscience had suddenly been covered with gloom . 
Of him also , as well as of Paris , it might have been said : `` Two principles are face to face . 
The white angel and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of the abyss . 
Which of the two will hurl the other over ? 
Who will carry the day ? '' 
On the evening preceding this same 5th of June , Jean Valjean , accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
A change awaited him there . 
Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort at resistance . 
For the first time since they had lived side by side , Cosette 's will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct , and had been in opposition , at least , if they had not clashed . 
There had been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other . 
The abrupt advice : `` Leave your house , '' hurled at Jean Valjean by a stranger , had alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory . 
He thought that he had been traced and followed . 
Cosette had been obliged to give way . 
Both had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme without opening their lips , and without uttering a word , each being absorbed in his own personal preoccupation ; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette 's sadness , Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean 's uneasiness . 
Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him , a thing which he had never done in his previous absences . 
He perceived the possibility of not returning to the Rue Plumet , and he could neither leave Toussaint behind nor confide his secret to her . 
Besides , he felt that she was devoted and trustworthy . 
Treachery between master and servant begins in curiosity . 
Now Toussaint , as though she had been destined to be Jean Valjean 's servant , was not curious . 
She stammered in her peasant dialect of Barneville : `` I am made so ; I do my work ; the rest is no affair of mine . '' 
In this departure from the Rue Plumet , which had been almost a flight , Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise , baptized by Cosette `` the inseparable . '' 
Full trunks would have required porters , and porters are witnesses . 
A fiacre had been summoned to the door on the Rue de Babylone , and they had taken their departure . 
It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack up a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles . 
Cosette had taken only her portfolio and her blotting-book . 
Jean Valjean , with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery of this departure , had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumet only at dusk , which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to Marius . 
They had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme after night had fully fallen . 
They had gone to bed in silence . 
The lodgings in the Rue de l'Homme Arme were situated on a back court , on the second floor , and were composed of two sleeping-rooms , a dining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room , with a garret where there was a folding-bed , and which fell to Toussaint 's share . 
The dining-room was an antechamber as well , and separated the two bedrooms . 
The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils . 
People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it ; human nature is so constituted . 
Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l'Homme Arme when his anxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated . 
There are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind . 
An obscure street , peaceable inhabitants . 
Jean Valjean experienced an indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris , which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transverse beam placed on two posts , which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the clamorous city , dimly lighted at mid-day , and is , so to speak , incapable of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old , which hold their peace like ancients as they are . 
There was a touch of stagnant oblivion in that street . 
Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there . 
How could he be found there ? 
His first care was to place the inseparable beside him . 
He slept well . 
Night brings wisdom ; we may add , night soothes . 
On the following morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay . 
He thought the dining-room charming , though it was hideous , furnished with an old round table , a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror , a dilapidated arm-chair , and several plain chairs which were encumbered with Toussaint 's packages . 
In one of these packages Jean Valjean 's uniform of a National Guard was visible through a rent . 
As for Cosette , she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room , and did not make her appearance until evening . 
About five o'clock , Toussaint , who was going and coming and busying herself with the tiny establishment , set on the table a cold chicken , which Cosette , out of deference to her father , consented to glance at . 
That done , Cosette , under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache , had bade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in her chamber . 
Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good appetite , and with his elbows on the table , having gradually recovered his serenity , had regained possession of his sense of security . 
While he was discussing this modest dinner , he had , twice or thrice , noticed in a confused way , Toussaint 's stammering words as she said to him : `` Monsieur , there is something going on , they are fighting in Paris . '' 
But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations , he had paid no heed to it . 
To tell the truth , he had not heard her . 
He rose and began to pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door , growing ever more serene . 
With this calm , Cosette , his sole anxiety , recurred to his thoughts . 
Not that he was troubled by this headache , a little nervous crisis , a young girl 's fit of sulks , the cloud of a moment , there would be nothing left of it in a day or two ; but he meditated on the future , and , as was his habit , he thought of it with pleasure . 
After all , he saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course . 
At certain hours , everything seems impossible , at others everything appears easy ; Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours . 
They generally succeed the bad ones , as day follows night , by virtue of that law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature , and which superficial minds call antithesis . 
In this peaceful street where he had taken refuge , Jean Valjean got rid of all that had been troubling him for some time past . 
This very fact , that he had seen many shadows , made him begin to perceive a little azure . 
To have quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one good step already accomplished . 
Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad , if only for a few months , and to set out for London . 
Well , they would go . 
What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in England , provided he had Cosette beside him ? 
Cosette was his nation . 
Cosette sufficed for his happiness ; the idea that he , perhaps , did not suffice for Cosette 's happiness , that idea which had formerly been the cause of his fever and sleeplessness , did not even present itself to his mind . 
He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings , and he was fully entered on optimism . 
Cosette was by his side , she seemed to be his ; an optical illusion which every one has experienced . 
He arranged in his own mind , with all sorts of felicitous devices , his departure for England with Cosette , and he beheld his felicity reconstituted wherever he pleased , in the perspective of his revery . 
As he paced to and fro with long strides , his glance suddenly encountered something strange . 
In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard , he saw the four lines which follow : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Jean Valjean halted , perfectly haggard . 
Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in front of the mirror , and , utterly absorbed in her agony of grief , had forgotten it and left it there , without even observing that she had left it wide open , and open at precisely the page on which she had laid to dry the four lines which she had penned , and which she had given in charge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet . 
The writing had been printed off on the blotter . 
The mirror reflected the writing . 
The result was , what is called in geometry , the symmetrical image ; so that the writing , reversed on the blotter , was righted in the mirror and presented its natural appearance ; and Jean Valjean had beneath his eyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening . 
It was simple and withering . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror . 
He read the four lines again , but he did not believe them . 
They produced on him the effect of appearing in a flash of lightning . 
It was a hallucination , it was impossible . 
It was not so . 
Little by little , his perceptions became more precise ; he looked at Cosette 's blotting-book , and the consciousness of the reality returned to him . 
He caught up the blotter and said : `` It comes from there . '' 
He feverishly examined the four lines imprinted on the blotter , the reversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl , and he saw no sense in it . 
Then he said to himself : `` But this signifies nothing ; there is nothing written here . '' 
And he drew a long breath with inexpressible relief . 
Who has not experienced those foolish joys in horrible instants ? 
The soul does not surrender to despair until it has exhausted all illusions . 
He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight , almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the dupe . 
All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again , and again he beheld the vision . 
There were the four lines outlined with inexorable clearness . 
This time it was no mirage . 
The recurrence of a vision is a reality ; it was palpable , it was the writing restored in the mirror . 
He understood . 
Jean Valjean tottered , dropped the blotter , and fell into the old arm-chair beside the buffet , with drooping head , and glassy eyes , in utter bewilderment . 
He told himself that it was plain , that the light of the world had been eclipsed forever , and that Cosette had written that to some one . 
Then he heard his soul , which had become terrible once more , give vent to a dull roar in the gloom . 
Try then the effect of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage ! 
Strange and sad to say , at that very moment , Marius had not yet received Cosette 's letter ; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean Valjean before delivering it to Marius . 
Up to that day , Jean Valjean had not been vanquished by trial . 
He had been subjected to fearful proofs ; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him ; the ferocity of fate , armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn , had taken him for her prey and had raged against him . 
He had accepted every extremity when it had been necessary ; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a reformed man , had yielded up his liberty , risked his head , lost everything , suffered everything , and he had remained disinterested and stoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent from himself like a martyr . 
His conscience inured to every assault of destiny , might have appeared to be forever impregnable . 
Well , any one who had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concede that it weakened at that moment . 
It was because , of all the tortures which he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to which destiny had doomed him , this was the most terrible . 
Never had such pincers seized him hitherto . 
He felt the mysterious stirring of all his latent sensibilities . 
He felt the plucking at the strange chord . 
Alas ! 
the supreme trial , let us say rather , the only trial , is the loss of the beloved being . 
Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as a father ; but we have already remarked , above , that into this paternity the widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love ; he loved Cosette as his daughter , and he loved her as his mother , and he loved her as his sister ; and , as he had never had either a woman to love or a wife , as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest , that sentiment also , the most impossible to lose , was mingled with the rest , vague , ignorant , pure with the purity of blindness , unconscious , celestial , angelic , divine ; less like a sentiment than like an instinct , less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible but real attraction ; and love , properly speaking , was , in his immense tenderness for Cosette , like the thread of gold in the mountain , concealed and virgin . 
Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already indicated . 
No marriage was possible between them ; not even that of souls ; and yet , it is certain that their destinies were wedded . 
With the exception of Cosette , that is to say , with the exception of a childhood , Jean Valjean had never , in the whole of his long life , known anything of that which may be loved . 
The passions and loves which succeed each other had not produced in him those successive green growths , tender green or dark green , which can be seen in foliage which passes through the winter and in men who pass fifty . 
In short , and we have insisted on it more than once , all this interior fusion , all this whole , of which the sum total was a lofty virtue , ended in rendering Jean Valjean a father to Cosette . 
A strange father , forged from the grandfather , the son , the brother , and the husband , that existed in Jean Valjean ; a father in whom there was included even a mother ; a father who loved Cosette and adored her , and who held that child as his light , his home , his family , his country , his paradise . 
Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come , that she was escaping from him , that she was slipping from his hands , that she was gliding from him , like a cloud , like water , when he had before his eyes this crushing proof : `` another is the goal of her heart , another is the wish of her life ; there is a dearest one , I am no longer anything but her father , I no longer exist '' ; when he could no longer doubt , when he said to himself : `` She is going away from me ! '' 
the grief which he felt surpassed the bounds of possibility . 
To have done all that he had done for the purpose of ending like this ! 
And the very idea of being nothing ! 
Then , as we have just said , a quiver of revolt ran through him from head to foot . 
He felt , even in the very roots of his hair , the immense reawakening of egotism , and the I in this man 's abyss howled . 
There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil . 
A despairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting aside and breaking certain profound elements which , in some cases , are the very man himself . 
Grief , when it attains this shape , is a headlong flight of all the forces of the conscience . 
These are fatal crises . 
Few among us emerge from them still like ourselves and firm in duty . 
When the limit of endurance is overstepped , the most imperturbable virtue is disconcerted . 
Jean Valjean took the blotter again , and convinced himself afresh ; he remained bowed and as though petrified and with staring eyes , over those four unobjectionable lines ; and there arose within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything in this soul was crumbling away . 
He examined this revelation , athwart the exaggerations of revery , with an apparent and terrifying calmness , for it is a fearful thing when a man 's calmness reaches the coldness of the statue . 
He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his having a suspicion of the fact ; he recalled his fears of the preceding summer , so foolishly dissipated ; he recognized the precipice , it was still the same ; only , Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink , he was at the bottom of it . 
The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had fallen without perceiving it . 
All the light of his life had departed , while he still fancied that he beheld the sun . 
His instinct did not hesitate . 
He put together certain circumstances , certain dates , certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette 's part , and he said to himself : `` It is he . '' 
The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never misses its aim . 
He struck Marius with his first conjecture . 
He did not know the name , but he found the man instantly . 
He distinctly perceived , in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories , the unknown prowler of the Luxembourg , that wretched seeker of love adventures , that idler of romance , that idiot , that coward , for it is cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a father who loves them . 
After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at the bottom of this situation , and that everything proceeded from that quarter , he , Jean Valjean , the regenerated man , the man who had so labored over his soul , the man who had made so many efforts to resolve all life , all misery , and all unhappiness into love , looked into his own breast and there beheld a spectre , Hate . 
Great griefs contain something of dejection . 
They discourage one with existence . 
The man into whom they enter feels something within him withdraw from him . 
In his youth , their visits are lugubrious ; later on they are sinister . 
Alas , if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is hot , when the hair is black , when the head is erect on the body like the flame on the torch , when the roll of destiny still retains its full thickness , when the heart , full of desirable love , still possesses beats which can be returned to it , when one has time for redress , when all women and all smiles and all the future and all the horizon are before one , when the force of life is complete , what is it in old age , when the years hasten on , growing ever paler , to that twilight hour when one begins to behold the stars of the tomb ? 
While he was meditating , Toussaint entered . 
Jean Valjean rose and asked her : -- `` In what quarter is it ? 
Do you know ? '' 
Toussaint was struck dumb , and could only answer him : -- `` What is it , sir ? '' 
Jean Valjean began again : `` Did you not tell me that just now that there is fighting going on ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , sir , '' replied Toussaint . 
`` It is in the direction of Saint-Merry . '' 
There is a mechanical movement which comes to us , unconsciously , from the most profound depths of our thought . 
It was , no doubt , under the impulse of a movement of this sort , and of which he was hardly conscious , that Jean Valjean , five minutes later , found himself in the street . 
Bareheaded , he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house . 
He seemed to be listening . 
Night had come . 
THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT How long did he remain thus ? 
What was the ebb and flow of this tragic meditation ? 
Did he straighten up ? 
Did he remain bowed ? 
Had he been bent to breaking ? 
Could he still rise and regain his footing in his conscience upon something solid ? 
He probably would not have been able to tell himself . 
The street was deserted . 
A few uneasy bourgeois , who were rapidly returning home , hardly saw him . 
Each one for himself in times of peril . 
The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situated precisely opposite the door of No. 7 , and then went away . 
Jean Valjean would not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examined him in that shadow . 
He sat there on the post of his door , motionless as a form of ice . 
There is congealment in despair . 
The alarm bells and a vague and stormy uproar were audible . 
In the midst of all these convulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt , the clock of Saint-Paul struck eleven , gravely and without haste ; for the tocsin is man ; the hour is God . 
The passage of the hour produced no effect on Jean Valjean ; Jean Valjean did not stir . 
Still , at about that moment , a brusque report burst forth in the direction of the Halles , a second yet more violent followed ; it was probably that attack on the barricade in the Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen repulsed by Marius . 
At this double discharge , whose fury seemed augmented by the stupor of the night , Jean Valjean started ; he rose , turning towards the quarter whence the noise proceeded ; then he fell back upon the post again , folded his arms , and his head slowly sank on his bosom again . 
He resumed his gloomy dialogue with himself . 
All at once , he raised his eyes ; some one was walking in the street , he heard steps near him . 
He looked , and by the light of the lanterns , in the direction of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives , he perceived a young , livid , and beaming face . 
Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue l'Homme Arme . 
Gavroche was staring into the air , apparently in search of something . 
He saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him . 
Gavroche after staring into the air , stared below ; he raised himself on tiptoe , and felt of the doors and windows of the ground floor ; they were all shut , bolted , and padlocked . 
After having authenticated the fronts of five or six barricaded houses in this manner , the urchin shrugged his shoulders , and took himself to task in these terms : -- `` Pardi ! '' 
Then he began to stare into the air again . 
Jean Valjean , who , an instant previously , in his then state of mind , would not have spoken to or even answered any one , felt irresistibly impelled to accost that child . 
`` What is the matter with you , my little fellow ? '' 
he said . 
`` The matter with me is that I am hungry , '' replied Gavroche frankly . 
And he added : `` Little fellow yourself . '' 
Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece . 
But Gavroche , who was of the wagtail species , and who skipped vivaciously from one gesture to another , had just picked up a stone . 
He had caught sight of the lantern . 
`` See here , '' said he , `` you still have your lanterns here . 
You are disobeying the regulations , my friend . 
This is disorderly . 
Smash that for me . '' 
And he flung the stone at the lantern , whose broken glass fell with such a clatter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains in the opposite house cried : `` There is ` Ninety-three ' come again . '' 
The lantern oscillated violently , and went out . 
The street had suddenly become black . 
`` That 's right , old street , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` put on your night-cap . '' 
And turning to Jean Valjean : -- `` What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the end of the street ? 
It 's the Archives , is n't it ? 
I must crumble up those big stupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them . '' 
Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche . 
`` Poor creature , '' he said in a low tone , and speaking to himself , `` he is hungry . '' 
And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand . 
Gavroche raised his face , astonished at the size of this sou ; he stared at it in the darkness , and the whiteness of the big sou dazzled him . 
He knew five-franc pieces by hearsay ; their reputation was agreeable to him ; he was delighted to see one close to . 
He said : -- `` Let us contemplate the tiger . '' 
He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy ; then , turning to Jean Valjean , he held out the coin to him , and said majestically to him : -- `` Bourgeois , I prefer to smash lanterns . 
Take back your ferocious beast . 
You ca n't bribe me . 
That has got five claws ; but it does n't scratch me . '' 
`` Have you a mother ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche replied : -- `` More than you have , perhaps . '' 
`` Well , '' returned Jean Valjean , `` keep the money for your mother ! '' 
Gavroche was touched . 
Moreover , he had just noticed that the man who was addressing him had no hat , and this inspired him with confidence . 
`` Truly , '' said he , `` so it was n't to keep me from breaking the lanterns ? '' 
`` Break whatever you please . '' 
`` You 're a fine man , '' said Gavroche . 
And he put the five-franc piece into one of his pockets . 
His confidence having increased , he added : -- `` Do you belong in this street ? '' 
`` Yes , why ? '' 
`` Can you tell me where No. 7 is ? '' 
`` What do you want with No. 7 ? '' 
Here the child paused , he feared that he had said too much ; he thrust his nails energetically into his hair and contented himself with replying : -- `` Ah ! 
Here it is . '' 
An idea flashed through Jean Valjean 's mind . 
Anguish does have these gleams . 
He said to the lad : -- `` Are you the person who is bringing a letter that I am expecting ? '' 
`` You ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` You are not a woman . '' 
`` The letter is for Mademoiselle Cosette , is it not ? '' 
`` Cosette , '' muttered Gavroche . 
`` Yes , I believe that is the queer name . '' 
`` Well , '' resumed Jean Valjean , `` I am the person to whom you are to deliver the letter . 
Give it here . '' 
`` In that case , you must know that I was sent from the barricade . '' 
`` Of course , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out a paper folded in four . 
Then he made the military salute . 
`` Respect for despatches , '' said he . 
`` It comes from the Provisional Government . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche held the paper elevated above his head . 
`` Do n't go and fancy it 's a love letter . 
It is for a woman , but it 's for the people . 
We men fight and we respect the fair sex . 
We are not as they are in fine society , where there are lions who send chickens -LSB- 55 -RSB- to camels . '' 
-LSB- 55 -RSB- Love letters . 
`` Give it to me . '' 
`` After all , '' continued Gavroche , `` you have the air of an honest man . '' 
`` Give it to me quick . '' 
`` Catch hold of it . '' 
And he handed the paper to Jean Valjean . 
`` And make haste , Monsieur What 's - your-name , for Mamselle Cosette is waiting . '' 
Gavroche was satisfied with himself for having produced this remark . 
Jean Valjean began again : -- `` Is it to Saint-Merry that the answer is to be sent ? '' 
`` There you are making some of those bits of pastry vulgarly called brioches -LSB- blunders -RSB- . 
This letter comes from the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and I 'm going back there . 
Good evening , citizen . '' 
That said , Gavroche took himself off , or , to describe it more exactly , fluttered away in the direction whence he had come with a flight like that of an escaped bird . 
He plunged back into the gloom as though he made a hole in it , with the rigid rapidity of a projectile ; the alley of l'Homme Arme became silent and solitary once more ; in a twinkling , that strange child , who had about him something of the shadow and of the dream , had buried himself in the mists of the rows of black houses , and was lost there , like smoke in the dark ; and one might have thought that he had dissipated and vanished , had there not taken place , a few minutes after his disappearance , a startling shiver of glass , and had not the magnificent crash of a lantern rattling down on the pavement once more abruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois . 
It was Gavroche upon his way through the Rue du Chaume . 
WHILE COSETTE AND TOUSSAINT ARE ASLEEP Jean Valjean went into the house with Marius ' letter . 
He groped his way up the stairs , as pleased with the darkness as an owl who grips his prey , opened and shut his door softly , listened to see whether he could hear any noise , -- made sure that , to all appearances , Cosette and Toussaint were asleep , and plunged three or four matches into the bottle of the Fumade lighter before he could evoke a spark , so greatly did his hand tremble . 
What he had just done smacked of theft . 
At last the candle was lighted ; he leaned his elbows on the table , unfolded the paper , and read . 
In violent emotions , one does not read , one flings to the earth , so to speak , the paper which one holds , one clutches it like a victim , one crushes it , one digs into it the nails of one 's wrath , or of one 's joy ; one hastens to the end , one leaps to the beginning ; attention is at fever heat ; it takes up in the gross , as it were , the essential points ; it seizes on one point , and the rest disappears . 
In Marius ' note to Cosette , Jean Valjean saw only these words : -- `` I die . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee . '' 
In the presence of these two lines , he was horribly dazzled ; he remained for a moment , crushed , as it were , by the change of emotion which was taking place within him , he stared at Marius ' note with a sort of intoxicated amazement , he had before his eyes that splendor , the death of a hated individual . 
He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy . 
So it was all over . 
The catastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope . 
The being who obstructed his destiny was disappearing . 
That man had taken himself off of his own accord , freely , willingly . 
This man was going to his death , and he , Jean Valjean , had had no hand in the matter , and it was through no fault of his . 
Perhaps , even , he is already dead . 
Here his fever entered into calculations . 
No , he is not dead yet . 
The letter had evidently been intended for Cosette to read on the following morning ; after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o'clock and midnight , nothing more has taken place ; the barricade will not be attacked seriously until daybreak ; but that makes no difference , from the moment when `` that man '' is concerned in this war , he is lost ; he is caught in the gearing . 
Jean Valjean felt himself delivered . 
So he was about to find himself alone with Cosette once more . 
The rivalry would cease ; the future was beginning again . 
He had but to keep this note in his pocket . 
Cosette would never know what had become of that man . 
All that there requires to be done is to let things take their own course . 
This man can not escape . 
If he is not already dead , it is certain that he is about to die . 
What good fortune ! 
Having said all this to himself , he became gloomy . 
Then he went down stairs and woke up the porter . 
About an hour later , Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a National Guard , and with his arms . 
The porter had easily found in the neighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment . 
He had a loaded gun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges . 
He strode off in the direction of the markets . 
GAVROCHE 'S EXCESS OF ZEAL In the meantime , Gavroche had had an adventure . 
Gavroche , after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du Chaume , entered the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , and not seeing `` even a cat '' there , he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all the song of which he was capable . 
His march , far from being retarded by his singing , was accelerated by it . 
He began to sow along the sleeping or terrified houses these incendiary couplets : -- `` L'oiseau medit dans les charmilles , Et pretend qu ` hier Atala Avec un Russe s ` en alla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Mon ami Pierrot , tu babilles , Parce que l'autre jour Mila Cogna sa vitre et m ` appela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Les drolesses sont fort gentilles , Leur poison qui m ` ensorcela Griserait Monsieur Orfila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` J'aime l'amour et les bisbilles , J'aime Agnes , j' aime Pamela , Lisa en m ` allumant se brula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jadis , quand je vis les mantilles De Suzette et de Zeila , Mon ame aleurs plis se mela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Amour , quand dans l'ombre ou tu brilles , Tu coiffes de roses Lola , Je me damnerais pour cela . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jeanne a ton miroir tu t ` habilles ! 
Mon coeur un beau jour s ` envola . 
Je crois que c'est Jeanne qui l' a. Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Le soir , en sortant des quadrilles , Je montre aux etoiles Stella , Et je leur dis : ` Regardez-la . ' 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 56 -RSB- -LSB- 56 -RSB- `` The bird slanders in the elms , And pretends that yesterday , Atala Went off with a Russian , Where fair maids go . 
Lon la . 
My friend Pierrot , thou pratest , because Mila knocked at her pane the other day and called me . 
The jades are very charming , their poison which bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila . 
I 'm fond of love and its bickerings , I love Agnes , I love Pamela , Lise burned herself in setting me aflame . 
In former days when I saw the mantillas of Suzette and of Zeila , my soul mingled with their folds . 
Love , when thou gleamest in the dark thou crownest Lola with roses , I would lose my soul for that . 
Jeanne , at thy mirror thou deckest thyself ! 
One fine day , my heart flew forth . 
I think that it is Jeanne who has it . 
At night , when I come from the quadrilles , I show Stella to the stars , and I say to them : `` Behold her . '' 
Where fair maids go , lon la . 
Gavroche , as he sang , was lavish of his pantomime . 
Gesture is the strong point of the refrain . 
His face , an inexhaustible repertory of masks , produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the rents of a cloth torn in a high gale . 
Unfortunately , as he was alone , and as it was night , this was neither seen nor even visible . 
Such wastes of riches do occur . 
All at once , he stopped short . 
`` Let us interrupt the romance , '' said he . 
His feline eye had just descried , in the recess of a carriage door , what is called in painting , an ensemble , that is to say , a person and a thing ; the thing was a hand-cart , the person was a man from Auvergene who was sleeping therein . 
The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement , and the Auvergnat 's head was supported against the front of the cart . 
His body was coiled up on this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground . 
Gavroche , with his experience of the things of this world , recognized a drunken man . 
He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and was sleeping too much . 
`` There now , '' thought Gavroche , `` that 's what the summer nights are good for . 
We 'll take the cart for the Republic , and leave the Auvergnat for the Monarchy . '' 
His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light : -- `` How bully that cart would look on our barricade ! '' 
The Auvergnat was snoring . 
Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind , and at the Auvergnat from the front , that is to say , by the feet , and at the expiration of another minute the imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on the pavement . 
The cart was free . 
Gavroche , habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters , had everything about him . 
He fumbled in one of his pockets , and pulled from it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter . 
He wrote : -- `` French Republic . '' 
`` Received thy cart . '' 
And he signed it : `` GAVROCHE . '' 
That done , he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring Auvergnat 's velvet vest , seized the cart shafts in both hands , and set off in the direction of the Halles , pushing the cart before him at a hard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar . 
This was perilous . 
There was a post at the Royal Printing Establishment . 
Gavroche did not think of this . 
This post was occupied by the National Guards of the suburbs . 
The squad began to wake up , and heads were raised from camp beds . 
Two street lanterns broken in succession , that ditty sung at the top of the lungs . 
This was a great deal for those cowardly streets , which desire to go to sleep at sunset , and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour . 
For the last hour , that boy had been creating an uproar in that peaceable arrondissement , the uproar of a fly in a bottle . 
The sergeant of the banlieue lent an ear . 
He waited . 
He was a prudent man . 
The mad rattle of the cart , filled to overflowing the possible measure of waiting , and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance . 
`` There 's a whole band of them there ! '' 
said he , `` let us proceed gently . '' 
It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and that it was stalking abroad through the quarter . 
And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread . 
All at once , Gavroche , pushing his cart in front of him , and at the very moment when he was about to turn into the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , found himself face to face with a uniform , a shako , a plume , and a gun . 
For the second time , he stopped short . 
`` Hullo , '' said he , `` it 's him . 
Good day , public order . '' 
Gavroche 's amazement was always brief and speedily thawed . 
`` Where are you going , you rascal ? '' 
shouted the sergeant . 
`` Citizen , '' retorted Gavroche , `` I have n't called you ` bourgeois ' yet . 
Why do you insult me ? '' 
`` Where are you going , you rogue ? '' 
`` Monsieur , '' retorted Gavroche , `` perhaps you were a man of wit yesterday , but you have degenerated this morning . '' 
`` I ask you where are you going , you villain ? '' 
Gavroche replied : -- `` You speak prettily . 
Really , no one would suppose you as old as you are . 
You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece . 
That would yield you five hundred francs . '' 
`` Where are you going ? 
Where are you going ? 
Where are you going , bandit ? '' 
Gavroche retorted again : -- `` What villainous words ! 
You must wipe your mouth better the first time that they give you suck . '' 
The sergeant lowered his bayonet . 
`` Will you tell me where you are going , you wretch ? '' 
`` General , '' said Gavroche `` I 'm on my way to look for a doctor for my wife who is in labor . '' 
`` To arms ! '' 
shouted the sergeant . 
The master-stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by the very means that have ruined them ; Gavroche took in the whole situation at a glance . 
It was the cart which had told against him , it was the cart 's place to protect him . 
At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent on Gavroche , the cart , converted into a projectile and launched with all the latter 's might , rolled down upon him furiously , and the sergeant , struck full in the stomach , tumbled over backwards into the gutter while his gun went off in the air . 
The men of the post had rushed out pell-mell at the sergeant 's shout ; the shot brought on a general random discharge , after which they reloaded their weapons and began again . 
This blind-man 's - buff musketry lasted for a quarter of an hour and killed several panes of glass . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche , who had retraced his steps at full speed , halted five or six streets distant and seated himself , panting , on the stone post which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges . 
He listened . 
After panting for a few minutes , he turned in the direction where the fusillade was raging , lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and thrust it forward three times , as he slapped the back of his head with his right hand ; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindom has condensed French irony , and which is evidently efficacious , since it has already lasted half a century . 
This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection . 
`` Yes , '' said he , `` I 'm splitting with laughter , I 'm twisting with delight , I abound in joy , but I 'm losing my way , I shall have to take a roundabout way . 
If I only reach the barricade in season ! '' 
Thereupon he set out again on a run . 
And as he ran : -- `` Ah , by the way , where was I ? '' 
said he . 
And he resumed his ditty , as he plunged rapidly through the streets , and this is what died away in the gloom : -- `` Mais il reste encore des bastilles , Et je vais mettre le hola Dans l'orde public que voila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Quelqu'un veut-il jouer aux quilles ? 
Tout l'ancien monde s ` ecroula Quand la grosse boule roula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Vieux bon peuple , a coups de bequilles , Cassons ce Louvre ou s ` etala La monarchie en falbala . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Nous en avons force les grilles , Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour la , Tenait mal et se decolla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 57 -RSB- -LSB- 57 -RSB- But some prisons still remain , and I am going to put a stop to this sort of public order . 
Does any one wish to play at skittles ? 
The whole ancient world fell in ruin , when the big ball rolled . 
Good old folks , let us smash with our crutches that Louvre where the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows . 
We have forced its gates . 
On that day , King Charles X. did not stick well and came unglued . 
The post 's recourse to arms was not without result . 
The cart was conquered , the drunken man was taken prisoner . 
The first was put in the pound , the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils of war as an accomplice . 
The public ministry of the day proved its indefatigable zeal in the defence of society , in this instance . 
Gavroche 's adventure , which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters of the Temple , is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly bourgeois of the Marais , and is entitled in their memories : `` The nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment . '' 
-LSB- The end of Volume IV . 
`` Saint Denis '' -RSB- VOLUME IV JEAN VALJEAN THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA OF THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work is laid . 
These two barricades , both of them symbols , under two different aspects , of a redoubtable situation , sprang from the earth at the time of the fatal insurrection of June , 1848 , the greatest war of the streets that history has ever beheld . 
It sometimes happens that , even contrary to principles , even contrary to liberty , equality , and fraternity , even contrary to the universal vote , even contrary to the government , by all for all , from the depths of its anguish , of its discouragements and its destitutions , of its fevers , of its distresses , of its miasmas , of its ignorances , of its darkness , that great and despairing body , the rabble , protests against , and that the populace wages battle against , the people . 
Beggars attack the common right ; the ochlocracy rises against demos . 
These are melancholy days ; for there is always a certain amount of night even in this madness , there is suicide in this duel , and those words which are intended to be insults -- beggars , canaille , ochlocracy , populace -- exhibit , alas ! 
rather the fault of those who reign than the fault of those who suffer ; rather the fault of the privileged than the fault of the disinherited . 
For our own part , we never pronounce those words without pain and without respect , for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they correspond , it often finds many a grandeur beside these miseries . 
Athens was an ochlocracy ; the beggars were the making of Holland ; the populace saved Rome more than once ; and the rabble followed Jesus Christ . 
There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificences of the lower classes . 
It was of this rabble that Saint Jerome was thinking , no doubt , and of all these poor people and all these vagabonds and all these miserable people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs , when he uttered this mysterious saying : `` Fex urbis , lex orbis , '' -- the dregs of the city , the law of the earth . 
The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds , its violences contrary to all sense , directed against the principles which are its life , its masterful deeds against the right , are its popular coups d'etat and should be repressed . 
The man of probity sacrifices himself , and out of his very love for this crowd , he combats it . 
But how excusable he feels it even while holding out against it ! 
How he venerates it even while resisting it ! 
This is one of those rare moments when , while doing that which it is one 's duty to do , one feels something which disconcerts one , and which would dissuade one from proceeding further ; one persists , it is necessary , but conscience , though satisfied , is sad , and the accomplishment of duty is complicated with a pain at the heart . 
June , 1848 , let us hasten to say , was an exceptional fact , and almost impossible of classification , in the philosophy of history . 
All the words which we have just uttered , must be discarded , when it becomes a question of this extraordinary revolt , in which one feels the holy anxiety of toil claiming its rights . 
It was necessary to combat it , and this was a duty , for it attacked the republic . 
But what was June , 1848 , at bottom ? 
A revolt of the people against itself . 
Where the subject is not lost sight of , there is no digression ; may we , then , be permitted to arrest the reader 's attention for a moment on the two absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which characterized this insurrection . 
One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine ; the other defended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple ; those before whom these two fearful masterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneath the brilliant blue sky of June , will never forget them . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous ; it was three stories high , and seven hundred feet wide . 
It barred the vast opening of the faubourg , that is to say , three streets , from angle to angle ; ravined , jagged , cut up , divided , crenelated , with an immense rent , buttressed with piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here and there , powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the faubourg , it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the formidable place which had seen the 14th of July . 
Nineteen barricades were ranged , one behind the other , in the depths of the streets behind this principal barricade . 
At the very sight of it , one felt the agonizing suffering in the immense faubourg , which had reached that point of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe . 
Of what was that barricade made ? 
Of the ruins of three six-story houses demolished expressly , said some . 
Of the prodigy of all wraths , said others . 
It wore the lamentable aspect of all constructions of hatred , ruin . 
It might be asked : Who built this ? 
It might also be said : Who destroyed this ? 
It was the improvisation of the ebullition . 
Hold ! 
take this door ! 
this grating ! 
this penthouse ! 
this chimney-piece ! 
this broken brazier ! 
this cracked pot ! 
Give all ! 
cast away all ! 
Push this roll , dig , dismantle , overturn , ruin everything ! 
It was the collaboration of the pavement , the block of stone , the beam , the bar of iron , the rag , the scrap , the broken pane , the unseated chair , the cabbage-stalk , the tatter , the rag , and the malediction . 
It was grand and it was petty . 
It was the abyss parodied on the public place by hubbub . 
The mass beside the atom ; the strip of ruined wall and the broken bowl , -- threatening fraternization of every sort of rubbish . 
Sisyphus had thrown his rock there and Job his potsherd . 
Terrible , in short . 
It was the acropolis of the barefooted . 
Overturned carts broke the uniformity of the slope ; an immense dray was spread out there crossways , its axle pointing heavenward , and seemed a scar on that tumultuous facade ; an omnibus hoisted gayly , by main force , to the very summit of the heap , as though the architects of this bit of savagery had wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror , presented its horseless , unharnessed pole to no one knows what horses of the air . 
This gigantic heap , the alluvium of the revolt , figured to the mind an Ossa on Pelion of all revolutions ; '93 on ' 89 , the 9th of Thermidor on the 10th of August , the 18th of Brumaire on the 11th of January , Vendemiaire on Prairial , 1848 on 1830 . 
The situation deserved the trouble and this barricade was worthy to figure on the very spot whence the Bastille had disappeared . 
If the ocean made dikes , it is thus that it would build . 
The fury of the flood was stamped upon this shapeless mass . 
What flood ? 
The crowd . 
One thought one beheld hubbub petrified . 
One thought one heard humming above this barricade as though there had been over their hive , enormous , dark bees of violent progress . 
Was it a thicket ? 
Was it a bacchanalia ? 
Was it a fortress ? 
Vertigo seemed to have constructed it with blows of its wings . 
There was something of the cess-pool in that redoubt and something Olympian in that confusion . 
One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair , the rafters of roofs , bits of garret windows with their figured paper , window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins awaiting the cannon , wrecks of chimneys , cupboards , tables , benches , howling topsyturveydom , and those thousand poverty-stricken things , the very refuse of the mendicant , which contain at the same time fury and nothingness . 
One would have said that it was the tatters of a people , rags of wood , of iron , of bronze , of stone , and that the Faubourg Saint Antoine had thrust it there at its door , with a colossal flourish of the broom making of its misery its barricade . 
Blocks resembling headsman 's blocks , dislocated chains , pieces of woodwork with brackets having the form of gibbets , horizontal wheels projecting from the rubbish , amalgamated with this edifice of anarchy the sombre figure of the old tortures endured by the people . 
The barricade Saint Antoine converted everything into a weapon ; everything that civil war could throw at the head of society proceeded thence ; it was not combat , it was a paroxysm ; the carbines which defended this redoubt , among which there were some blunderbusses , sent bits of earthenware bones , coat-buttons , even the casters from night-stands , dangerous projectiles on account of the brass . 
This barricade was furious ; it hurled to the clouds an inexpressible clamor ; at certain moments , when provoking the army , it was covered with throngs and tempest ; a tumultuous crowd of flaming heads crowned it ; a swarm filled it ; it had a thorny crest of guns , of sabres , of cudgels , of axes , of pikes and of bayonets ; a vast red flag flapped in the wind ; shouts of command , songs of attack , the roll of drums , the sobs of women and bursts of gloomy laughter from the starving were to be heard there . 
It was huge and living , and , like the back of an electric beast , there proceeded from it little flashes of lightning . 
The spirit of revolution covered with its cloud this summit where rumbled that voice of the people which resembles the voice of God ; a strange majesty was emitted by this titanic basket of rubbish . 
It was a heap of filth and it was Sinai . 
As we have said previously , it attacked in the name of the revolution -- what ? 
The revolution . 
It -- that barricade , chance , hazard , disorder , terror , misunderstanding , the unknown -- had facing it the Constituent Assembly , the sovereignty of the people , universal suffrage , the nation , the republic ; and it was the Carmagnole bidding defiance to the Marseillaise . 
Immense but heroic defiance , for the old faubourg is a hero . 
The faubourg and its redoubt lent each other assistance . 
The faubourg shouldered the redoubt , the redoubt took its stand under cover of the faubourg . 
The vast barricade spread out like a cliff against which the strategy of the African generals dashed itself . 
Its caverns , its excrescences , its warts , its gibbosities , grimaced , so to speak , and grinned beneath the smoke . 
The mitraille vanished in shapelessness ; the bombs plunged into it ; bullets only succeeded in making holes in it ; what was the use of cannonading chaos ? 
and the regiments , accustomed to the fiercest visions of war , gazed with uneasy eyes on that species of redoubt , a wild beast in its boar-like bristling and a mountain by its enormous size . 
A quarter of a league away , from the corner of the Rue du Temple which debouches on the boulevard near the Chateaud ` Eau , if one thrust one 's head bodily beyond the point formed by the front of the Dallemagne shop , one perceived in the distance , beyond the canal , in the street which mounts the slopes of Belleville at the culminating point of the rise , a strange wall reaching to the second story of the house fronts , a sort of hyphen between the houses on the right and the houses on the left , as though the street had folded back on itself its loftiest wall in order to close itself abruptly . 
This wall was built of paving-stones . 
It was straight , correct , cold , perpendicular , levelled with the square , laid out by rule and line . 
Cement was lacking , of course , but , as in the case of certain Roman walls , without interfering with its rigid architecture . 
The entablature was mathematically parallel with the base . 
From distance to distance , one could distinguish on the gray surface , almost invisible loopholes which resembled black threads . 
These loopholes were separated from each other by equal spaces . 
The street was deserted as far as the eye could reach . 
All windows and doors were closed . 
In the background rose this barrier , which made a blind thoroughfare of the street , a motionless and tranquil wall ; no one was visible , nothing was audible ; not a cry , not a sound , not a breath . 
A sepulchre . 
The dazzling sun of June inundated this terrible thing with light . 
It was the barricade of the Faubourg of the Temple . 
As soon as one arrived on the spot , and caught sight of it , it was impossible , even for the boldest , not to become thoughtful before this mysterious apparition . 
It was adjusted , jointed , imbricated , rectilinear , symmetrical and funereal . 
Science and gloom met there . 
One felt that the chief of this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre . 
One looked at it and spoke low . 
From time to time , if some soldier , an officer or representative of the people , chanced to traverse the deserted highway , a faint , sharp whistle was heard , and the passer-by fell dead or wounded , or , if he escaped the bullet , sometimes a biscaien was seen to ensconce itself in some closed shutter , in the interstice between two blocks of stone , or in the plaster of a wall . 
For the men in the barricade had made themselves two small cannons out of two cast-iron lengths of gas-pipe , plugged up at one end with tow and fire-clay . 
There was no waste of useless powder . 
Nearly every shot told . 
There were corpses here and there , and pools of blood on the pavement . 
I remember a white butterfly which went and came in the street . 
Summer does not abdicate . 
In the neighborhood , the spaces beneath the portes cocheres were encumbered with wounded . 
One felt oneself aimed at by some person whom one did not see , and one understood that guns were levelled at the whole length of the street . 
Massed behind the sort of sloping ridge which the vaulted canal forms at the entrance to the Faubourg du Temple , the soldiers of the attacking column , gravely and thoughtfully , watched this dismal redoubt , this immobility , this passivity , whence sprang death . 
Some crawled flat on their faces as far as the crest of the curve of the bridge , taking care that their shakos did not project beyond it . 
The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with a shudder . 
-- `` How that is built ! '' 
he said to a Representative . 
`` Not one paving-stone projects beyond its neighbor . 
It is made of porcelain . '' 
-- At that moment , a bullet broke the cross on his breast , and he fell . 
`` The cowards ! '' 
people said . 
`` Let them show themselves . 
Let us see them ! 
They dare not ! 
They are hiding ! '' 
The barricade of the Faubourg du Temple , defended by eighty men , attacked by ten thousand , held out for three days . 
On the fourth , they did as at Zaatcha , as at Constantine , they pierced the houses , they came over the roofs , the barricade was taken . 
Not one of the eighty cowards thought of flight , all were killed there with the exception of the leader , Barthelemy , of whom we shall speak presently . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was the tumult of thunders ; the barricade of the Temple was silence . 
The difference between these two redoubts was the difference between the formidable and the sinister . 
One seemed a maw ; the other a mask . 
Admitting that the gigantic and gloomy insurrection of June was composed of a wrath and of an enigma , one divined in the first barricade the dragon , and behind the second the sphinx . 
These two fortresses had been erected by two men named , the one , Cournet , the other , Barthelemy . 
Cournet made the Saint-Antoine barricade ; Barthelemy the barricade of the Temple . 
Each was the image of the man who had built it . 
Cournet was a man of lofty stature ; he had broad shoulders , a red face , a crushing fist , a bold heart , a loyal soul , a sincere and terrible eye . 
Intrepid , energetic , irascible , stormy ; the most cordial of men , the most formidable of combatants . 
War , strife , conflict , were the very air he breathed and put him in a good humor . 
He had been an officer in the navy , and , from his gestures and his voice , one divined that he sprang from the ocean , and that he came from the tempest ; he carried the hurricane on into battle . 
With the exception of the genius , there was in Cournet something of Danton , as , with the exception of the divinity , there was in Danton something of Hercules . 
Barthelemy , thin , feeble , pale , taciturn , was a sort of tragic street urchin , who , having had his ears boxed by a policeman , lay in wait for him , and killed him , and at seventeen was sent to the galleys . 
He came out and made this barricade . 
Later on , fatal circumstance , in London , proscribed by all , Barthelemy slew Cournet . 
It was a funereal duel . 
Some time afterwards , caught in the gearing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passion plays a part , a catastrophe in which French justice sees extenuating circumstances , and in which English justice sees only death , Barthelemy was hanged . 
The sombre social construction is so made that , thanks to material destitution , thanks to moral obscurity , that unhappy being who possessed an intelligence , certainly firm , possibly great , began in France with the galleys , and ended in England with the gallows . 
Barthelemy , on occasion , flew but one flag , the black flag . 
WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE ABYSS IF ONE DOES NOT CONVERSE Sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection , and June , 1848 , knew a great deal more about it than June , 1832 . 
So the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline , and an embryo compared to the two colossal barricades which we have just sketched ; but it was formidable for that epoch . 
The insurgents under the eye of Enjolras , for Marius no longer looked after anything , had made good use of the night . 
The barricade had been not only repaired , but augmented . 
They had raised it two feet . 
Bars of iron planted in the pavement resembled lances in rest . 
All sorts of rubbish brought and added from all directions complicated the external confusion . 
The redoubt had been cleverly made over , into a wall on the inside and a thicket on the outside . 
The staircase of paving-stones which permitted one to mount it like the wall of a citadel had been reconstructed . 
The barricade had been put in order , the tap-room disencumbered , the kitchen appropriated for the ambulance , the dressing of the wounded completed , the powder scattered on the ground and on the tables had been gathered up , bullets run , cartridges manufactured , lint scraped , the fallen weapons re-distributed , the interior of the redoubt cleaned , the rubbish swept up , corpses removed . 
They laid the dead in a heap in the Mondetour lane , of which they were still the masters . 
The pavement was red for a long time at that spot . 
Among the dead there were four National Guardsmen of the suburbs . 
Enjolras had their uniforms laid aside . 
Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep . 
Advice from Enjolras was a command . 
Still , only three or four took advantage of it . 
Feuilly employed these two hours in engraving this inscription on the wall which faced the tavern : -- LONG LIVE THE PEOPLES ! 
These four words , hollowed out in the rough stone with a nail , could be still read on the wall in 1848 . 
The three women had profited by the respite of the night to vanish definitely ; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely . 
They had found means of taking refuge in some neighboring house . 
The greater part of the wounded were able , and wished , to fight still . 
On a litter of mattresses and trusses of straw in the kitchen , which had been converted into an ambulance , there were five men gravely wounded , two of whom were municipal guardsmen . 
The municipal guardsmen were attended to first . 
In the tap-room there remained only Mabeuf under his black cloth and Javert bound to his post . 
`` This is the hall of the dead , '' said Enjolras . 
In the interior of this hall , barely lighted by a candle at one end , the mortuary table being behind the post like a horizontal bar , a sort of vast , vague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone . 
The pole of the omnibus , although snapped off by the fusillade , was still sufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it . 
Enjolras , who possessed that quality of a leader , of always doing what he said , attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat of the old man 's . 
No repast had been possible . 
There was neither bread nor meat . 
The fifty men in the barricade had speedily exhausted the scanty provisions of the wine-shop during the sixteen hours which they had passed there . 
At a given moment , every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of la Meduse . 
They were obliged to resign themselves to hunger . 
They had then reached the first hours of that Spartan day of the 6th of June when , in the barricade Saint-Merry , Jeanne , surrounded by the insurgents who demanded bread , replied to all combatants crying : `` Something to eat ! '' 
with : `` Why ? 
It is three o'clock ; at four we shall be dead . '' 
As they could no longer eat , Enjolras forbade them to drink . 
He interdicted wine , and portioned out the brandy . 
They had found in the cellar fifteen full bottles hermetically sealed . 
Enjolras and Combeferre examined them . 
Combeferre when he came up again said : -- `` It 's the old stock of Father Hucheloup , who began business as a grocer . '' 
-- `` It must be real wine , '' observed Bossuet . 
`` It 's lucky that Grantaire is asleep . 
If he were on foot , there would be a good deal of difficulty in saving those bottles . '' 
-- Enjolras , in spite of all murmurs , placed his veto on the fifteen bottles , and , in order that no one might touch them , he had them placed under the table on which Father Mabeuf was lying . 
About two o'clock in the morning , they reckoned up their strength . 
There were still thirty-seven of them . 
The day began to dawn . 
The torch , which had been replaced in its cavity in the pavement , had just been extinguished . 
The interior of the barricade , that species of tiny courtyard appropriated from the street , was bathed in shadows , and resembled , athwart the vague , twilight horror , the deck of a disabled ship . 
The combatants , as they went and came , moved about there like black forms . 
Above that terrible nesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividly outlined ; at the very top , the chimneys stood palely out . 
The sky was of that charming , undecided hue , which may be white and may be blue . 
Birds flew about in it with cries of joy . 
The lofty house which formed the back of the barricade , being turned to the East , had upon its roof a rosy reflection . 
The morning breeze ruffled the gray hair on the head of the dead man at the third-story window . 
`` I am delighted that the torch has been extinguished , '' said Courfeyrac to Feuilly . 
`` That torch flickering in the wind annoyed me . 
It had the appearance of being afraid . 
The light of torches resembles the wisdom of cowards ; it gives a bad light because it trembles . '' 
Dawn awakens minds as it does the birds ; all began to talk . 
Joly , perceiving a cat prowling on a gutter , extracted philosophy from it . 
`` What is the cat ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` It is a corrective . 
The good God , having made the mouse , said : ` Hullo ! 
I have committed a blunder . ' 
And so he made the cat . 
The cat is the erratum of the mouse . 
The mouse , plus the cat , is the proof of creation revised and corrected . '' 
Combeferre , surrounded by students and artisans , was speaking of the dead , of Jean Prouvaire , of Bahorel , of Mabeuf , and even of Cabuc , and of Enjolras ' sad severity . 
He said : -- `` Harmodius and Aristogiton , Brutus , Chereas , Stephanus , Cromwell , Charlotte Corday , Sand , have all had their moment of agony when it was too late . 
Our hearts quiver so , and human life is such a mystery that , even in the case of a civic murder , even in a murder for liberation , if there be such a thing , the remorse for having struck a man surpasses the joy of having served the human race . '' 
And , such are the windings of the exchange of speech , that , a moment later , by a transition brought about through Jean Prouvaire 's verses , Combeferre was comparing the translators of the Georgics , Raux with Cournand , Cournand with Delille , pointing out the passages translated by Malfilatre , particularly the prodigies of Caesar 's death ; and at that word , Caesar , the conversation reverted to Brutus . 
`` Caesar , '' said Combeferre , `` fell justly . 
Cicero was severe towards Caesar , and he was right . 
That severity is not diatribe . 
When Zoilus insults Homer , when Maevius insults Virgil , when Vise insults Moliere , when Pope insults Shakspeare , when Frederic insults Voltaire , it is an old law of envy and hatred which is being carried out ; genius attracts insult , great men are always more or less barked at . 
But Zoilus and Cicero are two different persons . 
Cicero is an arbiter in thought , just as Brutus is an arbiter by the sword . 
For my own part , I blame that last justice , the blade ; but , antiquity admitted it . 
Caesar , the violator of the Rubicon , conferring , as though they came from him , the dignities which emanated from the people , not rising at the entrance of the senate , committed the acts of a king and almost of a tyrant , regia ac pene tyrannica . 
He was a great man ; so much the worse , or so much the better ; the lesson is but the more exalted . 
His twenty-three wounds touch me less than the spitting in the face of Jesus Christ . 
Caesar is stabbed by the senators ; Christ is cuffed by lackeys . 
One feels the God through the greater outrage . '' 
Bossuet , who towered above the interlocutors from the summit of a heap of paving-stones , exclaimed , rifle in hand : -- `` Oh Cydathenaeum , Oh Myrrhinus , Oh Probalinthus , Oh graces of the AEantides ! 
Oh ! 
Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a Greek of Laurium or of Edapteon ? '' 
LIGHT AND SHADOW Enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance . 
He had made his way out through Mondetour lane , gliding along close to the houses . 
The insurgents , we will remark , were full of hope . 
The manner in which they had repulsed the attack of the preceding night had caused them to almost disdain in advance the attack at dawn . 
They waited for it with a smile . 
They had no more doubt as to their success than as to their cause . 
Moreover , succor was , evidently , on the way to them . 
They reckoned on it . 
With that facility of triumphant prophecy which is one of the sources of strength in the French combatant , they divided the day which was at hand into three distinct phases . 
At six o'clock in the morning a regiment `` which had been labored with , '' would turn ; at noon , the insurrection of all Paris ; at sunset , revolution . 
They heard the alarm bell of Saint-Merry , which had not been silent for an instant since the night before ; a proof that the other barricade , the great one , Jeanne 's , still held out . 
All these hopes were exchanged between the different groups in a sort of gay and formidable whisper which resembled the warlike hum of a hive of bees . 
Enjolras reappeared . 
He returned from his sombre eagle flight into outer darkness . 
He listened for a moment to all this joy with folded arms , and one hand on his mouth . 
Then , fresh and rosy in the growing whiteness of the dawn , he said : `` The whole army of Paris is to strike . 
A third of the army is bearing down upon the barricades in which you now are . 
There is the National Guard in addition . 
I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of the line , and the standard-bearers of the sixth legion . 
In one hour you will be attacked . 
As for the populace , it was seething yesterday , to-day it is not stirring . 
There is nothing to expect ; nothing to hope for . 
Neither from a faubourg nor from a regiment . 
You are abandoned . '' 
These words fell upon the buzzing of the groups , and produced on them the effect caused on a swarm of bees by the first drops of a storm . 
A moment of indescribable silence ensued , in which death might have been heard flitting by . 
This moment was brief . 
A voice from the obscurest depths of the groups shouted to Enjolras : `` So be it . 
Let us raise the barricade to a height of twenty feet , and let us all remain in it . 
Citizens , let us offer the protests of corpses . 
Let us show that , if the people abandon the republicans , the republicans do not abandon the people . '' 
These words freed the thought of all from the painful cloud of individual anxieties . 
It was hailed with an enthusiastic acclamation . 
No one ever has known the name of the man who spoke thus ; he was some unknown blouse-wearer , a stranger , a man forgotten , a passing hero , that great anonymous , always mingled in human crises and in social geneses who , at a given moment , utters in a supreme fashion the decisive word , and who vanishes into the shadows after having represented for a minute , in a lightning flash , the people and God . 
This inexorable resolution so thoroughly impregnated the air of the 6th of June , 1832 , that , almost at the very same hour , on the barricade Saint-Merry , the insurgents were raising that clamor which has become a matter of history and which has been consigned to the documents in the case : -- `` What matters it whether they come to our assistance or not ? 
Let us get ourselves killed here , to the very last man . '' 
As the reader sees , the two barricades , though materially isolated , were in communication with each other . 
MINUS FIVE , PLUS ONE After the man who decreed the `` protest of corpses '' had spoken , and had given this formula of their common soul , there issued from all mouths a strangely satisfied and terrible cry , funereal in sense and triumphant in tone : `` Long live death ! 
Let us all remain here ! '' 
`` Why all ? '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` All ! 
All ! '' 
Enjolras resumed : `` The position is good ; the barricade is fine . 
Thirty men are enough . 
Why sacrifice forty ? '' 
They replied : `` Because not one will go away . '' 
`` Citizens , '' cried Enjolras , and there was an almost irritated vibration in his voice , `` this republic is not rich enough in men to indulge in useless expenditure of them . 
Vain-glory is waste . 
If the duty of some is to depart , that duty should be fulfilled like any other . '' 
Enjolras , the man-principle , had over his co-religionists that sort of omnipotent power which emanates from the absolute . 
Still , great as was this omnipotence , a murmur arose . 
A leader to the very finger-tips , Enjolras , seeing that they murmured , insisted . 
He resumed haughtily : `` Let those who are afraid of not numbering more than thirty say so . '' 
The murmurs redoubled . 
`` Besides , '' observed a voice in one group , `` it is easy enough to talk about leaving . 
The barricade is hemmed in . '' 
`` Not on the side of the Halles , '' said Enjolras . 
`` The Rue Mondetour is free , and through the Rue des Precheurs one can reach the Marche des Innocents . '' 
`` And there , '' went on another voice , `` you would be captured . 
You would fall in with some grand guard of the line or the suburbs ; they will spy a man passing in blouse and cap . 
` Whence come you ? ' 
` Do n't you belong to the barricade ? ' 
And they will look at your hands . 
You smell of powder . 
Shot . '' 
Enjolras , without making any reply , touched Combeferre 's shoulder , and the two entered the tap-room . 
They emerged thence a moment later . 
Enjolras held in his outstretched hands the four uniforms which he had laid aside . 
Combeferre followed , carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos . 
`` With this uniform , '' said Enjolras , `` you can mingle with the ranks and escape ; here is enough for four . '' 
And he flung on the ground , deprived of its pavement , the four uniforms . 
No wavering took place in his stoical audience . 
Combeferre took the word . 
`` Come , said he , `` you must have a little pity . 
Do you know what the question is here ? 
It is a question of women . 
See here . 
Are there women or are there not ? 
Are there children or are there not ? 
Are there mothers , yes or no , who rock cradles with their foot and who have a lot of little ones around them ? 
Let that man of you who has never beheld a nurse 's breast raise his hand . 
Ah ! 
you want to get yourselves killed , so do I -- I , who am speaking to you ; but I do not want to feel the phantoms of women wreathing their arms around me . 
Die , if you will , but do n't make others die . 
Suicides like that which is on the brink of accomplishment here are sublime ; but suicide is narrow , and does not admit of extension ; and as soon as it touches your neighbors , suicide is murder . 
Think of the little blond heads ; think of the white locks . 
Listen , Enjolras has just told me that he saw at the corner of the Rue du Cygne a lighted casement , a candle in a poor window , on the fifth floor , and on the pane the quivering shadow of the head of an old woman , who had the air of having spent the night in watching . 
Perhaps she is the mother of some one of you . 
Well , let that man go , and make haste , to say to his mother : ` Here I am , mother ! ' 
Let him feel at ease , the task here will be performed all the same . 
When one supports one 's relatives by one 's toil , one has not the right to sacrifice one 's self . 
That is deserting one 's family . 
And those who have daughters ! 
what are you thinking of ? 
You get yourselves killed , you are dead , that is well . 
And tomorrow ? 
Young girls without bread -- that is a terrible thing . 
Man begs , woman sells . 
Ah ! 
those charming and gracious beings , so gracious and so sweet , who have bonnets of flowers , who fill the house with purity , who sing and prattle , who are like a living perfume , who prove the existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth , that Jeanne , that Lise , that Mimi , those adorable and honest creatures who are your blessings and your pride , ah ! 
good God , they will suffer hunger ! 
What do you want me to say to you ? 
