Still , how had it come to pass that , having fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , he had been picked up by the police-agent on the banks of the Seine , near the Pont des Invalides ? 
Some one had carried him from the Quartier des Halles to the Champs-Elysees . 
And how ? 
Through the sewer . 
Unheard-of devotion ! 
Some one ? 
Who ? 
This was the man for whom Marius was searching . 
Of this man , who was his savior , nothing ; not a trace ; not the faintest indication . 
Marius , although forced to preserve great reserve , in that direction , pushed his inquiries as far as the prefecture of police . 
There , no more than elsewhere , did the information obtained lead to any enlightenment . 
The prefecture knew less about the matter than did the hackney-coachman . 
They had no knowledge of any arrest having been made on the 6th of June at the mouth of the Grand Sewer . 
No report of any agent had been received there upon this matter , which was regarded at the prefecture as a fable . 
The invention of this fable was attributed to the coachman . 
A coachman who wants a gratuity is capable of anything , even of imagination . 
The fact was assured , nevertheless , and Marius could not doubt it , unless he doubted his own identity , as we have just said . 
Everything about this singular enigma was inexplicable . 
What had become of that man , that mysterious man , whom the coachman had seen emerge from the grating of the Grand Sewer bearing upon his back the unconscious Marius , and whom the police-agent on the watch had arrested in the very act of rescuing an insurgent ? 
What had become of the agent himself ? 
Why had this agent preserved silence ? 
Had the man succeeded in making his escape ? 
Had he bribed the agent ? 
Why did this man give no sign of life to Marius , who owed everything to him ? 
His disinterestedness was no less tremendous than his devotion . 
Why had not that man appeared again ? 
Perhaps he was above compensation , but no one is above gratitude . 
Was he dead ? 
Who was the man ? 
What sort of a face had he ? 
No one could tell him this . 
The coachman answered : `` The night was very dark . '' 
Basque and Nicolette , all in a flutter , had looked only at their young master all covered with blood . 
The porter , whose candle had lighted the tragic arrival of Marius , had been the only one to take note of the man in question , and this is the description that he gave : `` That man was terrible . '' 
Marius had the blood-stained clothing which he had worn when he had been brought back to his grandfather preserved , in the hope that it would prove of service in his researches . 
On examining the coat , it was found that one skirt had been torn in a singular way . 
A piece was missing . 
One evening , Marius was speaking in the presence of Cosette and Jean Valjean of the whole of that singular adventure , of the innumerable inquiries which he had made , and of the fruitlessness of his efforts . 
The cold countenance of `` Monsieur Fauchelevent '' angered him . 
He exclaimed , with a vivacity which had something of wrath in it : `` Yes , that man , whoever he may have been , was sublime . 
Do you know what he did , sir ? 
He intervened like an archangel . 
He must have flung himself into the midst of the battle , have stolen me away , have opened the sewer , have dragged me into it and have carried me through it ! 
He must have traversed more than a league and a half in those frightful subterranean galleries , bent over , weighed down , in the dark , in the cess-pool , -- more than a league and a half , sir , with a corpse upon his back ! 
And with what object ? 
With the sole object of saving the corpse . 
And that corpse I was . 
He said to himself : ` There may still be a glimpse of life there , perchance ; I will risk my own existence for that miserable spark ! ' 
And his existence he risked not once but twenty times ! 
And every step was a danger . 
The proof of it is , that on emerging from the sewer , he was arrested . 
Do you know , sir , that that man did all this ? 
And he had no recompense to expect . 
What was I ? 
An insurgent . 
What was I ? 
One of the conquered . 
Oh ! 
if Cosette 's six hundred thousand francs were mine ... '' `` They are yours , '' interrupted Jean Valjean . 
`` Well , '' resumed Marius , `` I would give them all to find that man once more . '' 
Jean Valjean remained silent . 
THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY , 1833 The night of the 16th to the 17th of February , 1833 , was a blessed night . 
Above its shadows heaven stood open . 
It was the wedding night of Marius and Cosette . 
The day had been adorable . 
It had not been the grand festival dreamed by the grandfather , a fairy spectacle , with a confusion of cherubim and Cupids over the heads of the bridal pair , a marriage worthy to form the subject of a painting to be placed over a door ; but it had been sweet and smiling . 
The manner of marriage in 1833 was not the same as it is to-day . 
France had not yet borrowed from England that supreme delicacy of carrying off one 's wife , of fleeing , on coming out of church , of hiding oneself with shame from one 's happiness , and of combining the ways of a bankrupt with the delights of the Song of Songs . 
People had not yet grasped to the full the chastity , exquisiteness , and decency of jolting their paradise in a posting-chaise , of breaking up their mystery with clic-clacs , of taking for a nuptial bed the bed of an inn , and of leaving behind them , in a commonplace chamber , at so much a night , the most sacred of the souvenirs of life mingled pell-mell with the tete-a-tete of the conductor of the diligence and the maid-servant of the inn . 
In this second half of the nineteenth century in which we are now living , the mayor and his scarf , the priest and his chasuble , the law and God no longer suffice ; they must be eked out by the Postilion de Lonjumeau ; a blue waistcoat turned up with red , and with bell buttons , a plaque like a vantbrace , knee-breeches of green leather , oaths to the Norman horses with their tails knotted up , false galloons , varnished hat , long powdered locks , an enormous whip and tall boots . 
France does not yet carry elegance to the length of doing like the English nobility , and raining down on the post-chaise of the bridal pair a hail storm of slippers trodden down at heel and of worn-out shoes , in memory of Churchill , afterwards Marlborough , or Malbrouck , who was assailed on his wedding-day by the wrath of an aunt which brought him good luck . 
Old shoes and slippers do not , as yet , form a part of our nuptial celebrations ; but patience , as good taste continues to spread , we shall come to that . 
In 1833 , a hundred years ago , marriage was not conducted at a full trot . 
Strange to say , at that epoch , people still imagined that a wedding was a private and social festival , that a patriarchal banquet does not spoil a domestic solemnity , that gayety , even in excess , provided it be honest , and decent , does happiness no harm , and that , in short , it is a good and a venerable thing that the fusion of these two destinies whence a family is destined to spring , should begin at home , and that the household should thenceforth have its nuptial chamber as its witness . 
And people were so immodest as to marry in their own homes . 
The marriage took place , therefore , in accordance with this now superannuated fashion , at M. Gillenormand 's house . 
Natural and commonplace as this matter of marrying is , the banns to publish , the papers to be drawn up , the mayoralty , and the church produce some complication . 
They could not get ready before the 16th of February . 
Now , we note this detail , for the pure satisfaction of being exact , it chanced that the 16th fell on Shrove Tuesday . 
Hesitations , scruples , particularly on the part of Aunt Gillenormand . 
`` Shrove Tuesday ! '' 
exclaimed the grandfather , `` so much the better . 
There is a proverb : '' ` Mariage un Mardi gras N'aura point enfants ingrats . ' 
-LSB- 66 -RSB- -LSB- 66 -RSB- `` A Shrove-Tuesday marriage will have no ungrateful children . '' 
Let us proceed . 
Here goes for the 16th ! 
Do you want to delay , Marius ? '' 
`` No , certainly not ! '' 
replied the lover . 
`` Let us marry , then , '' cried the grandfather . 
Accordingly , the marriage took place on the 16th , notwithstanding the public merrymaking . 
It rained that day , but there is always in the sky a tiny scrap of blue at the service of happiness , which lovers see , even when the rest of creation is under an umbrella . 
On the preceding evening , Jean Valjean handed to Marius , in the presence of M. Gillenormand , the five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs . 
As the marriage was taking place under the regime of community of property , the papers had been simple . 
Henceforth , Toussaint was of no use to Jean Valjean ; Cosette inherited her and promoted her to the rank of lady 's maid . 
As for Jean Valjean , a beautiful chamber in the Gillenormand house had been furnished expressly for him , and Cosette had said to him in such an irresistible manner : `` Father , I entreat you , '' that she had almost persuaded him to promise that he would come and occupy it . 
A few days before that fixed on for the marriage , an accident happened to Jean Valjean ; he crushed the thumb of his right hand . 
This was not a serious matter ; and he had not allowed any one to trouble himself about it , nor to dress it , nor even to see his hurt , not even Cosette . 
Nevertheless , this had forced him to swathe his hand in a linen bandage , and to carry his arm in a sling , and had prevented his signing . 
M. Gillenormand , in his capacity of Cosette 's supervising-guardian , had supplied his place . 
We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor 's office or to the church . 
One does not follow a pair of lovers to that extent , and one is accustomed to turn one 's back on the drama as soon as it puts a wedding nosegay in its buttonhole . 
We will confine ourselves to noting an incident which , though unnoticed by the wedding party , marked the transit from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire to the church of Saint-Paul . 
At that epoch , the northern extremity of the Rue Saint-Louis was in process of repaving . 
It was barred off , beginning with the Rue du Pare-Royal . 
It was impossible for the wedding carriages to go directly to Saint-Paul . 
They were obliged to alter their course , and the simplest way was to turn through the boulevard . 
One of the invited guests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday , and that there would be a jam of vehicles . 
-- `` Why ? '' 
asked M. Gillenormand -- `` Because of the maskers . '' 
-- `` Capital , '' said the grandfather , `` let us go that way . 
These young folks are on the way to be married ; they are about to enter the serious part of life . 
This will prepare them for seeing a bit of the masquerade . '' 
They went by way of the boulevard . 
The first wedding coach held Cosette and Aunt Gillenormand , M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean . 
Marius , still separated from his betrothed according to usage , did not come until the second . 
The nuptial train , on emerging from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , became entangled in a long procession of vehicles which formed an endless chain from the Madeleine to the Bastille , and from the Bastille to the Madeleine . 
Maskers abounded on the boulevard . 
In spite of the fact that it was raining at intervals , Merry-Andrew , Pantaloon and Clown persisted . 
In the good humor of that winter of 1833 , Paris had disguised itself as Venice . 
Such Shrove Tuesdays are no longer to be seen now-a-days . 
Everything which exists being a scattered Carnival , there is no longer any Carnival . 
The sidewalks were overflowing with pedestrians and the windows with curious spectators . 
The terraces which crown the peristyles of the theatres were bordered with spectators . 
Besides the maskers , they stared at that procession -- peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as to Longchamps , -- of vehicles of every description , citadines , tapissieres , carioles , cabriolets marching in order , rigorously riveted to each other by the police regulations , and locked into rails , as it were . 
Any one in these vehicles is at once a spectator and a spectacle . 
Police-sergeants maintained , on the sides of the boulevard , these two interminable parallel files , moving in contrary directions , and saw to it that nothing interfered with that double current , those two brooks of carriages , flowing , the one down stream , the other up stream , the one towards the Chaussee d'Antin , the other towards the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The carriages of the peers of France and of the Ambassadors , emblazoned with coats of arms , held the middle of the way , going and coming freely . 
Certain joyous and magnificent trains , notably that of the Boeuf Gras , had the same privilege . 
In this gayety of Paris , England cracked her whip ; Lord Seymour 's post-chaise , harassed by a nickname from the populace , passed with great noise . 
In the double file , along which the municipal guards galloped like sheep-dogs , honest family coaches , loaded down with great-aunts and grandmothers , displayed at their doors fresh groups of children in disguise , Clowns of seven years of age , Columbines of six , ravishing little creatures , who felt that they formed an official part of the public mirth , who were imbued with the dignity of their harlequinade , and who possessed the gravity of functionaries . 
From time to time , a hitch arose somewhere in the procession of vehicles ; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot was disentangled ; one carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the whole line . 
Then they set out again on the march . 
The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille , and skirting the right side of the Boulevard . 
At the top of the Pont-aux-Choux , there was a stoppage . 
Nearly at the same moment , the other file , which was proceeding towards the Madeleine , halted also . 
At that point of the file there was a carriage-load of maskers . 
These carriages , or to speak more correctly , these wagon-loads of maskers are very familiar to Parisians . 
If they were missing on a Shrove Tuesday , or at the Mid-Lent , it would be taken in bad part , and people would say : `` There 's something behind that . 
Probably the ministry is about to undergo a change . '' 
A pile of Cassandras , Harlequins and Columbines , jolted along high above the passers-by , all possible grotesquenesses , from the Turk to the savage , Hercules supporting Marquises , fishwives who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears just as the Maenads made Aristophanes drop his eyes , tow wigs , pink tights , dandified hats , spectacles of a grimacer , three-cornered hats of Janot tormented with a butterfly , shouts directed at pedestrians , fists on hips , bold attitudes , bare shoulders , immodesty unchained ; a chaos of shamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers ; this is what that institution was like . 
Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis , France stands in need of the hackney-coach of Vade . 
Everything can be parodied , even parody . 
The Saturnalia , that grimace of antique beauty , ends , through exaggeration after exaggeration , in Shrove Tuesday ; and the Bacchanal , formerly crowned with sprays of vine leaves and grapes , inundated with sunshine , displaying her marble breast in a divine semi-nudity , having at the present day lost her shape under the soaked rags of the North , has finally come to be called the Jack-pudding . 
The tradition of carriage-loads of maskers runs back to the most ancient days of the monarchy . 
The accounts of Louis XI . 
allot to the bailiff of the palace `` twenty sous , Tournois , for three coaches of mascarades in the cross-roads . '' 
In our day , these noisy heaps of creatures are accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancient cuckoo carriage , whose imperial they load down , or they overwhelm a hired landau , with its top thrown back , with their tumultuous groups . 
Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six . 
They cling to the seats , to the rumble , on the cheeks of the hood , on the shafts . 
They even bestride the carriage lamps . 
They stand , sit , lie , with their knees drawn up in a knot , and their legs hanging . 
The women sit on the men 's laps . 
Far away , above the throng of heads , their wild pyramid is visible . 
These carriage-loads form mountains of mirth in the midst of the rout . 
Colle , Panard and Piron flow from it , enriched with slang . 
This carriage which has become colossal through its freight , has an air of conquest . 
Uproar reigns in front , tumult behind . 
People vociferate , shout , howl , there they break forth and writhe with enjoyment ; gayety roars ; sarcasm flames forth , joviality is flaunted like a red flag ; two jades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis ; it is the triumphal car of laughter . 
A laughter that is too cynical to be frank . 
In truth , this laughter is suspicious . 
This laughter has a mission . 
It is charged with proving the Carnival to the Parisians . 
These fishwife vehicles , in which one feels one knows not what shadows , set the philosopher to thinking . 
There is government therein . 
There one lays one 's finger on a mysterious affinity between public men and public women . 
It certainly is sad that turpitude heaped up should give a sum total of gayety , that by piling ignominy upon opprobrium the people should be enticed , that the system of spying , and serving as caryatids to prostitution should amuse the rabble when it confronts them , that the crowd loves to behold that monstrous living pile of tinsel rags , half dung , half light , roll by on four wheels howling and laughing , that they should clap their hands at this glory composed of all shames , that there would be no festival for the populace , did not the police promenade in their midst these sorts of twenty-headed hydras of joy . 
But what can be done about it ? 
These be-ribboned and be-flowered tumbrils of mire are insulted and pardoned by the laughter of the public . 
The laughter of all is the accomplice of universal degradation . 
Certain unhealthy festivals disaggregate the people and convert them into the populace . 
And populaces , like tyrants , require buffoons . 
The King has Roquelaure , the populace has the Merry-Andrew . 
Paris is a great , mad city on every occasion that it is a great sublime city . 
There the Carnival forms part of politics . 
Paris , -- let us confess it -- willingly allows infamy to furnish it with comedy . 
She only demands of her masters -- when she has masters -- one thing : `` Paint me the mud . '' 
Rome was of the same mind . 
She loved Nero . 
Nero was a titanic lighterman . 
Chance ordained , as we have just said , that one of these shapeless clusters of masked men and women , dragged about on a vast calash , should halt on the left of the boulevard , while the wedding train halted on the right . 
The carriage-load of masks caught sight of the wedding carriage containing the bridal party opposite them on the other side of the boulevard . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said a masker , `` here 's a wedding . '' 
`` A sham wedding , '' retorted another . 
`` We are the genuine article . '' 
And , being too far off to accost the wedding party , and fearing also , the rebuke of the police , the two maskers turned their eyes elsewhere . 
At the end of another minute , the carriage-load of maskers had their hands full , the multitude set to yelling , which is the crowd 's caress to masquerades ; and the two maskers who had just spoken had to face the throng with their comrades , and did not find the entire repertory of projectiles of the fishmarkets too extensive to retort to the enormous verbal attacks of the populace . 
A frightful exchange of metaphors took place between the maskers and the crowd . 
In the meanwhile , two other maskers in the same carriage , a Spaniard with an enormous nose , an elderly air , and huge black moustache , and a gaunt fishwife , who was quite a young girl , masked with a loup , -LSB- 67 -RSB- had also noticed the wedding , and while their companions and the passers-by were exchanging insults , they had held a dialogue in a low voice . 
-LSB- 67 -RSB- A short mask . 
Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it . 
The gusts of rain had drenched the front of the vehicle , which was wide open ; the breezes of February are not warm ; as the fishwife , clad in a low-necked gown , replied to the Spaniard , she shivered , laughed and coughed . 
Here is their dialogue : `` Say , now . '' 
`` What , daddy ? '' 
`` Do you see that old cove ? '' 
`` What old cove ? '' 
`` Yonder , in the first wedding-cart , on our side . '' 
`` The one with his arm hung up in a black cravat ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` I 'm sure that I know him . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` I 'm willing that they should cut my throat , and I 'm ready to swear that I never said either you , thou , or I , in my life , if I do n't know that Parisian . '' 
-LSB- pantinois . -RSB- 
`` Paris in Pantin to-day . '' 
`` Can you see the bride if you stoop down ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` And the bridegroom ? '' 
`` There 's no bridegroom in that trap . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
`` Unless it 's the old fellow . '' 
`` Try to get a sight of the bride by stooping very low . '' 
`` I ca n't . '' 
`` Never mind , that old cove who has something the matter with his paw I know , and that I 'm positive . '' 
`` And what good does it do to know him ? '' 
`` No one can tell . 
Sometimes it does ! '' 
`` I do n't care a hang for old fellows , that I do n't ! '' 
`` I know him . '' 
`` Know him , if you want to . '' 
`` How the devil does he come to be one of the wedding party ? '' 
`` We are in it , too . '' 
`` Where does that wedding come from ? '' 
`` How should I know ? '' 
`` Listen . '' 
`` Well , what ? '' 
`` There 's one thing you ought to do . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
`` Get off of our trap and spin that wedding . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` To find out where it goes , and what it is . 
Hurry up and jump down , trot , my girl , your legs are young . '' 
`` I ca n't quit the vehicle . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` I 'm hired . '' 
`` Ah , the devil ! '' 
`` I owe my fishwife day to the prefecture . '' 
`` That 's true . '' 
`` If I leave the cart , the first inspector who gets his eye on me will arrest me . 
You know that well enough . '' 
`` Yes , I do . '' 
`` I 'm bought by the government for to-day . '' 
`` All the same , that old fellow bothers me . '' 
`` Do the old fellows bother you ? 
But you 're not a young girl . '' 
`` He 's in the first carriage . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` In the bride 's trap . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` So he is the father . '' 
`` What concern is that of mine ? '' 
`` I tell you that he 's the father . '' 
`` As if he were the only father . '' 
`` Listen . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` I ca n't go out otherwise than masked . 
Here I 'm concealed , no one knows that I 'm here . 
But to-morrow , there will be no more maskers . 
It 's Ash Wednesday . 
I run the risk of being nabbed . 
I must sneak back into my hole . 
But you are free . '' 
`` Not particularly . '' 
`` More than I am , at any rate . '' 
`` Well , what of that ? '' 
`` You must try to find out where that wedding-party went to . '' 
`` Where it went ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I know . '' 
`` Where is it going then ? '' 
`` To the Cadran-Bleu . '' 
`` In the first place , it 's not in that direction . '' 
`` Well ! 
to la Rapee . '' 
`` Or elsewhere . '' 
`` It 's free . 
Wedding-parties are at liberty . '' 
`` That 's not the point at all . 
I tell you that you must try to learn for me what that wedding is , who that old cove belongs to , and where that wedding pair lives . '' 
`` I like that ! 
that would be queer . 
It 's so easy to find out a wedding-party that passed through the street on a Shrove Tuesday , a week afterwards . 
A pin in a hay-mow ! 
It ai n't possible ! '' 
`` That do n't matter . 
You must try . 
You understand me , Azelma . '' 
The two files resumed their movement on both sides of the boulevard , in opposite directions , and the carriage of the maskers lost sight of the `` trap '' of the bride . 
JEAN VALJEAN STILL WEARS HIS ARM IN A SLING To realize one 's dream . 
To whom is this accorded ? 
There must be elections for this in heaven ; we are all candidates , unknown to ourselves ; the angels vote . 
Cosette and Marius had been elected . 
Cosette , both at the mayor 's office and at church , was dazzling and touching . 
Toussaint , assisted by Nicolette , had dressed her . 
Cosette wore over a petticoat of white taffeta , her robe of Binche guipure , a veil of English point , a necklace of fine pearls , a wreath of orange flowers ; all this was white , and , from the midst of that whiteness she beamed forth . 
It was an exquisite candor expanding and becoming transfigured in the light . 
One would have pronounced her a virgin on the point of turning into a goddess . 
Marius ' handsome hair was lustrous and perfumed ; here and there , beneath the thick curls , pale lines -- the scars of the barricade -- were visible . 
The grandfather , haughty , with head held high , amalgamating more than ever in his toilet and his manners all the elegances of the epoch of Barras , escorted Cosette . 
He took the place of Jean Valjean , who , on account of his arm being still in a sling , could not give his hand to the bride . 
Jean Valjean , dressed in black , followed them with a smile . 
`` Monsieur Fauchelevent , '' said the grandfather to him , `` this is a fine day . 
I vote for the end of afflictions and sorrows . 
Henceforth , there must be no sadness anywhere . 
Pardieu , I decree joy ! 
Evil has no right to exist . 
That there should be any unhappy men is , in sooth , a disgrace to the azure of the sky . 
Evil does not come from man , who is good at bottom . 
All human miseries have for their capital and central government hell , otherwise , known as the Devil 's Tuileries . 
Good , here I am uttering demagogical words ! 
As far as I am concerned , I have no longer any political opinions ; let all me be rich , that is to say , mirthful , and I confine myself to that . '' 
When , at the conclusion of all the ceremonies , after having pronounced before the mayor and before the priest all possible `` yesses , '' after having signed the registers at the municipality and at the sacristy , after having exchanged their rings , after having knelt side by side under the pall of white moire in the smoke of the censer , they arrived , hand in hand , admired and envied by all , Marius in black , she in white , preceded by the suisse , with the epaulets of a colonel , tapping the pavement with his halberd , between two rows of astonished spectators , at the portals of the church , both leaves of which were thrown wide open , ready to enter their carriage again , and all being finished , Cosette still could not believe that it was real . 
She looked at Marius , she looked at the crowd , she looked at the sky : it seemed as though she feared that she should wake up from her dream . 
Her amazed and uneasy air added something indescribably enchanting to her beauty . 
They entered the same carriage to return home , Marius beside Cosette ; M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean sat opposite them ; Aunt Gillenormand had withdrawn one degree , and was in the second vehicle . 
`` My children , '' said the grandfather , `` here you are , Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne , with an income of thirty thousand livres . '' 
And Cosette , nestling close to Marius , caressed his ear with an angelic whisper : `` So it is true . 
My name is Marius . 
I am Madame Thou . '' 
These two creatures were resplendent . 
They had reached that irrevocable and irrecoverable moment , at the dazzling intersection of all youth and all joy . 
They realized the verses of Jean Prouvaire ; they were forty years old taken together . 
It was marriage sublimated ; these two children were two lilies . 
They did not see each other , they did not contemplate each other . 
Cosette perceived Marius in the midst of a glory ; Marius perceived Cosette on an altar . 
And on that altar , and in that glory , the two apotheoses mingling , in the background , one knows not how , behind a cloud for Cosette , in a flash for Marius , there was the ideal thing , the real thing , the meeting of the kiss and the dream , the nuptial pillow . 
All the torments through which they had passed came back to them in intoxication . 
It seemed to them that their sorrows , their sleepless nights , their tears , their anguish , their terrors , their despair , converted into caresses and rays of light , rendered still more charming the charming hour which was approaching ; and that their griefs were but so many handmaidens who were preparing the toilet of joy . 
How good it is to have suffered ! 
Their unhappiness formed a halo round their happiness . 
The long agony of their love was terminating in an ascension . 
It was the same enchantment in two souls , tinged with voluptuousness in Marius , and with modesty in Cosette . 
They said to each other in low tones : `` We will go back to take a look at our little garden in the Rue Plumet . '' 
The folds of Cosette 's gown lay across Marius . 
Such a day is an ineffable mixture of dream and of reality . 
One possesses and one supposes . 
One still has time before one to divine . 
The emotion on that day , of being at mid-day and of dreaming of midnight is indescribable . 
The delights of these two hearts overflowed upon the crowd , and inspired the passers-by with cheerfulness . 
People halted in the Rue Saint-Antoine , in front of Saint-Paul , to gaze through the windows of the carriage at the orange-flowers quivering on Cosette 's head . 
Then they returned home to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Marius , triumphant and radiant , mounted side by side with Cosette the staircase up which he had been borne in a dying condition . 
The poor , who had trooped to the door , and who shared their purses , blessed them . 
There were flowers everywhere . 
The house was no less fragrant than the church ; after the incense , roses . 
They thought they heard voices carolling in the infinite ; they had God in their hearts ; destiny appeared to them like a ceiling of stars ; above their heads they beheld the light of a rising sun . 
All at once , the clock struck . 
Marius glanced at Cosette 's charming bare arm , and at the rosy things which were vaguely visible through the lace of her bodice , and Cosette , intercepting Marius ' glance , blushed to her very hair . 
Quite a number of old family friends of the Gillenormand family had been invited ; they pressed about Cosette . 
Each one vied with the rest in saluting her as Madame la Baronne . 
The officer , Theodule Gillenormand , now a captain , had come from Chartres , where he was stationed in garrison , to be present at the wedding of his cousin Pontmercy . 
Cosette did not recognize him . 
He , on his side , habituated as he was to have women consider him handsome , retained no more recollection of Cosette than of any other woman . 
`` How right I was not to believe in that story about the lancer ! '' 
said Father Gillenormand , to himself . 
Cosette had never been more tender with Jean Valjean . 
She was in unison with Father Gillenormand ; while he erected joy into aphorisms and maxims , she exhaled goodness like a perfume . 
Happiness desires that all the world should be happy . 
She regained , for the purpose of addressing Jean Valjean , inflections of voice belonging to the time when she was a little girl . 
She caressed him with her smile . 
A banquet had been spread in the dining-room . 
Illumination as brilliant as the daylight is the necessary seasoning of a great joy . 
Mist and obscurity are not accepted by the happy . 
They do not consent to be black . 
The night , yes ; the shadows , no . 
If there is no sun , one must be made . 
The dining-room was full of gay things . 
In the centre , above the white and glittering table , was a Venetian lustre with flat plates , with all sorts of colored birds , blue , violet , red , and green , perched amid the candles ; around the chandelier , girandoles , on the walls , sconces with triple and quintuple branches ; mirrors , silverware , glassware , plate , porcelain , faience , pottery , gold and silversmith 's work , all was sparkling and gay . 
The empty spaces between the candelabra were filled in with bouquets , so that where there was not a light , there was a flower . 
In the antechamber , three violins and a flute softly played quartettes by Haydn . 
Jean Valjean had seated himself on a chair in the drawing-room , behind the door , the leaf of which folded back upon him in such a manner as to nearly conceal him . 
A few moments before they sat down to table , Cosette came , as though inspired by a sudden whim , and made him a deep courtesy , spreading out her bridal toilet with both hands , and with a tenderly roguish glance , she asked him : `` Father , are you satisfied ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I am content ! '' 
`` Well , then , laugh . '' 
Jean Valjean began to laugh . 
A few moments later , Basque announced that dinner was served . 
The guests , preceded by M. Gillenormand with Cosette on his arm , entered the dining-room , and arranged themselves in the proper order around the table . 
Two large arm-chairs figured on the right and left of the bride , the first for M. Gillenormand , the other for Jean Valjean . 
M. Gillenormand took his seat . 
The other arm-chair remained empty . 
They looked about for M. Fauchelevent . 
He was no longer there . 
M. Gillenormand questioned Basque . 
`` Do you know where M. Fauchelevent is ? '' 
`` Sir , '' replied Basque , `` I do , precisely . 
M. Fauchelevent told me to say to you , sir , that he was suffering , his injured hand was paining him somewhat , and that he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne . 
That he begged to be excused , that he would come to-morrow . 
He has just taken his departure . '' 
That empty arm-chair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for a moment . 
But , if M. Fauchelevent was absent , M. Gillenormand was present , and the grandfather beamed for two . 
He affirmed that M. Fauchelevent had done well to retire early , if he were suffering , but that it was only a slight ailment . 
This declaration sufficed . 
Moreover , what is an obscure corner in such a submersion of joy ? 
Cosette and Marius were passing through one of those egotistical and blessed moments when no other faculty is left to a person than that of receiving happiness . 
And then , an idea occurred to M. Gillenormand . 
-- `` Pardieu , this armchair is empty . 
Come hither , Marius . 
Your aunt will permit it , although she has a right to you . 
This armchair is for you . 
That is legal and delightful . 
Fortunatus beside Fortunata . '' 
-- Applause from the whole table . 
Marius took Jean Valjean 's place beside Cosette , and things fell out so that Cosette , who had , at first , been saddened by Jean Valjean 's absence , ended by being satisfied with it . 
From the moment when Marius took his place , and was the substitute , Cosette would not have regretted God himself . 
She set her sweet little foot , shod in white satin , on Marius ' foot . 
The arm-chair being occupied , M. Fauchelevent was obliterated ; and nothing was lacking . 
And , five minutes afterward , the whole table from one end to the other , was laughing with all the animation of forgetfulness . 
At dessert , M. Gillenormand , rising to his feet , with a glass of champagne in his hand -- only half full so that the palsy of his eighty years might not cause an overflow , -- proposed the health of the married pair . 
`` You shall not escape two sermons , '' he exclaimed . 
`` This morning you had one from the cure , this evening you shall have one from your grandfather . 
Listen to me ; I will give you a bit of advice : Adore each other . 
I do not make a pack of gyrations , I go straight to the mark , be happy . 
In all creation , only the turtle-doves are wise . 
Philosophers say : ` Moderate your joys . ' 
I say : ` Give rein to your joys . ' 
Be as much smitten with each other as fiends . 
Be in a rage about it . 
The philosophers talk stuff and nonsense . 
I should like to stuff their philosophy down their gullets again . 
Can there be too many perfumes , too many open rose-buds , too many nightingales singing , too many green leaves , too much aurora in life ? 
can people love each other too much ? 
can people please each other too much ? 
Take care , Estelle , thou art too pretty ! 
Have a care , Nemorin , thou art too handsome ! 
Fine stupidity , in sooth ! 
Can people enchant each other too much , cajole each other too much , charm each other too much ? 
Can one be too much alive , too happy ? 
Moderate your joys . 
Ah , indeed ! 
Down with the philosophers ! 
Wisdom consists in jubilation . 
Make merry , let us make merry . 
Are we happy because we are good , or are we good because we are happy ? 
Is the Sancy diamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy , or because it weighs six hundred carats ? 
I know nothing about it , life is full of such problems ; the important point is to possess the Sancy and happiness . 
Let us be happy without quibbling and quirking . 
Let us obey the sun blindly . 
What is the sun ? 
It is love . 
He who says love , says woman . 
Ah ! 
ah ! 
behold omnipotence -- women . 
Ask that demagogue of a Marius if he is not the slave of that little tyrant of a Cosette . 
And of his own free will , too , the coward ! 
Woman ! 
There is no Robespierre who keeps his place but woman reigns . 
I am no longer Royalist except towards that royalty . 
What is Adam ? 
The kingdom of Eve . 
No '89 for Eve . 
There has been the royal sceptre surmounted by a fleur-de-lys , there has been the imperial sceptre surmounted by a globe , there has been the sceptre of Charlemagne , which was of iron , there has been the sceptre of Louis the Great , which was of gold , -- the revolution twisted them between its thumb and forefinger , ha ` penny straws ; it is done with , it is broken , it lies on the earth , there is no longer any sceptre , but make me a revolution against that little embroidered handkerchief , which smells of patchouli ! 
I should like to see you do it . 
Try . 
Why is it so solid ? 
Because it is a gewgaw . 
Ah ! 
you are the nineteenth century ? 
Well , what then ? 
And we have been as foolish as you . 
Do not imagine that you have effected much change in the universe , because your trip-gallant is called the cholera-morbus , and because your pourree is called the cachuca . 
In fact , the women must always be loved . 
I defy you to escape from that . 
These friends are our angels . 
Yes , love , woman , the kiss forms a circle from which I defy you to escape ; and , for my own part , I should be only too happy to re-enter it . 
Which of you has seen the planet Venus , the coquette of the abyss , the Celimene of the ocean , rise in the infinite , calming all here below ? 
The ocean is a rough Alcestis . 
Well , grumble as he will , when Venus appears he is forced to smile . 
That brute beast submits . 
We are all made so . 
Wrath , tempest , claps of thunder , foam to the very ceiling . 
A woman enters on the scene , a planet rises ; flat on your face ! 
Marius was fighting six months ago ; to-day he is married . 
That is well . 
Yes , Marius , yes , Cosette , you are in the right . 
Exist boldly for each other , make us burst with rage that we can not do the same , idealize each other , catch in your beaks all the tiny blades of felicity that exist on earth , and arrange yourselves a nest for life . 
Pardi , to love , to be loved , what a fine miracle when one is young ! 
Do n't imagine that you have invented that . 
I , too , have had my dream , I , too , have meditated , I , too , have sighed ; I , too , have had a moonlight soul . 
Love is a child six thousand years old . 
Love has the right to a long white beard . 
Methusalem is a street arab beside Cupid . 
For sixty centuries men and women have got out of their scrape by loving . 
The devil , who is cunning , took to hating man ; man , who is still more cunning , took to loving woman . 
In this way he does more good than the devil does him harm . 
This craft was discovered in the days of the terrestrial paradise . 
The invention is old , my friends , but it is perfectly new . 
Profit by it . 
Be Daphnis and Chloe , while waiting to become Philemon and Baucis . 
Manage so that , when you are with each other , nothing shall be lacking to you , and that Cosette may be the sun for Marius , and that Marius may be the universe to Cosette . 
Cosette , let your fine weather be the smile of your husband ; Marius , let your rain be your wife 's tears . 
And let it never rain in your household . 
You have filched the winning number in the lottery ; you have gained the great prize , guard it well , keep it under lock and key , do not squander it , adore each other and snap your fingers at all the rest . 
Believe what I say to you . 
It is good sense . 
And good sense can not lie . 
Be a religion to each other . 
Each man has his own fashion of adoring God . 
Saperlotte ! 
the best way to adore God is to love one 's wife . 
I love thee ! 
that 's my catechism . 
He who loves is orthodox . 
The oath of Henri IV . 
places sanctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness . 
Ventre-saint-gris ! 
I do n't belong to the religion of that oath . 
Woman is forgotten in it . 
This astonishes me on the part of Henri IV . 
My friends , long live women ! 
I am old , they say ; it 's astonishing how much I feel in the mood to be young . 
I should like to go and listen to the bagpipes in the woods . 
Children who contrive to be beautiful and contented , -- that intoxicates me . 
I would like greatly to get married , if any one would have me . 
It is impossible to imagine that God could have made us for anything but this : to idolize , to coo , to preen ourselves , to be dove-like , to be dainty , to bill and coo our loves from morn to night , to gaze at one 's image in one 's little wife , to be proud , to be triumphant , to plume oneself ; that is the aim of life . 
There , let not that displease you which we used to think in our day , when we were young folks . 
Ah ! 
vertu-bamboche ! 
what charming women there were in those days , and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses ! 
I committed my ravages among them . 
Then love each other . 
If people did not love each other , I really do not see what use there would be in having any springtime ; and for my own part , I should pray the good God to shut up all the beautiful things that he shows us , and to take away from us and put back in his box , the flowers , the birds , and the pretty maidens . 
My children , receive an old man 's blessing . 
The evening was gay , lively and agreeable . 
The grandfather 's sovereign good humor gave the key-note to the whole feast , and each person regulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality . 
They danced a little , they laughed a great deal ; it was an amiable wedding . 
Goodman Days of Yore might have been invited to it . 
However , he was present in the person of Father Gillenormand . 
There was a tumult , then silence . 
The married pair disappeared . 
A little after midnight , the Gillenormand house became a temple . 
Here we pause . 
On the threshold of wedding nights stands a smiling angel with his finger on his lips . 
The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where the celebration of love takes place . 
There should be flashes of light athwart such houses . 
The joy which they contain ought to make its escape through the stones of the walls in brilliancy , and vaguely illuminate the gloom . 
It is impossible that this sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radiance to the infinite . 
Love is the sublime crucible wherein the fusion of the man and the woman takes place ; the being one , the being triple , the being final , the human trinity proceeds from it . 
This birth of two souls into one , ought to be an emotion for the gloom . 
The lover is the priest ; the ravished virgin is terrified . 
Something of that joy ascends to God . 
Where true marriage is , that is to say , where there is love , the ideal enters in . 
A nuptial bed makes a nook of dawn amid the shadows . 
If it were given to the eye of the flesh to scan the formidable and charming visions of the upper life , it is probable that we should behold the forms of night , the winged unknowns , the blue passers of the invisible , bend down , a throng of sombre heads , around the luminous house , satisfied , showering benedictions , pointing out to each other the virgin wife gently alarmed , sweetly terrified , and bearing the reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances . 
If at that supreme hour , the wedded pair , dazzled with voluptuousness and believing themselves alone , were to listen , they would hear in their chamber a confused rustling of wings . 
Perfect happiness implies a mutual understanding with the angels . 
That dark little chamber has all heaven for its ceiling . 
When two mouths , rendered sacred by love , approach to create , it is impossible that there should not be , above that ineffable kiss , a quivering throughout the immense mystery of stars . 
These felicities are the true ones . 
There is no joy outside of these joys . 
Love is the only ecstasy . 
All the rest weeps . 
To love , or to have loved , -- this suffices . 
Demand nothing more . 
There is no other pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life . 
To love is a fulfilment . 
THE INSEPARABLE What had become of Jean Valjean ? 
Immediately after having laughed , at Cosette 's graceful command , when no one was paying any heed to him , Jean Valjean had risen and had gained the antechamber unperceived . 
This was the very room which , eight months before , he had entered black with mud , with blood and powder , bringing back the grandson to the grandfather . 
The old wainscoting was garlanded with foliage and flowers ; the musicians were seated on the sofa on which they had laid Marius down . 
Basque , in a black coat , knee-breeches , white stockings and white gloves , was arranging roses round all of the dishes that were to be served . 
Jean Valjean pointed to his arm in its sling , charged Basque to explain his absence , and went away . 
The long windows of the dining-room opened on the street . 
Jean Valjean stood for several minutes , erect and motionless in the darkness , beneath those radiant windows . 
He listened . 
The confused sounds of the banquet reached his ear . 
He heard the loud , commanding tones of the grandfather , the violins , the clatter of the plates , the bursts of laughter , and through all that merry uproar , he distinguished Cosette 's sweet and joyous voice . 
He quitted the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , and returned to the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
In order to return thither , he took the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , and the Blancs-Manteaux ; it was a little longer , but it was the road through which , for the last three months , he had become accustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue de l'Homme Arme to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , in order to avoid the obstructions and the mud in the Rue Vielle-du-Temple . 
This road , through which Cosette had passed , excluded for him all possibility of any other itinerary . 
Jean Valjean entered his lodgings . 
He lighted his candle and mounted the stairs . 
The apartment was empty . 
Even Toussaint was no longer there . 
Jean Valjean 's step made more noise than usual in the chambers . 
All the cupboards stood open . 
He penetrated to Cosette 's bedroom . 
There were no sheets on the bed . 
The pillow , covered with ticking , and without a case or lace , was laid on the blankets folded up on the foot of the mattress , whose covering was visible , and on which no one was ever to sleep again . 
All the little feminine objects which Cosette was attached to had been carried away ; nothing remained except the heavy furniture and the four walls . 
Toussaint 's bed was despoiled in like manner . 
One bed only was made up , and seemed to be waiting some one , and this was Jean Valjean 's bed . 
Jean Valjean looked at the walls , closed some of the cupboard doors , and went and came from one room to another . 
Then he sought his own chamber once more , and set his candle on a table . 
He had disengaged his arm from the sling , and he used his right hand as though it did not hurt him . 
He approached his bed , and his eyes rested , was it by chance ? 
was it intentionally ? 
on the inseparable of which Cosette had been jealous , on the little portmanteau which never left him . 
On his arrival in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , on the 4th of June , he had deposited it on a round table near the head of his bed . 
He went to this table with a sort of vivacity , took a key from his pocket , and opened the valise . 
From it he slowly drew forth the garments in which , ten years before , Cosette had quitted Montfermeil ; first the little gown , then the black fichu , then the stout , coarse child 's shoes which Cosette might almost have worn still , so tiny were her feet , then the fustian bodice , which was very thick , then the knitted petticoat , next the apron with pockets , then the woollen stockings . 
These stockings , which still preserved the graceful form of a tiny leg , were no longer than Jean Valjean 's hand . 
All this was black of hue . 
It was he who had brought those garments to Montfermeil for her . 
As he removed them from the valise , he laid them on the bed . 
He fell to thinking . 
He called up memories . 
It was in winter , in a very cold month of December , she was shivering , half-naked , in rags , her poor little feet were all red in their wooden shoes . 
He , Jean Valjean , had made her abandon those rags to clothe herself in these mourning habiliments . 
The mother must have felt pleased in her grave , to see her daughter wearing mourning for her , and , above all , to see that she was properly clothed , and that she was warm . 
He thought of that forest of Montfermeil ; they had traversed it together , Cosette and he ; he thought of what the weather had been , of the leafless trees , of the wood destitute of birds , of the sunless sky ; it mattered not , it was charming . 
He arranged the tiny garments on the bed , the fichu next to the petticoat , the stockings beside the shoes , and he looked at them , one after the other . 
She was no taller than that , she had her big doll in her arms , she had put her louis d'or in the pocket of that apron , she had laughed , they walked hand in hand , she had no one in the world but him . 
Then his venerable , white head fell forward on the bed , that stoical old heart broke , his face was engulfed , so to speak , in Cosette 's garments , and if any one had passed up the stairs at that moment , he would have heard frightful sobs . 
THE IMMORTAL LIVER -LSB- 68 -RSB- -LSB- 68 -RSB- In allusion to the story of Prometheus . 
The old and formidable struggle , of which we have already witnessed so many phases , began once more . 
Jacob struggled with the angel but one night . 
Alas ! 
how many times have we beheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience , in the darkness , and struggling desperately against it ! 
Unheard-of conflict ! 
At certain moments the foot slips ; at other moments the ground crumbles away underfoot . 
How many times had that conscience , mad for the good , clasped and overthrown him ! 
How many times had the truth set her knee inexorably upon his breast ! 
How many times , hurled to earth by the light , had he begged for mercy ! 
How many times had that implacable spark , lighted within him , and upon him by the Bishop , dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind ! 
How many times had he risen to his feet in the combat , held fast to the rock , leaning against sophism , dragged in the dust , now getting the upper hand of his conscience , again overthrown by it ! 
How many times , after an equivoque , after the specious and treacherous reasoning of egotism , had he heard his irritated conscience cry in his ear : `` A trip ! 
you wretch ! '' 
How many times had his refractory thoughts rattled convulsively in his throat , under the evidence of duty ! 
Resistance to God . 
Funereal sweats . 
What secret wounds which he alone felt bleed ! 
What excoriations in his lamentable existence ! 
How many times he had risen bleeding , bruised , broken , enlightened , despair in his heart , serenity in his soul ! 
and , vanquished , he had felt himself the conqueror . 
And , after having dislocated , broken , and rent his conscience with red-hot pincers , it had said to him , as it stood over him , formidable , luminous , and tranquil : `` Now , go in peace ! '' 
But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict , what a lugubrious peace , alas ! 
Nevertheless , that night Jean Valjean felt that he was passing through his final combat . 
A heart-rending question presented itself . 
Predestinations are not all direct ; they do not open out in a straight avenue before the predestined man ; they have blind courts , impassable alleys , obscure turns , disturbing crossroads offering the choice of many ways . 
Jean Valjean had halted at that moment at the most perilous of these crossroads . 
He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil . 
He had that gloomy intersection beneath his eyes . 
On this occasion once more , as had happened to him already in other sad vicissitudes , two roads opened out before him , the one tempting , the other alarming . 
Which was he to take ? 
He was counselled to the one which alarmed him whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness . 
Once more , Jean Valjean had the choice between Is it then true ? 
the soul may recover ; but not fate . 
This is the problem which presented itself to him : by that mysterious index finger which we all perceive the terrible port and the smiling ambush . 
Frightful thing ! 
an incurable destiny ! 
In what manner was Jean Valjean to behave in relation to the happiness of Cosette and Marius ? 
It was he who had willed that happiness , it was he who had brought it about ; he had , himself , buried it in his entrails , and at that moment , when he reflected on it , he was able to enjoy the sort of satisfaction which an armorer would experience on recognizing his factory mark on a knife , on withdrawing it , all smoking , from his own breast . 
Cosette had Marius , Marius possessed Cosette . 
They had everything , even riches . 
And this was his doing . 
But what was he , Jean Valjean , to do with this happiness , now that it existed , now that it was there ? 
Should he force himself on this happiness ? 
Should he treat it as belonging to him ? 
No doubt , Cosette did belong to another ; but should he , Jean Valjean , retain of Cosette all that he could retain ? 
Should he remain the sort of father , half seen but respected , which he had hitherto been ? 
Should he , without saying a word , bring his past to that future ? 
Should he present himself there , as though he had a right , and should he seat himself , veiled , at that luminous fireside ? 
Should he take those innocent hands into his tragic hands , with a smile ? 
Should he place upon the peaceful fender of the Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his , which dragged behind them the disgraceful shadow of the law ? 
Should he enter into participation in the fair fortunes of Cosette and Marius ? 
Should he render the obscurity on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still more dense ? 
Should he place his catastrophe as a third associate in their felicity ? 
Should he continue to hold his peace ? 
In a word , should he be the sinister mute of destiny beside these two happy beings ? 
We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it , in order to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questions appear to us in all their horrible nakedness . 
Good or evil stands behind this severe interrogation point . 
What are you going to do ? 
demands the sphinx . 
This habit of trial Jean Valjean possessed . 
He gazed intently at the sphinx . 
He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects . 
Cosette , that charming existence , was the raft of this shipwreck . 
What was he to do ? 
To cling fast to it , or to let go his hold ? 
If he clung to it , he should emerge from disaster , he should ascend again into the sunlight , he should let the bitter water drip from his garments and his hair , he was saved , he should live . 
And if he let go his hold ? 
Then the abyss . 
Thus he took sad council with his thoughts . 
Or , to speak more correctly , he fought ; he kicked furiously internally , now against his will , now against his conviction . 
Happily for Jean Valjean that he had been able to weep . 
That relieved him , possibly . 
But the beginning was savage . 
A tempest , more furious than the one which had formerly driven him to Arras , broke loose within him . 
The past surged up before him facing the present ; he compared them and sobbed . 
The silence of tears once opened , the despairing man writhed . 
He felt that he had been stopped short . 
Alas ! 
in this fight to the death between our egotism and our duty , when we thus retreat step by step before our immutable ideal , bewildered , furious , exasperated at having to yield , disputing the ground , hoping for a possible flight , seeking an escape , what an abrupt and sinister resistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear ! 
To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle ! 
The invisible inexorable , what an obsession ! 
Then , one is never done with conscience . 
Make your choice , Brutus ; make your choice , Cato . 
It is fathomless , since it is God . 
One flings into that well the labor of one 's whole life , one flings in one 's fortune , one flings in one 's riches , one flings in one 's success , one flings in one 's liberty or fatherland , one flings in one 's well-being , one flings in one 's repose , one flings in one 's joy ! 
More ! 
more ! 
more ! 
Empty the vase ! 
tip the urn ! 
One must finish by flinging in one 's heart . 
Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells , there is a tun like that . 
Is not one pardonable , if one at last refuses ! 
Can the inexhaustible have any right ? 
Are not chains which are endless above human strength ? 
Who would blame Sisyphus and Jean Valjean for saying : `` It is enough ! '' 
The obedience of matter is limited by friction ; is there no limit to the obedience of the soul ? 
If perpetual motion is impossible , can perpetual self-sacrifice be exacted ? 
The first step is nothing , it is the last which is difficult . 
What was the Champmathieu affair in comparison with Cosette 's marriage and of that which it entailed ? 
What is a re-entrance into the galleys , compared to entrance into the void ? 
Oh , first step that must be descended , how sombre art thou ! 
Oh , second step , how black art thou ! 
How could he refrain from turning aside his head this time ? 
Martyrdom is sublimation , corrosive sublimation . 
It is a torture which consecrates . 
One can consent to it for the first hour ; one seats oneself on the throne of glowing iron , one places on one 's head the crown of hot iron , one accepts the globe of red hot iron , one takes the sceptre of red hot iron , but the mantle of flame still remains to be donned , and comes there not a moment when the miserable flesh revolts and when one abdicates from suffering ? 
At length , Jean Valjean entered into the peace of exhaustion . 
He weighed , he reflected , he considered the alternatives , the mysterious balance of light and darkness . 
Should he impose his galleys on those two dazzling children , or should he consummate his irremediable engulfment by himself ? 
On one side lay the sacrifice of Cosette , on the other that of himself . 
At what solution should he arrive ? 
What decision did he come to ? 
What resolution did he take ? 
What was his own inward definitive response to the unbribable interrogatory of fatality ? 
What door did he decide to open ? 
Which side of his life did he resolve upon closing and condemning ? 
Among all the unfathomable precipices which surrounded him , which was his choice ? 
What extremity did he accept ? 
To which of the gulfs did he nod his head ? 
His dizzy revery lasted all night long . 
He remained there until daylight , in the same attitude , bent double over that bed , prostrate beneath the enormity of fate , crushed , perchance , alas ! 
with clenched fists , with arms outspread at right angles , like a man crucified who has been un-nailed , and flung face down on the earth . 
There he remained for twelve hours , the twelve long hours of a long winter 's night , ice-cold , without once raising his head , and without uttering a word . 
He was as motionless as a corpse , while his thoughts wallowed on the earth and soared , now like the hydra , now like the eagle . 
Any one to behold him thus motionless would have pronounced him dead ; all at once he shuddered convulsively , and his mouth , glued to Cosette 's garments , kissed them ; then it could be seen that he was alive . 
Who could see ? 
Since Jean Valjean was alone , and there was no one there . 
The One who is in the shadows . 
THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN The days that follow weddings are solitary . 
People respect the meditations of the happy pair . 
And also , their tardy slumbers , to some degree . 
The tumult of visits and congratulations only begins later on . 
On the morning of the 17th of February , it was a little past midday when Basque , with napkin and feather-duster under his arm , busy in setting his antechamber to rights , heard a light tap at the door . 
There had been no ring , which was discreet on such a day . 
Basque opened the door , and beheld M. Fauchelevent . 
He introduced him into the drawing-room , still encumbered and topsy-turvy , and which bore the air of a field of battle after the joys of the preceding evening . 
`` Dame , sir , '' remarked Basque , `` we all woke up late . '' 
`` Is your master up ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
`` How is Monsieur 's arm ? '' 
replied Basque . 
`` Better . 
Is your master up ? '' 
`` Which one ? 
the old one or the new one ? '' 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , '' said Basque , drawing himself up . 
A man is a Baron most of all to his servants . 
He counts for something with them ; they are what a philosopher would call , bespattered with the title , and that flatters them . 
Marius , be it said in passing , a militant republican as he had proved , was now a Baron in spite of himself . 
A small revolution had taken place in the family in connection with this title . 
It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it , and Marius who detached himself from it . 
But Colonel Pontmercy had written : `` My son will bear my title . '' 
Marius obeyed . 
And then , Cosette , in whom the woman was beginning to dawn , was delighted to be a Baroness . 
`` Monsieur le Baron ? '' 
repeated Basque . 
`` I will go and see . 
I will tell him that M. Fauchelevent is here . '' 
`` No . 
Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes to speak to him in private , and mention no name . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque . 
`` I wish to surprise him . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque once more , emitting his second `` ah ! '' 
as an explanation of the first . 
And he left the room . 
Jean Valjean remained alone . 
The drawing-room , as we have just said , was in great disorder . 
It seemed as though , by lending an air , one might still hear the vague noise of the wedding . 
On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which had fallen from garlands and head-dresses . 
The wax candles , burned to stumps , added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the chandeliers . 
Not a single piece of furniture was in its place . 
In the corners , three or four arm-chairs , drawn close together in a circle , had the appearance of continuing a conversation . 
The whole effect was cheerful . 
A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast . 
It has been a happy thing . 
On the chairs in disarray , among those fading flowers , beneath those extinct lights , people have thought of joy . 
The sun had succeeded to the chandelier , and made its way gayly into the drawing-room . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spot where Basque had left him . 
He was very pale . 
His eyes were hollow , and so sunken in his head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared in their orbits . 
His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has been up all night . 
The elbows were whitened with the down which the friction of cloth against linen leaves behind it . 
Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at his feet by the sun . 
There came a sound at the door , and he raised his eyes . 
Marius entered , his head well up , his mouth smiling , an indescribable light on his countenance , his brow expanded , his eyes triumphant . 
He had not slept either . 
`` It is you , father ! '' 
he exclaimed , on catching sight of Jean Valjean ; `` that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air ! 
But you have come too early . 
It is only half past twelve . 
Cosette is asleep . '' 
That word : `` Father , '' said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius , signified : supreme felicity . 
There had always existed , as the reader knows , a lofty wall , a coldness and a constraint between them ; ice which must be broken or melted . 
Marius had reached that point of intoxication when the wall was lowered , when the ice dissolved , and when M. Fauchelevent was to him , as to Cosette , a father . 
He continued : his words poured forth , as is the peculiarity of divine paroxysms of joy . 
`` How glad I am to see you ! 
If you only knew how we missed you yesterday ! 
Good morning , father . 
How is your hand ? 
Better , is it not ? '' 
And , satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself , he pursued : `` We have both been talking about you . 
Cosette loves you so dearly ! 
You must not forget that you have a chamber here , We want nothing more to do with the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
We will have no more of it at all . 
How could you go to live in a street like that , which is sickly , which is disagreeable , which is ugly , which has a barrier at one end , where one is cold , and into which one can not enter ? 
You are to come and install yourself here . 
And this very day . 
Or you will have to deal with Cosette . 
She means to lead us all by the nose , I warn you . 
You have your own chamber here , it is close to ours , it opens on the garden ; the trouble with the clock has been attended to , the bed is made , it is all ready , you have only to take possession of it . 
Near your bed Cosette has placed a huge , old , easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and she has said to it : ` Stretch out your arms to him . ' 
A nightingale comes to the clump of acacias opposite your windows , every spring . 
In two months more you will have it . 
You will have its nest on your left and ours on your right . 
By night it will sing , and by day Cosette will prattle . 
Your chamber faces due South . 
Cosette will arrange your books for you , your Voyages of Captain Cook and the other , -- Vancouver 's and all your affairs . 
I believe that there is a little valise to which you are attached , I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that . 
You have conquered my grandfather , you suit him . 
We will live together . 
Do you play whist ? 
you will overwhelm my grandfather with delight if you play whist . 
It is you who shall take Cosette to walk on the days when I am at the courts , you shall give her your arm , you know , as you used to , in the Luxembourg . 
We are absolutely resolved to be happy . 
And you shall be included in it , in our happiness , do you hear , father ? 
Come , will you breakfast with us to-day ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I have something to say to you . 
I am an ex-convict . '' 
The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped , as well in the case of the mind as in that of the ear . 
These words : `` I am an ex-convict , '' proceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and entering the ear of Marius overshot the possible . 
It seemed to him that something had just been said to him ; but he did not know what . 
He stood with his mouth wide open . 
Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful . 
Wholly absorbed in his own dazzled state , he had not , up to that moment , observed the other man 's terrible pallor . 
Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm , unrolled the linen from around his hand , bared his thumb and showed it to Marius . 
`` There is nothing the matter with my hand , '' said he . 
Marius looked at the thumb . 
`` There has not been anything the matter with it , '' went on Jean Valjean . 
There was , in fact , no trace of any injury . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` It was fitting that I should be absent from your marriage . 
I absented myself as much as was in my power . 
So I invented this injury in order that I might not commit a forgery , that I might not introduce a flaw into the marriage documents , in order that I might escape from signing . '' 
Marius stammered . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
`` The meaning of it is , '' replied Jean Valjean , `` that I have been in the galleys . '' 
`` You are driving me mad ! '' 
exclaimed Marius in terror . 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I was nineteen years in the galleys . 
For theft . 
Then , I was condemned for life for theft , for a second offence . 
At the present moment , I have broken my ban . '' 
In vain did Marius recoil before the reality , refuse the fact , resist the evidence , he was forced to give way . 
He began to understand , and , as always happens in such cases , he understood too much . 
An inward shudder of hideous enlightenment flashed through him ; an idea which made him quiver traversed his mind . 
He caught a glimpse of a wretched destiny for himself in the future . 
`` Say all , say all ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You are Cosette 's father ! '' 
And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribable horror . 
Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that he seemed to grow even to the ceiling . 
`` It is necessary that you should believe me here , sir ; although our oath to others may not be received in law ... '' Here he paused , then , with a sort of sovereign and sepulchral authority , he added , articulating slowly , and emphasizing the syllables : '' ... You will believe me . 
I the father of Cosette ! 
before God , no . 
Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy , I am a peasant of Faverolles . 
I earned my living by pruning trees . 
My name is not Fauchelevent , but Jean Valjean . 
I am not related to Cosette . 
Reassure yourself . '' 
Marius stammered : `` Who will prove that to me ? '' 
`` I . 
Since I tell you so . '' 
Marius looked at the man . 
He was melancholy yet tranquil . 
No lie could proceed from such a calm . 
That which is icy is sincere . 
The truth could be felt in that chill of the tomb . 
`` I believe you , '' said Marius . 
Jean Valjean bent his head , as though taking note of this , and continued : `` What am I to Cosette ? 
A passer-by . 
Ten years ago , I did not know that she was in existence . 
I love her , it is true . 
One loves a child whom one has seen when very young , being old oneself . 
When one is old , one feels oneself a grandfather towards all little children . 
You may , it seems to me , suppose that I have something which resembles a heart . 
She was an orphan . 
Without either father or mother . 
She needed me . 
That is why I began to love her . 
Children are so weak that the first comer , even a man like me , can become their protector . 
I have fulfilled this duty towards Cosette . 
I do not think that so slight a thing can be called a good action ; but if it be a good action , well , say that I have done it . 
Register this attenuating circumstance . 
To-day , Cosette passes out of my life ; our two roads part . 
Henceforth , I can do nothing for her . 
She is Madame Pontmercy . 
Her providence has changed . 
And Cosette gains by the change . 
All is well . 
As for the six hundred thousand francs , you do not mention them to me , but I forestall your thought , they are a deposit . 
How did that deposit come into my hands ? 
What does that matter ? 
I restore the deposit . 
Nothing more can be demanded of me . 
I complete the restitution by announcing my true name . 
That concerns me . 
I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am . '' 
And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face . 
All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent . 
Certain gusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls . 
We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us is dispersed ; we say the first things that occur to us , which are not always precisely those which should be said . 
There are sudden revelations which one can not bear , and which intoxicate like baleful wine . 
Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presented itself to him , to the point of addressing that man almost like a person who was angry with him for this avowal . 
`` But why , '' he exclaimed , `` do you tell me all this ? 
Who forces you to do so ? 
You could have kept your secret to yourself . 
You are neither denounced , nor tracked nor pursued . 
You have a reason for wantonly making such a revelation . 
Conclude . 
There is something more . 
In what connection do you make this confession ? 
What is your motive ? '' 
`` My motive ? '' 
replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one would have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius . 
`` From what motive , in fact , has this convict just said ` I am a convict ' ? 
Well , yes ! 
the motive is strange . 
It is out of honesty . 
Stay , the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart , which keeps me fast . 
It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly solid . 
All life falls in ruin around one ; one resists . 
Had I been able to tear out that thread , to break it , to undo the knot or to cut it , to go far away , I should have been safe . 
I had only to go away ; there are diligences in the Rue Bouloy ; you are happy ; I am going . 
I have tried to break that thread , I have jerked at it , it would not break , I tore my heart with it . 
Then I said : ` I can not live anywhere else than here . ' 
I must stay . 
Well , yes , you are right , I am a fool , why not simply remain here ? 
You offer me a chamber in this house , Madame Pontmercy is sincerely attached to me , she said to the arm-chair : ` Stretch out your arms to him , ' your grandfather demands nothing better than to have me , I suit him , we shall live together , and take our meals in common , I shall give Cosette my arm ... Madame Pontmercy , excuse me , it is a habit , we shall have but one roof , one table , one fire , the same chimney-corner in winter , the same promenade in summer , that is joy , that is happiness , that is everything . 
We shall live as one family . 
One family ! '' 
At that word , Jean Valjean became wild . 
He folded his arms , glared at the floor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abyss therein , and his voice suddenly rose in thundering tones : `` As one family ! 
No . 
I belong to no family . 
I do not belong to yours . 
I do not belong to any family of men . 
In houses where people are among themselves , I am superfluous . 
There are families , but there is nothing of the sort for me . 
I am an unlucky wretch ; I am left outside . 
Did I have a father and mother ? 
I almost doubt it . 
On the day when I gave that child in marriage , all came to an end . 
I have seen her happy , and that she is with a man whom she loves , and that there exists here a kind old man , a household of two angels , and all joys in that house , and that it was well , I said to myself : ` Enter thou not . ' 
I could have lied , it is true , have deceived you all , and remained Monsieur Fauchelevent . 
So long as it was for her , I could lie ; but now it would be for myself , and I must not . 
It was sufficient for me to hold my peace , it is true , and all would go on . 
You ask me what has forced me to speak ? 
a very odd thing ; my conscience . 
To hold my peace was very easy , however . 
I passed the night in trying to persuade myself to it ; you questioned me , and what I have just said to you is so extraordinary that you have the right to do it ; well , yes , I have passed the night in alleging reasons to myself , and I gave myself very good reasons , I have done what I could . 
But there are two things in which I have not succeeded ; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed , riveted and sealed here by the heart , or in silencing some one who speaks softly to me when I am alone . 
That is why I have come hither to tell you everything this morning . 
Everything or nearly everything . 
It is useless to tell you that which concerns only myself ; I keep that to myself . 
You know the essential points . 
So I have taken my mystery and have brought it to you . 
And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes . 
It was not a resolution that was easy to take . 
I struggled all night long . 
Ah ! 
you think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieu affair , that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury , that the name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself , out of gratitude for a service rendered to him , and that I might assuredly keep it , and that I should be happy in that chamber which you offer me , that I should not be in any one 's way , that I should be in my own little corner , and that , while you would have Cosette , I should have the idea that I was in the same house with her . 
Each one of us would have had his share of happiness . 
If I continued to be Monsieur Fauchelevent , that would arrange everything . 
Yes , with the exception of my soul . 
There was joy everywhere upon my surface , but the bottom of my soul remained black . 
It is not enough to be happy , one must be content . 
Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , thus I should have concealed my true visage , thus , in the presence of your expansion , I should have had an enigma , thus , in the midst of your full noonday , I should have had shadows , thus , without crying ` ` ware , ' I should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside , I should have taken my seat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was , you would drive me from it , I should have allowed myself to be served by domestics who , had they known , would have said : ` How horrible ! ' 
I should have touched you with my elbow , which you have a right to dislike , I should have filched your clasps of the hand ! 
There would have existed in your house a division of respect between venerable white locks and tainted white locks ; at your most intimate hours , when all hearts thought themselves open to the very bottom to all the rest , when we four were together , your grandfather , you two and myself , a stranger would have been present ! 
I should have been side by side with you in your existence , having for my only care not to disarrange the cover of my dreadful pit . 
Thus , I , a dead man , should have thrust myself upon you who are living beings . 
I should have condemned her to myself forever . 
You and Cosette and I would have had all three of our heads in the green cap ! 
Does it not make you shudder ? 
I am only the most crushed of men ; I should have been the most monstrous of men . 
And I should have committed that crime every day ! 
And I should have had that face of night upon my visage every day ! 
every day ! 
And I should have communicated to you a share in my taint every day ! 
every day ! 
