The young men were comrades ; the young girls were friends . 
Such loves are always accompanied by such friendships . 
Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things ; the proof of this is that , after making all due allowances for these little irregular households , Favourite , Zephine , and Dahlia were philosophical young women , while Fantine was a good girl . 
Good ! 
some one will exclaim ; and Tholomyes ? 
Solomon would reply that love forms a part of wisdom . 
We will confine ourselves to saying that the love of Fantine was a first love , a sole love , a faithful love . 
She alone , of all the four , was not called `` thou '' by a single one of them . 
Fantine was one of those beings who blossom , so to speak , from the dregs of the people . 
Though she had emerged from the most unfathomable depths of social shadow , she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous and the unknown . 
She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents ? 
Who can say ? 
She had never known father or mother . 
She was called Fantine . 
Why Fantine ? 
She had never borne any other name . 
At the epoch of her birth the Directory still existed . 
She had no family name ; she had no family ; no baptismal name ; the Church no longer existed . 
She bore the name which pleased the first random passer-by , who had encountered her , when a very small child , running bare-legged in the street . 
She received the name as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it rained . 
She was called little Fantine . 
No one knew more than that . 
This human creature had entered life in just this way . 
At the age of ten , Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in the neighborhood . 
At fifteen she came to Paris `` to seek her fortune . '' 
Fantine was beautiful , and remained pure as long as she could . 
She was a lovely blonde , with fine teeth . 
She had gold and pearls for her dowry ; but her gold was on her head , and her pearls were in her mouth . 
She worked for her living ; then , still for the sake of her living , -- for the heart , also , has its hunger , -- she loved . 
She loved Tholomyes . 
An amour for him ; passion for her . 
The streets of the Latin quarter , filled with throngs of students and grisettes , saw the beginning of their dream . 
Fantine had long evaded Tholomyes in the mazes of the hill of the Pantheon , where so many adventurers twine and untwine , but in such a way as constantly to encounter him again . 
There is a way of avoiding which resembles seeking . 
In short , the eclogue took place . 
Blachevelle , Listolier , and Fameuil formed a sort of group of which Tholomyes was the head . 
It was he who possessed the wit . 
Tholomyes was the antique old student ; he was rich ; he had an income of four thousand francs ; four thousand francs ! 
a splendid scandal on Mount Sainte-Genevieve . 
Tholomyes was a fast man of thirty , and badly preserved . 
He was wrinkled and toothless , and he had the beginning of a bald spot , of which he himself said with sadness , the skull at thirty , the knee at forty . 
His digestion was mediocre , and he had been attacked by a watering in one eye . 
But in proportion as his youth disappeared , gayety was kindled ; he replaced his teeth with buffooneries , his hair with mirth , his health with irony , his weeping eye laughed incessantly . 
He was dilapidated but still in flower . 
His youth , which was packing up for departure long before its time , beat a retreat in good order , bursting with laughter , and no one saw anything but fire . 
He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville . 
He made a few verses now and then . 
In addition to this he doubted everything to the last degree , which is a vast force in the eyes of the weak . 
Being thus ironical and bald , he was the leader . 
Iron is an English word . 
Is it possible that irony is derived from it ? 
One day Tholomyes took the three others aside , with the gesture of an oracle , and said to them : -- `` Fantine , Dahlia , Zephine , and Favourite have been teasing us for nearly a year to give them a surprise . 
We have promised them solemnly that we would . 
They are forever talking about it to us , to me in particular , just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius , ` Faccia gialluta , fa o miracolo , Yellow face , perform thy miracle , ' so our beauties say to me incessantly , ` Tholomyes , when will you bring forth your surprise ? ' 
At the same time our parents keep writing to us . 
Pressure on both sides . 
The moment has arrived , it seems to me ; let us discuss the question . '' 
Thereupon , Tholomyes lowered his voice and articulated something so mirthful , that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the four mouths simultaneously , and Blachevelle exclaimed , `` That is an idea . '' 
A smoky tap-room presented itself ; they entered , and the remainder of their confidential colloquy was lost in shadow . 
The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which took place on the following Sunday , the four young men inviting the four young girls . 
FOUR AND FOUR It is hard nowadays to picture to one 's self what a pleasure-trip of students and grisettes to the country was like , forty-five years ago . 
The suburbs of Paris are no longer the same ; the physiognomy of what may be called circumparisian life has changed completely in the last half-century ; where there was the cuckoo , there is the railway car ; where there was a tender-boat , there is now the steamboat ; people speak of Fecamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days . 
The Paris of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts . 
The four couples conscientiously went through with all the country follies possible at that time . 
The vacation was beginning , and it was a warm , bright , summer day . 
On the preceding day , Favourite , the only one who knew how to write , had written the following to Tholomyes in the name of the four : `` It is a good hour to emerge from happiness . '' 
That is why they rose at five o'clock in the morning . 
Then they went to Saint-Cloud by the coach , looked at the dry cascade and exclaimed , `` This must be very beautiful when there is water ! '' 
They breakfasted at the Tete-Noir , where Castaing had not yet been ; they treated themselves to a game of ring-throwing under the quincunx of trees of the grand fountain ; they ascended Diogenes ' lantern , they gambled for macaroons at the roulette establishment of the Pont de Sevres , picked bouquets at Pateaux , bought reed-pipes at Neuilly , ate apple tarts everywhere , and were perfectly happy . 
The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from their cage . 
It was a perfect delirium . 
From time to time they bestowed little taps on the young men . 
Matutinal intoxication of life ! 
adorable years ! 
the wings of the dragonfly quiver . 
Oh , whoever you may be , do you not remember ? 
Have you rambled through the brushwood , holding aside the branches , on account of the charming head which is coming on behind you ? 
Have you slid , laughing , down a slope all wet with rain , with a beloved woman holding your hand , and crying , `` Ah , my new boots ! 
what a state they are in ! '' 
Let us say at once that that merry obstacle , a shower , was lacking in the case of this good-humored party , although Favourite had said as they set out , with a magisterial and maternal tone , `` The slugs are crawling in the paths , -- a sign of rain , children . '' 
All four were madly pretty . 
A good old classic poet , then famous , a good fellow who had an Eleonore , M. le Chevalier de Labouisse , as he strolled that day beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud , saw them pass about ten o'clock in the morning , and exclaimed , `` There is one too many of them , '' as he thought of the Graces . 
Favourite , Blachevelle 's friend , the one aged three and twenty , the old one , ran on in front under the great green boughs , jumped the ditches , stalked distractedly over bushes , and presided over this merry-making with the spirit of a young female faun . 
Zephine and Dahlia , whom chance had made beautiful in such a way that they set each off when they were together , and completed each other , never left each other , more from an instinct of coquetry than from friendship , and clinging to each other , they assumed English poses ; the first keepsakes had just made their appearance , melancholy was dawning for women , as later on , Byronism dawned for men ; and the hair of the tender sex began to droop dolefully . 
Zephine and Dahlia had their hair dressed in rolls . 
Listolier and Fameuil , who were engaged in discussing their professors , explained to Fantine the difference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau . 
Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite 's single-bordered , imitation India shawl of Ternaux 's manufacture , on his arm on Sundays . 
Tholomyes followed , dominating the group . 
He was very gay , but one felt the force of government in him ; there was dictation in his joviality ; his principal ornament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg pattern of nankeen , with straps of braided copper wire ; he carried a stout rattan worth two hundred francs in his hand , and , as he treated himself to everything , a strange thing called a cigar in his mouth . 
Nothing was sacred to him ; he smoked . 
`` That Tholomyes is astounding ! '' 
said the others , with veneration . 
`` What trousers ! 
What energy ! '' 
As for Fantine , she was a joy to behold . 
Her splendid teeth had evidently received an office from God , -- laughter . 
She preferred to carry her little hat of sewed straw , with its long white strings , in her hand rather than on her head . 
Her thick blond hair , which was inclined to wave , and which easily uncoiled , and which it was necessary to fasten up incessantly , seemed made for the flight of Galatea under the willows . 
Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly . 
The corners of her mouth voluptuously turned up , as in the antique masks of Erigone , had an air of encouraging the audacious ; but her long , shadowy lashes drooped discreetly over the jollity of the lower part of the face as though to call a halt . 
There was something indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress . 
She wore a gown of mauve barege , little reddish brown buskins , whose ribbons traced an X on her fine , white , open-worked stockings , and that sort of muslin spencer , a Marseilles invention , whose name , canezou , a corruption of the words quinze aout , pronounced after the fashion of the Canebiere , signifies fine weather , heat , and midday . 
The three others , less timid , as we have already said , wore low-necked dresses without disguise , which in summer , beneath flower-adorned hats , are very graceful and enticing ; but by the side of these audacious outfits , blond Fantine 's canezou , with its transparencies , its indiscretion , and its reticence , concealing and displaying at one and the same time , seemed an alluring godsend of decency , and the famous Court of Love , presided over by the Vicomtesse de Cette , with the sea-green eyes , would , perhaps , have awarded the prize for coquetry to this canezou , in the contest for the prize of modesty . 
The most ingenious is , at times , the wisest . 
This does happen . 
Brilliant of face , delicate of profile , with eyes of a deep blue , heavy lids , feet arched and small , wrists and ankles admirably formed , a white skin which , here and there allowed the azure branching of the veins to be seen , joy , a cheek that was young and fresh , the robust throat of the Juno of AEgina , a strong and supple nape of the neck , shoulders modelled as though by Coustou , with a voluptuous dimple in the middle , visible through the muslin ; a gayety cooled by dreaminess ; sculptural and exquisite -- such was Fantine ; and beneath these feminine adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue , and in that statue a soul . 
Fantine was beautiful , without being too conscious of it . 
Those rare dreamers , mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront everything with perfection , would have caught a glimpse in this little working-woman , through the transparency of her Parisian grace , of the ancient sacred euphony . 
This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred . 
She was beautiful in the two ways -- style and rhythm . 
Style is the form of the ideal ; rhythm is its movement . 
We have said that Fantine was joy ; she was also modesty . 
To an observer who studied her attentively , that which breathed from her athwart all the intoxication of her age , the season , and her love affair , was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty . 
She remained a little astonished . 
This chaste astonishment is the shade of difference which separates Psyche from Venus . 
Fantine had the long , white , fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs the ashes of the sacred fire with a golden pin . 
Although she would have refused nothing to Tholomyes , as we shall have more than ample opportunity to see , her face in repose was supremely virginal ; a sort of serious and almost austere dignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times , and there was nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become so suddenly extinct there , and meditation succeed to cheerfulness without any transition state . 
This sudden and sometimes severely accentuated gravity resembled the disdain of a goddess . 
Her brow , her nose , her chin , presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct from equilibrium of proportion , and from which harmony of countenance results ; in the very characteristic interval which separates the base of the nose from the upper lip , she had that imperceptible and charming fold , a mysterious sign of chastity , which makes Barberousse fall in love with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia . 
Love is a fault ; so be it . 
Fantine was innocence floating high over fault . 
THOLOMYES IS SO MERRY THAT HE SINGS A SPANISH DITTY That day was composed of dawn , from one end to the other . 
All nature seemed to be having a holiday , and to be laughing . 
The flower-beds of Saint-Cloud perfumed the air ; the breath of the Seine rustled the leaves vaguely ; the branches gesticulated in the wind , bees pillaged the jasmines ; a whole bohemia of butterflies swooped down upon the yarrow , the clover , and the sterile oats ; in the august park of the King of France there was a pack of vagabonds , the birds . 
The four merry couples , mingled with the sun , the fields , the flowers , the trees , were resplendent . 
And in this community of Paradise , talking , singing , running , dancing , chasing butterflies , plucking convolvulus , wetting their pink , open-work stockings in the tall grass , fresh , wild , without malice , all received , to some extent , the kisses of all , with the exception of Fantine , who was hedged about with that vague resistance of hers composed of dreaminess and wildness , and who was in love . 
`` You always have a queer look about you , '' said Favourite to her . 
Such things are joys . 
These passages of happy couples are a profound appeal to life and nature , and make a caress and light spring forth from everything . 
There was once a fairy who created the fields and forests expressly for those in love , -- in that eternal hedge-school of lovers , which is forever beginning anew , and which will last as long as there are hedges and scholars . 
Hence the popularity of spring among thinkers . 
The patrician and the knife-grinder , the duke and the peer , the limb of the law , the courtiers and townspeople , as they used to say in olden times , all are subjects of this fairy . 
They laugh and hunt , and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis -- what a transfiguration effected by love ! 
Notaries ' clerks are gods . 
And the little cries , the pursuits through the grass , the waists embraced on the fly , those jargons which are melodies , those adorations which burst forth in the manner of pronouncing a syllable , those cherries torn from one mouth by another , -- all this blazes forth and takes its place among the celestial glories . 
Beautiful women waste themselves sweetly . 
They think that this will never come to an end . 
Philosophers , poets , painters , observe these ecstasies and know not what to make of it , so greatly are they dazzled by it . 
The departure for Cythera ! 
exclaims Watteau ; Lancret , the painter of plebeians , contemplates his bourgeois , who have flitted away into the azure sky ; Diderot stretches out his arms to all these love idyls , and d'Urfe mingles druids with them . 
After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called the King 's Square to see a newly arrived plant from India , whose name escapes our memory at this moment , and which , at that epoch , was attracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud . 
It was an odd and charming shrub with a long stem , whose numerous branches , bristling and leafless and as fine as threads , were covered with a million tiny white rosettes ; this gave the shrub the air of a head of hair studded with flowers . 
There was always an admiring crowd about it . 
After viewing the shrub , Tholomyes exclaimed , `` I offer you asses ! '' 
and having agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses , they returned by way of Vanvres and Issy . 
At Issy an incident occurred . 
The truly national park , at that time owned by Bourguin the contractor , happened to be wide open . 
They passed the gates , visited the manikin anchorite in his grotto , tried the mysterious little effects of the famous cabinet of mirrors , the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become a millionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus . 
They had stoutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebrated by the Abbe de Bernis . 
As he swung these beauties , one after the other , producing folds in the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have found to his taste , amid peals of laughter , the Toulousan Tholomyes , who was somewhat of a Spaniard , Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa , sang , to a melancholy chant , the old ballad gallega , probably inspired by some lovely maid dashing in full flight upon a rope between two trees : -- `` Soy de Badajoz , `` Badajoz is my home , Amor me llama , And Love is my name ; Toda mi alma , To my eyes in flame , Es en mi ojos , All my soul doth come ; Porque ensenas , For instruction meet A tuas piernas . 
I receive at thy feet '' Fantine alone refused to swing . 
`` I do n't like to have people put on airs like that , '' muttered Favourite , with a good deal of acrimony . 
After leaving the asses there was a fresh delight ; they crossed the Seine in a boat , and proceeding from Passy on foot they reached the barrier of l'Etoile . 
They had been up since five o'clock that morning , as the reader will remember ; but bah ! 
there is no such thing as fatigue on Sunday , said Favourite ; on Sunday fatigue does not work . 
About three o'clock the four couples , frightened at their happiness , were sliding down the Russian mountains , a singular edifice which then occupied the heights of Beaujon , and whose undulating line was visible above the trees of the Champs Elysees . 
From time to time Favourite exclaimed : -- `` And the surprise ? 
I claim the surprise . '' 
`` Patience , '' replied Tholomyes . 
AT BOMBARDA 'S The Russian mountains having been exhausted , they began to think about dinner ; and the radiant party of eight , somewhat weary at last , became stranded in Bombarda 's public house , a branch establishment which had been set up in the Champs-Elysees by that famous restaurant-keeper , Bombarda , whose sign could then be seen in the Rue de Rivoli , near Delorme Alley . 
A large but ugly room , with an alcove and a bed at the end -LRB- they had been obliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sunday crowd -RRB- ; two windows whence they could survey beyond the elms , the quay and the river ; a magnificent August sunlight lightly touching the panes ; two tables ; upon one of them a triumphant mountain of bouquets , mingled with the hats of men and women ; at the other the four couples seated round a merry confusion of platters , dishes , glasses , and bottles ; jugs of beer mingled with flasks of wine ; very little order on the table , some disorder beneath it ; `` They made beneath the table A noise , a clatter of the feet that was abominable , '' says Moliere . 
This was the state which the shepherd idyl , begun at five o'clock in the morning , had reached at half-past four in the afternoon . 
The sun was setting ; their appetites were satisfied . 
The Champs-Elysees , filled with sunshine and with people , were nothing but light and dust , the two things of which glory is composed . 
The horses of Marly , those neighing marbles , were prancing in a cloud of gold . 
Carriages were going and coming . 
A squadron of magnificent body-guards , with their clarions at their head , were descending the Avenue de Neuilly ; the white flag , showing faintly rosy in the setting sun , floated over the dome of the Tuileries . 
The Place de la Concorde , which had become the Place Louis XV . 
once more , was choked with happy promenaders . 
Many wore the silver fleur-de-lys suspended from the white-watered ribbon , which had not yet wholly disappeared from button-holes in the year 1817 . 
Here and there choruses of little girls threw to the winds , amid the passersby , who formed into circles and applauded , the then celebrated Bourbon air , which was destined to strike the Hundred Days with lightning , and which had for its refrain : -- `` Rendez-nous notre pere de Gand , Rendez-nous notre pere . '' 
`` Give us back our father from Ghent , Give us back our father . '' 
Groups of dwellers in the suburbs , in Sunday array , sometimes even decorated with the fleur-de-lys , like the bourgeois , scattered over the large square and the Marigny square , were playing at rings and revolving on the wooden horses ; others were engaged in drinking ; some journeyman printers had on paper caps ; their laughter was audible . 
Every thing was radiant . 
It was a time of undisputed peace and profound royalist security ; it was the epoch when a special and private report of Chief of Police Angeles to the King , on the subject of the suburbs of Paris , terminated with these lines : -- `` Taking all things into consideration , Sire , there is nothing to be feared from these people . 
They are as heedless and as indolent as cats . 
The populace is restless in the provinces ; it is not in Paris . 
These are very pretty men , Sire . 
It would take all of two of them to make one of your grenadiers . 
There is nothing to be feared on the part of the populace of Paris the capital . 
It is remarkable that the stature of this population should have diminished in the last fifty years ; and the populace of the suburbs is still more puny than at the time of the Revolution . 
It is not dangerous . 
In short , it is an amiable rabble . '' 
Prefects of the police do not deem it possible that a cat can transform itself into a lion ; that does happen , however , and in that lies the miracle wrought by the populace of Paris . 
Moreover , the cat so despised by Count Angles possessed the esteem of the republics of old . 
In their eyes it was liberty incarnate ; and as though to serve as pendant to the Minerva Aptera of the Piraeus , there stood on the public square in Corinth the colossal bronze figure of a cat . 
The ingenuous police of the Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too `` rose-colored '' a light ; it is not so much of `` an amiable rabble '' as it is thought . 
The Parisian is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek : no one sleeps more soundly than he , no one is more frankly frivolous and lazy than he , no one can better assume the air of forgetfulness ; let him not be trusted nevertheless ; he is ready for any sort of cool deed ; but when there is glory at the end of it , he is worthy of admiration in every sort of fury . 
Give him a pike , he will produce the 10th of August ; give him a gun , you will have Austerlitz . 
He is Napoleon 's stay and Danton 's resource . 
Is it a question of country , he enlists ; is it a question of liberty , he tears up the pavements . 
Beware ! 
his hair filled with wrath , is epic ; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of a chlamys . 
Take care ! 
he will make of the first Rue Grenetat which comes to hand Caudine Forks . 
When the hour strikes , this man of the faubourgs will grow in stature ; this little man will arise , and his gaze will be terrible , and his breath will become a tempest , and there will issue forth from that slender chest enough wind to disarrange the folds of the Alps . 
It is , thanks to the suburban man of Paris , that the Revolution , mixed with arms , conquers Europe . 
He sings ; it is his delight . 
Proportion his song to his nature , and you will see ! 
As long as he has for refrain nothing but la Carmagnole , he only overthrows Louis XVI. ; make him sing the Marseillaise , and he will free the world . 
This note jotted down on the margin of Angles ' report , we will return to our four couples . 
The dinner , as we have said , was drawing to its close . 
A CHAPTER IN WHICH THEY ADORE EACH OTHER Chat at table , the chat of love ; it is as impossible to reproduce one as the other ; the chat of love is a cloud ; the chat at table is smoke . 
Fameuil and Dahlia were humming . 
Tholomyes was drinking . 
Zephine was laughing , Fantine smiling , Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had purchased at Saint-Cloud . 
Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said : -- `` Blachevelle , I adore you . '' 
This called forth a question from Blachevelle : -- `` What would you do , Favourite , if I were to cease to love you ? '' 
`` I ! '' 
cried Favourite . 
`` Ah ! 
Do not say that even in jest ! 
If you were to cease to love me , I would spring after you , I would scratch you , I should rend you , I would throw you into the water , I would have you arrested . '' 
Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled in his self-love . 
Favourite resumed : -- `` Yes , I would scream to the police ! 
Ah ! 
I should not restrain myself , not at all ! 
Rabble ! '' 
Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair , in an ecstasy , and closed both eyes proudly . 
Dahlia , as she ate , said in a low voice to Favourite , amid the uproar : -- `` So you really idolize him deeply , that Blachevelle of yours ? '' 
`` I ? 
I detest him , '' replied Favourite in the same tone , seizing her fork again . 
`` He is avaricious . 
I love the little fellow opposite me in my house . 
He is very nice , that young man ; do you know him ? 
One can see that he is an actor by profession . 
I love actors . 
As soon as he comes in , his mother says to him : ` Ah ! 
mon Dieu ! 
my peace of mind is gone . 
There he goes with his shouting . 
But , my dear , you are splitting my head ! ' 
So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets , to black holes , as high as he can mount , and there he sets to singing , declaiming , how do I know what ? 
so that he can be heard down stairs ! 
He earns twenty sous a day at an attorney 's by penning quibbles . 
He is the son of a former precentor of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
He idolizes me so , that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes , he said to me : ` Mamselle , make your gloves into fritters , and I will eat them . ' 
It is only artists who can say such things as that . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow . 
Never mind ; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him -- how I lie ! 
Hey ! 
How I do lie ! '' 
Favourite paused , and then went on : -- `` I am sad , you see , Dahlia . 
It has done nothing but rain all summer ; the wind irritates me ; the wind does not abate . 
Blachevelle is very stingy ; there are hardly any green peas in the market ; one does not know what to eat . 
I have the spleen , as the English say , butter is so dear ! 
and then you see it is horrible , here we are dining in a room with a bed in it , and that disgusts me with life . '' 
THE WISDOM OF THOLOMYES In the meantime , while some sang , the rest talked together tumultuously all at once ; it was no longer anything but noise . 
Tholomyes intervened . 
`` Let us not talk at random nor too fast , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Let us reflect , if we wish to be brilliant . 
Too much improvisation empties the mind in a stupid way . 
Running beer gathers no froth . 
No haste , gentlemen . 
Let us mingle majesty with the feast . 
Let us eat with meditation ; let us make haste slowly . 
Let us not hurry . 
Consider the springtime ; if it makes haste , it is done for ; that is to say , it gets frozen . 
Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees . 
Excess of zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners . 
No zeal , gentlemen ! 
Grimod de la Reyniere agrees with Talleyrand . '' 
A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group . 
`` Leave us in peace , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` Down with the tyrant ! '' 
said Fameuil . 
`` Bombarda , Bombance , and Bambochel ! '' 
cried Listolier . 
`` Sunday exists , '' resumed Fameuil . 
`` We are sober , '' added Listolier . 
`` Tholomyes , '' remarked Blachevelle , `` contemplate my calmness -LSB- mon calme -RSB- . '' 
`` You are the Marquis of that , '' retorted Tholomyes . 
This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool . 
The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist . 
All the frogs held their peace . 
`` Friends , '' cried Tholomyes , with the accent of a man who had recovered his empire , `` Come to yourselves . 
This pun which has fallen from the skies must not be received with too much stupor . 
Everything which falls in that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect . 
The pun is the dung of the mind which soars . 
The jest falls , no matter where ; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges into the azure depths . 
A whitish speck flattened against the rock does not prevent the condor from soaring aloft . 
Far be it from me to insult the pun ! 
I honor it in proportion to its merits ; nothing more . 
All the most august , the most sublime , the most charming of humanity , and perhaps outside of humanity , have made puns . 
Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter , Moses on Isaac , AEschylus on Polynices , Cleopatra on Octavius . 
And observe that Cleopatra 's pun preceded the battle of Actium , and that had it not been for it , no one would have remembered the city of Toryne , a Greek name which signifies a ladle . 
That once conceded , I return to my exhortation . 
I repeat , brothers , I repeat , no zeal , no hubbub , no excess ; even in witticisms , gayety , jollities , or plays on words . 
Listen to me . 
I have the prudence of Amphiaraus and the baldness of Caesar . 
There must be a limit , even to rebuses . 
Est modus in rebus . 
`` There must be a limit , even to dinners . 
You are fond of apple turnovers , ladies ; do not indulge in them to excess . 
Even in the matter of turnovers , good sense and art are requisite . 
Gluttony chastises the glutton , Gula punit Gulax . 
Indigestion is charged by the good God with preaching morality to stomachs . 
And remember this : each one of our passions , even love , has a stomach which must not be filled too full . 
In all things the word finis must be written in good season ; self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent ; the bolt must be drawn on appetite ; one must set one 's own fantasy to the violin , and carry one 's self to the post . 
The sage is the man who knows how , at a given moment , to effect his own arrest . 
Have some confidence in me , for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law , according to the verdict of my examinations , for I know the difference between the question put and the question pending , for I have sustained a thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quaestor of the Parricide ; because I am going to be a doctor , apparently it does not follow that it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile . 
I recommend you to moderation in your desires . 
It is true that my name is Felix Tholomyes ; I speak well . 
Happy is he who , when the hour strikes , takes a heroic resolve , and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes . '' 
Favourite listened with profound attention . 
`` Felix , '' said she , `` what a pretty word ! 
I love that name . 
It is Latin ; it means prosper . '' 
Tholomyes went on : -- `` Quirites , gentlemen , caballeros , my friends . 
Do you wish never to feel the prick , to do without the nuptial bed , and to brave love ? 
Nothing more simple . 
Here is the receipt : lemonade , excessive exercise , hard labor ; work yourself to death , drag blocks , sleep not , hold vigil , gorge yourself with nitrous beverages , and potions of nymphaeas ; drink emulsions of poppies and agnus castus ; season this with a strict diet , starve yourself , and add thereto cold baths , girdles of herbs , the application of a plate of lead , lotions made with the subacetate of lead , and fomentations of oxycrat . '' 
`` I prefer a woman , '' said Listolier . 
`` Woman , '' resumed Tholomyes ; `` distrust her . 
Woe to him who yields himself to the unstable heart of woman ! 
Woman is perfidious and disingenuous . 
She detests the serpent from professional jealousy . 
The serpent is the shop over the way . '' 
`` Tholomyes ! '' 
cried Blachevelle , `` you are drunk ! '' 
`` Pardieu , '' said Tholomyes . 
`` Then be gay , '' resumed Blachevelle . 
`` I agree to that , '' responded Tholomyes . 
And , refilling his glass , he rose . 
`` Glory to wine ! 
Nunc te , Bacche , canam ! 
Pardon me ladies ; that is Spanish . 
And the proof of it , senoras , is this : like people , like cask . 
The arrobe of Castile contains sixteen litres ; the cantaro of Alicante , twelve ; the almude of the Canaries , twenty-five ; the cuartin of the Balearic Isles , twenty-six ; the boot of Tzar Peter , thirty . 
Long live that Tzar who was great , and long live his boot , which was still greater ! 
Ladies , take the advice of a friend ; make a mistake in your neighbor if you see fit . 
The property of love is to err . 
A love affair is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an English serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing . 
It is not made for that ; it errs gayly , our gentle love . 
It has been said , error is human ; I say , error is love . 
Ladies , I idolize you all . 
O Zephine , O Josephine , face more than irregular , you would be charming were you not all askew . 
You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has sat down by mistake . 
As for Favourite , O nymphs and muses ! 
one day when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guerin-Boisseau , he espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up , which displayed her legs . 
This prologue pleased him , and Blachevelle fell in love . 
The one he loved was Favourite . 
O Favourite , thou hast Ionian lips . 
There was a Greek painter named Euphorion , who was surnamed the painter of the lips . 
That Greek alone would have been worthy to paint thy mouth . 
Listen ! 
before thee , there was never a creature worthy of the name . 
Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus , or to eat it like Eve ; beauty begins with thee . 
I have just referred to Eve ; it is thou who hast created her . 
Thou deservest the letters-patent of the beautiful woman . 
O Favourite , I cease to address you as ` thou , ' because I pass from poetry to prose . 
You were speaking of my name a little while ago . 
That touched me ; but let us , whoever we may be , distrust names . 
They may delude us . 
I am called Felix , and I am not happy . 
Words are liars . 
Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford us . 
It would be a mistake to write to Liege -LSB- 2 -RSB- for corks , and to Pau for gloves . 
Miss Dahlia , were I in your place , I would call myself Rosa . 
A flower should smell sweet , and woman should have wit . 
I say nothing of Fantine ; she is a dreamer , a musing , thoughtful , pensive person ; she is a phantom possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun , who has strayed into the life of a grisette , but who takes refuge in illusions , and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure without very well knowing what she sees or what she is doing , and who , with her eyes fixed on heaven , wanders in a garden where there are more birds than are in existence . 
O Fantine , know this : I , Tholomyes , I am all illusion ; but she does not even hear me , that blond maid of Chimeras ! 
as for the rest , everything about her is freshness , suavity , youth , sweet morning light . 
O Fantine , maid worthy of being called Marguerite or Pearl , you are a woman from the beauteous Orient . 
Ladies , a second piece of advice : do not marry ; marriage is a graft ; it takes well or ill ; avoid that risk . 
But bah ! 
what am I saying ? 
I am wasting my words . 
Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage , and all that we wise men can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds . 
Well , so be it ; but , my beauties , remember this , you eat too much sugar . 
You have but one fault , O woman , and that is nibbling sugar . 
O nibbling sex , your pretty little white teeth adore sugar . 
Now , heed me well , sugar is a salt . 
All salts are withering . 
Sugar is the most desiccating of all salts ; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins ; hence the coagulation , and then the solidification of the blood ; hence tubercles in the lungs , hence death . 
That is why diabetes borders on consumption . 
Then , do not crunch sugar , and you will live . 
I turn to the men : gentlemen , make conquest , rob each other of your well-beloved without remorse . 
Chassez across . 
In love there are no friends . 
Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is open . 
No quarter , war to the death ! 
a pretty woman is a casus belli ; a pretty woman is flagrant misdemeanor . 
All the invasions of history have been determined by petticoats . 
Woman is man 's right . 
Romulus carried off the Sabines ; William carried off the Saxon women ; Caesar carried off the Roman women . 
The man who is not loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses of other men ; and for my own part , to all those unfortunate men who are widowers , I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army of Italy : `` Soldiers , you are in need of everything ; the enemy has it . '' 
-LSB- 2 -RSB- Liege : a cork-tree . 
Pau : a jest on peau , skin . 
Tholomyes paused . 
`` Take breath , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
At the same moment Blachevelle , supported by Listolier and Fameuil , struck up to a plaintive air , one of those studio songs composed of the first words which come to hand , rhymed richly and not at all , as destitute of sense as the gesture of the tree and the sound of the wind , which have their birth in the vapor of pipes , and are dissipated and take their flight with them . 
This is the couplet by which the group replied to Tholomyes ' harangue : -- `` The father turkey-cocks so grave Some money to an agent gave , That master good Clermont-Tonnerre Might be made pope on Saint Johns ' day fair . 
But this good Clermont could not be Made pope , because no priest was he ; And then their agent , whose wrath burned , With all their money back returned . '' 
This was not calculated to calm Tholomyes ' improvisation ; he emptied his glass , filled , refilled it , and began again : -- `` Down with wisdom ! 
Forget all that I have said . 
Let us be neither prudes nor prudent men nor prudhommes . 
I propose a toast to mirth ; be merry . 
Let us complete our course of law by folly and eating ! 
Indigestion and the digest . 
Let Justinian be the male , and Feasting , the female ! 
Joy in the depths ! 
Live , O creation ! 
The world is a great diamond . 
I am happy . 
The birds are astonishing . 
What a festival everywhere ! 
The nightingale is a gratuitous Elleviou . 
Summer , I salute thee ! 
O Luxembourg ! 
O Georgics of the Rue Madame , and of the Allee de l'Observatoire ! 
O pensive infantry soldiers ! 
O all those charming nurses who , while they guard the children , amuse themselves ! 
The pampas of America would please me if I had not the arcades of the Odeon . 
My soul flits away into the virgin forests and to the savannas . 
All is beautiful . 
The flies buzz in the sun . 
The sun has sneezed out the humming bird . 
Embrace me , Fantine ! '' 
He made a mistake and embraced Favourite . 
THE DEATH OF A HORSE `` The dinners are better at Edon 's than at Bombarda 's , '' exclaimed Zephine . 
`` I prefer Bombarda to Edon , '' declared Blachevelle . 
`` There is more luxury . 
It is more Asiatic . 
Look at the room downstairs ; there are mirrors -LSB- glaces -RSB- on the walls . '' 
`` I prefer them -LSB- glaces , ices -RSB- on my plate , '' said Favourite . 
Blachevelle persisted : -- `` Look at the knives . 
The handles are of silver at Bombarda 's and of bone at Edon 's . 
Now , silver is more valuable than bone . '' 
`` Except for those who have a silver chin , '' observed Tholomyes . 
He was looking at the dome of the Invalides , which was visible from Bombarda 's windows . 
A pause ensued . 
`` Tholomyes , '' exclaimed Fameuil , `` Listolier and I were having a discussion just now . '' 
`` A discussion is a good thing , '' replied Tholomyes ; `` a quarrel is better . '' 
`` We were disputing about philosophy . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Which do you prefer , Descartes or Spinoza ? '' 
`` Desaugiers , '' said Tholomyes . 
This decree pronounced , he took a drink , and went on : -- `` I consent to live . 
All is not at an end on earth since we can still talk nonsense . 
For that I return thanks to the immortal gods . 
We lie . 
One lies , but one laughs . 
One affirms , but one doubts . 
The unexpected bursts forth from the syllogism . 
That is fine . 
There are still human beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of the paradox merrily . 
This , ladies , which you are drinking with so tranquil an air is Madeira wine , you must know , from the vineyard of Coural das Freiras , which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms above the level of the sea . 
Attention while you drink ! 
three hundred and seventeen fathoms ! 
and Monsieur Bombarda , the magnificent eating-house keeper , gives you those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for four francs and fifty centimes . '' 
Again Fameuil interrupted him : -- `` Tholomyes , your opinions fix the law . 
Who is your favorite author ? '' 
`` Ber -- '' `` Quin ? '' 
`` No ; Choux . '' 
And Tholomyes continued : -- `` Honor to Bombarda ! 
He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could but get me an Indian dancing-girl , and Thygelion of Chaeronea if he could bring me a Greek courtesan ; for , oh , ladies ! 
there were Bombardas in Greece and in Egypt . 
Apuleius tells us of them . 
Alas ! 
always the same , and nothing new ; nothing more unpublished by the creator in creation ! 
Nil sub sole novum , says Solomon ; amor omnibus idem , says Virgil ; and Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint-Cloud , as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos . 
One last word . 
Do you know what Aspasia was , ladies ? 
Although she lived at an epoch when women had , as yet , no soul , she was a soul ; a soul of a rosy and purple hue , more ardent hued than fire , fresher than the dawn . 
Aspasia was a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met ; she was the goddess prostitute ; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut . 
Aspasia was created in case a mistress should be needed for Prometheus . '' 
Tholomyes , once started , would have found some difficulty in stopping , had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment . 
The shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt . 
It was a Beauceron mare , old and thin , and one fit for the knacker , which was dragging a very heavy cart . 
On arriving in front of Bombarda 's , the worn-out , exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further . 
This incident attracted a crowd . 
Hardly had the cursing and indignant carter had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word , Matin -LRB- the jade -RRB- , backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip , when the jade fell , never to rise again . 
On hearing the hubbub made by the passersby , Tholomyes ' merry auditors turned their heads , and Tholomyes took advantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with this melancholy strophe : -- `` Elle etait de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses -LSB- 3 -RSB- Ont le meme destin ; Et , rosse , elle a vecu ce que vivant les rosses , L'espace d'un matin ! '' 
-LSB- 3 -RSB- She belonged to that circle where cuckoos and carriages share the same fate ; and a jade herself , she lived , as jades live , for the space of a morning -LRB- or jade -RRB- . 
`` Poor horse ! '' 
sighed Fantine . 
And Dahlia exclaimed : -- `` There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses . 
How can one be such a pitiful fool as that ! '' 
At that moment Favourite , folding her arms and throwing her head back , looked resolutely at Tholomyes and said : -- `` Come , now ! 
the surprise ? '' 
`` Exactly . 
The moment has arrived , '' replied Tholomyes . 
`` Gentlemen , the hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck . 
Wait for us a moment , ladies . '' 
`` It begins with a kiss , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` On the brow , '' added Tholomyes . 
Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress 's brow ; then all four filed out through the door , with their fingers on their lips . 
Favourite clapped her hands on their departure . 
`` It is beginning to be amusing already , '' said she . 
`` Do n't be too long , '' murmured Fantine ; `` we are waiting for you . '' 
A MERRY END TO MIRTH When the young girls were left alone , they leaned two by two on the window-sills , chatting , craning out their heads , and talking from one window to the other . 
They saw the young men emerge from the Cafe Bombarda arm in arm . 
The latter turned round , made signs to them , smiled , and disappeared in that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the Champs-Elysees . 
`` Do n't be long ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
`` What are they going to bring us ? '' 
said Zephine . 
`` It will certainly be something pretty , '' said Dahlia . 
`` For my part , '' said Favourite , `` I want it to be of gold . '' 
Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore of the lake , which they could see through the branches of the large trees , and which diverted them greatly . 
It was the hour for the departure of the mail-coaches and diligences . 
Nearly all the stage-coaches for the south and west passed through the Champs-Elysees . 
The majority followed the quay and went through the Passy Barrier . 
From moment to moment , some huge vehicle , painted yellow and black , heavily loaded , noisily harnessed , rendered shapeless by trunks , tarpaulins , and valises , full of heads which immediately disappeared , rushed through the crowd with all the sparks of a forge , with dust for smoke , and an air of fury , grinding the pavements , changing all the paving-stones into steels . 
This uproar delighted the young girls . 
Favourite exclaimed : -- `` What a row ! 
One would say that it was a pile of chains flying away . '' 
It chanced that one of these vehicles , which they could only see with difficulty through the thick elms , halted for a moment , then set out again at a gallop . 
This surprised Fantine . 
`` That 's odd ! '' 
said she . 
`` I thought the diligence never stopped . '' 
Favourite shrugged her shoulders . 
`` This Fantine is surprising . 
I am coming to take a look at her out of curiosity . 
She is dazzled by the simplest things . 
Suppose a case : I am a traveller ; I say to the diligence , ` I will go on in advance ; you shall pick me up on the quay as you pass . ' 
The diligence passes , sees me , halts , and takes me . 
That is done every day . 
You do not know life , my dear . '' 
In this manner a certain time elapsed . 
All at once Favourite made a movement , like a person who is just waking up . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` and the surprise ? '' 
`` Yes , by the way , '' joined in Dahlia , `` the famous surprise ? '' 
`` They are a very long time about it ! '' 
said Fantine . 
As Fantine concluded this sigh , the waiter who had served them at dinner entered . 
He held in his hand something which resembled a letter . 
`` What is that ? '' 
demanded Favourite . 
The waiter replied : -- `` It is a paper that those gentlemen left for these ladies . '' 
`` Why did you not bring it at once ? '' 
`` Because , '' said the waiter , `` the gentlemen ordered me not to deliver it to the ladies for an hour . '' 
Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter 's hand . 
It was , in fact , a letter . 
`` Stop ! '' 
said she ; `` there is no address ; but this is what is written on it -- '' `` THIS IS THE SURPRISE . '' 
She tore the letter open hastily , opened it , and read -LSB- she knew how to read -RSB- : -- `` OUR BELOVED : -- `` You must know that we have parents . 
Parents -- you do not know much about such things . 
They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code , which is puerile and honest . 
Now , these parents groan , these old folks implore us , these good men and these good women call us prodigal sons ; they desire our return , and offer to kill calves for us . 
Being virtuous , we obey them . 
At the hour when you read this , five fiery horses will be bearing us to our papas and mammas . 
We are pulling up our stakes , as Bossuet says . 
We are going ; we are gone . 
We flee in the arms of Lafitte and on the wings of Caillard . 
The Toulouse diligence tears us from the abyss , and the abyss is you , O our little beauties ! 
We return to society , to duty , to respectability , at full trot , at the rate of three leagues an hour . 
It is necessary for the good of the country that we should be , like the rest of the world , prefects , fathers of families , rural police , and councillors of state . 
Venerate us . 
We are sacrificing ourselves . 
Mourn for us in haste , and replace us with speed . 
If this letter lacerates you , do the same by it . 
Adieu . 
`` For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy . 
We bear you no grudge for that . 
`` Signed : BLACHEVELLE . 
FAMUEIL . 
LISTOLIER . 
FELIX THOLOMYES . 
`` Postscriptum . 
The dinner is paid for . '' 
The four young women looked at each other . 
Favourite was the first to break the silence . 
`` Well ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` it 's a very pretty farce , all the same . '' 
`` It is very droll , '' said Zephine . 
`` That must have been Blachevelle 's idea , '' resumed Favourite . 
`` It makes me in love with him . 
No sooner is he gone than he is loved . 
This is an adventure , indeed . '' 
`` No , '' said Dahlia ; `` it was one of Tholomyes ' ideas . 
That is evident . 
`` In that case , '' retorted Favourite , `` death to Blachevelle , and long live Tholomyes ! '' 
`` Long live Tholomyes ! '' 
exclaimed Dahlia and Zephine . 
And they burst out laughing . 
Fantine laughed with the rest . 
An hour later , when she had returned to her room , she wept . 
It was her first love affair , as we have said ; she had given herself to this Tholomyes as to a husband , and the poor girl had a child . 
ONE MOTHER MEETS ANOTHER MOTHER There was , at Montfermeil , near Paris , during the first quarter of this century , a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists . 
This cook-shop was kept by some people named Thenardier , husband and wife . 
It was situated in Boulanger Lane . 
Over the door there was a board nailed flat against the wall . 
Upon this board was painted something which resembled a man carrying another man on his back , the latter wearing the big gilt epaulettes of a general , with large silver stars ; red spots represented blood ; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke , and probably represented a battle . 
Below ran this inscription : AT THE SIGN OF SERGEANT OF WATERLOO -LRB- Au Sargent de Waterloo -RRB- . 
Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of a hostelry . 
Nevertheless , the vehicle , or , to speak more accurately , the fragment of a vehicle , which encumbered the street in front of the cook-shop of the Sergeant of Waterloo , one evening in the spring of 1818 , would certainly have attracted , by its mass , the attention of any painter who had passed that way . 
It was the fore-carriage of one of those trucks which are used in wooded tracts of country , and which serve to transport thick planks and the trunks of trees . 
This fore-carriage was composed of a massive iron axle-tree with a pivot , into which was fitted a heavy shaft , and which was supported by two huge wheels . 
The whole thing was compact , overwhelming , and misshapen . 
It seemed like the gun-carriage of an enormous cannon . 
The ruts of the road had bestowed on the wheels , the fellies , the hub , the axle , and the shaft , a layer of mud , a hideous yellowish daubing hue , tolerably like that with which people are fond of ornamenting cathedrals . 
The wood was disappearing under mud , and the iron beneath rust . 
Under the axle-tree hung , like drapery , a huge chain , worthy of some Goliath of a convict . 
This chain suggested , not the beams , which it was its office to transport , but the mastodons and mammoths which it might have served to harness ; it had the air of the galleys , but of cyclopean and superhuman galleys , and it seemed to have been detached from some monster . 
Homer would have bound Polyphemus with it , and Shakespeare , Caliban . 
Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street ? 
In the first place , to encumber the street ; next , in order that it might finish the process of rusting . 
There is a throng of institutions in the old social order , which one comes across in this fashion as one walks about outdoors , and which have no other reasons for existence than the above . 
The centre of the chain swung very near the ground in the middle , and in the loop , as in the rope of a swing , there were seated and grouped , on that particular evening , in exquisite interlacement , two little girls ; one about two years and a half old , the other , eighteen months ; the younger in the arms of the other . 
A handkerchief , cleverly knotted about them , prevented their falling out . 
A mother had caught sight of that frightful chain , and had said , `` Come ! 
there 's a plaything for my children . '' 
The two children , who were dressed prettily and with some elegance , were radiant with pleasure ; one would have said that they were two roses amid old iron ; their eyes were a triumph ; their fresh cheeks were full of laughter . 
One had chestnut hair ; the other , brown . 
Their innocent faces were two delighted surprises ; a blossoming shrub which grew near wafted to the passers-by perfumes which seemed to emanate from them ; the child of eighteen months displayed her pretty little bare stomach with the chaste indecency of childhood . 
Above and around these two delicate heads , all made of happiness and steeped in light , the gigantic fore-carriage , black with rust , almost terrible , all entangled in curves and wild angles , rose in a vault , like the entrance of a cavern . 
A few paces apart , crouching down upon the threshold of the hostelry , the mother , not a very prepossessing woman , by the way , though touching at that moment , was swinging the two children by means of a long cord , watching them carefully , for fear of accidents , with that animal and celestial expression which is peculiar to maternity . 
At every backward and forward swing the hideous links emitted a strident sound , which resembled a cry of rage ; the little girls were in ecstasies ; the setting sun mingled in this joy , and nothing could be more charming than this caprice of chance which had made of a chain of Titans the swing of cherubim . 
As she rocked her little ones , the mother hummed in a discordant voice a romance then celebrated : -- `` It must be , said a warrior . '' 
Her song , and the contemplation of her daughters , prevented her hearing and seeing what was going on in the street . 
In the meantime , some one had approached her , as she was beginning the first couplet of the romance , and suddenly she heard a voice saying very near her ear : -- `` You have two beautiful children there , Madame . '' 
`` To the fair and tender Imogene -- '' replied the mother , continuing her romance ; then she turned her head . 
A woman stood before her , a few paces distant . 
This woman also had a child , which she carried in her arms . 
She was carrying , in addition , a large carpet-bag , which seemed very heavy . 
This woman 's child was one of the most divine creatures that it is possible to behold . 
lt was a girl , two or three years of age . 
She could have entered into competition with the two other little ones , so far as the coquetry of her dress was concerned ; she wore a cap of fine linen , ribbons on her bodice , and Valenciennes lace on her cap . 
The folds of her skirt were raised so as to permit a view of her white , firm , and dimpled leg . 
She was admirably rosy and healthy . 
The little beauty inspired a desire to take a bite from the apples of her cheeks . 
Of her eyes nothing could be known , except that they must be very large , and that they had magnificent lashes . 
She was asleep . 
She slept with that slumber of absolute confidence peculiar to her age . 
The arms of mothers are made of tenderness ; in them children sleep profoundly . 
As for the mother , her appearance was sad and poverty-stricken . 
She was dressed like a working-woman who is inclined to turn into a peasant again . 
She was young . 
Was she handsome ? 
Perhaps ; but in that attire it was not apparent . 
Her hair , a golden lock of which had escaped , seemed very thick , but was severely concealed beneath an ugly , tight , close , nun-like cap , tied under the chin . 
A smile displays beautiful teeth when one has them ; but she did not smile . 
Her eyes did not seem to have been dry for a very long time . 
She was pale ; she had a very weary and rather sickly appearance . 
She gazed upon her daughter asleep in her arms with the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own child . 
A large blue handkerchief , such as the Invalides use , was folded into a fichu , and concealed her figure clumsily . 
Her hands were sunburnt and all dotted with freckles , her forefinger was hardened and lacerated with the needle ; she wore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff , a linen gown , and coarse shoes . 
It was Fantine . 
It was Fantine , but difficult to recognize . 
Nevertheless , on scrutinizing her attentively , it was evident that she still retained her beauty . 
A melancholy fold , which resembled the beginning of irony , wrinkled her right cheek . 
As for her toilette , that aerial toilette of muslin and ribbons , which seemed made of mirth , of folly , and of music , full of bells , and perfumed with lilacs had vanished like that beautiful and dazzling hoar-frost which is mistaken for diamonds in the sunlight ; it melts and leaves the branch quite black . 
Ten months had elapsed since the `` pretty farce . '' 
What had taken place during those ten months ? 
It can be divined . 
After abandonment , straightened circumstances . 
Fantine had immediately lost sight of Favourite , Zephine and Dahlia ; the bond once broken on the side of the men , it was loosed between the women ; they would have been greatly astonished had any one told them a fortnight later , that they had been friends ; there no longer existed any reason for such a thing . 
Fantine had remained alone . 
The father of her child gone , -- alas ! 
such ruptures are irrevocable , -- she found herself absolutely isolated , minus the habit of work and plus the taste for pleasure . 
Drawn away by her liaison with Tholomyes to disdain the pretty trade which she knew , she had neglected to keep her market open ; it was now closed to her . 
She had no resource . 
Fantine barely knew how to read , and did not know how to write ; in her childhood she had only been taught to sign her name ; she had a public letter-writer indite an epistle to Tholomyes , then a second , then a third . 
Tholomyes replied to none of them . 
Fantine heard the gossips say , as they looked at her child : `` Who takes those children seriously ! 
One only shrugs one 's shoulders over such children ! '' 
Then she thought of Tholomyes , who had shrugged his shoulders over his child , and who did not take that innocent being seriously ; and her heart grew gloomy toward that man . 
But what was she to do ? 
She no longer knew to whom to apply . 
She had committed a fault , but the foundation of her nature , as will be remembered , was modesty and virtue . 
She was vaguely conscious that she was on the verge of falling into distress , and of gliding into a worse state . 
Courage was necessary ; she possessed it , and held herself firm . 
The idea of returning to her native town of M. sur M. occurred to her . 
There , some one might possibly know her and give her work ; yes , but it would be necessary to conceal her fault . 
In a confused way she perceived the necessity of a separation which would be more painful than the first one . 
Her heart contracted , but she took her resolution . 
Fantine , as we shall see , had the fierce bravery of life . 
She had already valiantly renounced finery , had dressed herself in linen , and had put all her silks , all her ornaments , all her ribbons , and all her laces on her daughter , the only vanity which was left to her , and a holy one it was . 
She sold all that she had , which produced for her two hundred francs ; her little debts paid , she had only about eighty francs left . 
At the age of twenty-two , on a beautiful spring morning , she quitted Paris , bearing her child on her back . 
Any one who had seen these two pass would have had pity on them . 
This woman had , in all the world , nothing but her child , and the child had , in all the world , no one but this woman . 
Fantine had nursed her child , and this had tired her chest , and she coughed a little . 
We shall have no further occasion to speak of M. Felix Tholomyes . 
Let us confine ourselves to saying , that , twenty years later , under King Louis Philippe , he was a great provincial lawyer , wealthy and influential , a wise elector , and a very severe juryman ; he was still a man of pleasure . 
Towards the middle of the day , after having , from time to time , for the sake of resting herself , travelled , for three or four sous a league , in what was then known as the Petites Voitures des Environs de Paris , the `` little suburban coach service , '' Fantine found herself at Montfermeil , in the alley Boulanger . 
As she passed the Thenardier hostelry , the two little girls , blissful in the monster swing , had dazzled her in a manner , and she had halted in front of that vision of joy . 
Charms exist . 
These two little girls were a charm to this mother . 
She gazed at them in much emotion . 
The presence of angels is an announcement of Paradise . 
She thought that , above this inn , she beheld the mysterious HERE of Providence . 
These two little creatures were evidently happy . 
She gazed at them , she admired them , in such emotion that at the moment when their mother was recovering her breath between two couplets of her song , she could not refrain from addressing to her the remark which we have just read : -- `` You have two pretty children , Madame . '' 
The most ferocious creatures are disarmed by caresses bestowed on their young . 
The mother raised her head and thanked her , and bade the wayfarer sit down on the bench at the door , she herself being seated on the threshold . 
The two women began to chat . 
`` My name is Madame Thenardier , '' said the mother of the two little girls . 
`` We keep this inn . '' 
Then , her mind still running on her romance , she resumed humming between her teeth : -- `` It must be so ; I am a knight , And I am off to Palestine . '' 
This Madame Thenardier was a sandy-complexioned woman , thin and angular -- the type of the soldier 's wife in all its unpleasantness ; and what was odd , with a languishing air , which she owed to her perusal of romances . 
She was a simpering , but masculine creature . 
Old romances produce that effect when rubbed against the imagination of cook-shop woman . 
She was still young ; she was barely thirty . 
If this crouching woman had stood upright , her lofty stature and her frame of a perambulating colossus suitable for fairs , might have frightened the traveller at the outset , troubled her confidence , and disturbed what caused what we have to relate to vanish . 
A person who is seated instead of standing erect -- destinies hang upon such a thing as that . 
The traveller told her story , with slight modifications . 
That she was a working-woman ; that her husband was dead ; that her work in Paris had failed her , and that she was on her way to seek it elsewhere , in her own native parts ; that she had left Paris that morning on foot ; that , as she was carrying her child , and felt fatigued , she had got into the Villemomble coach when she met it ; that from Villemomble she had come to Montfermeil on foot ; that the little one had walked a little , but not much , because she was so young , and that she had been obliged to take her up , and the jewel had fallen asleep . 
At this word she bestowed on her daughter a passionate kiss , which woke her . 
The child opened her eyes , great blue eyes like her mother 's , and looked at -- what ? 
Nothing ; with that serious and sometimes severe air of little children , which is a mystery of their luminous innocence in the presence of our twilight of virtue . 
One would say that they feel themselves to be angels , and that they know us to be men . 
Then the child began to laugh ; and although the mother held fast to her , she slipped to the ground with the unconquerable energy of a little being which wished to run . 
All at once she caught sight of the two others in the swing , stopped short , and put out her tongue , in sign of admiration . 
Mother Thenardier released her daughters , made them descend from the swing , and said : -- `` Now amuse yourselves , all three of you . '' 
Children become acquainted quickly at that age , and at the expiration of a minute the little Thenardiers were playing with the new-comer at making holes in the ground , which was an immense pleasure . 
The new-comer was very gay ; the goodness of the mother is written in the gayety of the child ; she had seized a scrap of wood which served her for a shovel , and energetically dug a cavity big enough for a fly . 
The grave-digger 's business becomes a subject for laughter when performed by a child . 
The two women pursued their chat . 
`` What is your little one 's name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
For Cosette , read Euphrasie . 
The child 's name was Euphrasie . 
But out of Euphrasie the mother had made Cosette by that sweet and graceful instinct of mothers and of the populace which changes Josepha into Pepita , and Francoise into Sillette . 
It is a sort of derivative which disarranges and disconcerts the whole science of etymologists . 
We have known a grandmother who succeeded in turning Theodore into Gnon . 
`` How old is she ? '' 
`` She is going on three . '' 
`` That is the age of my eldest . '' 
In the meantime , the three little girls were grouped in an attitude of profound anxiety and blissfulness ; an event had happened ; a big worm had emerged from the ground , and they were afraid ; and they were in ecstasies over it . 
Their radiant brows touched each other ; one would have said that there were three heads in one aureole . 
`` How easily children get acquainted at once ! '' 
exclaimed Mother Thenardier ; `` one would swear that they were three sisters ! '' 
This remark was probably the spark which the other mother had been waiting for . 
She seized the Thenardier 's hand , looked at her fixedly , and said : -- `` Will you keep my child for me ? '' 
The Thenardier made one of those movements of surprise which signify neither assent nor refusal . 
Cosette 's mother continued : -- `` You see , I can not take my daughter to the country . 
My work will not permit it . 
With a child one can find no situation . 
People are ridiculous in the country . 
It was the good God who caused me to pass your inn . 
When I caught sight of your little ones , so pretty , so clean , and so happy , it overwhelmed me . 
I said : ` Here is a good mother . 
That is just the thing ; that will make three sisters . ' 
And then , it will not be long before I return . 
Will you keep my child for me ? '' 
`` I must see about it , '' replied the Thenardier . 
`` I will give you six francs a month . '' 
Here a man 's voice called from the depths of the cook-shop : -- `` Not for less than seven francs . 
And six months paid in advance . '' 
`` Six times seven makes forty-two , '' said the Thenardier . 
`` I will give it , '' said the mother . 
`` And fifteen francs in addition for preliminary expenses , '' added the man 's voice . 
`` Total , fifty-seven francs , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
And she hummed vaguely , with these figures : -- `` It must be , said a warrior . '' 
`` I will pay it , '' said the mother . 
`` I have eighty francs . 
I shall have enough left to reach the country , by travelling on foot . 
I shall earn money there , and as soon as I have a little I will return for my darling . '' 
The man 's voice resumed : -- `` The little one has an outfit ? '' 
`` That is my husband , '' said the Thenardier . 
`` Of course she has an outfit , the poor treasure . 
-- I understood perfectly that it was your husband . 
-- And a beautiful outfit , too ! 
a senseless outfit , everything by the dozen , and silk gowns like a lady . 
It is here , in my carpet-bag . '' 
`` You must hand it over , '' struck in the man 's voice again . 
`` Of course I shall give it to you , '' said the mother . 
`` It would be very queer if I were to leave my daughter quite naked ! '' 
The master 's face appeared . 
`` That 's good , '' said he . 
The bargain was concluded . 
The mother passed the night at the inn , gave up her money and left her child , fastened her carpet-bag once more , now reduced in volume by the removal of the outfit , and light henceforth and set out on the following morning , intending to return soon . 
People arrange such departures tranquilly ; but they are despairs ! 
A neighbor of the Thenardiers met this mother as she was setting out , and came back with the remark : -- `` I have just seen a woman crying in the street so that it was enough to rend your heart . '' 
When Cosette 's mother had taken her departure , the man said to the woman : -- `` That will serve to pay my note for one hundred and ten francs which falls due to-morrow ; I lacked fifty francs . 
Do you know that I should have had a bailiff and a protest after me ? 
You played the mouse-trap nicely with your young ones . '' 
`` Without suspecting it , '' said the woman . 
FIRST SKETCH OF TWO UNPREPOSSESSING FIGURES The mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen ; but the cat rejoices even over a lean mouse . 
Who were these Thenardiers ? 
Let us say a word or two of them now . 
We will complete the sketch later on . 
These beings belonged to that bastard class composed of coarse people who have been successful , and of intelligent people who have descended in the scale , which is between the class called `` middle '' and the class denominated as `` inferior , '' and which combines some of the defects of the second with nearly all the vices of the first , without possessing the generous impulse of the workingman nor the honest order of the bourgeois . 
They were of those dwarfed natures which , if a dull fire chances to warm them up , easily become monstrous . 
There was in the woman a substratum of the brute , and in the man the material for a blackguard . 
Both were susceptible , in the highest degree , of the sort of hideous progress which is accomplished in the direction of evil . 
There exist crab-like souls which are continually retreating towards the darkness , retrograding in life rather than advancing , employing experience to augment their deformity , growing incessantly worse , and becoming more and more impregnated with an ever-augmenting blackness . 
This man and woman possessed such souls . 
Thenardier , in particular , was troublesome for a physiognomist . 
One can only look at some men to distrust them ; for one feels that they are dark in both directions . 
They are uneasy in the rear and threatening in front . 
There is something of the unknown about them . 
One can no more answer for what they have done than for what they will do . 
The shadow which they bear in their glance denounces them . 
From merely hearing them utter a word or seeing them make a gesture , one obtains a glimpse of sombre secrets in their past and of sombre mysteries in their future . 
This Thenardier , if he himself was to be believed , had been a soldier -- a sergeant , he said . 
He had probably been through the campaign of 1815 , and had even conducted himself with tolerable valor , it would seem . 
We shall see later on how much truth there was in this . 
The sign of his hostelry was in allusion to one of his feats of arms . 
He had painted it himself ; for he knew how to do a little of everything , and badly . 
It was at the epoch when the ancient classical romance which , after having been Clelie , was no longer anything but Lodoiska , still noble , but ever more and more vulgar , having fallen from Mademoiselle de Scuderi to Madame Bournon-Malarme , and from Madame de Lafayette to Madame Barthelemy-Hadot , was setting the loving hearts of the portresses of Paris aflame , and even ravaging the suburbs to some extent . 
Madame Thenardier was just intelligent enough to read this sort of books . 
She lived on them . 
In them she drowned what brains she possessed . 
This had given her , when very young , and even a little later , a sort of pensive attitude towards her husband , a scamp of a certain depth , a ruffian lettered to the extent of the grammar , coarse and fine at one and the same time , but , so far as sentimentalism was concerned , given to the perusal of Pigault-Lebrun , and `` in what concerns the sex , '' as he said in his jargon -- a downright , unmitigated lout . 
His wife was twelve or fifteen years younger than he was . 
Later on , when her hair , arranged in a romantically drooping fashion , began to grow gray , when the Magaera began to be developed from the Pamela , the female Thenardier was nothing but a coarse , vicious woman , who had dabbled in stupid romances . 
Now , one can not read nonsense with impunity . 
The result was that her eldest daughter was named Eponine ; as for the younger , the poor little thing came near being called Gulnare ; I know not to what diversion , effected by a romance of Ducray-Dumenil , she owed the fact that she merely bore the name of Azelma . 
However , we will remark by the way , everything was not ridiculous and superficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding , and which may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names . 
By the side of this romantic element which we have just indicated there is the social symptom . 
It is not rare for the neatherd 's boy nowadays to bear the name of Arthur , Alfred , or Alphonse , and for the vicomte -- if there are still any vicomtes -- to be called Thomas , Pierre , or Jacques . 
This displacement , which places the `` elegant '' name on the plebeian and the rustic name on the aristocrat , is nothing else than an eddy of equality . 
The irresistible penetration of the new inspiration is there as everywhere else . 
Beneath this apparent discord there is a great and a profound thing , -- the French Revolution . 
THE LARK It is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper . 
The cook-shop was in a bad way . 
Thanks to the traveller 's fifty-seven francs , Thenardier had been able to avoid a protest and to honor his signature . 
On the following month they were again in need of money . 
The woman took Cosette 's outfit to Paris , and pawned it at the pawnbroker 's for sixty francs . 
As soon as that sum was spent , the Thenardiers grew accustomed to look on the little girl merely as a child whom they were caring for out of charity ; and they treated her accordingly . 
As she had no longer any clothes , they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and chemises of the Thenardier brats ; that is to say , in rags . 
They fed her on what all the rest had left -- a little better than the dog , a little worse than the cat . 
Moreover , the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions ; Cosette ate with them under the table , from a wooden bowl similar to theirs . 
The mother , who had established herself , as we shall see later on , at M. sur M. , wrote , or , more correctly , caused to be written , a letter every month , that she might have news of her child . 
The Thenardiers replied invariably , `` Cosette is doing wonderfully well . '' 
At the expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francs for the seventh month , and continued her remittances with tolerable regularity from month to month . 
The year was not completed when Thenardier said : `` A fine favor she is doing us , in sooth ! 
What does she expect us to do with her seven francs ? '' 
and he wrote to demand twelve francs . 
The mother , whom they had persuaded into the belief that her child was happy , `` and was coming on well , '' submitted , and forwarded the twelve francs . 
Certain natures can not love on the one hand without hating on the other . 
Mother Thenardier loved her two daughters passionately , which caused her to hate the stranger . 
It is sad to think that the love of a mother can possess villainous aspects . 
Little as was the space occupied by Cosette , it seemed to her as though it were taken from her own , and that that little child diminished the air which her daughters breathed . 
This woman , like many women of her sort , had a load of caresses and a burden of blows and injuries to dispense each day . 
If she had not had Cosette , it is certain that her daughters , idolized as they were , would have received the whole of it ; but the stranger did them the service to divert the blows to herself . 
Her daughters received nothing but caresses . 
Cosette could not make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy shower of violent blows and unmerited chastisement . 
The sweet , feeble being , who should not have understood anything of this world or of God , incessantly punished , scolded , ill-used , beaten , and seeing beside her two little creatures like herself , who lived in a ray of dawn ! 
Madame Thenardier was vicious with Cosette . 
Eponine and Azelma were vicious . 
Children at that age are only copies of their mother . 
The size is smaller ; that is all . 
A year passed ; then another . 
People in the village said : -- `` Those Thenardiers are good people . 
They are not rich , and yet they are bringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands ! '' 
They thought that Cosette 's mother had forgotten her . 
In the meanwhile , Thenardier , having learned , it is impossible to say by what obscure means , that the child was probably a bastard , and that the mother could not acknowledge it , exacted fifteen francs a month , saying that `` the creature '' was growing and `` eating , '' and threatening to send her away . 
`` Let her not bother me , '' he exclaimed , `` or I 'll fire her brat right into the middle of her secrets . 
I must have an increase . '' 
The mother paid the fifteen francs . 
From year to year the child grew , and so did her wretchedness . 
As long as Cosette was little , she was the scape-goat of the two other children ; as soon as she began to develop a little , that is to say , before she was even five years old , she became the servant of the household . 
Five years old ! 
the reader will say ; that is not probable . 
Alas ! 
it is true . 
Social suffering begins at all ages . 
Have we not recently seen the trial of a man named Dumollard , an orphan turned bandit , who , from the age of five , as the official documents state , being alone in the world , `` worked for his living and stole '' ? 
Cosette was made to run on errands , to sweep the rooms , the courtyard , the street , to wash the dishes , to even carry burdens . 
The Thenardiers considered themselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner , since the mother , who was still at M. sur M. , had become irregular in her payments . 
Some months she was in arrears . 
If this mother had returned to Montfermeil at the end of these three years , she would not have recognized her child . 
Cosette , so pretty and rosy on her arrival in that house , was now thin and pale . 
She had an indescribably uneasy look . 
`` The sly creature , '' said the Thenardiers . 
Injustice had made her peevish , and misery had made her ugly . 
Nothing remained to her except her beautiful eyes , which inspired pain , because , large as they were , it seemed as though one beheld in them a still larger amount of sadness . 
It was a heart-breaking thing to see this poor child , not yet six years old , shivering in the winter in her old rags of linen , full of holes , sweeping the street before daylight , with an enormous broom in her tiny red hands , and a tear in her great eyes . 
She was called the Lark in the neighborhood . 
The populace , who are fond of these figures of speech , had taken a fancy to bestow this name on this trembling , frightened , and shivering little creature , no bigger than a bird , who was awake every morning before any one else in the house or the village , and was always in the street or the fields before daybreak . 
Only the little lark never sang . 
BOOK FIFTH . 
-- THE DESCENT . 
THE HISTORY OF A PROGRESS IN BLACK GLASS TRINKETS And in the meantime , what had become of that mother who according to the people at Montfermeil , seemed to have abandoned her child ? 
Where was she ? 
What was she doing ? 
After leaving her little Cosette with the Thenardiers , she had continued her journey , and had reached M. sur M. This , it will be remembered , was in 1818 . 
Fantine had quitted her province ten years before . 
M. sur M. had changed its aspect . 
While Fantine had been slowly descending from wretchedness to wretchedness , her native town had prospered . 
About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are the grand events of small districts had taken place . 
This detail is important , and we regard it as useful to develop it at length ; we should almost say , to underline it . 
From time immemorial , M. sur M. had had for its special industry the imitation of English jet and the black glass trinkets of Germany . 
This industry had always vegetated , on account of the high price of the raw material , which reacted on the manufacture . 
At the moment when Fantine returned to M. sur M. , an unheard-of transformation had taken place in the production of `` black goods . '' 
Towards the close of 1815 a man , a stranger , had established himself in the town , and had been inspired with the idea of substituting , in this manufacture , gum-lac for resin , and , for bracelets in particular , slides of sheet-iron simply laid together , for slides of soldered sheet-iron . 
This very small change had effected a revolution . 
This very small change had , in fact , prodigiously reduced the cost of the raw material , which had rendered it possible in the first place , to raise the price of manufacture , a benefit to the country ; in the second place , to improve the workmanship , an advantage to the consumer ; in the third place , to sell at a lower price , while trebling the profit , which was a benefit to the manufacturer . 
Thus three results ensued from one idea . 
In less than three years the inventor of this process had become rich , which is good , and had made every one about him rich , which is better . 
He was a stranger in the Department . 
Of his origin , nothing was known ; of the beginning of his career , very little . 
It was rumored that he had come to town with very little money , a few hundred francs at the most . 
It was from this slender capital , enlisted in the service of an ingenious idea , developed by method and thought , that he had drawn his own fortune , and the fortune of the whole countryside . 
On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments , the appearance , and the language of a workingman . 
It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into the little town of M. sur M. , just at nightfall , on a December evening , knapsack on back and thorn club in hand , a large fire had broken out in the town-hall . 
This man had rushed into the flames and saved , at the risk of his own life , two children who belonged to the captain of the gendarmerie ; this is why they had forgotten to ask him for his passport . 
Afterwards they had learned his name . 
He was called Father Madeleine . 
MADELEINE He was a man about fifty years of age , who had a preoccupied air , and who was good . 
That was all that could be said about him . 
Thanks to the rapid progress of the industry which he had so admirably re-constructed , M. sur M. had become a rather important centre of trade . 
Spain , which consumes a good deal of black jet , made enormous purchases there each year . 
M. sur M. almost rivalled London and Berlin in this branch of commerce . 
Father Madeleine 's profits were such , that at the end of the second year he was able to erect a large factory , in which there were two vast workrooms , one for the men , and the other for women . 
Any one who was hungry could present himself there , and was sure of finding employment and bread . 
Father Madeleine required of the men good will , of the women pure morals , and of all , probity . 
He had separated the work-rooms in order to separate the sexes , and so that the women and girls might remain discreet . 
On this point he was inflexible . 
It was the only thing in which he was in a manner intolerant . 
He was all the more firmly set on this severity , since M. sur M. , being a garrison town , opportunities for corruption abounded . 
However , his coming had been a boon , and his presence was a godsend . 
Before Father Madeleine 's arrival , everything had languished in the country ; now everything lived with a healthy life of toil . 
A strong circulation warmed everything and penetrated everywhere . 
Slack seasons and wretchedness were unknown . 
There was no pocket so obscure that it had not a little money in it ; no dwelling so lowly that there was not some little joy within it . 
Father Madeleine gave employment to every one . 
He exacted but one thing : Be an honest man . 
Be an honest woman . 
As we have said , in the midst of this activity of which he was the cause and the pivot , Father Madeleine made his fortune ; but a singular thing in a simple man of business , it did not seem as though that were his chief care . 
He appeared to be thinking much of others , and little of himself . 
In 1820 he was known to have a sum of six hundred and thirty thousand francs lodged in his name with Laffitte ; but before reserving these six hundred and thirty thousand francs , he had spent more than a million for the town and its poor . 
The hospital was badly endowed ; he founded six beds there . 
M. sur M. is divided into the upper and the lower town . 
The lower town , in which he lived , had but one school , a miserable hovel , which was falling to ruin : he constructed two , one for girls , the other for boys . 
He allotted a salary from his own funds to the two instructors , a salary twice as large as their meagre official salary , and one day he said to some one who expressed surprise , `` The two prime functionaries of the state are the nurse and the schoolmaster . '' 
He created at his own expense an infant school , a thing then almost unknown in France , and a fund for aiding old and infirm workmen . 
As his factory was a centre , a new quarter , in which there were a good many indigent families , rose rapidly around him ; he established there a free dispensary . 
At first , when they watched his beginnings , the good souls said , `` He 's a jolly fellow who means to get rich . '' 
When they saw him enriching the country before he enriched himself , the good souls said , `` He is an ambitious man . '' 
This seemed all the more probable since the man was religious , and even practised his religion to a certain degree , a thing which was very favorably viewed at that epoch . 
He went regularly to low mass every Sunday . 
The local deputy , who nosed out all rivalry everywhere , soon began to grow uneasy over this religion . 
This deputy had been a member of the legislative body of the Empire , and shared the religious ideas of a father of the Oratoire , known under the name of Fouche , Duc d'Otrante , whose creature and friend he had been . 
He indulged in gentle raillery at God with closed doors . 
But when he beheld the wealthy manufacturer Madeleine going to low mass at seven o'clock , he perceived in him a possible candidate , and resolved to outdo him ; he took a Jesuit confessor , and went to high mass and to vespers . 
Ambition was at that time , in the direct acceptation of the word , a race to the steeple . 
The poor profited by this terror as well as the good God , for the honorable deputy also founded two beds in the hospital , which made twelve . 
Nevertheless , in 1819 a rumor one morning circulated through the town to the effect that , on the representations of the prefect and in consideration of the services rendered by him to the country , Father Madeleine was to be appointed by the King , mayor of M. sur M. Those who had pronounced this new-comer to be `` an ambitious fellow , '' seized with delight on this opportunity which all men desire , to exclaim , `` There ! 
what did we say ! '' 
All M. sur M. was in an uproar . 
The rumor was well founded . 
Several days later the appointment appeared in the Moniteur . 
On the following day Father Madeleine refused . 
In this same year of 1819 the products of the new process invented by Madeleine figured in the industrial exhibition ; when the jury made their report , the King appointed the inventor a chevalier of the Legion of Honor . 
A fresh excitement in the little town . 
Well , so it was the cross that he wanted ! 
Father Madeleine refused the cross . 
Decidedly this man was an enigma . 
The good souls got out of their predicament by saying , `` After all , he is some sort of an adventurer . '' 
We have seen that the country owed much to him ; the poor owed him everything ; he was so useful and he was so gentle that people had been obliged to honor and respect him . 
His workmen , in particular , adored him , and he endured this adoration with a sort of melancholy gravity . 
When he was known to be rich , `` people in society '' bowed to him , and he received invitations in the town ; he was called , in town , Monsieur Madeleine ; his workmen and the children continued to call him Father Madeleine , and that was what was most adapted to make him smile . 
In proportion as he mounted , throve , invitations rained down upon him . 
`` Society '' claimed him for its own . 
The prim little drawing-rooms on M. sur M. , which , of course , had at first been closed to the artisan , opened both leaves of their folding-doors to the millionnaire . 
They made a thousand advances to him . 
He refused . 
This time the good gossips had no trouble . 
`` He is an ignorant man , of no education . 
No one knows where he came from . 
He would not know how to behave in society . 
It has not been absolutely proved that he knows how to read . '' 
When they saw him making money , they said , `` He is a man of business . '' 
When they saw him scattering his money about , they said , `` He is an ambitious man . '' 
When he was seen to decline honors , they said , `` He is an adventurer . '' 
When they saw him repulse society , they said , `` He is a brute . '' 
In 1820 , five years after his arrival in M. sur M. , the services which he had rendered to the district were so dazzling , the opinion of the whole country round about was so unanimous , that the King again appointed him mayor of the town . 
He again declined ; but the prefect resisted his refusal , all the notabilities of the place came to implore him , the people in the street besought him ; the urging was so vigorous that he ended by accepting . 
It was noticed that the thing which seemed chiefly to bring him to a decision was the almost irritated apostrophe addressed to him by an old woman of the people , who called to him from her threshold , in an angry way : `` A good mayor is a useful thing . 
Is he drawing back before the good which he can do ? '' 
This was the third phase of his ascent . 
Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine . 
Monsieur Madeleine became Monsieur le Maire . 
SUMS DEPOSITED WITH LAFFITTE On the other hand , he remained as simple as on the first day . 
He had gray hair , a serious eye , the sunburned complexion of a laborer , the thoughtful visage of a philosopher . 
He habitually wore a hat with a wide brim , and a long coat of coarse cloth , buttoned to the chin . 
He fulfilled his duties as mayor ; but , with that exception , he lived in solitude . 
He spoke to but few people . 
He avoided polite attentions ; he escaped quickly ; he smiled to relieve himself of the necessity of talking ; he gave , in order to get rid of the necessity for smiling , The women said of him , `` What a good-natured bear ! '' 
His pleasure consisted in strolling in the fields . 
He always took his meals alone , with an open book before him , which he read . 
He had a well-selected little library . 
He loved books ; books are cold but safe friends . 
In proportion as leisure came to him with fortune , he seemed to take advantage of it to cultivate his mind . 
It had been observed that , ever since his arrival at M. sur M. . 
his language had grown more polished , more choice , and more gentle with every passing year . 
He liked to carry a gun with him on his strolls , but he rarely made use of it . 
When he did happen to do so , his shooting was something so infallible as to inspire terror . 
He never killed an inoffensive animal . 
He never shot at a little bird . 
Although he was no longer young , it was thought that he was still prodigiously strong . 
He offered his assistance to any one who was in need of it , lifted a horse , released a wheel clogged in the mud , or stopped a runaway bull by the horns . 
He always had his pockets full of money when he went out ; but they were empty on his return . 
When he passed through a village , the ragged brats ran joyously after him , and surrounded him like a swarm of gnats . 
It was thought that he must , in the past , have lived a country life , since he knew all sorts of useful secrets , which he taught to the peasants . 
He taught them how to destroy scurf on wheat , by sprinkling it and the granary and inundating the cracks in the floor with a solution of common salt ; and how to chase away weevils by hanging up orviot in bloom everywhere , on the walls and the ceilings , among the grass and in the houses . 
He had `` recipes '' for exterminating from a field , blight , tares , foxtail , and all parasitic growths which destroy the wheat . 
He defended a rabbit warren against rats , simply by the odor of a guinea-pig which he placed in it . 
One day he saw some country people busily engaged in pulling up nettles ; he examined the plants , which were uprooted and already dried , and said : `` They are dead . 
