They renounce the world , towns , sensualities , pleasures , vanities , pride , interests . 
They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen . 
Not one of them possesses in his own right anything whatever . 
On entering there , each one who was rich makes himself poor . 
What he has , he gives to all . 
He who was what is called noble , a gentleman and a lord , is the equal of him who was a peasant . 
The cell is identical for all . 
All undergo the same tonsure , wear the same frock , eat the same black bread , sleep on the same straw , die on the same ashes . 
The same sack on their backs , the same rope around their loins . 
If the decision has been to go barefoot , all go barefoot . 
There may be a prince among them ; that prince is the same shadow as the rest . 
No titles . 
Even family names have disappeared . 
They bear only first names . 
All are bowed beneath the equality of baptismal names . 
They have dissolved the carnal family , and constituted in their community a spiritual family . 
They have no other relatives than all men . 
They succor the poor , they care for the sick . 
They elect those whom they obey . 
They call each other `` my brother . '' 
You stop me and exclaim , `` But that is the ideal convent ! '' 
It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent , that I should take notice of it . 
Thence it results that , in the preceding book , I have spoken of a convent with respectful accents . 
The Middle Ages cast aside , Asia cast aside , the historical and political question held in reserve , from the purely philosophical point of view , outside the requirements of militant policy , on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely a voluntary matter and shall contain only consenting parties , I shall always consider a cloistered community with a certain attentive , and , in some respects , a deferential gravity . 
Wherever there is a community , there is a commune ; where there is a commune , there is right . 
The monastery is the product of the formula : Equality , Fraternity . 
Oh ! 
how grand is liberty ! 
And what a splendid transfiguration ! 
Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into a republic . 
Let us continue . 
But these men , or these women who are behind these four walls . 
They dress themselves in coarse woollen , they are equals , they call each other brothers , that is well ; but they do something else ? 
Yes . 
What ? 
They gaze on the darkness , they kneel , and they clasp their hands . 
What does this signify ? 
PRAYER They pray . 
To whom ? 
To God . 
To pray to God , -- what is the meaning of these words ? 
Is there an infinite beyond us ? 
Is that infinite there , inherent , permanent ; necessarily substantial , since it is infinite ; and because , if it lacked matter it would be bounded ; necessarily intelligent , since it is infinite , and because , if it lacked intelligence , it would end there ? 
Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence , while we can attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence ? 
In other terms , is it not the absolute , of which we are only the relative ? 
At the same time that there is an infinite without us , is there not an infinite within us ? 
Are not these two infinites -LRB- what an alarming plural ! -RRB- 
superposed , the one upon the other ? 
Is not this second infinite , so to speak , subjacent to the first ? 
Is it not the latter 's mirror , reflection , echo , an abyss which is concentric with another abyss ? 
Is this second infinity intelligent also ? 
Does it think ? 
Does it love ? 
Does it will ? 
If these two infinities are intelligent , each of them has a will principle , and there is an I in the upper infinity as there is an I in the lower infinity . 
The I below is the soul ; the I on high is God . 
To place the infinity here below in contact , by the medium of thought , with the infinity on high , is called praying . 
Let us take nothing from the human mind ; to suppress is bad . 
We must reform and transform . 
Certain faculties in man are directed towards the Unknown ; thought , revery , prayer . 
The Unknown is an ocean . 
What is conscience ? 
It is the compass of the Unknown . 
Thought , revery , prayer , -- these are great and mysterious radiations . 
Let us respect them . 
Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul ? 
Into the shadow ; that is to say , to the light . 
The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of humanity . 
Close to the right of the man , beside it , at the least , there exists the right of the soul . 
To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite , such is the law . 
Let us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of creation , and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars . 
We have a duty to labor over the human soul , to defend the mystery against the miracle , to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd , to admit , as an inexplicable fact , only what is necessary , to purify belief , to remove superstitions from above religion ; to clear God of caterpillars . 
THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER With regard to the modes of prayer , all are good , provided that they are sincere . 
Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite . 
There is , as we know , a philosophy which denies the infinite . 
There is also a philosophy , pathologically classified , which denies the sun ; this philosophy is called blindness . 
To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth , is a fine blind man 's self-sufficiency . 
The curious thing is the haughty , superior , and compassionate airs which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which beholds God . 
One fancies he hears a mole crying , `` I pity them with their sun ! '' 
There are , as we know , powerful and illustrious atheists . 
At bottom , led back to the truth by their very force , they are not absolutely sure that they are atheists ; it is with them only a question of definition , and in any case , if they do not believe in God , being great minds , they prove God . 
We salute them as philosophers , while inexorably denouncing their philosophy . 
Let us go on . 
The remarkable thing about it is , also , their facility in paying themselves off with words . 
A metaphysical school of the North , impregnated to some extent with fog , has fancied that it has worked a revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with the word Will . 
To say : `` the plant wills , '' instead of : `` the plant grows '' : this would be fecund in results , indeed , if we were to add : `` the universe wills . '' 
Why ? 
Because it would come to this : the plant wills , therefore it has an _ I _ ; the universe wills , therefore it has a God . 
As for us , who , however , in contradistinction to this school , reject nothing a priori , a will in the plant , accepted by this school , appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it . 
To deny the will of the infinite , that is to say , God , is impossible on any other conditions than a denial of the infinite . 
We have demonstrated this . 
The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism . 
Everything becomes `` a mental conception . '' 
With nihilism , no discussion is possible ; for the nihilist logic doubts the existence of its interlocutor , and is not quite sure that it exists itself . 
From its point of view , it is possible that it may be for itself , only `` a mental conception . '' 
Only , it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in the lump , simply by the utterance of the word , mind . 
In short , no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all end in the monosyllable , No . 
To No there is only one reply , Yes . 
Nihilism has no point . 
There is no such thing as nothingness . 
Zero does not exist . 
Everything is something . 
Nothing is nothing . 
Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread . 
Even to see and to show does not suffice . 
Philosophy should be an energy ; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition of man . 
Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius ; in other words , the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man of felicity . 
Eden should be changed into a Lyceum . 
Science should be a cordial . 
To enjoy , -- what a sad aim , and what a paltry ambition ! 
The brute enjoys . 
To offer thought to the thirst of men , to give them all as an elixir the notion of God , to make conscience and science fraternize in them , to render them just by this mysterious confrontation ; such is the function of real philosophy . 
Morality is a blossoming out of truths . 
Contemplation leads to action . 
The absolute should be practicable . 
It is necessary that the ideal should be breathable , drinkable , and eatable to the human mind . 
It is the ideal which has the right to say : Take , this is my body , this is my blood . 
Wisdom is a holy communion . 
It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying , and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion . 
Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at its ease , without any other result than that of being convenient to curiosity . 
For our part , adjourning the development of our thought to another occasion , we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither understand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end , without those two forces which are their two motors : faith and love . 
Progress is the goal , the ideal is the type . 
What is this ideal ? 
It is God . 
Ideal , absolute , perfection , infinity : identical words . 
PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME History and philosophy have eternal duties , which are , at the same time , simple duties ; to combat Caiphas the High-priest , Draco the Lawgiver , Trimalcion the Legislator , Tiberius the Emperor ; this is clear , direct , and limpid , and offers no obscurity . 
But the right to live apart , even with its inconveniences and its abuses , insists on being stated and taken into account . 
Cenobitism is a human problem . 
When one speaks of convents , those abodes of error , but of innocence , of aberration but of good-will , of ignorance but of devotion , of torture but of martyrdom , it always becomes necessary to say either yes or no . 
A convent is a contradiction . 
Its object , salvation ; its means thereto , sacrifice . 
The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme abnegation . 
To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of monasticism . 
In the cloister , one suffers in order to enjoy . 
One draws a bill of exchange on death . 
One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light . 
In the cloister , hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise . 
The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity . 
It does not seem to us , that on such a subject mockery is permissible . 
All about it is serious , the good as well as the bad . 
The just man frowns , but never smiles with a malicious sneer . 
We understand wrath , but not malice . 
FAITH , LAW A few words more . 
We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues , we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal ; but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man . 
We salute the man who kneels . 
A faith ; this is a necessity for man . 
Woe to him who believes nothing . 
One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed . 
There is visible labor and invisible labor . 
To contemplate is to labor , to think is to act . 
Folded arms toil , clasped hands work . 
A gaze fixed on heaven is a work . 
Thales remained motionless for four years . 
He founded philosophy . 
In our opinion , cenobites are not lazy men , and recluses are not idlers . 
To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing . 
Without invalidating anything that we have just said , we believe that a perpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living . 
On this point , the priest and the philosopher agree . 
We must die . 
The Abbe de la Trappe replies to Horace . 
To mingle with one 's life a certain presence of the sepulchre , -- this is the law of the sage ; and it is the law of the ascetic . 
In this respect , the ascetic and the sage converge . 
There is a material growth ; we admit it . 
There is a moral grandeur ; we hold to that . 
Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say : -- `` What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery ? 
What purpose do they serve ? 
What do they do ? '' 
Alas ! 
In the presence of the darkness which environs us , and which awaits us , in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of us , we reply : `` There is probably no work more divine than that performed by these souls . '' 
And we add : `` There is probably no work which is more useful . '' 
There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never pray at all . 
In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that is mingled with prayer . 
Leibnitz praying is grand , Voltaire adoring is fine . 
Deo erexit Voltaire . 
We are for religion as against religions . 
We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons , and the sublimity of prayer . 
Moreover , at this minute which we are now traversing , -- a minute which will not , fortunately , leave its impress on the nineteenth century , -- at this hour , when so many men have low brows and souls but little elevated , among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment , and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter , whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us . 
The monastery is a renunciation . 
Sacrifice wrongly directed is still sacrifice . 
To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its own . 
Taken by itself , and ideally , and in order to examine the truth on all sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted , the monastery , the female convent in particular , -- for in our century it is woman who suffers the most , and in this exile of the cloister there is something of protestation , -- the female convent has incontestably a certain majesty . 
This cloistered existence which is so austere , so depressing , a few of whose features we have just traced , is not life , for it is not liberty ; it is not the tomb , for it is not plenitude ; it is the strange place whence one beholds , as from the crest of a lofty mountain , on one side the abyss where we are , on the other , the abyss whither we shall go ; it is the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds , illuminated and obscured by both at the same time , where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death ; it is the half obscurity of the tomb . 
We , who do not believe what these women believe , but who , like them , live by faith , -- we have never been able to think without a sort of tender and religious terror , without a sort of pity , that is full of envy , of those devoted , trembling and trusting creatures , of these humble and august souls , who dare to dwell on the very brink of the mystery , waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which is not yet open , turned towards the light which one can not see , possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is , aspiring towards the gulf , and the unknown , their eyes fixed motionless on the darkness , kneeling , bewildered , stupefied , shuddering , half lifted , at times , by the deep breaths of eternity . 
BOOK EIGHTH . 
-- CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT It was into this house that Jean Valjean had , as Fauchelevent expressed it , `` fallen from the sky . '' 
He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue Polonceau . 
That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of the night , was the nuns chanting matins ; that hall , of which he had caught a glimpse in the gloom , was the chapel . 
That phantom which he had seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was making reparation ; that bell , the sound of which had so strangely surprised him , was the gardener 's bell attached to the knee of Father Fauchelevent . 
Cosette once put to bed , Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had , as we have already seen , supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a good , crackling fire ; then , the only bed in the hut being occupied by Cosette , each threw himself on a truss of straw . 
Before he shut his eyes , Jean Valjean said : `` I must remain here henceforth . '' 
This remark trotted through Fauchelevent 's head all night long . 
To tell the truth , neither of them slept . 
Jean Valjean , feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his scent , understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to Paris . 
Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded him in this cloister . 
Jean Valjean had , henceforth , but one thought , -- to remain there . 
Now , for an unfortunate man in his position , this convent was both the safest and the most dangerous of places ; the most dangerous , because , as no men might enter there , if he were discovered , it was a flagrant offence , and Jean Valjean would find but one step intervening between the convent and prison ; the safest , because , if he could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there , who would ever seek him in such a place ? 
To dwell in an impossible place was safety . 
On his side , Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains . 
He began by declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter . 
How had M. Madeleine got there , when the walls were what they were ? 
Cloister walls are not to be stepped over . 
How did he get there with a child ? 
One can not scale a perpendicular wall with a child in one 's arms . 
Who was that child ? 
Where did they both come from ? 
Since Fauchelevent had lived in the convent , he had heard nothing of M. sur M. , and he knew nothing of what had taken place there . 
Father Madeleine had an air which discouraged questions ; and besides , Fauchelevent said to himself : `` One does not question a saint . '' 
M. Madeleine had preserved all his prestige in Fauchelevent 's eyes . 
Only , from some words which Jean Valjean had let fall , the gardener thought he could draw the inference that M. Madeleine had probably become bankrupt through the hard times , and that he was pursued by his creditors ; or that he had compromised himself in some political affair , and was in hiding ; which last did not displease Fauchelevent , who , like many of our peasants of the North , had an old fund of Bonapartism about him . 
While in hiding , M. Madeleine had selected the convent as a refuge , and it was quite simple that he should wish to remain there . 
But the inexplicable point , to which Fauchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain , was that M. Madeleine should be there , and that he should have that little girl with him . 
Fauchelevent saw them , touched them , spoke to them , and still did not believe it possible . 
The incomprehensible had just made its entrance into Fauchelevent 's hut . 
Fauchelevent groped about amid conjectures , and could see nothing clearly but this : `` M. Madeleine saved my life . '' 
This certainty alone was sufficient and decided his course . 
He said to himself : `` It is my turn now . '' 
He added in his conscience : `` M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it was a question of thrusting himself under the cart for the purpose of dragging me out . '' 
He made up his mind to save M. Madeleine . 
Nevertheless , he put many questions to himself and made himself divers replies : `` After what he did for me , would I save him if he were a thief ? 
Just the same . 
If he were an assassin , would I save him ? 
Just the same . 
Since he is a saint , shall I save him ? 
Just the same . '' 
But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent ! 
Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical undertaking ; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than his self-devotion , his good will , and a little of that old rustic cunning , on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generous enterprise , undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister , and the steep escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
Father Fauchelevent was an old man who had been an egoist all his life , and who , towards the end of his days , halt , infirm , with no interest left to him in the world , found it sweet to be grateful , and perceiving a generous action to be performed , flung himself upon it like a man , who at the moment when he is dying , should find close to his hand a glass of good wine which he had never tasted , and should swallow it with avidity . 
We may add , that the air which he had breathed for many years in this convent had destroyed all personality in him , and had ended by rendering a good action of some kind absolutely necessary to him . 
So he took his resolve : to devote himself to M. Madeleine . 
We have just called him a poor peasant of Picardy . 
That description is just , but incomplete . 
At the point of this story which we have now reached , a little of Father Fauchelevent 's physiology becomes useful . 
He was a peasant , but he had been a notary , which added trickery to his cunning , and penetration to his ingenuousness . 
Having , through various causes , failed in his business , he had descended to the calling of a carter and a laborer . 
But , in spite of oaths and lashings , which horses seem to require , something of the notary had lingered in him . 
He had some natural wit ; he talked good grammar ; he conversed , which is a rare thing in a village ; and the other peasants said of him : `` He talks almost like a gentleman with a hat . '' 
Fauchelevent belonged , in fact , to that species , which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last century qualified as demi-bourgeois , demi-lout , and which the metaphors showered by the chateau upon the thatched cottage ticketed in the pigeon-hole of the plebeian : rather rustic , rather citified ; pepper and salt . 
Fauchelevent , though sorely tried and harshly used by fate , worn out , a sort of poor , threadbare old soul , was , nevertheless , an impulsive man , and extremely spontaneous in his actions ; a precious quality which prevents one from ever being wicked . 
His defects and his vices , for he had some , were all superficial ; in short , his physiognomy was of the kind which succeeds with an observer . 
His aged face had none of those disagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead , which signify malice or stupidity . 
At daybreak , Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes , after having done an enormous deal of thinking , and beheld M. Madeleine seated on his truss of straw , and watching Cosette 's slumbers . 
Fauchelevent sat up and said : -- `` Now that you are here , how are you going to contrive to enter ? '' 
This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from his revery . 
The two men took counsel together . 
`` In the first place , '' ' said Fauchelevent , `` you will begin by not setting foot outside of this chamber , either you or the child . 
One step in the garden and we are done for . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` Monsieur Madeleine , '' resumed Fauchelevent , `` you have arrived at a very auspicious moment , I mean to say a very inauspicious moment ; one of the ladies is very ill . 
This will prevent them from looking much in our direction . 
It seems that she is dying . 
The prayers of the forty hours are being said . 
The whole community is in confusion . 
That occupies them . 
The one who is on the point of departure is a saint . 
In fact , we are all saints here ; all the difference between them and me is that they say ` our cell , ' and that I say ` my cabin . ' 
The prayers for the dying are to be said , and then the prayers for the dead . 
We shall be at peace here for to-day ; but I will not answer for to-morrow . '' 
`` Still , '' observed Jean Valjean , `` this cottage is in the niche of the wall , it is hidden by a sort of ruin , there are trees , it is not visible from the convent . '' 
`` And I add that the nuns never come near it . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
The interrogation mark which accentuated this `` well '' signified : `` it seems to me that one may remain concealed here ? '' 
It was to this interrogation point that Fauchelevent responded : -- `` There are the little girls . '' 
`` What little girls ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he had uttered , a bell emitted one stroke . 
`` The nun is dead , '' said he . 
`` There is the knell . '' 
And he made a sign to Jean Valjean to listen . 
The bell struck a second time . 
`` It is the knell , Monsieur Madeleine . 
The bell will continue to strike once a minute for twenty-four hours , until the body is taken from the church . 
-- You see , they play . 
At recreation hours it suffices to have a ball roll aside , to send them all hither , in spite of prohibitions , to hunt and rummage for it all about here . 
Those cherubs are devils . '' 
`` Who ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
`` The little girls . 
You would be very quickly discovered . 
They would shriek : ` Oh ! 
a man ! ' 
There is no danger to-day . 
There will be no recreation hour . 
The day will be entirely devoted to prayers . 
You hear the bell . 
As I told you , a stroke each minute . 
It is the death knell . '' 
`` I understand , Father Fauchelevent . 
There are pupils . '' 
And Jean Valjean thought to himself : -- `` Here is Cosette 's education already provided . '' 
Fauchelevent exclaimed : -- `` Pardine ! 
There are little girls indeed ! 
And they would bawl around you ! 
And they would rush off ! 
To be a man here is to have the plague . 
You see how they fasten a bell to my paw as though I were a wild beast . '' 
Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought . 
-- `` This convent would be our salvation , '' he murmured . 
Then he raised his voice : -- `` Yes , the difficulty is to remain here . '' 
`` No , '' said Fauchelevent , `` the difficulty is to get out . '' 
Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart . 
`` To get out ! '' 
`` Yes , Monsieur Madeleine . 
In order to return here it is first necessary to get out . '' 
And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded , Fauchelevent went on : -- `` You must not be found here in this fashion . 
Whence come you ? 
For me , you fall from heaven , because I know you ; but the nuns require one to enter by the door . '' 
All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` they are ringing up the vocal mothers . 
They are going to the chapter . 
They always hold a chapter when any one dies . 
She died at daybreak . 
People generally do die at daybreak . 
But can not you get out by the way in which you entered ? 
Come , I do not ask for the sake of questioning you , but how did you get in ? '' 
Jean Valjean turned pale ; the very thought of descending again into that terrible street made him shudder . 
You make your way out of a forest filled with tigers , and once out of it , imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to return thither ! 
Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that quarter , agents on the watch , sentinels everywhere , frightful fists extended towards his collar , Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
said he . 
`` Father Fauchelevent , say that I fell from the sky . '' 
`` But I believe it , I believe it , '' retorted Fauchelevent . 
`` You have no need to tell me that . 
The good God must have taken you in his hand for the purpose of getting a good look at you close to , and then dropped you . 
Only , he meant to place you in a man 's convent ; he made a mistake . 
Come , there goes another peal , that is to order the porter to go and inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a corpse . 
All that is the ceremony of dying . 
These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit . 
A doctor is a man who does not believe in anything . 
He lifts the veil . 
Sometimes he lifts something else too . 
How quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time ! 
What is the matter ? 
Your little one is still asleep . 
What is her name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
`` She is your daughter ? 
You are her grandfather , that is ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It will be easy enough for her to get out of here . 
I have my service door which opens on the courtyard . 
I knock . 
The porter opens ; I have my vintage basket on my back , the child is in it , I go out . 
Father Fauchelevent goes out with his basket -- that is perfectly natural . 
You will tell the child to keep very quiet . 
She will be under the cover . 
I will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend , a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert , who is deaf , and who has a little bed . 
I will shout in the fruit-seller 's ear , that she is a niece of mine , and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow . 
Then the little one will re-enter with you ; for I will contrive to have you re-enter . 
It must be done . 
But how will you manage to get out ? '' 
Jean Valjean shook his head . 
`` No one must see me , the whole point lies there , Father Fauchelevent . 
Find some means of getting me out in a basket , under cover , like Cosette . '' 
Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of his left hand , a sign of serious embarrassment . 
A third peal created a diversion . 
`` That is the dead-doctor taking his departure , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` He has taken a look and said : ` She is dead , that is well . ' 
When the doctor has signed the passport for paradise , the undertaker 's company sends a coffin . 
If it is a mother , the mothers lay her out ; if she is a sister , the sisters lay her out . 
After which , I nail her up . 
That forms a part of my gardener 's duty . 
A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger . 
She is placed in a lower hall of the church which communicates with the street , and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead . 
I do n't count the undertaker 's men and myself as men . 
It is in that hall that I nail up the coffin . 
The undertaker 's men come and get it , and whip up , coachman ! 
that 's the way one goes to heaven . 
They fetch a box with nothing in it , they take it away again with something in it . 
That 's what a burial is like . 
De profundis . '' 
A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping Cosette , who lay with her mouth vaguely open , and had the air of an angel drinking in the light . 
Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her . 
He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent . 
That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence . 
The good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble : -- `` The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery . 
They declare that they are going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery . 
It is an ancient cemetery which is outside the regulations , which has no uniform , and which is going to retire . 
It is a shame , for it is convenient . 
I have a friend there , Father Mestienne , the grave-digger . 
The nuns here possess one privilege , it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall . 
There is a special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf . 
But how many events have happened since yesterday ! 
Mother Crucifixion is dead , and Father Madeleine -- '' `` Is buried , '' said Jean Valjean , smiling sadly . 
Fauchelevent caught the word . 
`` Goodness ! 
if you were here for good , it would be a real burial . '' 
A fourth peal burst out . 
Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again . 
`` This time it is for me . 
The Mother Prioress wants me . 
Good , now I am pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle . 
Monsieur Madeleine , do n't stir from here , and wait for me . 
Something new has come up . 
If you are hungry , there is wine , bread and cheese . '' 
And he hastened out of the hut , crying : `` Coming ! 
coming ! '' 
Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his crooked leg would permit , casting a sidelong glance by the way on his melon patch . 
Less than ten minutes later , Father Fauchelevent , whose bell put the nuns in his road to flight , tapped gently at a door , and a gentle voice replied : `` Forever ! 
Forever ! '' 
that is to say : `` Enter . '' 
The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing the gardener on business . 
This parlor adjoined the chapter hall . 
The prioress , seated on the only chair in the parlor , was waiting for Fauchelevent . 
FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DIFFICULTY It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions , notably priests and nuns , to wear a grave and agitated air on critical occasions . 
At the moment when Fauchelevent entered , this double form of preoccupation was imprinted on the countenance of the prioress , who was that wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur , Mother Innocente , who was ordinarily cheerful . 
The gardener made a timid bow , and remained at the door of the cell . 
The prioress , who was telling her beads , raised her eyes and said : -- `` Ah ! 
it is you , Father Fauvent . '' 
This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent . 
Fauchelevent bowed again . 
`` Father Fauvent , I have sent for you . '' 
`` Here I am , reverend Mother . '' 
`` I have something to say to you . '' 
`` And so have I , '' said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him inward terror , `` I have something to say to the very reverend Mother . '' 
The prioress stared at him . 
`` Ah ! 
you have a communication to make to me . '' 
`` A request . '' 
`` Very well , speak . '' 
Goodman Fauchelevent , the ex-notary , belonged to the category of peasants who have assurance . 
A certain clever ignorance constitutes a force ; you do not distrust it , and you are caught by it . 
Fauchelevent had been a success during the something more than two years which he had passed in the convent . 
Always solitary and busied about his gardening , he had nothing else to do than to indulge his curiosity . 
As he was at a distance from all those veiled women passing to and fro , he saw before him only an agitation of shadows . 
By dint of attention and sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with flesh , and those corpses were alive for him . 
He was like a deaf man whose sight grows keener , and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more acute . 
He had applied himself to riddling out the significance of the different peals , and he had succeeded , so that this taciturn and enigmatical cloister possessed no secrets for him ; the sphinx babbled all her secrets in his ear . 
Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all ; that constituted his art . 
The whole convent thought him stupid . 
A great merit in religion . 
The vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent . 
He was a curious mute . 
He inspired confidence . 
Moreover , he was regular , and never went out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the orchard and vegetable garden . 
This discretion of conduct had inured to his credit . 
None the less , he had set two men to chattering : the porter , in the convent , and he knew the singularities of their parlor , and the grave-digger , at the cemetery , and he was acquainted with the peculiarities of their sepulture ; in this way , he possessed a double light on the subject of these nuns , one as to their life , the other as to their death . 
But he did not abuse his knowledge . 
The congregation thought a great deal of him . 
Old , lame , blind to everything , probably a little deaf into the bargain , -- what qualities ! 
They would have found it difficult to replace him . 
The goodman , with the assurance of a person who feels that he is appreciated , entered into a rather diffuse and very deep rustic harangue to the reverend prioress . 
He talked a long time about his age , his infirmities , the surcharge of years counting double for him henceforth , of the increasing demands of his work , of the great size of the garden , of nights which must be passed , like the last , for instance , when he had been obliged to put straw mats over the melon beds , because of the moon , and he wound up as follows : `` That he had a brother '' -- -LRB- the prioress made a movement -RRB- , -- `` a brother no longer young '' -- -LRB- a second movement on the part of the prioress , but one expressive of reassurance -RRB- , -- `` that , if he might be permitted , this brother would come and live with him and help him , that he was an excellent gardener , that the community would receive from him good service , better than his own ; that , otherwise , if his brother were not admitted , as he , the elder , felt that his health was broken and that he was insufficient for the work , he should be obliged , greatly to his regret , to go away ; and that his brother had a little daughter whom he would bring with him , who might be reared for God in the house , and who might , who knows , become a nun some day . '' 
When he had finished speaking , the prioress stayed the slipping of her rosary between her fingers , and said to him : -- `` Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening ? '' 
`` For what purpose ? '' 
`` To serve as a lever . '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother , '' replied Fauchelevent . 
The prioress , without adding a word , rose and entered the adjoining room , which was the hall of the chapter , and where the vocal mothers were probably assembled . 
Fauchelevent was left alone . 
MOTHER INNOCENTE About a quarter of an hour elapsed . 
The prioress returned and seated herself once more on her chair . 
The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied . 
We will present a stenographic report of the dialogue which then ensued , to the best of our ability . 
`` Father Fauvent ! '' 
`` Reverend Mother ! '' 
`` Do you know the chapel ? '' 
`` I have a little cage there , where I hear the mass and the offices . '' 
`` And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties ? '' 
`` Two or three times . '' 
`` There is a stone to be raised . '' 
`` Heavy ? '' 
`` The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar . '' 
`` The slab which closes the vault ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It would be a good thing to have two men for it . '' 
`` Mother Ascension , who is as strong as a man , will help you . '' 
`` A woman is never a man . '' 
`` We have only a woman here to help you . 
Each one does what he can . 
Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of Saint Bernard , while Merlonus Horstius only gives three hundred and sixty-seven , I do not despise Merlonus Horstius . '' 
`` Neither do I. '' `` Merit consists in working according to one 's strength . 
A cloister is not a dock-yard . '' 
`` And a woman is not a man . 
But my brother is the strong one , though ! '' 
`` And can you get a lever ? '' 
`` That is the only sort of key that fits that sort of door . '' 
`` There is a ring in the stone . '' 
`` I will put the lever through it . '' 
`` And the stone is so arranged that it swings on a pivot . '' 
`` That is good , reverend Mother . 
I will open the vault . '' 
`` And the four Mother Precentors will help you . '' 
`` And when the vault is open ? '' 
`` It must be closed again . '' 
`` Will that be all ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Give me your orders , very reverend Mother . '' 
`` Fauvent , we have confidence in you . '' 
`` I am here to do anything you wish . '' 
`` And to hold your peace about everything ! '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother . '' 
`` When the vault is open -- '' `` I will close it again . '' 
`` But before that -- '' `` What , reverend Mother ? '' 
`` Something must be lowered into it . '' 
A silence ensued . 
The prioress , after a pout of the under lip which resembled hesitation , broke it . 
`` Father Fauvent ! '' 
`` Reverend Mother ! '' 
`` You know that a mother died this morning ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Did you not hear the bell ? '' 
`` Nothing can be heard at the bottom of the garden . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` I can hardly distinguish my own signal . '' 
`` She died at daybreak . '' 
`` And then , the wind is not blowing in my direction this morning . '' 
`` It was Mother Crucifixion . 
A blessed woman . '' 
The prioress paused , moved her lips , as though in mental prayer , and resumed : -- `` Three years ago , Madame de Bethune , a Jansenist , turned orthodox , merely from having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer . '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , now I hear the knell , reverend Mother . '' 
`` The mothers have taken her to the dead-room , which opens on the church . '' 
`` I know . '' 
`` No other man than you can or must enter that chamber . 
See to that . 
A fine sight it would be , to see a man enter the dead-room ! '' 
`` More often ! '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
`` More often ! '' 
`` What do you say ? '' 
`` I say more often . '' 
`` More often than what ? '' 
`` Reverend Mother , I did not say more often than what , I said more often . '' 
`` I do n't understand you . 
Why do you say more often ? '' 
`` In order to speak like you , reverend Mother . '' 
`` But I did not say ` more often . ' '' 
At that moment , nine o'clock struck . 
`` At nine o'clock in the morning and at all hours , praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar , '' said the prioress . 
`` Amen , '' said Fauchelevent . 
The clock struck opportunely . 
It cut `` more often '' short . 
It is probable , that had it not been for this , the prioress and Fauchelevent would never have unravelled that skein . 
Fauchelevent mopped his forehead . 
The prioress indulged in another little inward murmur , probably sacred , then raised her voice : -- `` In her lifetime , Mother Crucifixion made converts ; after her death , she will perform miracles . '' 
`` She will ! '' 
replied Father Fauchelevent , falling into step , and striving not to flinch again . 
`` Father Fauvent , the community has been blessed in Mother Crucifixion . 
No doubt , it is not granted to every one to die , like Cardinal de Berulle , while saying the holy mass , and to breathe forth their souls to God , while pronouncing these words : Hanc igitur oblationem . 
But without attaining to such happiness , Mother Crucifixion 's death was very precious . 
She retained her consciousness to the very last moment . 
She spoke to us , then she spoke to the angels . 
She gave us her last commands . 
If you had a little more faith , and if you could have been in her cell , she would have cured your leg merely by touching it . 
She smiled . 
We felt that she was regaining her life in God . 
There was something of paradise in that death . '' 
Fauchelevent thought that it was an orison which she was finishing . 
`` Amen , '' said he . 
`` Father Fauvent , what the dead wish must be done . '' 
The prioress took off several beads of her chaplet . 
Fauchelevent held his peace . 
She went on : -- `` I have consulted upon this point many ecclesiastics laboring in Our Lord , who occupy themselves in the exercises of the clerical life , and who bear wonderful fruit . '' 
`` Reverend Mother , you can hear the knell much better here than in the garden . '' 
`` Besides , she is more than a dead woman , she is a saint . '' 
`` Like yourself , reverend Mother . '' 
`` She slept in her coffin for twenty years , by express permission of our Holy Father , Pius VII . 
-- '' `` The one who crowned the Emp -- Buonaparte . '' 
For a clever man like Fauchelevent , this allusion was an awkward one . 
Fortunately , the prioress , completely absorbed in her own thoughts , did not hear it . 
She continued : -- `` Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` Reverend Mother ? '' 
`` Saint Didorus , Archbishop of Cappadocia , desired that this single word might be inscribed on his tomb : Acarus , which signifies , a worm of the earth ; this was done . 
Is this true ? '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother . '' 
`` The blessed Mezzocane , Abbot of Aquila , wished to be buried beneath the gallows ; this was done . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` Saint Terentius , Bishop of Port , where the mouth of the Tiber empties into the sea , requested that on his tomb might be engraved the sign which was placed on the graves of parricides , in the hope that passers-by would spit on his tomb . 
This was done . 
The dead must be obeyed . '' 
`` So be it . '' 
`` The body of Bernard Guidonis , born in France near Roche-Abeille , was , as he had ordered , and in spite of the king of Castile , borne to the church of the Dominicans in Limoges , although Bernard Guidonis was Bishop of Tuy in Spain . 
Can the contrary be affirmed ? '' 
`` For that matter , no , reverend Mother . '' 
`` The fact is attested by Plantavit de la Fosse . '' 
Several beads of the chaplet were told off , still in silence . 
The prioress resumed : -- `` Father Fauvent , Mother Crucifixion will be interred in the coffin in which she has slept for the last twenty years . '' 
`` That is just . '' 
`` It is a continuation of her slumber . '' 
`` So I shall have to nail up that coffin ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And we are to reject the undertaker 's coffin ? '' 
`` Precisely . '' 
`` I am at the orders of the very reverend community . '' 
`` The four Mother Precentors will assist you . '' 
`` In nailing up the coffin ? 
I do not need them . '' 
`` No . 
In lowering the coffin . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` Into the vault . '' 
`` What vault ? '' 
`` Under the altar . '' 
Fauchelevent started . 
`` The vault under the altar ? '' 
`` Under the altar . '' 
`` But -- '' `` You will have an iron bar . '' 
`` Yes , but -- '' `` You will raise the stone with the bar by means of the ring . '' 
`` But -- '' `` The dead must be obeyed . 
To be buried in the vault under the altar of the chapel , not to go to profane earth ; to remain there in death where she prayed while living ; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion . 
She asked it of us ; that is to say , commanded us . '' 
`` But it is forbidden . '' 
`` Forbidden by men , enjoined by God . '' 
`` What if it became known ? '' 
`` We have confidence in you . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I am a stone in your walls . '' 
`` The chapter assembled . 
The vocal mothers , whom I have just consulted again , and who are now deliberating , have decided that Mother Crucifixion shall be buried , according to her wish , in her own coffin , under our altar . 
Think , Father Fauvent , if she were to work miracles here ! 
What a glory of God for the community ! 
And miracles issue from tombs . '' 
`` But , reverend Mother , if the agent of the sanitary commission -- '' `` Saint Benoit II. , in the matter of sepulture , resisted Constantine Pogonatus . '' 
`` But the commissary of police -- '' `` Chonodemaire , one of the seven German kings who entered among the Gauls under the Empire of Constantius , expressly recognized the right of nuns to be buried in religion , that is to say , beneath the altar . '' 
`` But the inspector from the Prefecture -- '' `` The world is nothing in the presence of the cross . 
Martin , the eleventh general of the Carthusians , gave to his order this device : Stat crux dum volvitur orbis . '' 
`` Amen , '' said Fauchelevent , who imperturbably extricated himself in this manner from the dilemma , whenever he heard Latin . 
Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long . 
On the day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison , bearing in his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in , he halted in front of the first tree which he came to , harangued it and made very great efforts to convince it . 
The prioress , who was usually subjected to the barrier of silence , and whose reservoir was overfull , rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away : -- `` I have on my right Benoit and on my left Bernard . 
Who was Bernard ? 
The first abbot of Clairvaux . 
Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that is blest because it gave him birth . 
His father was named Tecelin , and his mother Alethe . 
He began at Citeaux , to end in Clairvaux ; he was ordained abbot by the bishop of Chalon-sur-Saone , Guillaume de Champeaux ; he had seven hundred novices , and founded a hundred and sixty monasteries ; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of Sens in 1140 , and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple , and another sort of erring spirits who were called the Apostolics ; he confounded Arnauld de Brescia , darted lightning at the monk Raoul , the murderer of the Jews , dominated the council of Reims in 1148 , caused the condemnation of Gilbert de Porea , Bishop of Poitiers , caused the condemnation of Eon de l'Etoile , arranged the disputes of princes , enlightened King Louis the Young , advised Pope Eugene III. , regulated the Temple , preached the crusade , performed two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime , and as many as thirty-nine in one day . 
Who was Benoit ? 
He was the patriarch of Mont-Cassin ; he was the second founder of the Saintete Claustrale , he was the Basil of the West . 
His order has produced forty popes , two hundred cardinals , fifty patriarchs , sixteen hundred archbishops , four thousand six hundred bishops , four emperors , twelve empresses , forty-six kings , forty-one queens , three thousand six hundred canonized saints , and has been in existence for fourteen hundred years . 
On one side Saint Bernard , on the other the agent of the sanitary department ! 
On one side Saint Benoit , on the other the inspector of public ways ! 
The state , the road commissioners , the public undertaker , regulations , the administration , what do we know of all that ? 
There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see how we are treated . 
We have not even the right to give our dust to Jesus Christ ! 
Your sanitary department is a revolutionary invention . 
God subordinated to the commissary of police ; such is the age . 
Silence , Fauvent ! '' 
Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath . 
The prioress continued : -- `` No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture . 
Only fanatics and those in error deny it . 
We live in times of terrible confusion . 
We do not know that which it is necessary to know , and we know that which we should ignore . 
We are ignorant and impious . 
In this age there exist people who do not distinguish between the very great Saint Bernard and the Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics , a certain good ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century . 
Others are so blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI . 
to the cross of Jesus Christ . 
Louis XVI . 
was merely a king . 
Let us beware of God ! 
There is no longer just nor unjust . 
The name of Voltaire is known , but not the name of Cesar de Bus . 
Nevertheless , Cesar de Bus is a man of blessed memory , and Voltaire one of unblessed memory . 
The last arch-bishop , the Cardinal de Perigord , did not even know that Charles de Gondren succeeded to Berulle , and Francois Bourgoin to Gondren , and Jean-Francois Senault to Bourgoin , and Father Sainte-Marthe to Jean-Francois Senault . 
The name of Father Coton is known , not because he was one of the three who urged the foundation of the Oratorie , but because he furnished Henri IV. , the Huguenot king , with the material for an oath . 
That which pleases people of the world in Saint Francois de Sales , is that he cheated at play . 
And then , religion is attacked . 
Why ? 
Because there have been bad priests , because Sagittaire , Bishop of Gap , was the brother of Salone , Bishop of Embrun , and because both of them followed Mommol . 
What has that to do with the question ? 
Does that prevent Martin de Tours from being a saint , and giving half of his cloak to a beggar ? 
They persecute the saints . 
They shut their eyes to the truth . 
Darkness is the rule . 
The most ferocious beasts are beasts which are blind . 
No one thinks of hell as a reality . 
Oh ! 
how wicked people are ! 
By order of the king signifies to-day , by order of the revolution . 
One no longer knows what is due to the living or to the dead . 
A holy death is prohibited . 
Burial is a civil matter . 
This is horrible . 
Saint Leo II . 
wrote two special letters , one to Pierre Notaire , the other to the king of the Visigoths , for the purpose of combating and rejecting , in questions touching the dead , the authority of the exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor . 
Gauthier , Bishop of Chalons , held his own in this matter against Otho , Duke of Burgundy . 
The ancient magistracy agreed with him . 
In former times we had voices in the chapter , even on matters of the day . 
The Abbot of Citeaux , the general of the order , was councillor by right of birth to the parliament of Burgundy . 
We do what we please with our dead . 
Is not the body of Saint Benoit himself in France , in the abbey of Fleury , called Saint Benoit-sur-Loire , although he died in Italy at Mont-Cassin , on Saturday , the 21st of the month of March , of the year 543 ? 
All this is incontestable . 
I abhor psalm-singers , I hate priors , I execrate heretics , but I should detest yet more any one who should maintain the contrary . 
One has only to read Arnoul Wion , Gabriel Bucelin , Trithemus , Maurolics , and Dom Luc d'Achery . '' 
The prioress took breath , then turned to Fauchelevent . 
`` Is it settled , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` It is settled , reverend Mother . '' 
`` We may depend on you ? '' 
`` I will obey . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` I am entirely devoted to the convent . '' 
`` That is understood . 
You will close the coffin . 
The sisters will carry it to the chapel . 
The office for the dead will then be said . 
Then we shall return to the cloister . 
Between eleven o'clock and midnight , you will come with your iron bar . 
All will be done in the most profound secrecy . 
There will be in the chapel only the four Mother Precentors , Mother Ascension and yourself . '' 
`` And the sister at the post ? '' 
`` She will not turn round . '' 
`` But she will hear . '' 
`` She will not listen . 
Besides , what the cloister knows the world learns not . '' 
A pause ensued . 
The prioress went on : -- `` You will remove your bell . 
It is not necessary that the sister at the post should perceive your presence . '' 
`` Reverend Mother ? '' 
`` What , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit ? '' 
`` He will pay it at four o'clock to-day . 
The peal which orders the doctor for the dead to be summoned has already been rung . 
But you do not understand any of the peals ? '' 
`` I pay no attention to any but my own . '' 
`` That is well , Father Fauvent . '' 
`` Reverend Mother , a lever at least six feet long will be required . '' 
`` Where will you obtain it ? '' 
`` Where gratings are not lacking , iron bars are not lacking . 
I have my heap of old iron at the bottom of the garden . '' 
`` About three-quarters of an hour before midnight ; do not forget . '' 
`` Reverend Mother ? '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` If you were ever to have any other jobs of this sort , my brother is the strong man for you . 
A perfect Turk ! '' 
`` You will do it as speedily as possible . '' 
`` I can not work very fast . 
I am infirm ; that is why I require an assistant . 
I limp . '' 
`` To limp is no sin , and perhaps it is a blessing . 
The Emperor Henry II. , who combated Antipope Gregory and re-established Benoit VIII. , has two surnames , the Saint and the Lame . '' 
`` Two surtouts are a good thing , '' murmured Fauchelevent , who really was a little hard of hearing . 
`` Now that I think of it , Father Fauvent , let us give a whole hour to it . 
That is not too much . 
Be near the principal altar , with your iron bar , at eleven o'clock . 
The office begins at midnight . 
Everything must have been completed a good quarter of an hour before that . '' 
`` I will do anything to prove my zeal towards the community . 
These are my orders . 
I am to nail up the coffin . 
At eleven o'clock exactly , I am to be in the chapel . 
The Mother Precentors will be there . 
Mother Ascension will be there . 
Two men would be better . 
However , never mind ! 
I shall have my lever . 
We will open the vault , we will lower the coffin , and we will close the vault again . 
After which , there will be no trace of anything . 
The government will have no suspicion . 
Thus all has been arranged , reverend Mother ? '' 
`` No ! '' 
`` What else remains ? '' 
`` The empty coffin remains . '' 
This produced a pause . 
Fauchelevent meditated . 
The prioress meditated . 
`` What is to be done with that coffin , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` It will be given to the earth . '' 
`` Empty ? '' 
Another silence . 
Fauchelevent made , with his left hand , that sort of a gesture which dismisses a troublesome subject . 
`` Reverend Mother , I am the one who is to nail up the coffin in the basement of the church , and no one can enter there but myself , and I will cover the coffin with the pall . '' 
`` Yes , but the bearers , when they place it in the hearse and lower it into the grave , will be sure to feel that there is nothing in it . '' 
`` Ah ! 
the de -- ! '' 
exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
The prioress began to make the sign of the cross , and looked fixedly at the gardener . 
The vil stuck fast in his throat . 
He made haste to improvise an expedient to make her forget the oath . 
`` I will put earth in the coffin , reverend Mother . 
That will produce the effect of a corpse . '' 
`` You are right . 
Earth , that is the same thing as man . 
So you will manage the empty coffin ? '' 
`` I will make that my special business . '' 
The prioress 's face , up to that moment troubled and clouded , grew serene once more . 
She made the sign of a superior dismissing an inferior to him . 
Fauchelevent went towards the door . 
As he was on the point of passing out , the prioress raised her voice gently : -- `` I am pleased with you , Father Fauvent ; bring your brother to me to-morrow , after the burial , and tell him to fetch his daughter . '' 
IN WHICH JEAN VALJEAN HAS QUITE THE AIR OF HAVING READ AUSTIN CASTILLEJO The strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one-eyed man ; they do not reach their goal very promptly . 
Moreover , Fauchelevent was in a dilemma . 
He took nearly a quarter of an hour to return to his cottage in the garden . 
Cosette had waked up . 
Jean Valjean had placed her near the fire . 
At the moment when Fauchelevent entered , Jean Valjean was pointing out to her the vintner 's basket on the wall , and saying to her , `` Listen attentively to me , my little Cosette . 
We must go away from this house , but we shall return to it , and we shall be very happy here . 
The good man who lives here is going to carry you off on his back in that . 
You will wait for me at a lady 's house . 
I shall come to fetch you . 
Obey , and say nothing , above all things , unless you want Madame Thenardier to get you again ! '' 
Cosette nodded gravely . 
Jean Valjean turned round at the noise made by Fauchelevent opening the door . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Everything is arranged , and nothing is , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` I have permission to bring you in ; but before bringing you in you must be got out . 
That 's where the difficulty lies . 
It is easy enough with the child . '' 
`` You will carry her out ? '' 
`` And she will hold her tongue ? '' 
`` I answer for that . '' 
`` But you , Father Madeleine ? '' 
And , after a silence , fraught with anxiety , Fauchelevent exclaimed : -- `` Why , get out as you came in ! '' 
Jean Valjean , as in the first instance , contented himself with saying , `` Impossible . '' 
Fauchelevent grumbled , more to himself than to Jean Valjean : -- `` There is another thing which bothers me . 
I have said that I would put earth in it . 
When I come to think it over , the earth instead of the corpse will not seem like the real thing , it wo n't do , it will get displaced , it will move about . 
The men will bear it . 
You understand , Father Madeleine , the government will notice it . '' 
Jean Valjean stared him straight in the eye and thought that he was raving . 
Fauchelevent went on : -- `` How the de -- uce are you going to get out ? 
It must all be done by to-morrow morning . 
It is to-morrow that I am to bring you in . 
The prioress expects you . '' 
Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for a service which he , Fauchelevent , was to render to the community . 
That it fell among his duties to take part in their burials , that he nailed up the coffins and helped the grave-digger at the cemetery . 
That the nun who had died that morning had requested to be buried in the coffin which had served her for a bed , and interred in the vault under the altar of the chapel . 
That the police regulations forbade this , but that she was one of those dead to whom nothing is refused . 
That the prioress and the vocal mothers intended to fulfil the wish of the deceased . 
That it was so much the worse for the government . 
That he , Fauchelevent , was to nail up the coffin in the cell , raise the stone in the chapel , and lower the corpse into the vault . 
And that , by way of thanks , the prioress was to admit his brother to the house as a gardener , and his niece as a pupil . 
That his brother was M. Madeleine , and that his niece was Cosette . 
That the prioress had told him to bring his brother on the following evening , after the counterfeit interment in the cemetery . 
But that he could not bring M. Madeleine in from the outside if M. Madeleine was not outside . 
That that was the first problem . 
And then , that there was another : the empty coffin . '' 
`` What is that empty coffin ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` The coffin of the administration . '' 
`` What coffin ? 
What administration ? '' 
`` A nun dies . 
The municipal doctor comes and says , ` A nun has died . ' 
The government sends a coffin . 
The next day it sends a hearse and undertaker 's men to get the coffin and carry it to the cemetery . 
The undertaker 's men will come and lift the coffin ; there will be nothing in it . '' 
`` Put something in it . '' 
`` A corpse ? 
I have none . '' 
`` No . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` A living person . '' 
`` What person ? '' 
`` Me ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Fauchelevent , who was seated , sprang up as though a bomb had burst under his chair . 
`` You ! '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
Jean Valjean gave way to one of those rare smiles which lighted up his face like a flash from heaven in the winter . 
`` You know , Fauchelevent , what you have said : ` Mother Crucifixion is dead . ' 
and I add : ` and Father Madeleine is buried . ' 
`` Ah ! 
good , you can laugh , you are not speaking seriously . '' 
`` Very seriously , I must get out of this place . '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` l have told you to find a basket , and a cover for me also , '' `` Well ? '' 
`` The basket will be of pine , and the cover a black cloth . '' 
`` In the first place , it will be a white cloth . 
Nuns are buried in white . '' 
`` Let it be a white cloth , then . '' 
`` You are not like other men , Father Madeleine . '' 
To behold such devices , which are nothing else than the savage and daring inventions of the galleys , spring forth from the peaceable things which surrounded him , and mingle with what he called the `` petty course of life in the convent , '' caused Fauchelevent as much amazement as a gull fishing in the gutter of the Rue Saint-Denis would inspire in a passer-by . 
Jean Valjean went on : -- `` The problem is to get out of here without being seen . 
This offers the means . 
But give me some information , in the first place . 
How is it managed ? 
Where is this coffin ? '' 
`` The empty one ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Down stairs , in what is called the dead-room . 
It stands on two trestles , under the pall . '' 
`` How long is the coffin ? '' 
`` Six feet . '' 
`` What is this dead-room ? '' 
`` It is a chamber on the ground floor which has a grated window opening on the garden , which is closed on the outside by a shutter , and two doors ; one leads into the convent , the other into the church . '' 
`` What church ? '' 
`` The church in the street , the church which any one can enter . '' 
`` Have you the keys to those two doors ? '' 
`` No ; I have the key to the door which communicates with the convent ; the porter has the key to the door which communicates with the church . '' 
`` When does the porter open that door ? '' 
`` Only to allow the undertaker 's men to enter , when they come to get the coffin . 
When the coffin has been taken out , the door is closed again . '' 
`` Who nails up the coffin ? '' 
`` I do . '' 
`` Who spreads the pall over it ? '' 
`` I do . '' 
`` Are you alone ? '' 
`` Not another man , except the police doctor , can enter the dead-room . 
That is even written on the wall . '' 
`` Could you hide me in that room to-night when every one is asleep ? '' 
`` No . 
But I could hide you in a small , dark nook which opens on the dead-room , where I keep my tools to use for burials , and of which I have the key . '' 
`` At what time will the hearse come for the coffin to-morrow ? '' 
`` About three o'clock in the afternoon . 
The burial will take place at the Vaugirard cemetery a little before nightfall . 
It is not very near . '' 
`` I will remain concealed in your tool-closet all night and all the morning . 
And how about food ? 
I shall be hungry . '' 
`` I will bring you something . '' 
`` You can come and nail me up in the coffin at two o'clock . '' 
Fauchelevent recoiled and cracked his finger-joints . 
`` But that is impossible ! '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank ? '' 
What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was , we repeat , a simple matter to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had been in worse straits than this . 
Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contract himself to fit the diameter of the escape . 
The prisoner is subject to flight as the sick man is subject to a crisis which saves or kills him . 
An escape is a cure . 
What does not a man undergo for the sake of a cure ? 
To have himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a bale of goods , to live for a long time in a box , to find air where there is none , to economize his breath for hours , to know how to stifle without dying -- this was one of Jean Valjean 's gloomy talents . 
Moreover , a coffin containing a living being , -- that convict 's expedient , -- is also an imperial expedient . 
If we are to credit the monk Austin Castillejo , this was the means employed by Charles the Fifth , desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication . 
He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yuste in this manner . 
Fauchelevent , who had recovered himself a little , exclaimed : -- `` But how will you manage to breathe ? '' 
`` I will breathe . '' 
`` In that box ! 
The mere thought of it suffocates me . '' 
`` You surely must have a gimlet , you will make a few holes here and there , around my mouth , and you will nail the top plank on loosely . '' 
`` Good ! 
And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze ? '' 
`` A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze . '' 
And Jean Valjean added : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , we must come to a decision : I must either be caught here , or accept this escape through the hearse . '' 
Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing and lounging between the two leaves of a half-shut door . 
Who is there who has not said to a cat , `` Do come in ! '' 
There are men who , when an incident stands half-open before them , have the same tendency to halt in indecision between two resolutions , at the risk of getting crushed through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate . 
The over-prudent , cats as they are , and because they are cats , sometimes incur more danger than the audacious . 
Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature . 
But Jean Valjean 's coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself . 
He grumbled : -- `` Well , since there is no other means . '' 
Jean Valjean resumed : -- `` The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at the cemetery . '' 
`` That is the very point that is not troublesome , '' exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
`` If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right , I am sure of getting you out of the grave . 
The grave-digger is a drunkard , and a friend of mine . 
He is Father Mestienne . 
An old fellow of the old school . 
The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave , and I put the grave-digger in my pocket . 
I will tell you what will take place . 
They will arrive a little before dusk , three-quarters of an hour before the gates of the cemetery are closed . 
The hearse will drive directly up to the grave . 
I shall follow ; that is my business . 
I shall have a hammer , a chisel , and some pincers in my pocket . 
The hearse halts , the undertaker 's men knot a rope around your coffin and lower you down . 
The priest says the prayers , makes the sign of the cross , sprinkles the holy water , and takes his departure . 
I am left alone with Father Mestienne . 
He is my friend , I tell you . 
One of two things will happen , he will either be sober , or he will not be sober . 
If he is not drunk , I shall say to him : ` Come and drink a bout while the Bon Coing -LSB- the Good Quince -RSB- is open . ' 
I carry him off , I get him drunk , -- it does not take long to make Father Mestienne drunk , he always has the beginning of it about him , -- I lay him under the table , I take his card , so that I can get into the cemetery again , and I return without him . 
Then you have no longer any one but me to deal with . 
If he is drunk , I shall say to him : ` Be off ; I will do your work for you . ' 
Off he goes , and I drag you out of the hole . '' 
Jean Valjean held out his hand , and Fauchelevent precipitated himself upon it with the touching effusion of a peasant . 
`` That is settled , Father Fauchelevent . 
All will go well . '' 
`` Provided nothing goes wrong , '' thought Fauchelevent . 
`` In that case , it would be terrible . '' 
IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE IMMORTAL On the following day , as the sun was declining , the very rare passers-by on the Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to an old-fashioned hearse , ornamented with skulls , cross-bones , and tears . 
This hearse contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over which spread a large black cross , like a huge corpse with drooping arms . 
A mourning-coach , in which could be seen a priest in his surplice , and a choir boy in his red cap , followed . 
Two undertaker 's men in gray uniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left of the hearse . 
Behind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer , who limped along . 
The procession was going in the direction of the Vaugirard cemetery . 
The handle of a hammer , the blade of a cold chisel , and the antennae of a pair of pincers were visible , protruding from the man 's pocket . 
The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries of Paris . 
It had its peculiar usages , just as it had its carriage entrance and its house door , which old people in the quarter , who clung tenaciously to ancient words , still called the porte cavaliere and the porte pietonne . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Rue Petit-Picpus had obtained permission , as we have already stated , to be buried there in a corner apart , and at night , the plot of land having formerly belonged to their community . 
The grave-diggers being thus bound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter , in this cemetery , they were subjected to a special discipline . 
The gates of the Paris cemeteries closed , at that epoch , at sundown , and this being a municipal regulation , the Vaugirard cemetery was bound by it like the rest . 
The carriage gate and the house door were two contiguous grated gates , adjoining a pavilion built by the architect Perronet , and inhabited by the door-keeper of the cemetery . 
These gates , therefore , swung inexorably on their hinges at the instant when the sun disappeared behind the dome of the Invalides . 
If any grave-digger were delayed after that moment in the cemetery , there was but one way for him to get out -- his grave-digger 's card furnished by the department of public funerals . 
A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter 's window . 
The grave-digger dropped his card into this box , the porter heard it fall , pulled the rope , and the small door opened . 
If the man had not his card , he mentioned his name , the porter , who was sometimes in bed and asleep , rose , came out and identified the man , and opened the gate with his key ; the grave-digger stepped out , but had to pay a fine of fifteen francs . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- Instead of porte cochere and porte batarde . 
This cemetery , with its peculiarities outside the regulations , embarrassed the symmetry of the administration . 
It was suppressed a little later than 1830 . 
The cemetery of Mont-Parnasse , called the Eastern cemetery , succeeded to it , and inherited that famous dram-shop next to the Vaugirard cemetery , which was surmounted by a quince painted on a board , and which formed an angle , one side on the drinkers ' tables , and the other on the tombs , with this sign : Au Bon Coing . 
The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery . 
It was falling into disuse . 
Dampness was invading it , the flowers were deserting it . 
The bourgeois did not care much about being buried in the Vaugirard ; it hinted at poverty . 
Pere-Lachaise if you please ! 
to be buried in Pere-Lachaise is equivalent to having furniture of mahogany . 
It is recognized as elegant . 
The Vaugirard cemetery was a venerable enclosure , planted like an old-fashioned French garden . 
Straight alleys , box , thuya-trees , holly , ancient tombs beneath aged cypress-trees , and very tall grass . 
In the evening it was tragic there . 
There were very lugubrious lines about it . 
The sun had not yet set when the hearse with the white pall and the black cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery . 
The lame man who followed it was no other than Fauchelevent . 
The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar , the exit of Cosette , the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room , -- all had been executed without difficulty , and there had been no hitch . 
Let us remark in passing , that the burial of Mother Crucifixion under the altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight . 
It is one of the faults which resemble a duty . 
The nuns had committed it , not only without difficulty , but even with the applause of their own consciences . 
In the cloister , what is called the `` government '' is only an intermeddling with authority , an interference which is always questionable . 
In the first place , the rule ; as for the code , we shall see . 
Make as many laws as you please , men ; but keep them for yourselves . 
The tribute to Caesar is never anything but the remnants of the tribute to God . 
A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle . 
