This strange battle was like a duel between two raging , wounded men , each of whom , still fighting and still resisting , is expending all his blood . 
Which of the two will be the first to fall ? 
The conflict on the plateau continued . 
What had become of the cuirassiers ? 
No one could have told . 
One thing is certain , that on the day after the battle , a cuirassier and his horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean , at the very point where the four roads from Nivelles , Genappe , La Hulpe , and Brussels meet and intersect each other . 
This horseman had pierced the English lines . 
One of the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean . 
His name is Dehaze . 
He was eighteen years old at that time . 
Wellington felt that he was yielding . 
The crisis was at hand . 
The cuirassiers had not succeeded , since the centre was not broken through . 
As every one was in possession of the plateau , no one held it , and in fact it remained , to a great extent , with the English . 
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain ; Ney had only the crest and the slope . 
They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides . 
But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable . 
The bleeding of that army was horrible . 
Kempt , on the left wing , demanded reinforcements . 
`` There are none , '' replied Wellington ; `` he must let himself be killed ! '' 
Almost at that same moment , a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies , Ney demanded infantry from Napoleon , and Napoleon exclaimed , `` Infantry ! 
Where does he expect me to get it ? 
Does he think I can make it ? '' 
Nevertheless , the English army was in the worse case of the two . 
The furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and breasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing . 
A few men clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment ; such and such a battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant ; Alten 's division , already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte , was almost destroyed ; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze 's brigade strewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road ; hardly anything was left of those Dutch grenadiers , who , intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811 , fought against Wellington ; and who , in 1815 , rallied to the English standard , fought against Napoleon . 
The loss in officers was considerable . 
Lord Uxbridge , who had his leg buried on the following day , had his knee shattered . 
If , on the French side , in that tussle of the cuirassiers , Delort , l'Heritier , Colbert , Dnop , Travers , and Blancard were disabled , on the side of the English there was Alten wounded , Barne wounded , Delancey killed , Van Meeren killed , Ompteda killed , the whole of Wellington 's staff decimated , and England had the worse of it in that bloody scale . 
The second regiment of foot-guards had lost five lieutenant-colonels , four captains , and three ensigns ; the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200 soldiers ; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded , 18 officers killed , 450 soldiers killed . 
The Hanoverian hussars of Cumberland , a whole regiment , with Colonel Hacke at its head , who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered , had turned bridle in the presence of the fray , and had fled to the forest of Soignes , sowing defeat all the way to Brussels . 
The transports , ammunition-wagons , the baggage-wagons , the wagons filled with wounded , on perceiving that the French were gaining ground and approaching the forest , rushed headlong thither . 
The Dutch , mowed down by the French cavalry , cried , `` Alarm ! '' 
From Vert-Coucou to Groentendael , for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels , according to the testimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive , the roads were encumbered with fugitives . 
This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin , and Louis XVIII . 
at Ghent . 
With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean , and of Vivian 's and Vandeleur 's brigades , which flanked the left wing , Wellington had no cavalry left . 
A number of batteries lay unhorsed . 
These facts are attested by Siborne ; and Pringle , exaggerating the disaster , goes so far as to say that the Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men . 
The Iron Duke remained calm , but his lips blanched . 
Vincent , the Austrian commissioner , Alava , the Spanish commissioner , who were present at the battle in the English staff , thought the Duke lost . 
At five o'clock Wellington drew out his watch , and he was heard to murmur these sinister words , `` Blucher , or night ! '' 
It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed on the heights in the direction of Frischemont . 
Here comes the change of face in this giant drama . 
A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON ; A GOOD GUIDE TO BULOW The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known . 
Grouchy hoped for , Blucher arriving . 
Death instead of life . 
Fate has these turns ; the throne of the world was expected ; it was Saint Helena that was seen . 
If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow , Blucher 's lieutenant , had advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont , instead of below Plancenoit , the form of the nineteenth century might , perhaps , have been different . 
Napoleon would have won the battle of Waterloo . 
By any other route than that below Plancenoit , the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for artillery , and Bulow would not have arrived . 
Now the Prussian general , Muffling , declares that one hour 's delay , and Blucher would not have found Wellington on his feet . 
`` The battle was lost . '' 
It was time that Bulow should arrive , as will be seen . 
He had , moreover , been very much delayed . 
He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont , and had set out at daybreak ; but the roads were impassable , and his divisions stuck fast in the mire . 
The ruts were up to the hubs of the cannons . 
Moreover , he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre ; the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the French , so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass between two rows of burning houses , and had been obliged to wait until the conflagration was extinguished . 
It was mid-day before Bulow 's vanguard had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert . 
Had the action been begun two hours earlier , it would have been over at four o'clock , and Blucher would have fallen on the battle won by Napoleon . 
Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinite which we can not comprehend . 
The Emperor had been the first , as early as mid-day , to descry with his field-glass , on the extreme horizon , something which had attracted his attention . 
He had said , `` I see yonder a cloud , which seems to me to be troops . '' 
Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie , `` Soult , what do you see in the direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert ? '' 
The marshal , levelling his glass , answered , `` Four or five thousand men , Sire ; evidently Grouchy . '' 
But it remained motionless in the mist . 
All the glasses of the staff had studied `` the cloud '' pointed out by the Emperor . 
Some said : `` It is trees . '' 
The truth is , that the cloud did not move . 
The Emperor detached Domon 's division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter . 
Bulow had not moved , in fact . 
His vanguard was very feeble , and could accomplish nothing . 
He was obliged to wait for the body of the army corps , and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before entering into line ; but at five o'clock , perceiving Wellington 's peril , Blucher ordered Bulow to attack , and uttered these remarkable words : `` We must give air to the English army . '' 
A little later , the divisions of Losthin , Hiller , Hacke , and Ryssel deployed before Lobau 's corps , the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia debouched from the forest of Paris , Plancenoit was in flames , and the Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in reserve behind Napoleon . 
THE GUARD Every one knows the rest , -- the irruption of a third army ; the battle broken to pieces ; eighty-six months of fire thundering simultaneously ; Pirch the first coming up with Bulow ; Zieten 's cavalry led by Blucher in person , the French driven back ; Marcognet swept from the plateau of Ohain ; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte ; Donzelot and Quiot retreating ; Lobau caught on the flank ; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall ; the whole English line resuming the offensive and thrust forward ; the gigantic breach made in the French army ; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each other ; the extermination ; disaster in front ; disaster on the flank ; the Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all things . 
Conscious that they were about to die , they shouted , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in acclamations . 
The sky had been overcast all day long . 
All of a sudden , at that very moment , -- it was eight o'clock in the evening -- the clouds on the horizon parted , and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to pass through , athwart the elms on the Nivelles road . 
They had seen it rise at Austerlitz . 
Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this final catastrophe . 
Friant , Michel , Roguet , Harlet , Mallet , Poret de Morvan , were there . 
When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard , with their large plaques bearing the eagle appeared , symmetrical , in line , tranquil , in the midst of that combat , the enemy felt a respect for France ; they thought they beheld twenty victories entering the field of battle , with wings outspread , and those who were the conquerors , believing themselves to be vanquished , retreated ; but Wellington shouted , `` Up , Guards , and aim straight ! '' 
The red regiment of English guards , lying flat behind the hedges , sprang up , a cloud of grape-shot riddled the tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles ; all hurled themselves forwards , and the final carnage began . 
In the darkness , the Imperial Guard felt the army losing ground around it , and in the vast shock of the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken the place of the `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
and , with flight behind it , it continued to advance , more crushed , losing more men at every step that it took . 
There were none who hesitated , no timid men in its ranks . 
The soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general . 
Not a man was missing in that suicide . 
Ney , bewildered , great with all the grandeur of accepted death , offered himself to all blows in that tempest . 
He had his fifth horse killed under him there . 
Perspiring , his eyes aflame , foaming at the mouth , with uniform unbuttoned , one of his epaulets half cut off by a sword-stroke from a horseguard , his plaque with the great eagle dented by a bullet ; bleeding , bemired , magnificent , a broken sword in his hand , he said , `` Come and see how a Marshal of France dies on the field of battle ! '' 
But in vain ; he did not die . 
He was haggard and angry . 
At Drouet d'Erlon he hurled this question , `` Are you not going to get yourself killed ? '' 
In the midst of all that artillery engaged in crushing a handful of men , he shouted : `` So there is nothing for me ! 
Oh ! 
I should like to have all these English bullets enter my bowels ! '' 
Unhappy man , thou wert reserved for French bullets ! 
THE CATASTROPHE The rout behind the Guard was melancholy . 
The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once , -- Hougomont , La Haie-Sainte , Papelotte , Plancenoit . 
The cry `` Treachery ! '' 
was followed by a cry of `` Save yourselves who can ! '' 
An army which is disbanding is like a thaw . 
All yields , splits , cracks , floats , rolls , falls , jostles , hastens , is precipitated . 
The disintegration is unprecedented . 
Ney borrows a horse , leaps upon it , and without hat , cravat , or sword , places himself across the Brussels road , stopping both English and French . 
He strives to detain the army , he recalls it to its duty , he insults it , he clings to the rout . 
He is overwhelmed . 
The soldiers fly from him , shouting , `` Long live Marshal Ney ! '' 
Two of Durutte 's regiments go and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between the swords of the Uhlans and the fusillade of the brigades of Kempt , Best , Pack , and Rylandt ; the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat ; friends kill each other in order to escape ; squadrons and battalions break and disperse against each other , like the tremendous foam of battle . 
Lobau at one extremity , and Reille at the other , are drawn into the tide . 
In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of his Guard ; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable squadrons . 
Quiot retreats before Vivian , Kellermann before Vandeleur , Lobau before Bulow , Morand before Pirch , Domon and Subervic before Prince William of Prussia ; Guyot , who led the Emperor 's squadrons to the charge , falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons . 
Napoleon gallops past the line of fugitives , harangues , urges , threatens , entreats them . 
All the mouths which in the morning had shouted , `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
remain gaping ; they hardly recognize him . 
The Prussian cavalry , newly arrived , dashes forwards , flies , hews , slashes , kills , exterminates . 
Horses lash out , the cannons flee ; the soldiers of the artillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to make their escape ; transports overturned , with all four wheels in the air , clog the road and occasion massacres . 
Men are crushed , trampled down , others walk over the dead and the living . 
Arms are lost . 
A dizzy multitude fills the roads , the paths , the bridges , the plains , the hills , the valleys , the woods , encumbered by this invasion of forty thousand men . 
Shouts despair , knapsacks and guns flung among the rye , passages forced at the point of the sword , no more comrades , no more officers , no more generals , an inexpressible terror . 
Zieten putting France to the sword at its leisure . 
Lions converted into goats . 
Such was the flight . 
At Genappe , an effort was made to wheel about , to present a battle front , to draw up in line . 
Lobau rallied three hundred men . 
The entrance to the village was barricaded , but at the first volley of Prussian canister , all took to flight again , and Lobau was taken . 
That volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the ancient gable of a brick building on the right of the road at a few minutes ' distance before you enter Genappe . 
The Prussians threw themselves into Genappe , furious , no doubt , that they were not more entirely the conquerors . 
The pursuit was stupendous . 
Blucher ordered extermination . 
Roguet had set the lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadier who should bring him a Prussian prisoner . 
Blucher outdid Roguet . 
Duhesme , the general of the Young Guard , hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe , surrendered his sword to a huzzar of death , who took the sword and slew the prisoner . 
The victory was completed by the assassination of the vanquished . 
Let us inflict punishment , since we are history : old Blucher disgraced himself . 
This ferocity put the finishing touch to the disaster . 
The desperate route traversed Genappe , traversed Quatre-Bras , traversed Gosselies , traversed Frasnes , traversed Charleroi , traversed Thuin , and only halted at the frontier . 
Alas ! 
and who , then , was fleeing in that manner ? 
The Grand Army . 
This vertigo , this terror , this downfall into ruin of the loftiest bravery which ever astounded history , -- is that causeless ? 
No . 
The shadow of an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo . 
It is the day of destiny . 
The force which is mightier than man produced that day . 
Hence the terrified wrinkle of those brows ; hence all those great souls surrendering their swords . 
Those who had conquered Europe have fallen prone on the earth , with nothing left to say nor to do , feeling the present shadow of a terrible presence . 
Hoc erat in fatis . 
That day the perspective of the human race underwent a change . 
Waterloo is the hinge of the nineteenth century . 
The disappearance of the great man was necessary to the advent of the great century . 
Some one , a person to whom one replies not , took the responsibility on himself . 
The panic of heroes can be explained . 
In the battle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud , there is something of the meteor . 
God has passed by . 
At nightfall , in a meadow near Genappe , Bernard and Bertrand seized by the skirt of his coat and detained a man , haggard , pensive , sinister , gloomy , who , dragged to that point by the current of the rout , had just dismounted , had passed the bridle of his horse over his arm , and with wild eye was returning alone to Waterloo . 
It was Napoleon , the immense somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled , essaying once more to advance . 
THE LAST SQUARE Several squares of the Guard , motionless amid this stream of the defeat , as rocks in running water , held their own until night . 
Night came , death also ; they awaited that double shadow , and , invincible , allowed themselves to be enveloped therein . 
Each regiment , isolated from the rest , and having no bond with the army , now shattered in every part , died alone . 
They had taken up position for this final action , some on the heights of Rossomme , others on the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
There , abandoned , vanquished , terrible , those gloomy squares endured their death-throes in formidable fashion . 
Ulm , Wagram , Jena , Friedland , died with them . 
At twilight , towards nine o'clock in the evening , one of them was left at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
In that fatal valley , at the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended , now inundated by the masses of the English , under the converging fires of the victorious hostile cavalry , under a frightful density of projectiles , this square fought on . 
It was commanded by an obscure officer named Cambronne . 
At each discharge , the square diminished and replied . 
It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade , continually contracting its four walls . 
The fugitives pausing breathless for a moment in the distance , listened in the darkness to that gloomy and ever-decreasing thunder . 
When this legion had been reduced to a handful , when nothing was left of their flag but a rag , when their guns , the bullets all gone , were no longer anything but clubs , when the heap of corpses was larger than the group of survivors , there reigned among the conquerors , around those men dying so sublimely , a sort of sacred terror , and the English artillery , taking breath , became silent . 
This furnished a sort of respite . 
These combatants had around them something in the nature of a swarm of spectres , silhouettes of men on horseback , the black profiles of cannon , the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages , the colossal death 's - head , which the heroes saw constantly through the smoke , in the depths of the battle , advanced upon them and gazed at them . 
Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being loaded ; the matches all lighted , like the eyes of tigers at night , formed a circle round their heads ; all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons , and then , with emotion , holding the supreme moment suspended above these men , an English general , Colville according to some , Maitland according to others , shouted to them , `` Surrender , brave Frenchmen ! '' 
Cambronne replied , '' ----- . '' 
-LCB- EDITOR 'S COMMENTARY : Another edition of this book has the word `` Merde ! '' 
in lieu of the ----- above . -RCB- 
CAMBRONNE If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended , one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made . 
This would enjoin us from consigning something sublime to History . 
At our own risk and peril , let us violate this injunction . 
Now , then , among those giants there was one Titan , -- Cambronne . 
To make that reply and then perish , what could be grander ? 
For being willing to die is the same as to die ; and it was not this man 's fault if he survived after he was shot . 
The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon , who was put to flight ; nor Wellington , giving way at four o'clock , in despair at five ; nor Blucher , who took no part in the engagement . 
The winner of Waterloo was Cambronne . 
To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is to conquer ! 
Thus to answer the Catastrophe , thus to speak to Fate , to give this pedestal to the future lion , to hurl such a challenge to the midnight rainstorm , to the treacherous wall of Hougomont , to the sunken road of Ohain , to Grouchy 's delay , to Blucher 's arrival , to be Irony itself in the tomb , to act so as to stand upright though fallen , to drown in two syllables the European coalition , to offer kings privies which the Caesars once knew , to make the lowest of words the most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France , insolently to end Waterloo with Mardigras , to finish Leonidas with Rabellais , to set the crown on this victory by a word impossible to speak , to lose the field and preserve history , to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage , -- this is immense ! 
It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl ! 
It reaches the grandeur of AEschylus ! 
Cambronne 's reply produces the effect of a violent break . 
'T is like the breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn . 
'T is the overflow of agony bursting forth . 
Who conquered ? 
Wellington ? 
No ! 
Had it not been for Blucher , he was lost . 
Was it Blucher ? 
No ! 
If Wellington had not begun , Blucher could not have finished . 
This Cambronne , this man spending his last hour , this unknown soldier , this infinitesimal of war , realizes that here is a falsehood , a falsehood in a catastrophe , and so doubly agonizing ; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of it , he is offered this mockery , -- life ! 
How could he restrain himself ? 
Yonder are all the kings of Europe , the general 's flushed with victory , the Jupiter 's darting thunderbolts ; they have a hundred thousand victorious soldiers , and back of the hundred thousand a million ; their cannon stand with yawning mouths , the match is lighted ; they grind down under their heels the Imperial guards , and the grand army ; they have just crushed Napoleon , and only Cambronne remains , -- only this earthworm is left to protest . 
He will protest . 
Then he seeks for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword . 
His mouth froths , and the froth is the word . 
In face of this mean and mighty victory , in face of this victory which counts none victorious , this desperate soldier stands erect . 
He grants its overwhelming immensity , but he establishes its triviality ; and he does more than spit upon it . 
Borne down by numbers , by superior force , by brute matter , he finds in his soul an expression : `` Excrement ! '' 
We repeat it , -- to use that word , to do thus , to invent such an expression , is to be the conqueror ! 
The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on that unknown man . 
Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget invents the `` Marseillaise , '' under the visitation of a breath from on high . 
An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes sweeping over these men , and they shake , and one of them sings the song supreme , and the other utters the frightful cry . 
This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in the name of the Empire , -- that would be a trifle : he hurls it at the past in the name of the Revolution . 
It is heard , and Cambronne is recognized as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans . 
Danton seems to be speaking ! 
Kleber seems to be bellowing ! 
At that word from Cambronne , the English voice responded , `` Fire ! '' 
The batteries flamed , the hill trembled , from all those brazen mouths belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot ; a vast volume of smoke , vaguely white in the light of the rising moon , rolled out , and when the smoke dispersed , there was no longer anything there . 
That formidable remnant had been annihilated ; the Guard was dead . 
The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone , and hardly was there discernible , here and there , even a quiver in the bodies ; it was thus that the French legions , greater than the Roman legions , expired on Mont-Saint-Jean , on the soil watered with rain and blood , amid the gloomy grain , on the spot where nowadays Joseph , who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles , passes whistling , and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o'clock in the morning . 
QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE ? 
The battle of Waterloo is an enigma . 
It is as obscure to those who won it as to those who lost it . 
For Napoleon it was a panic ; -LSB- 10 -RSB- Blucher sees nothing in it but fire ; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it . 
Look at the reports . 
The bulletins are confused , the commentaries involved . 
Some stammer , others lisp . 
Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments ; Muffling cuts it up into three changes ; Charras alone , though we hold another judgment than his on some points , seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance . 
All the other historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled , and in this dazzled state they fumble about . 
It was a day of lightning brilliancy ; in fact , a crumbling of the military monarchy which , to the vast stupefaction of kings , drew all the kingdoms after it -- the fall of force , the defeat of war . 
-LSB- 10 -RSB- `` A battle terminated , a day finished , false measures repaired , greater successes assured for the morrow , -- all was lost by a moment of panic , terror . '' 
-- Napoleon , Dictees de Sainte Helene . 
In this event , stamped with superhuman necessity , the part played by men amounts to nothing . 
If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blucher , do we thereby deprive England and Germany of anything ? 
No . 
Neither that illustrious England nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo . 
Thank Heaven , nations are great , independently of the lugubrious feats of the sword . 
Neither England , nor Germany , nor France is contained in a scabbard . 
At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords , above Blucher , Germany has Schiller ; above Wellington , England has Byron . 
A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century , and in that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance . 
They are majestic because they think . 
The elevation of level which they contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them ; it proceeds from themselves and not from an accident . 
The aggrandizement which they have brought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source . 
It is only barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory . 
That is the temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm . 
Civilized people , especially in our day , are neither elevated nor abased by the good or bad fortune of a captain . 
Their specific gravity in the human species results from something more than a combat . 
Their honor , thank God ! 
their dignity , their intelligence , their genius , are not numbers which those gamblers , heroes and conquerors , can put in the lottery of battles . 
Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered . 
There is less glory and more liberty . 
The drum holds its peace ; reason takes the word . 
It is a game in which he who loses wins . 
Let us , therefore , speak of Waterloo coldly from both sides . 
Let us render to chance that which is due to chance , and to God that which is due to God . 
What is Waterloo ? 
A victory ? 
No . 
The winning number in the lottery . 
The quine -LSB- 11 -RSB- won by Europe , paid by France . 
-LSB- 11 -RSB- Five winning numbers in a lottery . 
It was not worth while to place a lion there . 
Waterloo , moreover , is the strangest encounter in history . 
Napoleon and Wellington . 
They are not enemies ; they are opposites . 
Never did God , who is fond of antitheses , make a more striking contrast , a more extraordinary comparison . 
On one side , precision , foresight , geometry , prudence , an assured retreat , reserves spared , with an obstinate coolness , an imperturbable method , strategy , which takes advantage of the ground , tactics , which preserve the equilibrium of battalions , carnage , executed according to rule , war regulated , watch in hand , nothing voluntarily left to chance , the ancient classic courage , absolute regularity ; on the other , intuition , divination , military oddity , superhuman instinct , a flaming glance , an indescribable something which gazes like an eagle , and which strikes like the lightning , a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity , all the mysteries of a profound soul , associated with destiny ; the stream , the plain , the forest , the hill , summoned , and in a manner , forced to obey , the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle ; faith in a star mingled with strategic science , elevating but perturbing it . 
Wellington was the Bareme of war ; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo ; and on this occasion , genius was vanquished by calculation . 
On both sides some one was awaited . 
It was the exact calculator who succeeded . 
Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy ; he did not come . 
Wellington expected Blucher ; he came . 
Wellington is classic war taking its revenge . 
Bonaparte , at his dawning , had encountered him in Italy , and beaten him superbly . 
The old owl had fled before the young vulture . 
The old tactics had been not only struck as by lightning , but disgraced . 
Who was that Corsican of six and twenty ? 
What signified that splendid ignoramus , who , with everything against him , nothing in his favor , without provisions , without ammunition , without cannon , without shoes , almost without an army , with a mere handful of men against masses , hurled himself on Europe combined , and absurdly won victories in the impossible ? 
Whence had issued that fulminating convict , who almost without taking breath , and with the same set of combatants in hand , pulverized , one after the other , the five armies of the emperor of Germany , upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi , Wurmser on Beaulieu , Melas on Wurmser , Mack on Melas ? 
Who was this novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary ? 
The academical military school excommunicated him , and as it lost its footing ; hence , the implacable rancor of the old Caesarism against the new ; of the regular sword against the flaming sword ; and of the exchequer against genius . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , that rancor had the last word . 
and beneath Lodi , Montebello , Montenotte , Mantua , Arcola , it wrote : Waterloo . 
A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority . 
Destiny consented to this irony . 
In his decline , Napoleon found Wurmser , the younger , again in front of him . 
In fact , to get Wurmser , it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington . 
Waterloo is a battle of the first order , won by a captain of the second . 
That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo , is England ; the English firmness , the English resolution , the English blood ; the superb thing about England there , no offence to her , was herself . 
It was not her captain ; it was her army . 
Wellington , oddly ungrateful , declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst , that his army , the army which fought on the 18th of June , 1815 , was a `` detestable army . '' 
What does that sombre intermingling of bones buried beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that ? 
England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington . 
To make Wellington so great is to belittle England . 
Wellington is nothing but a hero like many another . 
Those Scotch Grays , those Horse Guards , those regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell , that infantry of Pack and Kempt , that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset , those Highlanders playing the pibroch under the shower of grape-shot , those battalions of Rylandt , those utterly raw recruits , who hardly knew how to handle a musket holding their own against Essling 's and Rivoli 's old troops , -- that is what was grand . 
Wellington was tenacious ; in that lay his merit , and we are not seeking to lessen it : but the least of his foot-soldiers and of his cavalry would have been as solid as he . 
The iron soldier is worth as much as the Iron Duke . 
As for us , all our glorification goes to the English soldier , to the English army , to the English people . 
If trophy there be , it is to England that the trophy is due . 
The column of Waterloo would be more just , if , instead of the figure of a man , it bore on high the statue of a people . 
But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here . 
She still cherishes , after her own 1688 and our 1789 , the feudal illusion . 
She believes in heredity and hierarchy . 
This people , surpassed by none in power and glory , regards itself as a nation , and not as a people . 
And as a people , it willingly subordinates itself and takes a lord for its head . 
As a workman , it allows itself to be disdained ; as a soldier , it allows itself to be flogged . 
It will be remembered , that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant who had , it appears , saved the army , could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan , as the English military hierarchy does not permit any hero below the grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports . 
That which we admire above all , in an encounter of the nature of Waterloo , is the marvellous cleverness of chance . 
A nocturnal rain , the wall of Hougomont , the hollow road of Ohain , Grouchy deaf to the cannon , Napoleon 's guide deceiving him , Bulow 's guide enlightening him , -- the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted . 
On the whole , let us say it plainly , it was more of a massacre than of a battle at Waterloo . 
Of all pitched battles , Waterloo is the one which has the smallest front for such a number of combatants . 
Napoleon three-quarters of a league ; Wellington , half a league ; seventy-two thousand combatants on each side . 
From this denseness the carnage arose . 
The following calculation has been made , and the following proportion established : Loss of men : at Austerlitz , French , fourteen per cent ; Russians , thirty per cent ; Austrians , forty-four per cent . 
At Wagram , French , thirteen per cent ; Austrians , fourteen . 
At the Moskowa , French , thirty-seven per cent ; Russians , forty-four . 
At Bautzen , French , thirteen per cent ; Russians and Prussians , fourteen . 
At Waterloo , French , fifty-six per cent ; the Allies , thirty-one . 
Total for Waterloo , forty-one per cent ; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants ; sixty thousand dead . 
To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth , the impassive support of man , and it resembles all plains . 
At night , moreover , a sort of visionary mist arises from it ; and if a traveller strolls there , if he listens , if he watches , if he dreams like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi , the hallucination of the catastrophe takes possession of him . 
The frightful 18th of June lives again ; the false monumental hillock disappears , the lion vanishes in air , the battle-field resumes its reality , lines of infantry undulate over the plain , furious gallops traverse the horizon ; the frightened dreamer beholds the flash of sabres , the gleam of bayonets , the flare of bombs , the tremendous interchange of thunders ; he hears , as it were , the death rattle in the depths of a tomb , the vague clamor of the battle phantom ; those shadows are grenadiers , those lights are cuirassiers ; that skeleton Napoleon , that other skeleton is Wellington ; all this no longer exists , and yet it clashes together and combats still ; and the ravines are empurpled , and the trees quiver , and there is fury even in the clouds and in the shadows ; all those terrible heights , Hougomont , Mont-Saint-Jean , Frischemont , Papelotte , Plancenoit , appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in exterminating each other . 
IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD ? 
There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate Waterloo . 
We do not belong to it . 
To us , Waterloo is but the stupefied date of liberty . 
That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is certainly unexpected . 
If one places one 's self at the culminating point of view of the question , Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory . 
It is Europe against France ; it is Petersburg , Berlin , and Vienna against Paris ; it is the statu quo against the initiative ; it is the 14th of July , 1789 , attacked through the 20th of March , 1815 ; it is the monarchies clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable French rioting . 
The final extinction of that vast people which had been in eruption for twenty-six years -- such was the dream . 
The solidarity of the Brunswicks , the Nassaus , the Romanoffs , the Hohenzollerns , the Hapsburgs with the Bourbons . 
Waterloo bears divine right on its crupper . 
It is true , that the Empire having been despotic , the kingdom by the natural reaction of things , was forced to be liberal , and that a constitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo , to the great regret of the conquerors . 
It is because revolution can not be really conquered , and that being providential and absolutely fatal , it is always cropping up afresh : before Waterloo , in Bonaparte overthrowing the old thrones ; after Waterloo , in Louis XVIII . 
granting and conforming to the charter . 
Bonaparte places a postilion on the throne of Naples , and a sergeant on the throne of Sweden , employing inequality to demonstrate equality ; Louis XVIII . 
at Saint-Ouen countersigns the declaration of the rights of man . 
If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is , call it Progress ; and if you wish to acquire an idea of the nature of progress , call it To-morrow . 
To-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly , and it is already fulfilling it to-day . 
It always reaches its goal strangely . 
It employs Wellington to make of Foy , who was only a soldier , an orator . 
Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in the tribune . 
Thus does progress proceed . 
There is no such thing as a bad tool for that workman . 
It does not become disconcerted , but adjusts to its divine work the man who has bestridden the Alps , and the good old tottering invalid of Father Elysee . 
It makes use of the gouty man as well as of the conqueror ; of the conqueror without , of the gouty man within . 
Waterloo , by cutting short the demolition of European thrones by the sword , had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary work to be continued in another direction . 
The slashers have finished ; it was the turn of the thinkers . 
The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march . 
That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty . 
In short , and incontestably , that which triumphed at Waterloo ; that which smiled in Wellington 's rear ; that which brought him all the marshals ' staffs of Europe , including , it is said , the staff of a marshal of France ; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of bones to erect the knoll of the lion ; that which triumphantly inscribed on that pedestal the date `` June 18 , 1815 '' ; that which encouraged Blucher , as he put the flying army to the sword ; that which , from the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , hovered over France as over its prey , was the counter-revolution . 
It was the counter-revolution which murmured that infamous word `` dismemberment . '' 
On arriving in Paris , it beheld the crater close at hand ; it felt those ashes which scorched its feet , and it changed its mind ; it returned to the stammer of a charter . 
Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo . 
Of intentional liberty there is none . 
The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal , in the same manner as , by a corresponding phenomenon , Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle . 
A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT End of the dictatorship . 
A whole European system crumbled away . 
The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as it expired . 
Again we behold the abyss , as in the days of the barbarians ; only the barbarism of 1815 , which must be called by its pet name of the counter-revolution , was not long breathed , soon fell to panting , and halted short . 
The Empire was bewept , -- let us acknowledge the fact , -- and bewept by heroic eyes . 
If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre , the Empire had been glory in person . 
It had diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give a sombre light . 
We will say more ; an obscure light . 
Compared to the true daylight , it is night . 
This disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse . 
Louis XVIII . 
re-entered Paris . 
The circling dances of the 8th of July effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March . 
The Corsican became the antithesis of the Bearnese . 
The flag on the dome of the Tuileries was white . 
The exile reigned . 
Hartwell 's pine table took its place in front of the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV . 
Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day , Austerlitz having become antiquated . 
The altar and the throne fraternized majestically . 
One of the most undisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth century was established over France , and over the continent . 
Europe adopted the white cockade . 
Trestaillon was celebrated . 
The device non pluribus impar re-appeared on the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai d'Orsay . 
Where there had been an Imperial Guard , there was now a red house . 
The Arc du Carrousel , all laden with badly borne victories , thrown out of its element among these novelties , a little ashamed , it may be , of Marengo and Arcola , extricated itself from its predicament with the statue of the Duc d'Angouleme . 
The cemetery of the Madeleine , a terrible pauper 's grave in 1793 , was covered with jasper and marble , since the bones of Louis XVI . 
and Marie Antoinette lay in that dust . 
In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth , recalling the fact that the Duc d'Enghien had perished in the very month when Napoleon was crowned . 
Pope Pius VII. , who had performed the coronation very near this death , tranquilly bestowed his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation . 
At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow , aged four , whom it was seditious to call the King of Rome . 
And these things took place , and the kings resumed their thrones , and the master of Europe was put in a cage , and the old regime became the new regime , and all the shadows and all the light of the earth changed place , because , on the afternoon of a certain summer 's day , a shepherd said to a Prussian in the forest , `` Go this way , and not that ! '' 
This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April . 
Ancient unhealthy and poisonous realities were covered with new appearances . 
A lie wedded 1789 ; the right divine was masked under a charter ; fictions became constitutional ; prejudices , superstitions and mental reservations , with Article 14 in the heart , were varnished over with liberalism . 
It was the serpent 's change of skin . 
Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon . 
Under this reign of splendid matter , the ideal had received the strange name of ideology ! 
It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future into derision . 
The populace , however , that food for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer , sought him with its glance . 
Where is he ? 
What is he doing ? 
`` Napoleon is dead , '' said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo . 
`` He dead ! '' 
cried the soldier ; `` you do n't know him . '' 
Imagination distrusted this man , even when overthrown . 
The depths of Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo . 
Something enormous remained long empty through Napoleon 's disappearance . 
The kings placed themselves in this void . 
Ancient Europe profited by it to undertake reforms . 
There was a Holy Alliance ; Belle-Alliance , Beautiful Alliance , the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance . 
In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed , the features of a new France were sketched out . 
The future , which the Emperor had rallied , made its entry . 
On its brow it bore the star , Liberty . 
The glowing eyes of all young generations were turned on it . 
Singular fact ! 
people were , at one and the same time , in love with the future , Liberty , and the past , Napoleon . 
Defeat had rendered the vanquished greater . 
Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleon erect . 
Those who had triumphed were alarmed . 
England had him guarded by Hudson Lowe , and France had him watched by Montchenu . 
His folded arms became a source of uneasiness to thrones . 
Alexander called him `` my sleeplessness . '' 
This terror was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained in him . 
That is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism . 
This phantom caused the old world to tremble . 
The kings reigned , but ill at their ease , with the rock of Saint Helena on the horizon . 
While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood , the sixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietly rotting , and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world . 
The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815 , and Europe called this the Restoration . 
This is what Waterloo was . 
But what matters it to the Infinite ? 
all that tempest , all that cloud , that war , then that peace ? 
All that darkness did not trouble for a moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from one blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre Dame . 
THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT Let us return -- it is a necessity in this book -- to that fatal battle-field . 
On the 18th of June the moon was full . 
Its light favored Blucher 's ferocious pursuit , betrayed the traces of the fugitives , delivered up that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry , and aided the massacre . 
Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during catastrophes . 
After the last cannon-shot had been fired , the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean remained deserted . 
The English occupied the encampment of the French ; it is the usual sign of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished . 
They established their bivouac beyond Rossomme . 
The Prussians , let loose on the retreating rout , pushed forward . 
Wellington went to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst . 
If ever the sic vos non vobis was applicable , it certainly is to that village of Waterloo . 
Waterloo took no part , and lay half a league from the scene of action . 
Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded , Hougomont was burned , La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault , Papelotte was burned , Plancenoit was burned , La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two conquerors ; these names are hardly known , and Waterloo , which worked not in the battle , bears off all the honor . 
We are not of the number of those who flatter war ; when the occasion presents itself , we tell the truth about it . 
War has frightful beauties which we have not concealed ; it has also , we acknowledge , some hideous features . 
One of the most surprising is the prompt stripping of the bodies of the dead after the victory . 
The dawn which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses . 
Who does this ? 
Who thus soils the triumph ? 
What hideous , furtive hand is that which is slipped into the pocket of victory ? 
What pickpockets are they who ply their trade in the rear of glory ? 
Some philosophers -- Voltaire among the number -- affirm that it is precisely those persons have made the glory . 
It is the same men , they say ; there is no relief corps ; those who are erect pillage those who are prone on the earth . 
The hero of the day is the vampire of the night . 
One has assuredly the right , after all , to strip a corpse a bit when one is the author of that corpse . 
For our own part , we do not think so ; it seems to us impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels and purloin the shoes from a dead man . 
One thing is certain , which is , that generally after conquerors follow thieves . 
But let us leave the soldier , especially the contemporary soldier , out of the question . 
Every army has a rear-guard , and it is that which must be blamed . 
Bat-like creatures , half brigands and lackeys ; all the sorts of vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders ; wearers of uniforms , who take no part in the fighting ; pretended invalids ; formidable limpers ; interloping sutlers , trotting along in little carts , sometimes accompanied by their wives , and stealing things which they sell again ; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers ; soldiers ' servants ; marauders ; armies on the march in days gone by , -- we are not speaking of the present , -- dragged all this behind them , so that in the special language they are called `` stragglers . '' 
No army , no nation , was responsible for those beings ; they spoke Italian and followed the Germans , then spoke French and followed the English . 
It was by one of these wretches , a Spanish straggler who spoke French , that the Marquis of Fervacques , deceived by his Picard jargon , and taking him for one of our own men , was traitorously slain and robbed on the battle-field itself , in the course of the night which followed the victory of Cerisoles . 
The rascal sprang from this marauding . 
The detestable maxim , Live on the enemy ! 
produced this leprosy , which a strict discipline alone could heal . 
There are reputations which are deceptive ; one does not always know why certain generals , great in other directions , have been so popular . 
Turenne was adored by his soldiers because he tolerated pillage ; evil permitted constitutes part of goodness . 
Turenne was so good that he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered over to fire and blood . 
The marauders in the train of an army were more or less in number , according as the chief was more or less severe . 
Hoche and Marceau had no stragglers ; Wellington had few , and we do him the justice to mention it . 
Nevertheless , on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June , the dead were robbed . 
Wellington was rigid ; he gave orders that any one caught in the act should be shot ; but rapine is tenacious . 
The marauders stole in one corner of the battlefield while others were being shot in another . 
The moon was sinister over this plain . 
Towards midnight , a man was prowling about , or rather , climbing in the direction of the hollow road of Ohain . 
To all appearance he was one of those whom we have just described , -- neither English nor French , neither peasant nor soldier , less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent of the dead bodies having theft for his victory , and come to rifle Waterloo . 
He was clad in a blouse that was something like a great coat ; he was uneasy and audacious ; he walked forwards and gazed behind him . 
Who was this man ? 
The night probably knew more of him than the day . 
He had no sack , but evidently he had large pockets under his coat . 
From time to time he halted , scrutinized the plain around him as though to see whether he were observed , bent over abruptly , disturbed something silent and motionless on the ground , then rose and fled . 
His sliding motion , his attitudes , his mysterious and rapid gestures , caused him to resemble those twilight larvae which haunt ruins , and which ancient Norman legends call the Alleurs . 
Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among the marshes . 
A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceived at some distance a sort of little sutler 's wagon with a fluted wicker hood , harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across its bit as it halted , hidden , as it were , behind the hovel which adjoins the highway to Nivelles , at the angle of the road from Mont-Saint-Jean to Braine l'Alleud ; and in the wagon , a sort of woman seated on coffers and packages . 
Perhaps there was some connection between that wagon and that prowler . 
The darkness was serene . 
Not a cloud in the zenith . 
What matters it if the earth be red ! 
the moon remains white ; these are the indifferences of the sky . 
In the fields , branches of trees broken by grape-shot , but not fallen , upheld by their bark , swayed gently in the breeze of night . 
A breath , almost a respiration , moved the shrubbery . 
Quivers which resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass . 
In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds of the English camp were audible . 
Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn , forming , one in the west , the other in the east , two great flames which were joined by the cordon of bivouac fires of the English , like a necklace of rubies with two carbuncles at the extremities , as they extended in an immense semicircle over the hills along the horizon . 
We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain . 
The heart is terrified at the thought of what that death must have been to so many brave men . 
If there is anything terrible , if there exists a reality which surpasses dreams , it is this : to live , to see the sun ; to be in full possession of virile force ; to possess health and joy ; to laugh valiantly ; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one ; to feel in one 's breast lungs which breathe , a heart which beats , a will which reasons ; to speak , think , hope , love ; to have a mother , to have a wife , to have children ; to have the light -- and all at once , in the space of a shout , in less than a minute , to sink into an abyss ; to fall , to roll , to crush , to be crushed ; to see ears of wheat , flowers , leaves , branches ; not to be able to catch hold of anything ; to feel one 's sword useless , men beneath one , horses on top of one ; to struggle in vain , since one 's bones have been broken by some kick in the darkness ; to feel a heel which makes one 's eyes start from their sockets ; to bite horses ' shoes in one 's rage ; to stifle , to yell , to writhe ; to be beneath , and to say to one 's self , `` But just a little while ago I was a living man ! '' 
There , where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle , all was silence now . 
The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with horses and riders , inextricably heaped up . 
Terrible entanglement ! 
There was no longer any slope , for the corpses had levelled the road with the plain , and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley . 
A heap of dead bodies in the upper part , a river of blood in the lower part -- such was that road on the evening of the 18th of June , 1815 . 
The blood ran even to the Nivelles highway , and there overflowed in a large pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way , at a spot which is still pointed out . 
It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point , in the direction of the Genappe road , that the destruction of the cuirassiers had taken place . 
The thickness of the layer of bodies was proportioned to the depth of the hollow road . 
Towards the middle , at the point where it became level , where Delort 's division had passed , the layer of corpses was thinner . 
The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was going in that direction . 
He was searching that vast tomb . 
He gazed about . 
He passed the dead in some sort of hideous review . 
He walked with his feet in the blood . 
All at once he paused . 
A few paces in front of him , in the hollow road , at the point where the pile of dead came to an end , an open hand , illumined by the moon , projected from beneath that heap of men . 
That hand had on its finger something sparkling , which was a ring of gold . 
The man bent over , remained in a crouching attitude for a moment , and when he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand . 
He did not precisely rise ; he remained in a stooping and frightened attitude , with his back turned to the heap of dead , scanning the horizon on his knees , with the whole upper portion of his body supported on his two forefingers , which rested on the earth , and his head peering above the edge of the hollow road . 
The jackal 's four paws suit some actions . 
Then coming to a decision , he rose to his feet . 
At that moment , he gave a terrible start . 
He felt some one clutch him from behind . 
He wheeled round ; it was the open hand , which had closed , and had seized the skirt of his coat . 
An honest man would have been terrified ; this man burst into a laugh . 
`` Come , '' said he , `` it 's only a dead body . 
I prefer a spook to a gendarme . '' 
But the hand weakened and released him . 
Effort is quickly exhausted in the grave . 
`` Well now , '' said the prowler , `` is that dead fellow alive ? 
Let 's see . '' 
He bent down again , fumbled among the heap , pushed aside everything that was in his way , seized the hand , grasped the arm , freed the head , pulled out the body , and a few moments later he was dragging the lifeless , or at least the unconscious , man , through the shadows of hollow road . 
He was a cuirassier , an officer , and even an officer of considerable rank ; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath the cuirass ; this officer no longer possessed a helmet . 
A furious sword-cut had scarred his face , where nothing was discernible but blood . 
However , he did not appear to have any broken limbs , and , by some happy chance , if that word is permissible here , the dead had been vaulted above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed . 
His eyes were still closed . 
On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor . 
The prowler tore off this cross , which disappeared into one of the gulfs which he had beneath his great coat . 
Then he felt of the officer 's fob , discovered a watch there , and took possession of it . 
Next he searched his waistcoat , found a purse and pocketed it . 
When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering to this dying man , the officer opened his eyes . 
`` Thanks , '' he said feebly . 
The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him , the freshness of the night , the air which he could inhale freely , had roused him from his lethargy . 
The prowler made no reply . 
He raised his head . 
A sound of footsteps was audible in the plain ; some patrol was probably approaching . 
The officer murmured , for the death agony was still in his voice : -- `` Who won the battle ? '' 
`` The English , '' answered the prowler . 
The officer went on : -- `` Look in my pockets ; you will find a watch and a purse . 
Take them . '' 
It was already done . 
The prowler executed the required feint , and said : -- `` There is nothing there . '' 
`` I have been robbed , '' said the officer ; `` I am sorry for that . 
You should have had them . '' 
The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct . 
`` Some one is coming , '' said the prowler , with the movement of a man who is taking his departure . 
The officer raised his arm feebly , and detained him . 
`` You have saved my life . 
Who are you ? '' 
The prowler answered rapidly , and in a low voice : -- `` Like yourself , I belonged to the French army . 
I must leave you . 
If they were to catch me , they would shoot me . 
I have saved your life . 
Now get out of the scrape yourself . '' 
`` What is your rank ? '' 
`` Sergeant . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Thenardier . '' 
`` I shall not forget that name , '' said the officer ; `` and do you remember mine . 
My name is Pontmercy . '' 
BOOK SECOND . 
-- THE SHIP ORION NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430 Jean Valjean had been recaptured . 
The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the sad details . 
We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs published by the journals of that day , a few months after the surprising events which had taken place at M. sur M . 
These articles are rather summary . 
It must be remembered , that at that epoch the Gazette des Tribunaux was not yet in existence . 
We borrow the first from the Drapeau Blanc . 
It bears the date of July 25 , 1823 . 
An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the theatre of an event quite out of the ordinary course . 
A man , who was a stranger in the Department , and who bore the name of M. Madeleine , had , thanks to the new methods , resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry , the manufacture of jet and of black glass trinkets . 
He had made his fortune in the business , and that of the arrondissement as well , we will admit . 
He had been appointed mayor , in recognition of his services . 
The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than an ex-convict who had broken his ban , condemned in 1796 for theft , and named Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison . 
It appears that previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of M. Laffitte , a sum of over half a million which he had lodged there , and which he had , moreover , and by perfectly legitimate means , acquired in his business . 
No one has been able to discover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since his return to prison at Toulon . 
The second article , which enters a little more into detail , is an extract from the Journal de Paris , of the same date . 
A former convict , who had been liberated , named Jean Valjean , has just appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var , under circumstances calculated to attract attention . 
This wretch had succeeded in escaping the vigilance of the police , he had changed his name , and had succeeded in getting himself appointed mayor of one of our small northern towns ; in this town he had established a considerable commerce . 
He has at last been unmasked and arrested , thanks to the indefatigable zeal of the public prosecutor . 
He had for his concubine a woman of the town , who died of a shock at the moment of his arrest . 
This scoundrel , who is endowed with Herculean strength , found means to escape ; but three or four days after his flight the police laid their hands on him once more , in Paris itself , at the very moment when he was entering one of those little vehicles which run between the capital and the village of Montfermeil -LRB- Seine-et-Oise -RRB- . 
He is said to have profited by this interval of three or four days of liberty , to withdraw a considerable sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers . 
This sum has been estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs . 
If the indictment is to be trusted , he has hidden it in some place known to himself alone , and it has not been possible to lay hands on it . 
However that may be , the said Jean Valjean has just been brought before the Assizes of the Department of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with violence , about eight years ago , on the person of one of those honest children who , as the patriarch of Ferney has said , in immortal verse , '' ... Arrive from Savoy every year , And who , with gentle hands , do clear Those long canals choked up with soot . '' 
This bandit refused to defend himself . 
It was proved by the skilful and eloquent representative of the public prosecutor , that the theft was committed in complicity with others , and that Jean Valjean was a member of a band of robbers in the south . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty and was condemned to the death penalty in consequence . 
This criminal refused to lodge an appeal . 
The king , in his inexhaustible clemency , has deigned to commute his penalty to that of penal servitude for life . 
Jean Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at Toulon . 
The reader has not forgotten that Jean Valjean had religious habits at M. sur M . 
Some papers , among others the Constitutional , presented this commutation as a triumph of the priestly party . 
Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys . 
He was called 9,430 . 
However , and we will mention it at once in order that we may not be obliged to recur to the subject , the prosperity of M. sur M. vanished with M. Madeleine ; all that he had foreseen during his night of fever and hesitation was realized ; lacking him , there actually was a soul lacking . 
After this fall , there took place at M. sur M. that egotistical division of great existences which have fallen , that fatal dismemberment of flourishing things which is accomplished every day , obscurely , in the human community , and which history has noted only once , because it occurred after the death of Alexander . 
Lieutenants are crowned kings ; superintendents improvise manufacturers out of themselves . 
Envious rivalries arose . 
M. Madeleine 's vast workshops were shut ; his buildings fell to ruin , his workmen were scattered . 
Some of them quitted the country , others abandoned the trade . 
Thenceforth , everything was done on a small scale , instead of on a grand scale ; for lucre instead of the general good . 
There was no longer a centre ; everywhere there was competition and animosity . 
M. Madeleine had reigned over all and directed all . 
No sooner had he fallen , than each pulled things to himself ; the spirit of combat succeeded to the spirit of organization , bitterness to cordiality , hatred of one another to the benevolence of the founder towards all ; the threads which M. Madeleine had set were tangled and broken , the methods were adulterated , the products were debased , confidence was killed ; the market diminished , for lack of orders ; salaries were reduced , the workshops stood still , bankruptcy arrived . 
And then there was nothing more for the poor . 
All had vanished . 
The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere . 
Less than four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizes establishing the identity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine , for the benefit of the galleys , the cost of collecting taxes had doubled in the arrondissement of M. sur M. ; and M. de Villele called attention to the fact in the rostrum , in the month of February , 1827 . 
IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERUSE TWO VERSES , WHICH ARE OF THE DEVIL 'S COMPOSITION , POSSIBLY Before proceeding further , it will be to the purpose to narrate in some detail , a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch , in Montfermeil , and which is not lacking in coincidence with certain conjectures of the indictment . 
There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition , which is all the more curious and all the more precious , because a popular superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in Siberia . 
We are among those who respect everything which is in the nature of a rare plant . 
Here , then , is the superstition of Montfermeil : it is thought that the devil , from time immemorial , has selected the forest as a hiding-place for his treasures . 
Goodwives affirm that it is no rarity to encounter at nightfall , in secluded nooks of the forest , a black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper , wearing wooden shoes , clad in trousers and a blouse of linen , and recognizable by the fact , that , instead of a cap or hat , he has two immense horns on his head . 
This ought , in fact , to render him recognizable . 
This man is habitually engaged in digging a hole . 
There are three ways of profiting by such an encounter . 
The first is to approach the man and speak to him . 
Then it is seen that the man is simply a peasant , that he appears black because it is nightfall ; that he is not digging any hole whatever , but is cutting grass for his cows , and that what had been taken for horns is nothing but a dung-fork which he is carrying on his back , and whose teeth , thanks to the perspective of evening , seemed to spring from his head . 
The man returns home and dies within the week . 
The second way is to watch him , to wait until he has dug his hole , until he has filled it and has gone away ; then to run with great speed to the trench , to open it once more and to seize the `` treasure '' which the black man has necessarily placed there . 
In this case one dies within the month . 
Finally , the last method is not to speak to the black man , not to look at him , and to flee at the best speed of one 's legs . 
One then dies within the year . 
As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences , the second , which at all events , presents some advantages , among others that of possessing a treasure , if only for a month , is the one most generally adopted . 
So bold men , who are tempted by every chance , have quite frequently , as we are assured , opened the holes excavated by the black man , and tried to rob the devil . 
The success of the operation appears to be but moderate . 
At least , if the tradition is to be believed , and in particular the two enigmatical lines in barbarous Latin , which an evil Norman monk , a bit of a sorcerer , named Tryphon has left on this subject . 
This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey of Saint-Georges de Bocherville , near Rouen , and toads spawn on his grave . 
Accordingly , enormous efforts are made . 
Such trenches are ordinarily extremely deep ; a man sweats , digs , toils all night -- for it must be done at night ; he wets his shirt , burns out his candle , breaks his mattock , and when he arrives at the bottom of the hole , when he lays his hand on the `` treasure , '' what does he find ? 
What is the devil 's treasure ? 
A sou , sometimes a crown-piece , a stone , a skeleton , a bleeding body , sometimes a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in a portfolio , sometimes nothing . 
This is what Tryphon 's verses seem to announce to the indiscreet and curious : -- `` Fodit , et in fossa thesauros condit opaca , As , nummas , lapides , cadaver , simulacra , nihilque . '' 
It seems that in our day there is sometimes found a powder-horn with bullets , sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn , which has evidently served the devil . 
Tryphon does not record these two finds , since Tryphon lived in the twelfth century , and since the devil does not appear to have had the wit to invent powder before Roger Bacon 's time , and cards before the time of Charles VI . 
Moreover , if one plays at cards , one is sure to lose all that one possesses ! 
and as for the powder in the horn , it possesses the property of making your gun burst in your face . 
Now , a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to the prosecuting attorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during his flight of several days had been prowling around Montfermeil , it was remarked in that village that a certain old road-laborer , named Boulatruelle , had `` peculiar ways '' in the forest . 
People thereabouts thought they knew that this Boulatruelle had been in the galleys . 
He was subjected to certain police supervision , and , as he could find work nowhere , the administration employed him at reduced rates as a road-mender on the cross-road from Gagny to Lagny . 
This Boulatruelle was a man who was viewed with disfavor by the inhabitants of the district as too respectful , too humble , too prompt in removing his cap to every one , and trembling and smiling in the presence of the gendarmes , -- probably affiliated to robber bands , they said ; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of copses at nightfall . 
The only thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard . 
This is what people thought they had noticed : -- Of late , Boulatruelle had taken to quitting his task of stone-breaking and care of the road at a very early hour , and to betaking himself to the forest with his pickaxe . 
He was encountered towards evening in the most deserted clearings , in the wildest thickets ; and he had the appearance of being in search of something , and sometimes he was digging holes . 
The goodwives who passed took him at first for Beelzebub ; then they recognized Boulatruelle , and were not in the least reassured thereby . 
These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a lively displeasure . 
It was evident that he sought to hide , and that there was some mystery in what he was doing . 
It was said in the village : `` It is clear that the devil has appeared . 
Boulatruelle has seen him , and is on the search . 
In sooth , he is cunning enough to pocket Lucifer 's hoard . '' 
The Voltairians added , `` Will Boulatruelle catch the devil , or will the devil catch Boulatruelle ? '' 
The old women made a great many signs of the cross . 
In the meantime , Boulatruelle 's manoeuvres in the forest ceased ; and he resumed his regular occupation of roadmending ; and people gossiped of something else . 
Some persons , however , were still curious , surmising that in all this there was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends , but some fine windfall of a more serious and palpable sort than the devil 's bank-bills , and that the road-mender had half discovered the secret . 
The most `` puzzled '' were the school-master and Thenardier , the proprietor of the tavern , who was everybody 's friend , and had not disdained to ally himself with Boulatruelle . 
`` He has been in the galleys , '' said Thenardier . 
`` Eh ! 
Good God ! 
no one knows who has been there or will be there . '' 
One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the law would have instituted an inquiry as to what Boulatruelle did in the forest , and that the latter would have been forced to speak , and that he would have been put to the torture in case of need , and that Boulatruelle would not have resisted the water test , for example . 
`` Let us put him to the wine test , '' said Thenardier . 
They made an effort , and got the old road-mender to drinking . 
Boulatruelle drank an enormous amount , but said very little . 
He combined with admirable art , and in masterly proportions , the thirst of a gormandizer with the discretion of a judge . 
Nevertheless , by dint of returning to the charge and of comparing and putting together the few obscure words which he did allow to escape him , this is what Thenardier and the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out : -- One morning , when Boulatruelle was on his way to his work , at daybreak , he had been surprised to see , at a nook of the forest in the underbrush , a shovel and a pickaxe , concealed , as one might say . 
However , he might have supposed that they were probably the shovel and pick of Father Six-Fours , the water-carrier , and would have thought no more about it . 
But , on the evening of that day , he saw , without being seen himself , as he was hidden by a large tree , `` a person who did not belong in those parts , and whom he , Boulatruelle , knew well , '' directing his steps towards the densest part of the wood . 
Translation by Thenardier : A comrade of the galleys . 
Boulatruelle obstinately refused to reveal his name . 
This person carried a package -- something square , like a large box or a small trunk . 
Surprise on the part of Boulatruelle . 
However , it was only after the expiration of seven or eight minutes that the idea of following that `` person '' had occurred to him . 
But it was too late ; the person was already in the thicket , night had descended , and Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him . 
Then he had adopted the course of watching for him at the edge of the woods . 
`` It was moonlight . '' 
Two or three hours later , Boulatruelle had seen this person emerge from the brushwood , carrying no longer the coffer , but a shovel and pick . 
Boulatruelle had allowed the person to pass , and had not dreamed of accosting him , because he said to himself that the other man was three times as strong as he was , and armed with a pickaxe , and that he would probably knock him over the head on recognizing him , and on perceiving that he was recognized . 
Touching effusion of two old comrades on meeting again . 
But the shovel and pick had served as a ray of light to Boulatruelle ; he had hastened to the thicket in the morning , and had found neither shovel nor pick . 
From this he had drawn the inference that this person , once in the forest , had dug a hole with his pick , buried the coffer , and reclosed the hole with his shovel . 
Now , the coffer was too small to contain a body ; therefore it contained money . 
Hence his researches . 
Boulatruelle had explored , sounded , searched the entire forest and the thicket , and had dug wherever the earth appeared to him to have been recently turned up . 
In vain . 
He had `` ferreted out '' nothing . 
No one in Montfermeil thought any more about it . 
There were only a few brave gossips , who said , `` You may be certain that the mender on the Gagny road did not take all that trouble for nothing ; he was sure that the devil had come . '' 
THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORY MANIPULATION TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER Towards the end of October , in that same year , 1823 , the inhabitants of Toulon beheld the entry into their port , after heavy weather , and for the purpose of repairing some damages , of the ship Orion , which was employed later at Brest as a school-ship , and which then formed a part of the Mediterranean squadron . 
This vessel , battered as it was , -- for the sea had handled it roughly , -- produced a fine effect as it entered the roads . 
It flew some colors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns , which it returned , shot for shot ; total , twenty-two . 
It has been calculated that what with salvos , royal and military politenesses , courteous exchanges of uproar , signals of etiquette , formalities of roadsteads and citadels , sunrises and sunsets , saluted every day by all fortresses and all ships of war , openings and closings of ports , etc. , the civilized world , discharged all over the earth , in the course of four and twenty hours , one hundred and fifty thousand useless shots . 
At six francs the shot , that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day , three hundred millions a year , which vanish in smoke . 
This is a mere detail . 
All this time the poor were dying of hunger . 
The year 1823 was what the Restoration called `` the epoch of the Spanish war . '' 
This war contained many events in one , and a quantity of peculiarities . 
A grand family affair for the house of Bourbon ; the branch of France succoring and protecting the branch of Madrid , that is to say , performing an act devolving on the elder ; an apparent return to our national traditions , complicated by servitude and by subjection to the cabinets of the North ; M. le Duc d'Angouleme , surnamed by the liberal sheets the hero of Andujar , compressing in a triumphal attitude that was somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air , the ancient and very powerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the chimerical terrorism of the liberals ; the sansculottes resuscitated , to the great terror of dowagers , under the name of descamisados ; monarchy opposing an obstacle to progress described as anarchy ; the theories of '89 roughly interrupted in the sap ; a European halt , called to the French idea , which was making the tour of the world ; beside the son of France as generalissimo , the Prince de Carignan , afterwards Charles Albert , enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as a volunteer , with grenadier epaulets of red worsted ; the soldiers of the Empire setting out on a fresh campaign , but aged , saddened , after eight years of repose , and under the white cockade ; the tricolored standard waved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen , as the white standard had been thirty years earlier at Coblentz ; monks mingled with our troops ; the spirit of liberty and of novelty brought to its senses by bayonets ; principles slaughtered by cannonades ; France undoing by her arms that which she had done by her mind ; in addition to this , hostile leaders sold , soldiers hesitating , cities besieged by millions ; no military perils , and yet possible explosions , as in every mine which is surprised and invaded ; but little bloodshed , little honor won , shame for some , glory for no one . 
Such was this war , made by the princes descended from Louis XIV. , and conducted by generals who had been under Napoleon . 
Its sad fate was to recall neither the grand war nor grand politics . 
Some feats of arms were serious ; the taking of the Trocadero , among others , was a fine military action ; but after all , we repeat , the trumpets of this war give back a cracked sound , the whole effect was suspicious ; history approves of France for making a difficulty about accepting this false triumph . 
It seemed evident that certain Spanish officers charged with resistance yielded too easily ; the idea of corruption was connected with the victory ; it appears as though generals and not battles had been won , and the conquering soldier returned humiliated . 
A debasing war , in short , in which the Bank of France could be read in the folds of the flag . 
Soldiers of the war of 1808 , on whom Saragossa had fallen in formidable ruin , frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels , and began to regret Palafox . 
It is the nature of France to prefer to have Rostopchine rather than Ballesteros in front of her . 
From a still more serious point of view , and one which it is also proper to insist upon here , this war , which wounded the military spirit of France , enraged the democratic spirit . 
It was an enterprise of inthralment . 
In that campaign , the object of the French soldier , the son of democracy , was the conquest of a yoke for others . 
A hideous contradiction . 
France is made to arouse the soul of nations , not to stifle it . 
All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the French Revolution : liberty darts rays from France . 
That is a solar fact . 
Blind is he who will not see ! 
It was Bonaparte who said it . 
The war of 1823 , an outrage on the generous Spanish nation , was then , at the same time , an outrage on the French Revolution . 
It was France who committed this monstrous violence ; by foul means , for , with the exception of wars of liberation , everything that armies do is by foul means . 
The words passive obedience indicate this . 
An army is a strange masterpiece of combination where force results from an enormous sum of impotence . 
Thus is war , made by humanity against humanity , despite humanity , explained . 
As for the Bourbons , the war of 1823 was fatal to them . 
They took it for a success . 
They did not perceive the danger that lies in having an idea slain to order . 
They went astray , in their innocence , to such a degree that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime into their establishment as an element of strength . 
The spirit of the ambush entered into their politics . 
1830 had its germ in 1823 . 
The Spanish campaign became in their counsels an argument for force and for adventures by right Divine . 
France , having re-established elrey netto in Spain , might well have re-established the absolute king at home . 
They fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of the soldier for the consent of the nation . 
Such confidence is the ruin of thrones . 
It is not permitted to fall asleep , either in the shadow of a machineel tree , nor in the shadow of an army . 
Let us return to the ship Orion . 
During the operations of the army commanded by the prince generalissimo , a squadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean . 
We have just stated that the Orion belonged to this fleet , and that accidents of the sea had brought it into port at Toulon . 
The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it which attracts and engages a crowd . 
It is because it is great , and the crowd loves what is great . 
A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations of the genius of man with the powers of nature . 
A ship of the line is composed , at the same time , of the heaviest and the lightest of possible matter , for it deals at one and the same time with three forms of substance , -- solid , liquid , and fluid , -- and it must do battle with all three . 
It has eleven claws of iron with which to seize the granite on the bottom of the sea , and more wings and more antennae than winged insects , to catch the wind in the clouds . 
Its breath pours out through its hundred and twenty cannons as through enormous trumpets , and replies proudly to the thunder . 
The ocean seeks to lead it astray in the alarming sameness of its billows , but the vessel has its soul , its compass , which counsels it and always shows it the north . 
In the blackest nights , its lanterns supply the place of the stars . 
Thus , against the wind , it has its cordage and its canvas ; against the water , wood ; against the rocks , its iron , brass , and lead ; against the shadows , its light ; against immensity , a needle . 
If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which , taken as a whole , constitute the ship of the line , one has only to enter one of the six-story covered construction stocks , in the ports of Brest or Toulon . 
The vessels in process of construction are under a bell-glass there , as it were . 
This colossal beam is a yard ; that great column of wood which stretches out on the earth as far as the eye can reach is the main-mast . 
Taking it from its root in the stocks to its tip in the clouds , it is sixty fathoms long , and its diameter at its base is three feet . 
The English main-mast rises to a height of two hundred and seventeen feet above the water-line . 
The navy of our fathers employed cables , ours employs chains . 
The simple pile of chains on a ship of a hundred guns is four feet high , twenty feet in breadth , and eight feet in depth . 
And how much wood is required to make this ship ? 
Three thousand cubic metres . 
It is a floating forest . 
And moreover , let this be borne in mind , it is only a question here of the military vessel of forty years ago , of the simple sailing-vessel ; steam , then in its infancy , has since added new miracles to that prodigy which is called a war vessel . 
At the present time , for example , the mixed vessel with a screw is a surprising machine , propelled by three thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand five hundred horse-power . 
Not to mention these new marvels , the ancient vessel of Christopher Columbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man . 
It is as inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales ; it stores up the wind in its sails , it is precise in the immense vagueness of the billows , it floats , and it reigns . 
There comes an hour , nevertheless , when the gale breaks that sixty-foot yard like a straw , when the wind bends that mast four hundred feet tall , when that anchor , which weighs tens of thousands , is twisted in the jaws of the waves like a fisherman 's hook in the jaws of a pike , when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars , which the hurricane bears forth into the void and into night , when all that power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty which are superior . 
Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immense feebleness it affords men food for thought , Hence in the ports curious people abound around these marvellous machines of war and of navigation , without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why . 
Every day , accordingly , from morning until night , the quays , sluices , and the jetties of the port of Toulon were covered with a multitude of idlers and loungers , as they say in Paris , whose business consisted in staring at the Orion . 
The Orion was a ship that had been ailing for a long time ; in the course of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collected on its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed ; it had gone into the dry dock the year before this , in order to have the barnacles scraped off , then it had put to sea again ; but this cleaning had affected the bolts of the keel : in the neighborhood of the Balearic Isles the sides had been strained and had opened ; and , as the plating in those days was not of sheet iron , the vessel had sprung a leak . 
A violent equinoctial gale had come up , which had first staved in a grating and a porthole on the larboard side , and damaged the foretop-gallant-shrouds ; in consequence of these injuries , the Orion had run back to Toulon . 
It anchored near the Arsenal ; it was fully equipped , and repairs were begun . 
The hull had received no damage on the starboard , but some of the planks had been unnailed here and there , according to custom , to permit of air entering the hold . 
One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident . 
The crew was busy bending the sails ; the topman , who had to take the upper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard , lost his balance ; he was seen to waver ; the multitude thronging the Arsenal quay uttered a cry ; the man 's head overbalanced his body ; the man fell around the yard , with his hands outstretched towards the abyss ; on his way he seized the footrope , first with one hand , then with the other , and remained hanging from it : the sea lay below him at a dizzy depth ; the shock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swinging motion ; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope , like a stone in a sling . 
It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance ; not one of the sailors , all fishermen of the coast , recently levied for the service , dared to attempt it . 
In the meantime , the unfortunate topman was losing his strength ; his anguish could not be discerned on his face , but his exhaustion was visible in every limb ; his arms were contracted in horrible twitchings ; every effort which he made to re-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope ; he did not shout , for fear of exhausting his strength . 
All were awaiting the minute when he should release his hold on the rope , and , from instant to instant , heads were turned aside that his fall might not be seen . 
There are moments when a bit of rope , a pole , the branch of a tree , is life itself , and it is a terrible thing to see a living being detach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit . 
All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility of a tiger-cat ; this man was dressed in red ; he was a convict ; he wore a green cap ; he was a life convict . 
On arriving on a level with the top , a gust of wind carried away his cap , and allowed a perfectly white head to be seen : he was not a young man . 
A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had , in fact , at the very first instant , hastened to the officer of the watch , and , in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew , while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back , he had asked the officer 's permission to risk his life to save the topman ; at an affirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted to his ankle with one blow of a hammer , then he had caught up a rope , and had dashed into the rigging : no one noticed , at the instant , with what ease that chain had been broken ; it was only later on that the incident was recalled . 
In a twinkling he was on the yard ; he paused for a few seconds and appeared to be measuring it with his eye ; these seconds , during which the breeze swayed the topman at the extremity of a thread , seemed centuries to those who were looking on . 
At last , the convict raised his eyes to heaven and advanced a step : the crowd drew a long breath . 
He was seen to run out along the yard : on arriving at the point , he fastened the rope which he had brought to it , and allowed the other end to hang down , then he began to descend the rope , hand over hand , and then , -- and the anguish was indescribable , -- instead of one man suspended over the gulf , there were two . 
One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly , only here the spider brought life , not death . 
Ten thousand glances were fastened on this group ; not a cry , not a word ; the same tremor contracted every brow ; all mouths held their breath as though they feared to add the slightest puff to the wind which was swaying the two unfortunate men . 
In the meantime , the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a position near the sailor . 
It was high time ; one minute more , and the exhausted and despairing man would have allowed himself to fall into the abyss . 
The convict had moored him securely with the cord to which he clung with one hand , while he was working with the other . 
At last , he was seen to climb back on the yard , and to drag the sailor up after him ; he held him there a moment to allow him to recover his strength , then he grasped him in his arms and carried him , walking on the yard himself to the cap , and from there to the main-top , where he left him in the hands of his comrades . 
At that moment the crowd broke into applause : old convict-sergeants among them wept , and women embraced each other on the quay , and all voices were heard to cry with a sort of tender rage , `` Pardon for that man ! '' 
He , in the meantime , had immediately begun to make his descent to rejoin his detachment . 
In order to reach them the more speedily , he dropped into the rigging , and ran along one of the lower yards ; all eyes were following him . 
At a certain moment fear assailed them ; whether it was that he was fatigued , or that his head turned , they thought they saw him hesitate and stagger . 
All at once the crowd uttered a loud shout : the convict had fallen into the sea . 
The fall was perilous . 
The frigate Algesiras was anchored alongside the Orion , and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels : it was to be feared that he would slip under one or the other of them . 
Four men flung themselves hastily into a boat ; the crowd cheered them on ; anxiety again took possession of all souls ; the man had not risen to the surface ; he had disappeared in the sea without leaving a ripple , as though he had fallen into a cask of oil : they sounded , they dived . 
In vain . 
The search was continued until the evening : they did not even find the body . 
On the following day the Toulon newspaper printed these lines : -- `` Nov. 17 , 1823 . 
Yesterday , a convict belonging to the detachment on board of the Orion , on his return from rendering assistance to a sailor , fell into the sea and was drowned . 
The body has not yet been found ; it is supposed that it is entangled among the piles of the Arsenal point : this man was committed under the number 9,430 , and his name was Jean Valjean . '' 
THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL Montfermeil is situated between Livry and Chelles , on the southern edge of that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne . 
At the present day it is a tolerably large town , ornamented all the year through with plaster villas , and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois . 
In 1823 there were at Montfermeil neither so many white houses nor so many well-satisfied citizens : it was only a village in the forest . 
Some pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there , to be sure , which were recognizable by their grand air , their balconies in twisted iron , and their long windows , whose tiny panes cast all sorts of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters ; but Montfermeil was none the less a village . 
Retired cloth-merchants and rusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet ; it was a peaceful and charming place , which was not on the road to anywhere : there people lived , and cheaply , that peasant rustic life which is so bounteous and so easy ; only , water was rare there , on account of the elevation of the plateau . 
It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance ; the end of the village towards Gagny drew its water from the magnificent ponds which exist in the woods there . 
The other end , which surrounds the church and which lies in the direction of Chelles , found drinking-water only at a little spring half-way down the slope , near the road to Chelles , about a quarter of an hour from Montfermeil . 
Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water . 
The large houses , the aristocracy , of which the Thenardier tavern formed a part , paid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a business of it , and who earned about eight sous a day in his enterprise of supplying Montfermeil with water ; but this good man only worked until seven o'clock in the evening in summer , and five in winter ; and night once come and the shutters on the ground floor once closed , he who had no water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did without it . 
This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader has probably not forgotten , -- little Cosette . 
It will be remembered that Cosette was useful to the Thenardiers in two ways : they made the mother pay them , and they made the child serve them . 
So when the mother ceased to pay altogether , the reason for which we have read in preceding chapters , the Thenardiers kept Cosette . 
She took the place of a servant in their house . 
In this capacity she it was who ran to fetch water when it was required . 
So the child , who was greatly terrified at the idea of going to the spring at night , took great care that water should never be lacking in the house . 
Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil . 
The beginning of the winter had been mild ; there had been neither snow nor frost up to that time . 
Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained permission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal street of the village , and a band of itinerant merchants , under protection of the same tolerance , had constructed their stalls on the Church Square , and even extended them into Boulanger Alley , where , as the reader will perhaps remember , the Thenardiers ' hostelry was situated . 
These people filled the inns and drinking-shops , and communicated to that tranquil little district a noisy and joyous life . 
In order to play the part of a faithful historian , we ought even to add that , among the curiosities displayed in the square , there was a menagerie , in which frightful clowns , clad in rags and coming no one knew whence , exhibited to the peasants of Montfermeil in 1823 one of those horrible Brazilian vultures , such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845 , and which have a tricolored cockade for an eye . 
I believe that naturalists call this bird Caracara Polyborus ; it belongs to the order of the Apicides , and to the family of the vultures . 
Some good old Bonapartist soldiers , who had retired to the village , went to see this creature with great devotion . 
The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored cockade was a unique phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie . 
On Christmas eve itself , a number of men , carters , and peddlers , were seated at table , drinking and smoking around four or five candles in the public room of Thenardier 's hostelry . 
This room resembled all drinking-shop rooms , -- tables , pewter jugs , bottles , drinkers , smokers ; but little light and a great deal of noise . 
The date of the year 1823 was indicated , nevertheless , by two objects which were then fashionable in the bourgeois class : to wit , a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed tin . 
The female Thenardier was attending to the supper , which was roasting in front of a clear fire ; her husband was drinking with his customers and talking politics . 
Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjects the Spanish war and M. le Duc d'Angouleme , strictly local parentheses , like the following , were audible amid the uproar : -- `` About Nanterre and Suresnes the vines have flourished greatly . 
When ten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve . 
They have yielded a great deal of juice under the press . '' 
`` But the grapes can not be ripe ? '' 
`` In those parts the grapes should not be ripe ; the wine turns oily as soon as spring comes . '' 
`` Then it is very thin wine ? '' 
`` There are wines poorer even than these . 
The grapes must be gathered while green . '' 
Etc. . 
Or a miller would call out : -- `` Are we responsible for what is in the sacks ? 
We find in them a quantity of small seed which we can not sift out , and which we are obliged to send through the mill-stones ; there are tares , fennel , vetches , hempseed , fox-tail , and a host of other weeds , not to mention pebbles , which abound in certain wheat , especially in Breton wheat . 
I am not fond of grinding Breton wheat , any more than long-sawyers like to saw beams with nails in them . 
You can judge of the bad dust that makes in grinding . 
And then people complain of the flour . 
They are in the wrong . 
The flour is no fault of ours . '' 
In a space between two windows a mower , who was seated at table with a landed proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to be performed in the spring , was saying : -- `` It does no harm to have the grass wet . 
It cuts better . 
Dew is a good thing , sir . 
It makes no difference with that grass . 
Your grass is young and very hard to cut still . 
It 's terribly tender . 
It yields before the iron . '' 
Etc. . 
Cosette was in her usual place , seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen table near the chimney . 
She was in rags ; her bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes , and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting woollen stockings destined for the young Thenardiers . 
A very young kitten was playing about among the chairs . 
Laughter and chatter were audible in the adjoining room , from two fresh children 's voices : it was Eponine and Azelma . 
In the chimney-corner a cat-o ' - nine-tails was hanging on a nail . 
At intervals the cry of a very young child , which was somewhere in the house , rang through the noise of the dram-shop . 
It was a little boy who had been born to the Thenardiers during one of the preceding winters , -- `` she did not know why , '' she said , `` the result of the cold , '' -- and who was a little more than three years old . 
The mother had nursed him , but she did not love him . 
When the persistent clamor of the brat became too annoying , `` Your son is squalling , '' Thenardier would say ; `` do go and see what he wants . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
the mother would reply , `` he bothers me . '' 
And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark . 
TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS So far in this book the Thenardiers have been viewed only in profile ; the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple , and considering it under all its aspects . 
Thenardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday ; Madame Thenardier was approaching her forties , which is equivalent to fifty in a woman ; so that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife . 
Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this Thenardier woman , ever since her first appearance , -- tall , blond , red , fat , angular , square , enormous , and agile ; she belonged , as we have said , to the race of those colossal wild women , who contort themselves at fairs with paving-stones hanging from their hair . 
She did everything about the house , -- made the beds , did the washing , the cooking , and everything else . 
Cosette was her only servant ; a mouse in the service of an elephant . 
Everything trembled at the sound of her voice , -- window panes , furniture , and people . 
Her big face , dotted with red blotches , presented the appearance of a skimmer . 
She had a beard . 
She was an ideal market-porter dressed in woman 's clothes . 
She swore splendidly ; she boasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist . 
Except for the romances which she had read , and which made the affected lady peep through the ogress at times , in a very queer way , the idea would never have occurred to any one to say of her , `` That is a woman . '' 
This Thenardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on a fishwife . 
When one heard her speak , one said , `` That is a gendarme '' ; when one saw her drink , one said , `` That is a carter '' ; when one saw her handle Cosette , one said , `` That is the hangman . '' 
One of her teeth projected when her face was in repose . 
Thenardier was a small , thin , pale , angular , bony , feeble man , who had a sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy . 
His cunning began here ; he smiled habitually , by way of precaution , and was almost polite to everybody , even to the beggar to whom he refused half a farthing . 
He had the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters . 
He greatly resembled the portraits of the Abbe Delille . 
His coquetry consisted in drinking with the carters . 
No one had ever succeeded in rendering him drunk . 
He smoked a big pipe . 
He wore a blouse , and under his blouse an old black coat . 
He made pretensions to literature and to materialism . 
There were certain names which he often pronounced to support whatever things he might be saying , -- Voltaire , Raynal , Parny , and , singularly enough , Saint Augustine . 
He declared that he had `` a system . '' 
In addition , he was a great swindler . 
A filousophe -LSB- philosophe -RSB- , a scientific thief . 
The species does exist . 
It will be remembered that he pretended to have served in the army ; he was in the habit of relating with exuberance , how , being a sergeant in the 6th or the 9th light something or other , at Waterloo , he had alone , and in the presence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars , covered with his body and saved from death , in the midst of the grape-shot , `` a general , who had been dangerously wounded . '' 
Thence arose for his wall the flaring sign , and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood , of `` the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo . '' 
He was a liberal , a classic , and a Bonapartist . 
He had subscribed for the Champ d'Asile . 
It was said in the village that he had studied for the priesthood . 
We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper . 
This rascal of composite order was , in all probability , some Fleming from Lille , in Flanders , a Frenchman in Paris , a Belgian at Brussels , being comfortably astride of both frontiers . 
As for his prowess at Waterloo , the reader is already acquainted with that . 
It will be perceived that he exaggerated it a trifle . 
Ebb and flow , wandering , adventure , was the leven of his existence ; a tattered conscience entails a fragmentary life , and , apparently at the stormy epoch of June 18 , 1815 , Thenardier belonged to that variety of marauding sutlers of which we have spoken , beating about the country , selling to some , stealing from others , and travelling like a family man , with wife and children , in a rickety cart , in the rear of troops on the march , with an instinct for always attaching himself to the victorious army . 
This campaign ended , and having , as he said , `` some quibus , '' he had come to Montfermeil and set up an inn there . 
This quibus , composed of purses and watches , of gold rings and silver crosses , gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses , did not amount to a large total , and did not carry this sutler turned eating-house-keeper very far . 
Thenardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his gestures which , accompanied by an oath , recalls the barracks , and by a sign of the cross , the seminary . 
He was a fine talker . 
He allowed it to be thought that he was an educated man . 
Nevertheless , the schoolmaster had noticed that he pronounced improperly . 
-LSB- 12 -RSB- -LSB- 12 -RSB- Literally `` made cuirs '' ; i. e. , pronounced a t or an s at the end of words where the opposite letter should occur , or used either one of them where neither exists . 
He composed the travellers ' tariff card in a superior manner , but practised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it . 
Thenardier was cunning , greedy , slothful , and clever . 
He did not disdain his servants , which caused his wife to dispense with them . 
This giantess was jealous . 
It seemed to her that that thin and yellow little man must be an object coveted by all . 
Thenardier , who was , above all , an astute and well-balanced man , was a scamp of a temperate sort . 
This is the worst species ; hypocrisy enters into it . 
It is not that Thenardier was not , on occasion , capable of wrath to quite the same degree as his wife ; but this was very rare , and at such times , since he was enraged with the human race in general , as he bore within him a deep furnace of hatred . 
And since he was one of those people who are continually avenging their wrongs , who accuse everything that passes before them of everything which has befallen them , and who are always ready to cast upon the first person who comes to hand , as a legitimate grievance , the sum total of the deceptions , the bankruptcies , and the calamities of their lives , -- when all this leaven was stirred up in him and boiled forth from his mouth and eyes , he was terrible . 
Woe to the person who came under his wrath at such a time ! 
In addition to his other qualities , Thenardier was attentive and penetrating , silent or talkative , according to circumstances , and always highly intelligent . 
He had something of the look of sailors , who are accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses . 
Thenardier was a statesman . 
Every new-comer who entered the tavern said , on catching sight of Madame Thenardier , `` There is the master of the house . '' 
A mistake . 
She was not even the mistress . 
The husband was both master and mistress . 
She worked ; he created . 
He directed everything by a sort of invisible and constant magnetic action . 
A word was sufficient for him , sometimes a sign ; the mastodon obeyed . 
Thenardier was a sort of special and sovereign being in Madame Thenardier 's eyes , though she did not thoroughly realize it . 
She was possessed of virtues after her own kind ; if she had ever had a disagreement as to any detail with `` Monsieur Thenardier , '' -- which was an inadmissible hypothesis , by the way , -- she would not have blamed her husband in public on any subject whatever . 
She would never have committed `` before strangers '' that mistake so often committed by women , and which is called in parliamentary language , `` exposing the crown . '' 
Although their concord had only evil as its result , there was contemplation in Madame Thenardier 's submission to her husband . 
That mountain of noise and of flesh moved under the little finger of that frail despot . 
Viewed on its dwarfed and grotesque side , this was that grand and universal thing , the adoration of mind by matter ; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths of eternal beauty . 
There was an unknown quantity about Thenardier ; hence the absolute empire of the man over that woman . 
At certain moments she beheld him like a lighted candle ; at others she felt him like a claw . 
This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except her children , and who did not fear any one except her husband . 
She was a mother because she was mammiferous . 
But her maternity stopped short with her daughters , and , as we shall see , did not extend to boys . 
The man had but one thought , -- how to enrich himself . 
He did not succeed in this . 
A theatre worthy of this great talent was lacking . 
Thenardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil , if ruin is possible to zero ; in Switzerland or in the Pyrenees this penniless scamp would have become a millionaire ; but an inn-keeper must browse where fate has hitched him . 
It will be understood that the word inn-keeper is here employed in a restricted sense , and does not extend to an entire class . 
In this same year , 1823 , Thenardier was burdened with about fifteen hundred francs ' worth of petty debts , and this rendered him anxious . 
Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in this case , Thenardier was one of those men who understand best , with the most profundity and in the most modern fashion , that thing which is a virtue among barbarous peoples and an object of merchandise among civilized peoples , -- hospitality . 
Besides , he was an admirable poacher , and quoted for his skill in shooting . 
He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh , which was particularly dangerous . 
His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes . 
He had professional aphorisms , which he inserted into his wife 's mind . 
`` The duty of the inn-keeper , '' he said to her one day , violently , and in a low voice , `` is to sell to the first comer , stews , repose , light , fire , dirty sheets , a servant , lice , and a smile ; to stop passers-by , to empty small purses , and to honestly lighten heavy ones ; to shelter travelling families respectfully : to shave the man , to pluck the woman , to pick the child clean ; to quote the window open , the window shut , the chimney-corner , the arm-chair , the chair , the ottoman , the stool , the feather-bed , the mattress and the truss of straw ; to know how much the shadow uses up the mirror , and to put a price on it ; and , by five hundred thousand devils , to make the traveller pay for everything , even for the flies which his dog eats ! '' 
This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded -- a hideous and terrible team . 
While the husband pondered and combined , Madame Thenardier thought not of absent creditors , took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow , and lived in a fit of anger , all in a minute . 
Such were these two beings . 
Cosette was between them , subjected to their double pressure , like a creature who is at the same time being ground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers . 
The man and the woman each had a different method : Cosette was overwhelmed with blows -- this was the woman 's ; she went barefooted in winter -- that was the man 's doing . 
Cosette ran up stairs and down , washed , swept , rubbed , dusted , ran , fluttered about , panted , moved heavy articles , and weak as she was , did the coarse work . 
There was no mercy for her ; a fierce mistress and venomous master . 
The Thenardier hostelry was like a spider 's web , in which Cosette had been caught , and where she lay trembling . 
The ideal of oppression was realized by this sinister household . 
It was something like the fly serving the spiders . 
The poor child passively held her peace . 
What takes place within these souls when they have but just quitted God , find themselves thus , at the very dawn of life , very small and in the midst of men all naked ! 
MEN MUST HAVE WINE , AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER Four new travellers had arrived . 
Cosette was meditating sadly ; for , although she was only eight years old , she had already suffered so much that she reflected with the lugubrious air of an old woman . 
Her eye was black in consequence of a blow from Madame Thenardier 's fist , which caused the latter to remark from time to time , `` How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye ! '' 
Cosette was thinking that it was dark , very dark , that the pitchers and caraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must have been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern . 
She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thenardier establishment drank much water . 
Thirsty people were never lacking there ; but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug rather than to the pitcher . 
Any one who had asked for a glass of water among all those glasses of wine would have appeared a savage to all these men . 
But there came a moment when the child trembled ; Madame Thenardier raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove , then seized a glass and briskly approached the cistern . 
She turned the faucet ; the child had raised her head and was following all the woman 's movements . 
A thin stream of water trickled from the faucet , and half filled the glass . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` there is no more water ! '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The child did not breathe . 
`` Bah ! '' 
resumed Madame Thenardier , examining the half-filled glass , `` this will be enough . '' 
Cosette applied herself to her work once more , but for a quarter of an hour she felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big snow-flake . 
She counted the minutes that passed in this manner , and wished it were the next morning . 
From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street , and exclaimed , `` It 's as black as an oven ! '' 
or , `` One must needs be a cat to go about the streets without a lantern at this hour ! '' 
And Cosette trembled . 
All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered , and said in a harsh voice : -- `` My horse has not been watered . '' 
`` Yes , it has , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
`` I tell you that it has not , '' retorted the pedler . 
Cosette had emerged from under the table . 
`` Oh , yes , sir ! '' 
said she , `` the horse has had a drink ; he drank out of a bucket , a whole bucketful , and it was I who took the water to him , and I spoke to him . '' 
It was not true ; Cosette lied . 
`` There 's a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house , '' exclaimed the pedler . 
`` I tell you that he has not been watered , you little jade ! 
He has a way of blowing when he has had no water , which I know well . '' 
Cosette persisted , and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish , and which was hardly audible : -- `` And he drank heartily . '' 
`` Come , '' said the pedler , in a rage , `` this wo n't do at all , let my horse be watered , and let that be the end of it ! '' 
Cosette crept under the table again . 
`` In truth , that is fair ! '' 
