There is no insurrection except in a forward direction . 
Any other sort of rising is bad ; every violent step towards the rear is a revolt ; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human race . 
Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth ; the pavements which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right . 
These pavements bequeath to the uprising only their mud . 
Danton against Louis XIV . 
is insurrection ; Hebert against Danton is revolt . 
Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be , as Lafayette says , the most holy of duties , an uprising may be the most fatal of crimes . 
There is also a difference in the intensity of heat ; insurrection is often a volcano , revolt is often only a fire of straw . 
Revolt , as we have said , is sometimes found among those in power . 
Polignac is a rioter ; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing powers . 
Insurrection is sometimes resurrection . 
The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutely modern fact , and all history anterior to this fact being , for the space of four thousand years , filled with violated right , and the suffering of peoples , each epoch of history brings with it that protest of which it is capable . 
Under the Caesars , there was no insurrection , but there was Juvenal . 
The facit indignatio replaces the Gracchi . 
Under the Caesars , there is the exile to Syene ; there is also the man of the Annales . 
We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who , on his part also , overwhelms the real world with a protest in the name of the ideal world , who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on Rome-Nineveh , on Rome-Babylon , on Rome-Sodom , the flaming reflection of the Apocalypse . 
John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal ; we may understand him , he is a Jew , and it is Hebrew ; but the man who writes the Annales is of the Latin race , let us rather say he is a Roman . 
As the Neros reign in a black way , they should be painted to match . 
The work of the graving-tool alone would be too pale ; there must be poured into the channel a concentrated prose which bites . 
Despots count for something in the question of philosophers . 
A word that is chained is a terrible word . 
The writer doubles and trebles his style when silence is imposed on a nation by its master . 
From this silence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters into thought and there congeals into bronze . 
The compression of history produces conciseness in the historian . 
The granite solidity of such and such a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by the tyrant . 
Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are augmentations of force . 
The Ciceronian period , which hardly sufficed for Verres , would be blunted on Caligula . 
The less spread of sail in the phrase , the more intensity in the blow . 
Tacitus thinks with all his might . 
The honesty of a great heart , condensed in justice and truth , overwhelms as with lightning . 
Be it remarked , in passing , that Tacitus is not historically superposed upon Caesar . 
The Tiberii were reserved for him . 
Caesar and Tacitus are two successive phenomena , a meeting between whom seems to be mysteriously avoided , by the One who , when He sets the centuries on the stage , regulates the entrances and the exits . 
Caesar is great , Tacitus is great ; God spares these two greatnesses by not allowing them to clash with one another . 
The guardian of justice , in striking Caesar , might strike too hard and be unjust . 
God does not will it . 
The great wars of Africa and Spain , the pirates of Sicily destroyed , civilization introduced into Gaul , into Britanny , into Germany , -- all this glory covers the Rubicon . 
There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine justice , hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the formidable historian , sparing Caesar Tacitus , and according extenuating circumstances to genius . 
Certainly , despotism remains despotism , even under the despot of genius . 
There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants , but the moral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants . 
In such reigns , nothing veils the shame ; and those who make examples , Tacitus as well as Juvenal , slap this ignominy which can not reply , in the face , more usefully in the presence of all humanity . 
Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla . 
Under Claudius and under Domitian , there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the repulsiveness of the tyrant . 
The villainy of slaves is a direct product of the despot ; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein the master is reflected ; public powers are unclean ; hearts are small ; consciences are dull , souls are like vermin ; thus it is under Caracalla , thus it is under Commodus , thus it is under Heliogabalus , while , from the Roman Senate , under Caesar , there comes nothing but the odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles . 
Hence the advent , apparently tardy , of the Tacituses and the Juvenals ; it is in the hour for evidence , that the demonstrator makes his appearance . 
But Juvenal and Tacitus , like Isaiah in Biblical times , like Dante in the Middle Ages , is man ; riot and insurrection are the multitude , which is sometimes right and sometimes wrong . 
In the majority of cases , riot proceeds from a material fact ; insurrection is always a moral phenomenon . 
Riot is Masaniello ; insurrection , Spartacus . 
Insurrection borders on mind , riot on the stomach ; Gaster grows irritated ; but Gaster , assuredly , is not always in the wrong . 
In questions of famine , riot , Buzancais , for example , holds a true , pathetic , and just point of departure . 
Nevertheless , it remains a riot . 
Why ? 
It is because , right at bottom , it was wrong in form . 
Shy although in the right , violent although strong , it struck at random ; it walked like a blind elephant ; it left behind it the corpses of old men , of women , and of children ; it wished the blood of inoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why . 
The nourishment of the people is a good object ; to massacre them is a bad means . 
All armed protests , even the most legitimate , even that of the 10th of August , even that of July 14th , begin with the same troubles . 
Before the right gets set free , there is foam and tumult . 
In the beginning , the insurrection is a riot , just as a river is a torrent . 
Ordinarily it ends in that ocean : revolution . 
Sometimes , however , coming from those lofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon , justice , wisdom , reason , right , formed of the pure snow of the ideal , after a long fall from rock to rock , after having reflected the sky in its transparency and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph , insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire , as the Rhine is in a swamp . 
All this is of the past , the future is another thing . 
Universal suffrage has this admirable property , that it dissolves riot in its inception , and , by giving the vote to insurrection , it deprives it of its arms . 
The disappearance of wars , of street wars as well as of wars on the frontiers , such is the inevitable progression . 
Whatever To-day may be , To-morrow will be peace . 
However , insurrection , riot , and points of difference between the former and the latter , -- the bourgeois , properly speaking , knows nothing of such shades . 
In his mind , all is sedition , rebellion pure and simple , the revolt of the dog against his master , an attempt to bite whom must be punished by the chain and the kennel , barking , snapping , until such day as the head of the dog , suddenly enlarged , is outlined vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion . 
Then the bourgeois shouts : `` Long live the people ! '' 
This explanation given , what does the movement of June , 1832 , signify , so far as history is concerned ? 
Is it a revolt ? 
Is it an insurrection ? 
It may happen to us , in placing this formidable event on the stage , to say revolt now and then , but merely to distinguish superficial facts , and always preserving the distinction between revolt , the form , and insurrection , the foundation . 
This movement of 1832 had , in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy extinction , so much grandeur , that even those who see in it only an uprising , never refer to it otherwise than with respect . 
For them , it is like a relic of 1830 . 
Excited imaginations , say they , are not to be calmed in a day . 
A revolution can not be cut off short . 
It must needs undergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest , like a mountain sinking into the plain . 
There are no Alps without their Jura , nor Pyrenees without the Asturias . 
This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of Parisians calls `` the epoch of the riots , '' is certainly a characteristic hour amid the stormy hours of this century . 
A last word , before we enter on the recital . 
The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and living reality , which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time and space . 
There , nevertheless , we insist upon it , is life , palpitation , human tremor . 
Petty details , as we think we have already said , are , so to speak , the foliage of great events , and are lost in the distance of history . 
The epoch , surnamed `` of the riots , '' abounds in details of this nature . 
Judicial inquiries have not revealed , and perhaps have not sounded the depths , for another reason than history . 
We shall therefore bring to light , among the known and published peculiarities , things which have not heretofore been known , about facts over which have passed the forgetfulness of some , and the death of others . 
The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have disappeared ; beginning with the very next day they held their peace ; but of what we shall relate , we shall be able to say : `` We have seen this . '' 
We alter a few names , for history relates and does not inform against , but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine . 
In accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing , we shall show only one side and one episode , and certainly , the least known at that , of the two days , the 5th and the 6th of June , 1832 , but we shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse , beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift , of the real form of this frightful public adventure . 
A BURIAL ; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN In the spring of 1832 , although the cholera had been chilling all minds for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable and gloomy pacification , Paris had already long been ripe for commotion . 
As we have said , the great city resembles a piece of artillery ; when it is loaded , it suffices for a spark to fall , and the shot is discharged . 
In June , 1832 , the spark was the death of General Lamarque . 
Lamarque was a man of renown and of action . 
He had had in succession , under the Empire and under the Restoration , the sorts of bravery requisite for the two epochs , the bravery of the battle-field and the bravery of the tribune . 
He was as eloquent as he had been valiant ; a sword was discernible in his speech . 
Like Foy , his predecessor , after upholding the command , he upheld liberty ; he sat between the left and the extreme left , beloved of the people because he accepted the chances of the future , beloved of the populace because he had served the Emperor well ; he was , in company with Comtes Gerard and Drouet , one of Napoleon 's marshals in petto . 
The treaties of 1815 removed him as a personal offence . 
He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which pleased the multitude ; and , for seventeen years , he majestically preserved the sadness of Waterloo , paying hardly any attention to intervening events . 
In his death agony , at his last hour , he clasped to his breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers of the Hundred Days . 
Napoleon had died uttering the word army , Lamarque uttering the word country . 
His death , which was expected , was dreaded by the people as a loss , and by the government as an occasion . 
This death was an affliction . 
Like everything that is bitter , affliction may turn to revolt . 
This is what took place . 
On the preceding evening , and on the morning of the 5th of June , the day appointed for Lamarque 's burial , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which the procession was to touch at , assumed a formidable aspect . 
This tumultuous network of streets was filled with rumors . 
They armed themselves as best they might . 
Joiners carried off door-weights of their establishment `` to break down doors . '' 
One of them had made himself a dagger of a stocking-weaver 's hook by breaking off the hook and sharpening the stump . 
Another , who was in a fever `` to attack , '' slept wholly dressed for three days . 
A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade , who asked him : `` Whither are you going ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
well , I have no weapons . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` I 'm going to my timber-yard to get my compasses . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' said Lombier . 
A certain Jacqueline , an expeditious man , accosted some passing artisans : `` Come here , you ! '' 
He treated them to ten sous ' worth of wine and said : `` Have you work ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Go to Filspierre , between the Barriere Charonne and the Barriere Montreuil , and you will find work . '' 
At Filspierre 's they found cartridges and arms . 
Certain well-known leaders were going the rounds , that is to say , running from one house to another , to collect their men . 
At Barthelemy 's , near the Barriere du Trone , at Capel 's , near the Petit-Chapeau , the drinkers accosted each other with a grave air . 
They were heard to say : `` Have you your pistol ? '' 
`` Under my blouse . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
`` Under my shirt . '' 
In the Rue Traversiere , in front of the Bland workshop , and in the yard of the Maison-Brulee , in front of tool-maker Bernier 's , groups whispered together . 
Among them was observed a certain Mavot , who never remained more than a week in one shop , as the masters always discharged him `` because they were obliged to dispute with him every day . '' 
Mavot was killed on the following day at the barricade of the Rue Menilmontant . 
Pretot , who was destined to perish also in the struggle , seconded Mavot , and to the question : `` What is your object ? '' 
he replied : `` Insurrection . '' 
Workmen assembled at the corner of the Rue de Bercy , waited for a certain Lemarin , the revolutionary agent for the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly . 
On the 5th of June , accordingly , a day of mingled rain and sun , General Lamarque 's funeral procession traversed Paris with official military pomp , somewhat augmented through precaution . 
Two battalions , with draped drums and reversed arms , ten thousand National Guards , with their swords at their sides , escorted the coffin . 
The hearse was drawn by young men . 
The officers of the Invalides came immediately behind it , bearing laurel branches . 
Then came an innumerable , strange , agitated multitude , the sectionaries of the Friends of the People , the Law School , the Medical School , refugees of all nationalities , and Spanish , Italian , German , and Polish flags , tricolored horizontal banners , every possible sort of banner , children waving green boughs , stone-cutters and carpenters who were on strike at the moment , printers who were recognizable by their paper caps , marching two by two , three by three , uttering cries , nearly all of them brandishing sticks , some brandishing sabres , without order and yet with a single soul , now a tumultuous rout , again a column . 
Squads chose themselves leaders ; a man armed with a pair of pistols in full view , seemed to pass the host in review , and the files separated before him . 
On the side alleys of the boulevards , in the branches of the trees , on balconies , in windows , on the roofs , swarmed the heads of men , women , and children ; all eyes were filled with anxiety . 
An armed throng was passing , and a terrified throng looked on . 
The Government , on its side , was taking observations . 
It observed with its hand on its sword . 
Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen in the Place Louis XV . 
in their saddles , with their trumpets at their head , cartridge-boxes filled and muskets loaded , all in readiness to march ; in the Latin country and at the Jardin des Plantes , the Municipal Guard echelonned from street to street ; at the Halle-aux-Vins , a squadron of dragoons ; at the Greve half of the 12th Light Infantry , the other half being at the Bastille ; the 6th Dragoons at the Celestins ; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery . 
The remainder of the troops were confined to their barracks , without reckoning the regiments of the environs of Paris . 
Power being uneasy , held suspended over the menacing multitude twenty-four thousand soldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the banlieue . 
Divers reports were in circulation in the cortege . 
Legitimist tricks were hinted at ; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt , whom God had marked out for death at that very moment when the populace were designating him for the Empire . 
One personage , whose name has remained unknown , announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been won over , would throw open the doors of a factory of arms to the people . 
That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of those present was enthusiasm mingled with dejection . 
Here and there , also , in that multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions , there were visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths which said : `` Let us plunder ! '' 
There are certain agitations which stir up the bottoms of marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water . 
A phenomenon to which `` well drilled '' policemen are no strangers . 
The procession proceeded , with feverish slowness , from the house of the deceased , by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille . 
It rained from time to time ; the rain mattered nothing to that throng . 
Many incidents , the coffin borne round the Vendome column , stones thrown at the Duc de Fitz-James , who was seen on a balcony with his hat on his head , the Gallic cock torn from a popular flag and dragged in the mire , a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin , an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud : `` I am a Republican , '' the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly against orders to remain at home , the shouts of : `` Long live the Polytechnique ! 
Long live the Republic ! '' 
marked the passage of the funeral train . 
At the Bastille , long files of curious and formidable people who descended from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , effected a junction with the procession , and a certain terrible seething began to agitate the throng . 
One man was heard to say to another : `` Do you see that fellow with a red beard , he 's the one who will give the word when we are to fire . '' 
It appears that this red beard was present , at another riot , the Quenisset affair , entrusted with this same function . 
The hearse passed the Bastille , traversed the small bridge , and reached the esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz . 
There it halted . 
The crowd , surveyed at that moment with a bird ` seye view , would have presented the aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail spread out over the Quai Bourdon , covered the Bastille , and was prolonged on the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin . 
A circle was traced around the hearse . 
The vast rout held their peace . 
Lafayette spoke and bade Lamarque farewell . 
This was a touching and august instant , all heads uncovered , all hearts beat high . 
All at once , a man on horseback , clad in black , made his appearance in the middle of the group with a red flag , others say , with a pike surmounted with a red liberty-cap . 
Lafayette turned aside his head . 
Exelmans quitted the procession . 
This red flag raised a storm , and disappeared in the midst of it . 
From the Boulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamors which resemble billows stirred the multitude . 
Two prodigious shouts went up : `` Lamarque to the Pantheon ! 
-- Lafayette to the Town-hall ! '' 
Some young men , amid the declamations of the throng , harnessed themselves and began to drag Lamarque in the hearse across the bridge of Austerlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland . 
In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette , it was noticed that a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder , who died a centenarian afterwards , who had also been in the war of 1776 , and who had fought at Trenton under Washington , and at Brandywine under Lafayette . 
In the meantime , the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set in motion , and came to bar the bridge , on the right bank the dragoons emerged from the Celestins and deployed along the Quai Morland . 
The men who were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner of the quay and shouted : `` The dragoons ! '' 
The dragoons advanced at a walk , in silence , with their pistols in their holsters , their swords in their scabbards , their guns slung in their leather sockets , with an air of gloomy expectation . 
They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge . 
The carriage in which sat Lafayette advanced to them , their ranks opened and allowed it to pass , and then closed behind it . 
At that moment the dragoons and the crowd touched . 
The women fled in terror . 
What took place during that fatal minute ? 
No one can say . 
It is the dark moment when two clouds come together . 
Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding the charge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal others that a blow from a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon . 
The fact is , that three shots were suddenly discharged : the first killed Cholet , chief of the squadron , the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act of closing her window , the third singed the shoulder of an officer ; a woman screamed : `` They are beginning too soon ! '' 
and all at once , a squadron of dragoons which had remained in the barracks up to this time , was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared swords , through the Rue Bassompierre and the Boulevard Bourdon , sweeping all before them . 
Then all is said , the tempest is loosed , stones rain down , a fusillade breaks forth , many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank , and pass the small arm of the Seine , now filled in , the timber-yards of the Isle Louviers , that vast citadel ready to hand , bristle with combatants , stakes are torn up , pistol-shots fired , a barricade begun , the young men who are thrust back pass the Austerlitz bridge with the hearse at a run , and the municipal guard , the carabineers rush up , the dragoons ply their swords , the crowd disperses in all directions , a rumor of war flies to all four quarters of Paris , men shout : `` To arms ! '' 
they run , tumble down , flee , resist . 
Wrath spreads abroad the riot as wind spreads a fire . 
THE EBULLITIONS OF FORMER DAYS Nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot . 
Everything bursts forth everywhere at once . 
Was it foreseen ? 
Yes . 
Was it prepared ? 
No . 
Whence comes it ? 
From the pavements . 
Whence falls it ? 
From the clouds . 
Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot ; there of an improvisation . 
The first comer seizes a current of the throng and leads it whither he wills . 
A beginning full of terror , in which is mingled a sort of formidable gayety . 
First come clamors , the shops are closed , the displays of the merchants disappear ; then come isolated shots ; people flee ; blows from gun-stocks beat against portes cocheres , servants can be heard laughing in the courtyards of houses and saying : `` There 's going to be a row ! '' 
A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking place at twenty different spots in Paris at once . 
In the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie , twenty young men , bearded and with long hair , entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later , carrying a horizontal tricolored flag covered with crape , and having at their head three men armed , one with a sword , one with a gun , and the third with a pike . 
In the Rue des Nonaindieres , a very well-dressed bourgeois , who had a prominent belly , a sonorous voice , a bald head , a lofty brow , a black beard , and one of these stiff mustaches which will not lie flat , offered cartridges publicly to passers-by . 
In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre , men with bare arms carried about a black flag , on which could be read in white letters this inscription : `` Republic or Death ! '' 
In the Rue des Jeuneurs , Rue du Cadran , Rue Montorgueil , Rue Mandar , groups appeared waving flags on which could be distinguished in gold letters , the word section with a number . 
One of these flags was red and blue with an almost imperceptible stripe of white between . 
They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin , and three armorers ' shops , the first in the Rue Beaubourg , the second in the Rue Michel-le-Comte , the other in the Rue du Temple . 
In a few minutes , the thousand hands of the crowd had seized and carried off two hundred and thirty guns , nearly all double-barrelled , sixty-four swords , and eighty-three pistols . 
In order to provide more arms , one man took the gun , the other the bayonet . 
Opposite the Quai de la Greve , young men armed with muskets installed themselves in the houses of some women for the purpose of firing . 
One of them had a flint-lock . 
They rang , entered , and set about making cartridges . 
One of these women relates : `` I did not know what cartridges were ; it was my husband who told me . '' 
One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue des Vielles Haudriettes , and seized yataghans and Turkish arms . 
The body of a mason who had been killed by a gun-shot lay in the Rue de la Perle . 
And then on the right bank , the left bank , on the quays , on the boulevards , in the Latin country , in the quarter of the Halles , panting men , artisans , students , members of sections read proclamations and shouted : `` To arms ! '' 
broke street lanterns , unharnessed carriages , unpaved the streets , broke in the doors of houses , uprooted trees , rummaged cellars , rolled out hogsheads , heaped up paving-stones , rough slabs , furniture and planks , and made barricades . 
They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this . 
They entered the dwellings of women , they forced them to hand over the swords and guns of their absent husbands , and they wrote on the door , with whiting : `` The arms have been delivered '' ; some signed `` their names '' to receipts for the guns and swords and said : `` Send for them to-morrow at the Mayor 's office . '' 
They disarmed isolated sentinels and National Guardsmen in the streets on their way to the Townhall . 
They tore the epaulets from officers . 
In the Rue du Cimitiere-Saint-Nicholas , an officer of the National Guard , on being pursued by a crowd armed with clubs and foils , took refuge with difficulty in a house , whence he was only able to emerge at nightfall and in disguise . 
In the Quartier Saint-Jacques , the students swarmed out of their hotels and ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Cafe du Progress , or descended to the Cafe des Sept-Billards , in the Rue des Mathurins . 
There , in front of the door , young men mounted on the stone corner-posts , distributed arms . 
They plundered the timber-yard in the Rue Transnonain in order to obtain material for barricades . 
On a single point the inhabitants resisted , at the corner of the Rue Sainte-Avoye and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc , where they destroyed the barricade with their own hands . 
At a single point the insurgents yielded ; they abandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on a detachment of the National Guard , and fled through the Rue de la Corderie . 
The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag , a package of cartridges , and three hundred pistol-balls . 
The National Guardsmen tore up the flag , and carried off its tattered remains on the points of their bayonets . 
All that we are here relating slowly and successively took place simultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult , like a mass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder . 
In less than an hour , twenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in the quarter of the Halles alone . 
In the centre was that famous house No. 50 , which was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions , and which , flanked on the one hand by a barricade at Saint-Merry , and on the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuee , commanded three streets , the Rue des Arcis , the Rue Saint-Martin , and the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , which it faced . 
The barricades at right angles fell back , the one of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie , the other of the Rue Geoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye . 
Without reckoning innumerable barricades in twenty other quarters of Paris , in the Marais , at Mont-Sainte-Genevieve ; one in the Rue Menilmontant , where was visible a porte cochere torn from its hinges ; another near the little bridge of the Hotel-Dieu made with an `` ecossais , '' which had been unharnessed and overthrown , three hundred paces from the Prefecture of Police . 
At the barricade of the Rue des Menetriers , a well-dressed man distributed money to the workmen . 
At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat , a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to be the commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll of silver . 
`` Here , '' said he , `` this is to pay expenses , wine , et caetera . '' 
A light-haired young man , without a cravat , went from barricade to barricade , carrying pass-words . 
Another , with a naked sword , a blue police cap on his head , placed sentinels . 
In the interior , beyond the barricades , the wine-shops and porters ' lodges were converted into guard-houses . 
Otherwise the riot was conducted after the most scientific military tactics . 
The narrow , uneven , sinuous streets , full of angles and turns , were admirably chosen ; the neighborhood of the Halles , in particular , a network of streets more intricate than a forest . 
The Society of the Friends of the People had , it was said , undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye . 
A man killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a plan of Paris . 
That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a sort of strange impetuosity which was in the air . 
The insurrection had abruptly built barricades with one hand , and with the other seized nearly all the posts of the garrison . 
In less than three hours , like a train of powder catching fire , the insurgents had invaded and occupied , on the right bank , the Arsenal , the Mayoralty of the Place Royale , the whole of the Marais , the Popincourt arms manufactory , la Galiote , the Chateau-d'Eau , and all the streets near the Halles ; on the left bank , the barracks of the Veterans , Sainte-Pelagie , the Place Maubert , the powder magazine of the Deux-Moulins , and all the barriers . 
At five o'clock in the evening , they were masters of the Bastille , of the Lingerie , of the Blancs-Manteaux ; their scouts had reached the Place des Victoires , and menaced the Bank , the Petits-Peres barracks , and the Post-Office . 
A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters . 
The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points ; and , as a result of the disarming domiciliary visits , and armorers ' shops hastily invaded , was , that the combat which had begun with the throwing of stones was continued with gun-shots . 
About six o'clock in the evening , the Passage du Saumon became the field of battle . 
The uprising was at one end , the troops were at the other . 
They fired from one gate to the other . 
An observer , a dreamer , the author of this book , who had gone to get a near view of this volcano , found himself in the passage between the two fires . 
All that he had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the two half-columns which separate the shops ; he remained in this delicate situation for nearly half an hour . 
Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten , the National Guard armed in haste , the legions emerged from the Mayoralities , the regiments from their barracks . 
Opposite the passage de l'Ancre a drummer received a blow from a dagger . 
Another , in the Rue du Cygne , was assailed by thirty young men who broke his instrument , and took away his sword . 
Another was killed in the Rue Grenier-Saint-Lazare . 
In the Rue-Michelle-Comte , three officers fell dead one after the other . 
Many of the Municipal Guards , on being wounded , in the Rue des Lombards , retreated . 
In front of the Cour-Batave , a detachment of National Guards found a red flag bearing the following inscription : Republican revolution , No. 127 . 
Was this a revolution , in fact ? 
The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort of inextricable , tortuous , colossal citadel . 
There was the hearth ; there , evidently , was the question . 
All the rest was nothing but skirmishes . 
The proof that all would be decided there lay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet . 
In some regiments , the soldiers were uncertain , which added to the fearful uncertainty of the crisis . 
They recalled the popular ovation which had greeted the neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July , 1830 . 
Two intrepid men , tried in great wars , the Marshal Lobau and General Bugeaud , were in command , Bugeaud under Lobau . 
Enormous patrols , composed of battalions of the Line , enclosed in entire companies of the National Guard , and preceded by a commissary of police wearing his scarf of office , went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion . 
The insurgents , on their side , placed videttes at the corners of all open spaces , and audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades . 
Each side was watching the other . 
The Government , with an army in its hand , hesitated ; the night was almost upon them , and the Saint-Merry tocsin began to make itself heard . 
The Minister of War at that time , Marshal Soult , who had seen Austerlitz , regarded this with a gloomy air . 
These old sailors , accustomed to correct manoeuvres and having as resource and guide only tactics , that compass of battles , are utterly disconcerted in the presence of that immense foam which is called public wrath . 
The National Guards of the suburbs rushed up in haste and disorder . 
A battalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis , the 14th of the Line arrived from Courbevoie , the batteries of the Military School had taken up their position on the Carrousel ; cannons were descending from Vincennes . 
Solitude was formed around the Tuileries . 
Louis Philippe was perfectly serene . 
ORIGINALITY OF PARIS During the last two years , as we have said , Paris had witnessed more than one insurrection . 
Nothing is , generally , more singularly calm than the physiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of the rebellious quarters . 
Paris very speedily accustoms herself to anything , -- it is only a riot , -- and Paris has so many affairs on hand , that she does not put herself out for so small a matter . 
These colossal cities alone can offer such spectacles . 
These immense enclosures alone can contain at the same time civil war and an odd and indescribable tranquillity . 
Ordinarily , when an insurrection commences , when the shop-keeper hears the drum , the call to arms , the general alarm , he contents himself with the remark : -- `` There appears to be a squabble in the Rue Saint-Martin . '' 
Or : -- `` In the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . '' 
Often he adds carelessly : -- `` Or somewhere in that direction . '' 
Later on , when the heart-rending and mournful hubbub of musketry and firing by platoons becomes audible , the shopkeeper says : -- `` It 's getting hot ! 
Hullo , it 's getting hot ! '' 
A moment later , the riot approaches and gains in force , he shuts up his shop precipitately , hastily dons his uniform , that is to say , he places his merchandise in safety and risks his own person . 
Men fire in a square , in a passage , in a blind alley ; they take and re-take the barricade ; blood flows , the grape-shot riddles the fronts of the houses , the balls kill people in their beds , corpses encumber the streets . 
A few streets away , the shock of billiard-balls can be heard in the cafes . 
The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles ; the curious laugh and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with war . 
Hackney-carriages go their way ; passers-by are going to a dinner somewhere in town . 
Sometimes in the very quarter where the fighting is going on . 
In 1831 , a fusillade was stopped to allow a wedding party to pass . 
At the time of the insurrection of 1839 , in the Rue Saint-Martin a little , infirm old man , pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricolored rag , in which he had carafes filled with some sort of liquid , went and came from barricade to troops and from troops to the barricade , offering his glasses of cocoa impartially , -- now to the Government , now to anarchy . 
Nothing can be stranger ; and this is the peculiar character of uprisings in Paris , which can not be found in any other capital . 
To this end , two things are requisite , the size of Paris and its gayety . 
The city of Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary . 
On this occasion , however , in the resort to arms of June 25th , 1832 , the great city felt something which was , perhaps , stronger than itself . 
It was afraid . 
Closed doors , windows , and shutters were to be seen everywhere , in the most distant and most `` disinterested '' quarters . 
The courageous took to arms , the poltroons hid . 
The busy and heedless passer-by disappeared . 
Many streets were empty at four o'clock in the morning . 
Alarming details were hawked about , fatal news was disseminated , -- that they were masters of the Bank ; -- that there were six hundred of them in the Cloister of Saint-Merry alone , entrenched and embattled in the church ; that the line was not to be depended on ; that Armand Carrel had been to see Marshal Clausel and that the Marshal had said : `` Get a regiment first '' ; that Lafayette was ill , but that he had said to them , nevertheless : `` I am with you . 
I will follow you wherever there is room for a chair '' ; that one must be on one 's guard ; that at night there would be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted corners of Paris -LRB- there the imagination of the police , that Anne Radcliffe mixed up with the Government was recognizable -RRB- ; that a battery had been established in the Rue Aubry le Boucher ; that Lobau and Bugeaud were putting their heads together , and that , at midnight , or at daybreak at latest , four columns would march simultaneously on the centre of the uprising , the first coming from the Bastille , the second from the Porte Saint-Martin , the third from the Greve , the fourth from the Halles ; that perhaps , also , the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to the Champ-de-Mars ; that no one knew what would happen , but that this time , it certainly was serious . 
People busied themselves over Marshal Soult 's hesitations . 
Why did not he attack at once ? 
It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed . 
The old lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom . 
Evening came , the theatres did not open ; the patrols circulated with an air of irritation ; passers-by were searched ; suspicious persons were arrested . 
By nine o'clock , more than eight hundred persons had been arrested , the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them , so was the Conciergerie , so was La Force . 
At the Conciergerie in particular , the long vault which is called the Rue de Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heap of prisoners , whom the man of Lyons , Lagrange , harangued valiantly . 
All that straw rustled by all these men , produced the sound of a heavy shower . 
Elsewhere prisoners slept in the open air in the meadows , piled on top of each other . 
Anxiety reigned everywhere , and a certain tremor which was not habitual with Paris . 
People barricaded themselves in their houses ; wives and mothers were uneasy ; nothing was to be heard but this : `` Ah ! 
my God ! 
He has not come home ! '' 
There was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to be heard . 
People listened on their thresholds , to the rumors , the shouts , the tumult , the dull and indistinct sounds , to the things that were said : `` It is cavalry , '' or : `` Those are the caissons galloping , '' to the trumpets , the drums , the firing , and , above all , to that lamentable alarm peal from Saint-Merry . 
They waited for the first cannon-shot . 
Men sprang up at the corners of the streets and disappeared , shouting : `` Go home ! '' 
And people made haste to bolt their doors . 
They said : `` How will all this end ? '' 
From moment to moment , in proportion as the darkness descended , Paris seemed to take on a more mournful hue from the formidable flaming of the revolt . 
SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE 'S POETRY . 
THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS POETRY At the instant when the insurrection , arising from the shock of the populace and the military in front of the Arsenal , started a movement in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following the hearse and which , through the whole length of the boulevards , weighed , so to speak , on the head of the procession , there arose a frightful ebb . 
The rout was shaken , their ranks were broken , all ran , fled , made their escape , some with shouts of attack , others with the pallor of flight . 
The great river which covered the boulevards divided in a twinkling , overflowed to right and left , and spread in torrents over two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken loose . 
At that moment , a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue Menilmontant , holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville , caught sight of an old holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-a-brac merchant 's shop . 
`` Mother What 's - your-name , I 'm going to borrow your machine . '' 
And off he ran with the pistol . 
Two minutes later , a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeing through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse , encountered the lad brandishing his pistol and singing : -- La nuit on ne voit rien , Le jour on voit tres bien , D'un ecrit apocrypha Le bourgeois s ` ebouriffe , Pratiquez la vertu , Tutu , chapeau pointu ! 
-LSB- 44 -RSB- -LSB- 44 -RSB- At night one sees nothing , by day one sees very well ; the bourgeois gets flurried over an apocryphal scrawl , practice virtue , tutu , pointed hat ! 
It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars . 
On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger . 
Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march , and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion ? 
We know not . 
Who does know ? 
Himself , perhaps . 
However , Gavroche was well up in all the popular tunes in circulation , and he mingled with them his own chirpings . 
An observing urchin and a rogue , he made a potpourri of the voices of nature and the voices of Paris . 
He combined the repertory of the birds with the repertory of the workshops . 
He was acquainted with thieves , a tribe contiguous to his own . 
He had , it appears , been for three months apprenticed to a printer . 
He had one day executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian , one of the Forty . 
Gavroche was a gamin of letters . 
Moreover , Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously rainy night , it was to his own brothers that he had played the part of Providence . 
His brothers in the evening , his father in the morning ; that is what his night had been like . 
On quitting the Rue des Ballets at daybreak , he had returned in haste to the elephant , had artistically extracted from it the two brats , had shared with them some sort of breakfast which he had invented , and had then gone away , confiding them to that good mother , the street , who had brought him up , almost entirely . 
On leaving them , he had appointed to meet them at the same spot in the evening , and had left them this discourse by way of a farewell : `` I break a cane , otherwise expressed , I cut my stick , or , as they say at the court , I file off . 
If you do n't find papa and mamma , young ` uns , come back here this evening . 
I 'll scramble you up some supper , and I 'll give you a shakedown . '' 
The two children , picked up by some policeman and placed in the refuge , or stolen by some mountebank , or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris , did not return . 
The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of these lost traces . 
Gavroche did not see them again . 
Ten or twelve weeks had elapsed since that night . 
More than once he had scratched the back of his head and said : `` Where the devil are my two children ? '' 
In the meantime , he had arrived , pistol in hand , in the Rue du Pont-aux-Choux . 
He noticed that there was but one shop open in that street , and , a matter worthy of reflection , that was a pastry-cook 's shop . 
This presented a providential occasion to eat another apple-turnover before entering the unknown . 
Gavroche halted , fumbled in his fob , turned his pocket inside out , found nothing , not even a sou , and began to shout : `` Help ! '' 
It is hard to miss the last cake . 
Nevertheless , Gavroche pursued his way . 
Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis . 
While traversing the Rue du Parc-Royal , he felt called upon to make good the loss of the apple-turnover which had been impossible , and he indulged himself in the immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broad daylight . 
A little further on , on catching sight of a group of comfortable-looking persons , who seemed to be landed proprietors , he shrugged his shoulders and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as they passed : `` How fat those moneyed men are ! 
They 're drunk ! 
They just wallow in good dinners . 
Ask 'em what they do with their money . 
They do n't know . 
They eat it , that 's what they do ! 
As much as their bellies will hold . '' 
GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH The brandishing of a triggerless pistol , grasped in one 's hand in the open street , is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his fervor increasing with every moment . 
Amid the scraps of the Marseillaise which he was singing , he shouted : -- `` All goes well . 
I suffer a great deal in my left paw , I 'm all broken up with rheumatism , but I 'm satisfied , citizens . 
All that the bourgeois have to do is to bear themselves well , I 'll sneeze them out subversive couplets . 
What are the police spies ? 
Dogs . 
And I 'd just like to have one of them at the end of my pistol . 
I 'm just from the boulevard , my friends . 
It 's getting hot there , it 's getting into a little boil , it 's simmering . 
It 's time to skim the pot . 
Forward march , men ! 
Let an impure blood inundate the furrows ! 
I give my days to my country , I shall never see my concubine more , Nini , finished , yes , Nini ? 
But never mind ! 
Long live joy ! 
Let 's fight , crebleu ! 
I 've had enough of despotism . '' 
At that moment , the horse of a lancer of the National Guard having fallen , Gavroche laid his pistol on the pavement , and picked up the man , then he assisted in raising the horse . 
After which he picked up his pistol and resumed his way . 
In the Rue de Thorigny , all was peace and silence . 
This apathy , peculiar to the Marais , presented a contrast with the vast surrounding uproar . 
Four gossips were chatting in a doorway . 
Scotland has trios of witches , Paris has quartettes of old gossiping hags ; and the `` Thou shalt be King '' could be quite as mournfully hurled at Bonaparte in the Carrefour Baudoyer as at Macbeth on the heath of Armuyr . 
The croak would be almost identical . 
The gossips of the Rue de Thorigny busied themselves only with their own concerns . 
Three of them were portresses , and the fourth was a rag-picker with her basket on her back . 
All four of them seemed to be standing at the four corners of old age , which are decrepitude , decay , ruin , and sadness . 
The rag-picker was humble . 
In this open-air society , it is the rag-picker who salutes and the portress who patronizes . 
This is caused by the corner for refuse , which is fat or lean , according to the will of the portresses , and after the fancy of the one who makes the heap . 
There may be kindness in the broom . 
This rag-picker was a grateful creature , and she smiled , with what a smile ! 
on the three portresses . 
Things of this nature were said : -- `` Ah , by the way , is your cat still cross ? '' 
`` Good gracious , cats are naturally the enemies of dogs , you know . 
It 's the dogs who complain . '' 
`` And people also . '' 
`` But the fleas from a cat do n't go after people . '' 
`` That 's not the trouble , dogs are dangerous . 
I remember one year when there were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in the newspapers . 
That was at the time when there were at the Tuileries great sheep that drew the little carriage of the King of Rome . 
Do you remember the King of Rome ? '' 
`` I liked the Duc de Bordeau better . '' 
`` I knew Louis XVIII . 
I prefer Louis XVIII . '' 
`` Meat is awfully dear , is n't it , Mother Patagon ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
do n't mention it , the butcher 's shop is a horror . 
A horrible horror -- one ca n't afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays . '' 
Here the rag-picker interposed : -- `` Ladies , business is dull . 
The refuse heaps are miserable . 
No one throws anything away any more . 
They eat everything . '' 
`` There are poorer people than you , la Vargouleme . '' 
`` Ah , that 's true , '' replied the rag-picker , with deference , `` I have a profession . '' 
A pause succeeded , and the rag-picker , yielding to that necessity for boasting which lies at the bottom of man , added : -- `` In the morning , on my return home , I pick over my basket , I sort my things . 
This makes heaps in my room . 
I put the rags in a basket , the cores and stalks in a bucket , the linen in my cupboard , the woollen stuff in my commode , the old papers in the corner of the window , the things that are good to eat in my bowl , the bits of glass in my fireplace , the old shoes behind my door , and the bones under my bed . '' 
Gavroche had stopped behind her and was listening . 
`` Old ladies , '' said he , `` what do you mean by talking politics ? '' 
He was assailed by a broadside , composed of a quadruple howl . 
`` Here 's another rascal . '' 
`` What 's that he 's got in his paddle ? 
A pistol ? '' 
`` Well , I 'd like to know what sort of a beggar 's brat this is ? '' 
`` That sort of animal is never easy unless he 's overturning the authorities . '' 
Gavroche disdainfully contented himself , by way of reprisal , with elevating the tip of his nose with his thumb and opening his hand wide . 
The rag-picker cried : -- `` You malicious , bare-pawed little wretch ! '' 
The one who answered to the name of Patagon clapped her hands together in horror . 
`` There 's going to be evil doings , that 's certain . 
The errand-boy next door has a little pointed beard , I have seen him pass every day with a young person in a pink bonnet on his arm ; to-day I saw him pass , and he had a gun on his arm . 
Mame Bacheux says , that last week there was a revolution at -- at -- at -- where 's the calf ! 
-- at Pontoise . 
And then , there you see him , that horrid scamp , with his pistol ! 
It seems that the Celestins are full of pistols . 
What do you suppose the Government can do with good-for-nothings who do n't know how to do anything but contrive ways of upsetting the world , when we had just begun to get a little quiet after all the misfortunes that have happened , good Lord ! 
to that poor queen whom I saw pass in the tumbril ! 
And all this is going to make tobacco dearer . 
It 's infamous ! 
And I shall certainly go to see him beheaded on the guillotine , the wretch ! '' 
`` You 've got the sniffles , old lady , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Blow your promontory . '' 
And he passed on . 
When he was in the Rue Pavee , the rag-picker occurred to his mind , and he indulged in this soliloquy : -- `` You 're in the wrong to insult the revolutionists , Mother Dust-Heap-Corner . 
This pistol is in your interests . 
It 's so that you may have more good things to eat in your basket . '' 
All at once , he heard a shout behind him ; it was the portress Patagon who had followed him , and who was shaking her fist at him in the distance and crying : -- `` You 're nothing but a bastard . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Come now , '' said Gavroche , `` I do n't care a brass farthing for that ! '' 
Shortly afterwards , he passed the Hotel Lamoignon . 
There he uttered this appeal : -- `` Forward march to the battle ! '' 
And he was seized with a fit of melancholy . 
He gazed at his pistol with an air of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it : -- `` I 'm going off , '' said he , `` but you wo n't go off ! '' 
One dog may distract the attention from another dog . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- A very gaunt poodle came along at the moment . 
Gavroche felt compassion for him . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- Chien , dog , trigger . 
`` My poor doggy , '' said he , `` you must have gone and swallowed a cask , for all the hoops are visible . '' 
Then he directed his course towards l'Orme-Saint-Gervais . 
JUST INDIGNATION OF A HAIR-DRESSER The worthy hair-dresser who had chased from his shop the two little fellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the elephant was at that moment in his shop engaged in shaving an old soldier of the legion who had served under the Empire . 
They were talking . 
The hair-dresser had , naturally , spoken to the veteran of the riot , then of General Lamarque , and from Lamarque they had passed to the Emperor . 
Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and soldier which Prudhomme , had he been present , would have enriched with arabesques , and which he would have entitled : `` Dialogue between the razor and the sword . '' 
`` How did the Emperor ride , sir ? '' 
said the barber . 
`` Badly . 
He did not know how to fall -- so he never fell . '' 
`` Did he have fine horses ? 
He must have had fine horses ! '' 
`` On the day when he gave me my cross , I noticed his beast . 
It was a racing mare , perfectly white . 
Her ears were very wide apart , her saddle deep , a fine head marked with a black star , a very long neck , strongly articulated knees , prominent ribs , oblique shoulders and a powerful crupper . 
A little more than fifteen hands in height . '' 
`` A pretty horse , '' remarked the hair-dresser . 
`` It was His Majesty 's beast . '' 
The hair-dresser felt , that after this observation , a short silence would be fitting , so he conformed himself to it , and then went on : -- `` The Emperor was never wounded but once , was he , sir ? '' 
The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man who had been there : -- `` In the heel . 
At Ratisbon . 
I never saw him so well dressed as on that day . 
He was as neat as a new sou . '' 
`` And you , Mr. Veteran , you must have been often wounded ? '' 
`` I ? '' 
said the soldier , `` ah ! 
not to amount to anything . 
At Marengo , I received two sabre-blows on the back of my neck , a bullet in the right arm at Austerlitz , another in the left hip at Jena . 
At Friedland , a thrust from a bayonet , there , -- at the Moskowa seven or eight lance-thrusts , no matter where , at Lutzen a splinter of a shell crushed one of my fingers . 
Ah ! 
and then at Waterloo , a ball from a biscaien in the thigh , that 's all . '' 
`` How fine that is ! '' 
exclaimed the hair-dresser , in Pindaric accents , `` to die on the field of battle ! 
On my word of honor , rather than die in bed , of an illness , slowly , a bit by bit each day , with drugs , cataplasms , syringes , medicines , I should prefer to receive a cannon-ball in my belly ! '' 
`` You 're not over fastidious , '' said the soldier . 
He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop . 
The show-window had suddenly been fractured . 
The wig-maker turned pale . 
`` Ah , good God ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` it 's one of them ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` A cannon-ball . '' 
`` Here it is , '' said the soldier . 
And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor . 
It was a pebble . 
The hair-dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeing at the full speed , towards the Marche Saint-Jean . 
As he passed the hair-dresser 's shop Gavroche , who had the two brats still in his mind , had not been able to resist the impulse to say good day to him , and had flung a stone through his panes . 
`` You see ! '' 
shrieked the hair-dresser , who from white had turned blue , `` that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it . 
What has any one done to that gamin ? '' 
THE CHILD IS AMAZED AT THE OLD MAN In the meantime , in the Marche Saint-Jean , where the post had already been disarmed , Gavroche had just `` effected a junction '' with a band led by Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Feuilly . 
They were armed after a fashion . 
Bahorel and Jean Prouvaire had found them and swelled the group . 
Enjolras had a double-barrelled hunting-gun , Combeferre the gun of a National Guard bearing the number of his legion , and in his belt , two pistols which his unbuttoned coat allowed to be seen , Jean Prouvaire an old cavalry musket , Bahorel a rifle ; Courfeyrac was brandishing an unsheathed sword-cane . 
Feuilly , with a naked sword in his hand , marched at their head shouting : `` Long live Poland ! '' 
They reached the Quai Morland . 
Cravatless , hatless , breathless , soaked by the rain , with lightning in their eyes . 
Gavroche accosted them calmly : -- `` Where are we going ? '' 
`` Come along , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Behind Feuilly marched , or rather bounded , Bahorel , who was like a fish in water in a riot . 
He wore a scarlet waistcoat , and indulged in the sort of words which break everything . 
His waistcoat astounded a passer-by , who cried in bewilderment : -- `` Here are the reds ! '' 
`` The reds , the reds ! '' 
retorted Bahorel . 
`` A queer kind of fear , bourgeois . 
For my part I do n't tremble before a poppy , the little red hat inspires me with no alarm . 
Take my advice , bourgeois , let 's leave fear of the red to horned cattle . '' 
He caught sight of a corner of the wall on which was placarded the most peaceable sheet of paper in the world , a permission to eat eggs , a Lenten admonition addressed by the Archbishop of Paris to his `` flock . '' 
Bahorel exclaimed : -- '' ` Flock ' ; a polite way of saying geese . '' 
And he tore the charge from the nail . 
This conquered Gavroche . 
From that instant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel . 
`` Bahorel , '' observed Enjolras , `` you are wrong . 
You should have let that charge alone , he is not the person with whom we have to deal , you are wasting your wrath to no purpose . 
Take care of your supply . 
One does not fire out of the ranks with the soul any more than with a gun . '' 
`` Each one in his own fashion , Enjolras , '' retorted Bahorel . 
`` This bishop 's prose shocks me ; I want to eat eggs without being permitted . 
Your style is the hot and cold ; I am amusing myself . 
Besides , I 'm not wasting myself , I 'm getting a start ; and if I tore down that charge , Hercle ! 
't was only to whet my appetite . '' 
This word , Hercle , struck Gavroche . 
He sought all occasions for learning , and that tearer-down of posters possessed his esteem . 
He inquired of him : -- `` What does Hercle mean ? '' 
Bahorel answered : -- `` It means cursed name of a dog , in Latin . '' 
Here Bahorel recognized at a window a pale young man with a black beard who was watching them as they passed , probably a Friend of the A B C . 
He shouted to him : -- `` Quick , cartridges , para bellum . '' 
`` A fine man ! 
that 's true , '' said Gavroche , who now understood Latin . 
A tumultuous retinue accompanied them , -- students , artists , young men affiliated to the Cougourde of Aix , artisans , longshoremen , armed with clubs and bayonets ; some , like Combeferre , with pistols thrust into their trousers . 
An old man , who appeared to be extremely aged , was walking in the band . 
He had no arms , and he made great haste , so that he might not be left behind , although he had a thoughtful air . 
Gavroche caught sight of him : -- `` Keksekca ? '' 
said he to Courfeyrac . 
`` He 's an old duffer . '' 
It was M. Mabeuf . 
THE OLD MAN Let us recount what had taken place . 
Enjolras and his friends had been on the Boulevard Bourdon , near the public storehouses , at the moment when the dragoons had made their charge . 
Enjolras , Courfeyrac , and Combeferre were among those who had taken to the Rue Bassompierre , shouting : `` To the barricades ! '' 
In the Rue Lesdiguieres they had met an old man walking along . 
What had attracted their attention was that the goodman was walking in a zig-zag , as though he were intoxicated . 
Moreover , he had his hat in his hand , although it had been raining all the morning , and was raining pretty briskly at the very time . 
Courfeyrac had recognized Father Mabeuf . 
He knew him through having many times accompanied Marius as far as his door . 
As he was acquainted with the peaceful and more than timid habits of the old beadle-book-collector , and was amazed at the sight of him in the midst of that uproar , a couple of paces from the cavalry charges , almost in the midst of a fusillade , hatless in the rain , and strolling about among the bullets , he had accosted him , and the following dialogue had been exchanged between the rioter of fire and the octogenarian : -- `` M. Mabeuf , go to your home . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` There 's going to be a row . '' 
`` That 's well . '' 
`` Thrusts with the sword and firing , M. Mabeuf . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` Firing from cannon . '' 
`` That is good . 
Where are the rest of you going ? '' 
`` We are going to fling the government to the earth . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
And he had set out to follow them . 
From that moment forth he had not uttered a word . 
His step had suddenly become firm ; artisans had offered him their arms ; he had refused with a sign of the head . 
He advanced nearly to the front rank of the column , with the movement of a man who is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping . 
`` What a fierce old fellow ! '' 
muttered the students . 
The rumor spread through the troop that he was a former member of the Convention , -- an old regicide . 
The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie . 
Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of him a sort of trumpet . 
He sang : `` Voici la lune qui paratt , Quand irons-nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tou tou tou Pour Chatou . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Pour avoir bu de grand matin La rosee a meme le thym , Deux moineaux etaient en ribotte . 
Zi zi zi Pour Passy . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Et ces deux pauvres petits loups , Comme deux grives estaient souls ; Une tigre en riait dans sa grotte . 
Don don don Pour Meudon . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` L'un jurait et l'autre sacrait . 
Quand irons nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tin tin tin Pour Pantin . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . '' 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- They directed their course towards Saint-Merry . 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- Here is the morn appearing . 
When shall we go to the forest , Charlot asked Charlotte . 
Tou , tou , tou , for Chatou , I have but one God , one King , one half-farthing , and one boot . 
And these two poor little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme very early in the morning . 
And these two poor little things were as drunk as thrushes in a vineyard ; a tiger laughed at them in his cave . 
The one cursed , the other swore . 
When shall we go to the forest ? 
Charlot asked Charlotte . 
RECRUITS The band augmented every moment . 
Near the Rue des Billettes , a man of lofty stature , whose hair was turning gray , and whose bold and daring mien was remarked by Courfeyrac , Enjolras , and Combeferre , but whom none of them knew , joined them . 
Gavroche , who was occupied in singing , whistling , humming , running on ahead and pounding on the shutters of the shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol ; paid no attention to this man . 
It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie , they passed in front of Courfeyrac 's door . 
`` This happens just right , '' said Courfeyrac , `` I have forgotten my purse , and I have lost my hat . '' 
He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed . 
He seized an old hat and his purse . 
He also seized a large square coffer , of the dimensions of a large valise , which was concealed under his soiled linen . 
As he descended again at a run , the portress hailed him : -- `` Monsieur de Courfeyrac ! '' 
`` What 's your name , portress ? '' 
The portress stood bewildered . 
`` Why , you know perfectly well , I 'm the concierge ; my name is Mother Veuvain . '' 
`` Well , if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again , I shall call you Mother de Veuvain . 
Now speak , what 's the matter ? 
What do you want ? '' 
`` There is some one who wants to speak with you . '' 
`` Who is it ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` In my lodge . '' 
`` The devil ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` But the person has been waiting your return for over an hour , '' said the portress . 
At the same time , a sort of pale , thin , small , freckled , and youthful artisan , clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbed velvet , and who had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than of a man , emerged from the lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice which was not the least in the world like a woman 's voice : -- `` Monsieur Marius , if you please . '' 
`` He is not here . '' 
`` Will he return this evening ? '' 
`` I know nothing about it . '' 
And Courfeyrac added : -- `` For my part , I shall not return . '' 
The young man gazed steadily at him and said : -- `` Why not ? '' 
`` Because . '' 
`` Where are you going , then ? '' 
`` What business is that of yours ? '' 
`` Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you ? '' 
`` I am going to the barricades . '' 
`` Would you like to have me go with you ? '' 
`` If you like ! '' 
replied Courfeyrac . 
`` The street is free , the pavements belong to every one . '' 
And he made his escape at a run to join his friends . 
When he had rejoined them , he gave the coffer to one of them to carry . 
It was only a quarter of an hour after this that he saw the young man , who had actually followed them . 
A mob does not go precisely where it intends . 
We have explained that a gust of wind carries it away . 
They overshot Saint-Merry and found themselves , without precisely knowing how , in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION The Parisians who nowadays on entering on the Rue Rambuteau at the end near the Halles , notice on their right , opposite the Rue Mondetour , a basket-maker 's shop having for its sign a basket in the form of Napoleon the Great with this inscription : -- NAPOLEON IS MADE WHOLLY OF WILLOW , have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessed hardly thirty years ago . 
It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie , which ancient deeds spell Chanverrerie , and the celebrated public-house called Corinthe . 
The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricade effected at this point , and eclipsed , by the way , by the barricade Saint-Merry . 
It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , now fallen into profound obscurity , that we are about to shed a little light . 
May we be permitted to recur , for the sake of clearness in the recital , to the simple means which we have already employed in the case of Waterloo . 
Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably exact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epoch near the Pointe Saint-Eustache , at the northeast angle of the Halles of Paris , where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau , have only to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and the Halles with its base , and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue de la Grande-Truanderie , and the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and whose transverse bar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The old Rue Mondetour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked angles . 
So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to form , on a space three fathoms square , between the Halles and the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand , and between the Rue du Cygne and the Rue des Precheurs on the other , seven islands of houses , oddly cut up , of varying sizes , placed crosswise and hap-hazard , and barely separated , like the blocks of stone in a dock , by narrow crannies . 
We say narrow crannies , and we can give no more just idea of those dark , contracted , many-angled alleys , lined with eight-story buildings . 
These buildings were so decrepit that , in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie , the fronts were shored up with beams running from one house to another . 
The street was narrow and the gutter broad , the pedestrian there walked on a pavement that was always wet , skirting little stalls resembling cellars , big posts encircled with iron hoops , excessive heaps of refuse , and gates armed with enormous , century-old gratings . 
The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that . 
The name of Mondetour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of that whole set of streets . 
A little further on , they are found still better expressed by the Rue Pirouette , which ran into the Rue Mondetour . 
The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue de la Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had entered an elongated funnel . 
At the end of this street , which was very short , he found further passage barred in the direction of the Halles by a tall row of houses , and he would have thought himself in a blind alley , had he not perceived on the right and left two dark cuts through which he could make his escape . 
This was the Rue Mondetour , which on one side ran into the Rue de Precheurs , and on the other into the Rue du Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie . 
At the bottom of this sort of cul-de-sac , at the angle of the cutting on the right , there was to be seen a house which was not so tall as the rest , and which formed a sort of cape in the street . 
It is in this house , of two stories only , that an illustrious wine-shop had been merrily installed three hundred years before . 
This tavern created a joyous noise in the very spot which old Theophilus described in the following couplet : -- La branle le squelette horrible D'un pauvre amant qui se pendit . 
-LSB- 47 -RSB- -LSB- 47 -RSB- There swings the horrible skeleton of a poor lover who hung himself . 
The situation was good , and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there , from father to son . 
In the time of Mathurin Regnier , this cabaret was called the Pot-aux-Roses , and as the rebus was then in fashion , it had for its sign-board , a post -LRB- poteau -RRB- painted rose-color . 
In the last century , the worthy Natoire , one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised by the stiff school , having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at the very table where Regnier had drunk his fill , had painted , by way of gratitude , a bunch of Corinth grapes on the pink post . 
The keeper of the cabaret , in his joy , had changed his device and had caused to be placed in gilt letters beneath the bunch these words : `` At the Bunch of Corinth Grapes '' -LRB- `` Au Raisin de Corinthe '' -RRB- . 
Hence the name of Corinthe . 
Nothing is more natural to drunken men than ellipses . 
The ellipsis is the zig-zag of the phrase . 
Corinthe gradually dethroned the Pot-aux-Roses . 
The last proprietor of the dynasty , Father Hucheloup , no longer acquainted even with the tradition , had the post painted blue . 
A room on the ground floor , where the bar was situated , one on the first floor containing a billiard-table , a wooden spiral staircase piercing the ceiling , wine on the tables , smoke on the walls , candles in broad daylight , -- this was the style of this cabaret . 
A staircase with a trap-door in the lower room led to the cellar . 
On the second floor were the lodgings of the Hucheloup family . 
They were reached by a staircase which was a ladder rather than a staircase , and had for their entrance only a private door in the large room on the first floor . 
Under the roof , in two mansard attics , were the nests for the servants . 
The kitchen shared the ground-floor with the tap-room . 
Father Hucheloup had , possibly , been born a chemist , but the fact is that he was a cook ; people did not confine themselves to drinking alone in his wine-shop , they also ate there . 
Hucheloup had invented a capital thing which could be eaten nowhere but in his house , stuffed carps , which he called carpes au gras . 
These were eaten by the light of a tallow candle or of a lamp of the time of Louis XVI. , on tables to which were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of table-cloths . 
People came thither from a distance . 
Hucheloup , one fine morning , had seen fit to notify passers-by of this `` specialty '' ; he had dipped a brush in a pot of black paint , and as he was an orthographer on his own account , as well as a cook after his own fashion , he had improvised on his wall this remarkable inscription : -- CARPES HO GRAS . 
One winter , the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to obliterate the S which terminated the first word , and the G which began the third ; this is what remained : -- CARPE HO RAS . 
Time and rain assisting , a humble gastronomical announcement had become a profound piece of advice . 
In this way it came about , that though he knew no French , Father Hucheloup understood Latin , that he had evoked philosophy from his kitchen , and that , desirous simply of effacing Lent , he had equalled Horace . 
And the striking thing about it was , that that also meant : `` Enter my wine-shop . '' 
Nothing of all this is in existence now . 
The Mondetour labyrinth was disembowelled and widely opened in 1847 , and probably no longer exists at the present moment . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe have disappeared beneath the pavement of the Rue Rambuteau . 
As we have already said , Corinthe was the meeting-place if not the rallying-point , of Courfeyrac and his friends . 
It was Grantaire who had discovered Corinthe . 
He had entered it on account of the Carpe horas , and had returned thither on account of the Carpes au gras . 
There they drank , there they ate , there they shouted ; they did not pay much , they paid badly , they did not pay at all , but they were always welcome . 
Father Hucheloup was a jovial host . 
Hucheloup , that amiable man , as was just said , was a wine-shop-keeper with a mustache ; an amusing variety . 
He always had an ill-tempered air , seemed to wish to intimidate his customers , grumbled at the people who entered his establishment , and had rather the mien of seeking a quarrel with them than of serving them with soup . 
And yet , we insist upon the word , people were always welcome there . 
This oddity had attracted customers to his shop , and brought him young men , who said to each other : `` Come hear Father Hucheloup growl . '' 
He had been a fencing-master . 
All of a sudden , he would burst out laughing . 
A big voice , a good fellow . 
He had a comic foundation under a tragic exterior , he asked nothing better than to frighten you , very much like those snuff-boxes which are in the shape of a pistol . 
The detonation makes one sneeze . 
Mother Hucheloup , his wife , was a bearded and a very homely creature . 
About 1830 , Father Hucheloup died . 
With him disappeared the secret of stuffed carps . 
His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop . 
But the cooking deteriorated , and became execrable ; the wine , which had always been bad , became fearfully bad . 
Nevertheless , Courfeyrac and his friends continued to go to Corinthe , -- out of pity , as Bossuet said . 
The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rustic recollections . 
She deprived them of their flatness by her pronunciation . 
She had a way of her own of saying things , which spiced her reminiscences of the village and of her springtime . 
It had formerly been her delight , so she affirmed , to hear the loups-de-gorge -LRB- rouges-gorges -RRB- chanter dans les ogrepines -LRB- aubepines -RRB- -- to hear the redbreasts sing in the hawthorn-trees . 
The hall on the first floor , where `` the restaurant '' was situated , was a large and long apartment encumbered with stools , chairs , benches , and tables , and with a crippled , lame , old billiard-table . 
It was reached by a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a square hole like the hatchway of a ship . 
This room , lighted by a single narrow window , and by a lamp that was always burning , had the air of a garret . 
All the four-footed furniture comported itself as though it had but three legs -- the whitewashed walls had for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup : -- Elle etonne a dix pas , elle epouvente a deux , Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux ; On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche Et qu'un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche . 
-LSB- 48 -RSB- -LSB- 48 -RSB- She astounds at ten paces , she frightens at two , a wart inhabits her hazardous nose ; you tremble every instant lest she should blow it at you , and lest , some fine day , her nose should tumble into her mouth . 
This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall . 
Mame Hucheloup , a good likeness , went and came from morning till night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity . 
Two serving-maids , named Matelote and Gibelotte , -LSB- 49 -RSB- and who had never been known by any other names , helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine , and the various broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls . 
Matelote , large , plump , redhaired , and noisy , the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup , was homelier than any mythological monster , be it what it may ; still , as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress , she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup . 
Gibelotte , tall , delicate , white with a lymphatic pallor , with circles round her eyes , and drooping lids , always languid and weary , afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude , the first up in the house and the last in bed , waited on every one , even the other maid , silently and gently , smiling through her fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile . 
-LSB- 49 -RSB- Matelote : a culinary preparation of various fishes . 
Gibelotte : stewed rabbits . 
Before entering the restaurant room , the visitor read on the door the following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac : -- Regale si tu peux et mange si tu l'oses . 
-LSB- 50 -RSB- -LSB- 50 -RSB- Treat if you can , and eat if you dare . 
PRELIMINARY GAYETIES Laigle de Meaux , as the reader knows , lived more with Joly than elsewhere . 
He had a lodging , as a bird has one on a branch . 
The two friends lived together , ate together , slept together . 
They had everything in common , even Musichetta , to some extent . 
They were , what the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called , bini . 
On the morning of the 5th of June , they went to Corinthe to breakfast . 
Joly , who was all stuffed up , had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning to share . 
Laigle 's coat was threadbare , but Joly was well dressed . 
It was about nine o'clock in the morning , when they opened the door of Corinthe . 
They ascended to the first floor . 
Matelote and Gibelotte received them . 
`` Oysters , cheese , and ham , '' said Laigle . 
And they seated themselves at a table . 
The wine-shop was empty ; there was no one there but themselves . 
Gibelotte , knowing Joly and Laigle , set a bottle of wine on the table . 
While they were busy with their first oysters , a head appeared at the hatchway of the staircase , and a voice said : -- `` I am passing by . 
I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie cheese . 
I enter . '' 
It was Grantaire . 
Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table . 
At the sight of Grantaire , Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the table . 
That made three . 
`` Are you going to drink those two bottles ? '' 
Laigle inquired of Grantaire . 
Grantaire replied : -- `` All are ingenious , thou alone art ingenuous . 
Two bottles never yet astonished a man . '' 
The others had begun by eating , Grantaire began by drinking . 
Half a bottle was rapidly gulped down . 
`` So you have a hole in your stomach ? '' 
began Laigle again . 
`` You have one in your elbow , '' said Grantaire . 
And after having emptied his glass , he added : -- `` Ah , by the way , Laigle of the funeral oration , your coat is old . '' 
`` I should hope so , '' retorted Laigle . 
`` That 's why we get on well together , my coat and I . 
It has acquired all my folds , it does not bind me anywhere , it is moulded on my deformities , it falls in with all my movements , I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm . 
Old coats are just like old friends . '' 
`` That 's true , '' ejaculated Joly , striking into the dialogue , `` an old goat is an old abi '' -LRB- ami , friend -RRB- . 
`` Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up , '' said Grantaire . 
`` Grantaire , '' demanded Laigle , `` have you just come from the boulevard ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` We have just seen the head of the procession pass , Joly and I. '' `` It 's a marvellous sight , '' said Joly . 
`` How quiet this street is ! '' 
exclaimed Laigle . 
`` Who would suspect that Paris was turned upside down ? 
How plainly it is to be seen that in former days there were nothing but convents here ! 
In this neighborhood ! 
Du Breul and Sauval give a list of them , and so does the Abbe Lebeuf . 
They were all round here , they fairly swarmed , booted and barefooted , shaven , bearded , gray , black , white , Franciscans , Minims , Capuchins , Carmelites , Little Augustines , Great Augustines , old Augustines -- there was no end of them . '' 
`` Do n't let 's talk of monks , '' interrupted Grantaire , `` it makes one want to scratch one 's self . '' 
Then he exclaimed : -- `` Bouh ! 
I 've just swallowed a bad oyster . 
Now hypochondria is taking possession of me again . 
The oysters are spoiled , the servants are ugly . 
I hate the human race . 
I just passed through the Rue Richelieu , in front of the big public library . 
That pile of oyster-shells which is called a library is disgusting even to think of . 
What paper ! 
What ink ! 
What scrawling ! 
And all that has been written ! 
What rascal was it who said that man was a featherless biped ? 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- And then , I met a pretty girl of my acquaintance , who is as beautiful as the spring , worthy to be called Floreal , and who is delighted , enraptured , as happy as the angels , because a wretch yesterday , a frightful banker all spotted with small-pox , deigned to take a fancy to her ! 
Alas ! 
woman keeps on the watch for a protector as much as for a lover ; cats chase mice as well as birds . 
Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic , she adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets , what do you call it ? 
She sewed , she had a camp bed , she dwelt beside a pot of flowers , she was contented . 
Now here she is a bankeress . 
This transformation took place last night . 
I met the victim this morning in high spirits . 
The hideous point about it is , that the jade is as pretty to-day as she was yesterday . 
Her financier did not show in her face . 
Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women , that the traces left upon them by caterpillars are visible . 
Ah ! 
there is no morality on earth . 
I call to witness the myrtle , the symbol of love , the laurel , the symbol of air , the olive , that ninny , the symbol of peace , the apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips , and the fig-tree , the grandfather of petticoats . 
As for right , do you know what right is ? 
The Gauls covet Clusium , Rome protects Clusium , and demands what wrong Clusium has done to them . 
Brennus answers : ` The wrong that Alba did to you , the wrong that Fidenae did to you , the wrong that the Eques , the Volsci , and the Sabines have done to you . 
They were your neighbors . 
The Clusians are ours . 
We understand neighborliness just as you do . 
You have stolen Alba , we shall take Clusium . ' 
Rome said : ` You shall not take Clusium . ' 
Brennus took Rome . 
Then he cried : ` Vae victis ! ' 
That is what right is . 
Ah ! 
what beasts of prey there are in this world ! 
What eagles ! 
It makes my flesh creep . '' 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- Bipede sans plume : biped without feathers -- pen . 
He held out his glass to Joly , who filled it , then he drank and went on , having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine , of which no one , not even himself , had taken any notice : -- `` Brennus , who takes Rome , is an eagle ; the banker who takes the grisette is an eagle . 
There is no more modesty in the one case than in the other . 
So we believe in nothing . 
There is but one reality : drink . 
Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock , like the Canton of Uri , or in favor of the fat cock , like the Canton of Glaris , it matters little , drink . 
You talk to me of the boulevard , of that procession , et caetera , et caetera . 
Come now , is there going to be another revolution ? 
This poverty of means on the part of the good God astounds me . 
He has to keep greasing the groove of events every moment . 
There is a hitch , it wo n't work . 
Quick , a revolution ! 
The good God has his hands perpetually black with that cart-grease . 
If I were in his place , I 'd be perfectly simple about it , I would not wind up my mechanism every minute , I 'd lead the human race in a straightforward way , I 'd weave matters mesh by mesh , without breaking the thread , I would have no provisional arrangements , I would have no extraordinary repertory . 
What the rest of you call progress advances by means of two motors , men and events . 
But , sad to say , from time to time , the exceptional becomes necessary . 
The ordinary troupe suffices neither for event nor for men : among men geniuses are required , among events revolutions . 
Great accidents are the law ; the order of things can not do without them ; and , judging from the apparition of comets , one would be tempted to think that Heaven itself finds actors needed for its performance . 
At the moment when one expects it the least , God placards a meteor on the wall of the firmament . 
Some queer star turns up , underlined by an enormous tail . 
And that causes the death of Caesar . 
Brutus deals him a blow with a knife , and God a blow with a comet . 
Crac , and behold an aurora borealis , behold a revolution , behold a great man ; '93 in big letters , Napoleon on guard , the comet of 1811 at the head of the poster . 
Ah ! 
what a beautiful blue theatre all studded with unexpected flashes ! 
Boum ! 
Boum ! 
extraordinary show ! 
Raise your eyes , boobies . 
Everything is in disorder , the star as well as the drama . 
Good God , it is too much and not enough . 
These resources , gathered from exception , seem magnificence and poverty . 
My friends , Providence has come down to expedients . 
What does a revolution prove ? 
That God is in a quandry . 
He effects a coup d'etat because he , God , has not been able to make both ends meet . 
In fact , this confirms me in my conjectures as to Jehovah 's fortune ; and when I see so much distress in heaven and on earth , from the bird who has not a grain of millet to myself without a hundred thousand livres of income , when I see human destiny , which is very badly worn , and even royal destiny , which is threadbare , witness the Prince de Conde hung , when I see winter , which is nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows , when I see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on the crests of hills , when I see the drops of dew , those mock pearls , when I see the frost , that paste , when I see humanity ripped apart and events patched up , and so many spots on the sun and so many holes in the moon , when I see so much misery everywhere , I suspect that God is not rich . 
The appearance exists , it is true , but I feel that he is hard up . 
He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose money-box is empty gives a ball . 
God must not be judged from appearances . 
Beneath the gilding of heaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe . 
Creation is bankrupt . 
That is why I am discontented . 
Here it is the 4th of June , it is almost night ; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight to come ; it has not come , and I bet that it wo n't come all day . 
This is the inexactness of an ill-paid clerk . 
Yes , everything is badly arranged , nothing fits anything else , this old world is all warped , I take my stand on the opposition , everything goes awry ; the universe is a tease . 
It 's like children , those who want them have none , and those who do n't want them have them . 
Total : I 'm vexed . 
Besides , Laigle de Meaux , that bald-head , offends my sight . 
It humiliates me to think that I am of the same age as that baldy . 
However , I criticise , but I do not insult . 
The universe is what it is . 
I speak here without evil intent and to ease my conscience . 
Receive , Eternal Father , the assurance of my distinguished consideration . 
Ah ! 
by all the saints of Olympus and by all the gods of paradise , I was not intended to be a Parisian , that is to say , to rebound forever , like a shuttlecock between two battledores , from the group of the loungers to the group of the roysterers . 
I was made to be a Turk , watching oriental houris all day long , executing those exquisite Egyptian dances , as sensuous as the dream of a chaste man , or a Beauceron peasant , or a Venetian gentleman surrounded by gentlewoman , or a petty German prince , furnishing the half of a foot-soldier to the Germanic confederation , and occupying his leisure with drying his breeches on his hedge , that is to say , his frontier . 
Those are the positions for which I was born ! 
Yes , I have said a Turk , and I will not retract . 
I do not understand how people can habitually take Turks in bad part ; Mohammed had his good points ; respect for the inventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques ! 
Let us not insult Mohammedanism , the only religion which is ornamented with a hen-roost ! 
Now , I insist on a drink . 
The earth is a great piece of stupidity . 
And it appears that they are going to fight , all those imbeciles , and to break each other 's profiles and to massacre each other in the heart of summer , in the month of June , when they might go off with a creature on their arm , to breathe the immense heaps of new-mown hay in the meadows ! 
Really , people do commit altogether too many follies . 
An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a bric-a-brac merchant 's suggests a reflection to my mind ; it is time to enlighten the human race . 
Yes , behold me sad again . 
That 's what comes of swallowing an oyster and a revolution the wrong way ! 
I am growing melancholy once more . 
Oh ! 
frightful old world . 
People strive , turn each other out , prostitute themselves , kill each other , and get used to it ! '' 
And Grantaire , after this fit of eloquence , had a fit of coughing , which was well earned . 
`` A propos of revolution , '' said Joly , `` it is decidedly abberent that Barius is in lub . '' 
`` Does any one know with whom ? '' 
demanded Laigle . 
`` Do . '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` Do ! 
I tell you . '' 
`` Marius ' love affairs ! '' 
exclaimed Grantaire . 
`` I can imagine it . 
Marius is a fog , and he must have found a vapor . 
Marius is of the race of poets . 
He who says poet , says fool , madman , Tymbraeus Apollo . 
Marius and his Marie , or his Marion , or his Maria , or his Mariette . 
They must make a queer pair of lovers . 
I know just what it is like . 
Ecstasies in which they forget to kiss . 
Pure on earth , but joined in heaven . 
They are souls possessed of senses . 
They lie among the stars . '' 
Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and , possibly , his second harangue , when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the stairs . 
It was a boy less than ten years of age , ragged , very small , yellow , with an odd phiz , a vivacious eye , an enormous amount of hair drenched with rain , and wearing a contented air . 
The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three , addressed himself to Laigle de Meaux . 
`` Are you Monsieur Bossuet ? '' 
`` That is my nickname , '' replied Laigle . 
`` What do you want with me ? '' 
`` This . 
A tall blonde fellow on the boulevard said to me : ` Do you know Mother Hucheloup ? ' 
I said : ` Yes , Rue Chanvrerie , the old man 's widow ; ' he said to me : ` Go there . 
There you will find M. Bossuet . 
Tell him from me : `` A B C '' . ' 
It 's a joke that they 're playing on you , is n't it . 
He gave me ten sous . '' 
`` Joly , lend me ten sous , '' said Laigle ; and , turning to Grantaire : `` Grantaire , lend me ten sous . '' 
This made twenty sous , which Laigle handed to the lad . 
`` Thank you , sir , '' said the urchin . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
inquired Laigle . 
`` Navet , Gavroche 's friend . '' 
`` Stay with us , '' said Laigle . 
`` Breakfast with us , '' said Grantaire , The child replied : -- `` I ca n't , I belong in the procession , I 'm the one to shout ` Down with Polignac ! ' '' 
And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him , which is the most respectful of all possible salutes , he took his departure . 
The child gone , Grantaire took the word : -- `` That is the pure-bred gamin . 
There are a great many varieties of the gamin species . 
The notary 's gamin is called Skip-the-Gutter , the cook 's gamin is called a scullion , the baker 's gamin is called a mitron , the lackey 's gamin is called a groom , the marine gamin is called the cabin-boy , the soldier 's gamin is called the drummer-boy , the painter 's gamin is called paint-grinder , the tradesman 's gamin is called an errand-boy , the courtesan gamin is called the minion , the kingly gamin is called the dauphin , the god gamin is called the bambino . '' 
In the meantime , Laigle was engaged in reflection ; he said half aloud : -- `` A B C , that is to say : the burial of Lamarque . '' 
`` The tall blonde , '' remarked Grantaire , `` is Enjolras , who is sending you a warning . '' 
`` Shall we go ? '' 
ejaculated Bossuet . 
`` It 's raiding , '' said Joly . 
`` I have sworn to go through fire , but not through water . 
I do n't wand to ged a gold . '' 
`` I shall stay here , '' said Grantaire . 
`` I prefer a breakfast to a hearse . '' 
`` Conclusion : we remain , '' said Laigle . 
`` Well , then , let us drink . 
Besides , we might miss the funeral without missing the riot . '' 
`` Ah ! 
the riot , I am with you ! '' 
cried Joly . 
Laigle rubbed his hands . 
`` Now we 're going to touch up the revolution of 1830 . 
As a matter of fact , it does hurt the people along the seams . '' 
`` I do n't think much of your revolution , '' said Grantaire . 
`` I do n't execrate this Government . 
It is the crown tempered by the cotton night-cap . 
It is a sceptre ending in an umbrella . 
In fact , I think that to-day , with the present weather , Louis Philippe might utilize his royalty in two directions , he might extend the tip of the sceptre end against the people , and open the umbrella end against heaven . '' 
The room was dark , large clouds had just finished the extinction of daylight . 
There was no one in the wine-shop , or in the street , every one having gone off `` to watch events . '' 
`` Is it mid-day or midnight ? '' 
cried Bossuet . 
`` You ca n't see your hand before your face . 
Gibelotte , fetch a light . '' 
Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way . 
`` Enjolras disdains me , '' he muttered . 
