Twenty months had barely elapsed since the Revolution of July , the year 1832 had opened with an aspect of something impending and threatening . 
The distress of the people , the laborers without bread , the last Prince de Conde engulfed in the shadows , Brussels expelling the Nassaus as Paris did the Bourbons , Belgium offering herself to a French Prince and giving herself to an English Prince , the Russian hatred of Nicolas , behind us the demons of the South , Ferdinand in Spain , Miguel in Portugal , the earth quaking in Italy , Metternich extending his hand over Bologna , France treating Austria sharply at Ancona , at the North no one knew what sinister sound of the hammer nailing up Poland in her coffin , irritated glances watching France narrowly all over Europe , England , a suspected ally , ready to give a push to that which was tottering and to hurl herself on that which should fall , the peerage sheltering itself behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law , the fleurs-de-lys erased from the King 's carriage , the cross torn from Notre Dame , Lafayette lessened , Laffitte ruined , Benjamin Constant dead in indigence , Casimir Perier dead in the exhaustion of his power ; political and social malady breaking out simultaneously in the two capitals of the kingdom , the one in the city of thought , the other in the city of toil ; at Paris civil war , at Lyons servile war ; in the two cities , the same glare of the furnace ; a crater-like crimson on the brow of the people ; the South rendered fanatic , the West troubled , the Duchesse de Berry in la Vendee , plots , conspiracies , risings , cholera , added the sombre roar of tumult of events to the sombre roar of ideas . 
FACTS WHENCE HISTORY SPRINGS AND WHICH HISTORY IGNORES Towards the end of April , everything had become aggravated . 
The fermentation entered the boiling state . 
Ever since 1830 , petty partial revolts had been going on here and there , which were quickly suppressed , but ever bursting forth afresh , the sign of a vast underlying conflagration . 
Something terrible was in preparation . 
Glimpses could be caught of the features still indistinct and imperfectly lighted , of a possible revolution . 
France kept an eye on Paris ; Paris kept an eye on the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which was in a dull glow , was beginning its ebullition . 
The wine-shops of the Rue de Charonne were , although the union of the two epithets seems singular when applied to wine-shops , grave and stormy . 
The government was there purely and simply called in question . 
There people publicly discussed the question of fighting or of keeping quiet . 
There were back shops where workingmen were made to swear that they would hasten into the street at the first cry of alarm , and `` that they would fight without counting the number of the enemy . '' 
This engagement once entered into , a man seated in the corner of the wine-shop `` assumed a sonorous tone , '' and said , `` You understand ! 
You have sworn ! '' 
Sometimes they went up stairs , to a private room on the first floor , and there scenes that were almost masonic were enacted . 
They made the initiated take oaths to render service to himself as well as to the fathers of families . 
That was the formula . 
In the tap-rooms , `` subversive '' pamphlets were read . 
They treated the government with contempt , says a secret report of that time . 
Words like the following could be heard there : -- `` I do n't know the names of the leaders . 
We folks shall not know the day until two hours beforehand . '' 
One workman said : `` There are three hundred of us , let each contribute ten sous , that will make one hundred and fifty francs with which to procure powder and shot . '' 
Another said : `` I do n't ask for six months , I do n't ask for even two . 
In less than a fortnight we shall be parallel with the government . 
With twenty-five thousand men we can face them . '' 
Another said : `` I do n't sleep at night , because I make cartridges all night . '' 
From time to time , men `` of bourgeois appearance , and in good coats '' came and `` caused embarrassment , '' and with the air of `` command , '' shook hands with the most important , and then went away . 
They never stayed more than ten minutes . 
Significant remarks were exchanged in a low tone : `` The plot is ripe , the matter is arranged . '' 
`` It was murmured by all who were there , '' to borrow the very expression of one of those who were present . 
The exaltation was such that one day , a workingman exclaimed , efore the whole wine-shop : `` We have no arms ! '' 
One of his comrades replied : `` The soldiers have ! '' 
thus parodying without being aware of the fact , Bonaparte 's proclamation to the army in Italy : `` When they had anything of a more secret nature on hand , '' adds one report , `` they did not communicate it to each other . '' 
It is not easy to understand what they could conceal after what they said . 
These reunions were sometimes periodical . 
At certain ones of them , there were never more than eight or ten persons present , and they were always the same . 
In others , any one entered who wished , and the room was so full that they were forced to stand . 
Some went thither through enthusiasm and passion ; others because it was on their way to their work . 
As during the Revolution , there were patriotic women in some of these wine-shops who embraced new-comers . 
Other expressive facts came to light . 
A man would enter a shop , drink , and go his way with the remark : `` Wine-merchant , the revolution will pay what is due to you . '' 
Revolutionary agents were appointed in a wine-shop facing the Rue de Charonne . 
The balloting was carried on in their caps . 
Workingmen met at the house of a fencing-master who gave lessons in the Rue de Cotte . 
There there was a trophy of arms formed of wooden broadswords , canes , clubs , and foils . 
One day , the buttons were removed from the foils . 
A workman said : `` There are twenty-five of us , but they do n't count on me , because I am looked upon as a machine . '' 
Later on , that machine became Quenisset . 
The indefinite things which were brewing gradually acquired a strange and indescribable notoriety . 
A woman sweeping off her doorsteps said to another woman : `` For a long time , there has been a strong force busy making cartridges . '' 
In the open street , proclamation could be seen addressed to the National Guard in the departments . 
One of these proclamations was signed : Burtot , wine-merchant . 
One day a man with his beard worn like a collar and with an Italian accent mounted a stone post at the door of a liquor-seller in the Marche Lenoir , and read aloud a singular document , which seemed to emanate from an occult power . 
Groups formed around him , and applauded . 
The passages which touched the crowd most deeply were collected and noted down . '' 
-- Our doctrines are trammelled , our proclamations torn , our bill-stickers are spied upon and thrown into prison . '' 
-- `` The breakdown which has recently taken place in cottons has converted to us many mediums . '' 
-- `` The future of nations is being worked out in our obscure ranks . '' 
-- '' Here are the fixed terms : action or reaction , revolution or counter-revolution . 
For , at our epoch , we no longer believe either in inertia or in immobility . 
For the people against the people , that is the question . 
There is no other . '' 
-- `` On the day when we cease to suit you , break us , but up to that day , help us to march on . '' 
All this in broad daylight . 
Other deeds , more audacious still , were suspicious in the eyes of the people by reason of their very audacity . 
On the 4th of April , 1832 , a passer-by mounted the post on the corner which forms the angle of the Rue Sainte-Marguerite and shouted : `` I am a Babouvist ! '' 
But beneath Babeuf , the people scented Gisquet . 
Among other things , this man said : -- `` Down with property ! 
The opposition of the left is cowardly and treacherous . 
When it wants to be on the right side , it preaches revolution , it is democratic in order to escape being beaten , and royalist so that it may not have to fight . 
The republicans are beasts with feathers . 
Distrust the republicans , citizens of the laboring classes . '' 
`` Silence , citizen spy ! '' 
cried an artisan . 
This shout put an end to the discourse . 
Mysterious incidents occurred . 
At nightfall , a workingman encountered near the canal a `` very well dressed man , '' who said to him : `` Whither are you bound , citizen ? '' 
`` Sir , '' replied the workingman , `` I have not the honor of your acquaintance . '' 
`` I know you very well , however . '' 
And the man added : `` Do n't be alarmed , I am an agent of the committee . 
You are suspected of not being quite faithful . 
You know that if you reveal anything , there is an eye fixed on you . '' 
Then he shook hands with the workingman and went away , saying : `` We shall meet again soon . '' 
The police , who were on the alert , collected singular dialogues , not only in the wine-shops , but in the street . 
`` Get yourself received very soon , '' said a weaver to a cabinet-maker . 
`` Why ? '' 
`` There is going to be a shot to fire . '' 
Two ragged pedestrians exchanged these remarkable replies , fraught with evident Jacquerie : -- `` Who governs us ? '' 
`` M. Philippe . '' 
`` No , it is the bourgeoisie . '' 
The reader is mistaken if he thinks that we take the word Jacquerie in a bad sense . 
The Jacques were the poor . 
On another occasion two men were heard to say to each other as they passed by : `` We have a good plan of attack . '' 
Only the following was caught of a private conversation between four men who were crouching in a ditch of the circle of the Barriere du Trone : -- `` Everything possible will be done to prevent his walking about Paris any more . '' 
Who was the he ? 
Menacing obscurity . 
`` The principal leaders , '' as they said in the faubourg , held themselves apart . 
It was supposed that they met for consultation in a wine-shop near the point Saint-Eustache . 
A certain Aug -- , chief of the Society aid for tailors , Rue Mondetour , had the reputation of serving as intermediary central between the leaders and the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
Nevertheless , there was always a great deal of mystery about these leaders , and no certain fact can invalidate the singular arrogance of this reply made later on by a man accused before the Court of Peers : -- `` Who was your leader ? '' 
`` I knew of none and I recognized none . '' 
There was nothing but words , transparent but vague ; sometimes idle reports , rumors , hearsay . 
Other indications cropped up . 
A carpenter , occupied in nailing boards to a fence around the ground on which a house was in process of construction , in the Rue de Reuilly found on that plot the torn fragment of a letter on which were still legible the following lines : -- The committee must take measures to prevent recruiting in the sections for the different societies . 
And , as a postscript : -- We have learned that there are guns in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonniere , No. 5 -LSB- bis -RSB- , to the number of five or six thousand , in the house of a gunsmith in that court . 
The section owns no arms . 
What excited the carpenter and caused him to show this thing to his neighbors was the fact , that a few paces further on he picked up another paper , torn like the first , and still more significant , of which we reproduce a facsimile , because of the historical interest attaching to these strange documents : -- + ------------------------------------------------------------ + | Q | C | D | E | Learn this list by heart . 
After so doing | | | | | | you will tear it up . 
The men admitted | | | | | | will do the same when you have transmitted | | | | | | their orders to them . 
| | | | | | Health and Fraternity , | | | | | | u og a fe L. | + ------------------------------------------------------------ + It was only later on that the persons who were in the secret of this find at the time , learned the significance of those four capital letters : quinturions , centurions , decurions , eclaireurs -LSB- scouts -RSB- , and the sense of the letters : u og a fe , which was a date , and meant April 15th , 1832 . 
Under each capital letter were inscribed names followed by very characteristic notes . 
Thus : Q. Bannerel . 
8 guns , 83 cartridges . 
A safe man . 
-- C. Boubiere . 
1 pistol , 40 cartridges . 
-- D. Rollet . 
1 foil , 1 pistol , 1 pound of powder . 
-- E. Tessier . 
1 sword , 1 cartridge-box . 
Exact . 
-- Terreur . 
8 guns . 
Brave , etc. . 
Finally , this carpenter found , still in the same enclosure , a third paper on which was written in pencil , but very legibly , this sort of enigmatical list : -- Unite : Blanchard : Arbre-Sec . 
6 . 
Barra . 
Soize . 
Salle-au-Comte . 
Kosciusko . 
Aubry the Butcher ? 
J. J. R. Caius Gracchus . 
Right of revision . 
Dufond . 
Four . 
Fall of the Girondists . 
Derbac . 
Maubuee . 
Washington . 
Pinson . 
1 pistol , 86 cartridges . 
Marseillaise . 
Sovereignty of the people . 
Michel . 
Quincampoix . 
Sword . 
Hoche . 
Marceau . 
Plato . 
Arbre-Sec . 
Warsaw . 
Tilly , crier of the Populaire . 
The honest bourgeois into whose hands this list fell knew its significance . 
It appears that this list was the complete nomenclature of the sections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of the Rights of Man , with the names and dwellings of the chiefs of sections . 
To-day , when all these facts which were obscure are nothing more than history , we may publish them . 
It should be added , that the foundation of the Society of the Rights of Man seems to have been posterior to the date when this paper was found . 
Perhaps this was only a rough draft . 
Still , according to all the remarks and the words , according to written notes , material facts begin to make their appearance . 
In the Rue Popincourt , in the house of a dealer in bric-abrac , there were seized seven sheets of gray paper , all folded alike lengthwise and in four ; these sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same gray paper folded in the form of a cartridge , and a card , on which was written the following : -- Saltpetre ... 12 ounces . 
Sulphur ... 2 ounces . 
Charcoal ... 2 ounces and a half . 
Water ... 2 ounces . 
The report of the seizure stated that the drawer exhaled a strong smell of powder . 
A mason returning from his day 's work , left behind him a little package on a bench near the bridge of Austerlitz . 
This package was taken to the police station . 
It was opened , and in it were found two printed dialogues , signed Lahautiere , a song entitled : `` Workmen , band together , '' and a tin box full of cartridges . 
One artisan drinking with a comrade made the latter feel him to see how warm he was ; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat . 
In a ditch on the boulevard , between Pere-Lachaise and the Barriere du Trone , at the most deserted spot , some children , while playing , discovered beneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood , a bag containing a bullet-mould , a wooden punch for the preparation of cartridges , a wooden bowl , in which there were grains of hunting-powder , and a little cast-iron pot whose interior presented evident traces of melted lead . 
Police agents , making their way suddenly and unexpectedly at five o'clock in the morning , into the dwelling of a certain Pardon , who was afterwards a member of the Barricade-Merry section and got himself killed in the insurrection of April , 1834 , found him standing near his bed , and holding in his hand some cartridges which he was in the act of preparing . 
Towards the hour when workingmen repose , two men were seen to meet between the Barriere Picpus and the Barriere Charenton in a little lane between two walls , near a wine-shop , in front of which there was a `` Jeu de Siam . '' 
-LSB- 33 -RSB- One drew a pistol from beneath his blouse and handed it to the other . 
As he was handing it to him , he noticed that the perspiration of his chest had made the powder damp . 
He primed the pistol and added more powder to what was already in the pan . 
Then the two men parted . 
-LSB- 33 -RSB- A game of ninepins , in which one side of the ball is smaller than the other , so that it does not roll straight , but describes a curve on the ground . 
A certain Gallais , afterwards killed in the Rue Beaubourg in the affair of April , boasted of having in his house seven hundred cartridges and twenty-four flints . 
The government one day received a warning that arms and two hundred thousand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg . 
On the following week thirty thousand cartridges were distributed . 
The remarkable point about it was , that the police were not able to seize a single one . 
An intercepted letter read : `` The day is not far distant when , within four hours by the clock , eighty thousand patriots will be under arms . '' 
All this fermentation was public , one might almost say tranquil . 
The approaching insurrection was preparing its storm calmly in the face of the government . 
No singularity was lacking to this still subterranean crisis , which was already perceptible . 
The bourgeois talked peaceably to the working-classes of what was in preparation . 
They said : `` How is the rising coming along ? '' 
in the same tone in which they would have said : `` How is your wife ? '' 
A furniture-dealer , of the Rue Moreau , inquired : `` Well , when are you going to make the attack ? '' 
Another shop-keeper said : -- `` The attack will be made soon . '' 
`` I know it . 
A month ago , there were fifteen thousand of you , now there are twenty-five thousand . '' 
He offered his gun , and a neighbor offered a small pistol which he was willing to sell for seven francs . 
Moreover , the revolutionary fever was growing . 
Not a point in Paris nor in France was exempt from it . 
The artery was beating everywhere . 
Like those membranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in the human body , the network of secret societies began to spread all over the country . 
From the associations of the Friends of the People , which was at the same time public and secret , sprang the Society of the Rights of Man , which also dated from one of the orders of the day : Pluviose , Year 40 of the republican era , which was destined to survive even the mandate of the Court of Assizes which pronounced its dissolution , and which did not hesitate to bestow on its sections significant names like the following : -- Pikes . 
Tocsin . 
Signal cannon . 
Phrygian cap . 
January 21 . 
The beggars . 
The vagabonds . 
Forward march . 
Robespierre . 
Level . 
Ca Ira . 
The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action . 
These were impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead . 
Other associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mother societies . 
The members of sections complained that they were torn asunder . 
Thus , the Gallic Society , and the committee of organization of the Municipalities . 
Thus the associations for the liberty of the press , for individual liberty , for the instruction of the people against indirect taxes . 
Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was divided into three fractions , the levellers , the communists , the reformers . 
Then the Army of the Bastilles , a sort of cohort organized on a military footing , four men commanded by a corporal , ten by a sergeant , twenty by a sub-lieutenant , forty by a lieutenant ; there were never more than five men who knew each other . 
Creation where precaution is combined with audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius of Venice . 
The central committee , which was at the head , had two arms , the Society of Action , and the Army of the Bastilles . 
A legitimist association , the Chevaliers of Fidelity , stirred about among these the republican affiliations . 
It was denounced and repudiated there . 
The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities , Lyons , Nantes , Lille , Marseilles , and each had its Society of the Rights of Man , the Charbonniere , and The Free Men . 
All had a revolutionary society which was called the Cougourde . 
We have already mentioned this word . 
In Paris , the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , and the schools were no less moved than the faubourgs . 
A cafe in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the Seven Billiards , Rue des Mathurins-Saint-Jacques , served as rallying points for the students . 
The Society of the Friends of the A B C affiliated to the Mutualists of Angers , and to the Cougourde of Aix , met , as we have seen , in the Cafe Musain . 
These same young men assembled also , as we have stated already , in a restaurant wine-shop of the Rue Mondetour which was called Corinthe . 
These meetings were secret . 
Others were as public as possible , and the reader can judge of their boldness from these fragments of an interrogatory undergone in one of the ulterior prosecutions : `` Where was this meeting held ? '' 
`` In the Rue de la Paix . '' 
`` At whose house ? '' 
`` In the street . '' 
`` What sections were there ? '' 
`` Only one . '' 
`` Which ? '' 
`` The Manuel section . '' 
`` Who was its leader ? '' 
`` I. '' `` You are too young to have decided alone upon the bold course of attacking the government . 
Where did your instructions come from ? '' 
`` From the central committee . '' 
The army was mined at the same time as the population , as was proved subsequently by the operations of Beford , Luneville , and Epinard . 
They counted on the fifty-second regiment , on the fifth , on the eighth , on the thirty-seventh , and on the twentieth light cavalry . 
In Burgundy and in the southern towns they planted the liberty tree ; that is to say , a pole surmounted by a red cap . 
Such was the situation . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , more than any other group of the population , as we stated in the beginning , accentuated this situation and made it felt . 
That was the sore point . 
This old faubourg , peopled like an ant-hill , laborious , courageous , and angry as a hive of bees , was quivering with expectation and with the desire for a tumult . 
Everything was in a state of agitation there , without any interruption , however , of the regular work . 
It is impossible to convey an idea of this lively yet sombre physiognomy . 
In this faubourg exists poignant distress hidden under attic roofs ; there also exist rare and ardent minds . 
It is particularly in the matter of distress and intelligence that it is dangerous to have extremes meet . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble ; for it received the counter-shock of commercial crises , of failures , strikes , slack seasons , all inherent to great political disturbances . 
In times of revolution misery is both cause and effect . 
The blow which it deals rebounds upon it . 
This population full of proud virtue , capable to the highest degree of latent heat , always ready to fly to arms , prompt to explode , irritated , deep , undermined , seemed to be only awaiting the fall of a spark . 
Whenever certain sparks float on the horizon chased by the wind of events , it is impossible not to think of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the very gates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas . 
The wine-shops of the Faubourg Antoine , which have been more than once drawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused , possess historical notoriety . 
In troublous times people grow intoxicated there more on words than on wine . 
A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatus of the future circulates there , swelling hearts and enlarging souls . 
The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns of Mont Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating with the profound and sacred breath ; taverns where the tables were almost tripods , and where was drunk what Ennius calls the sibylline wine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is a reservoir of people . 
Revolutionary agitations create fissures there , through which trickles the popular sovereignty . 
This sovereignty may do evil ; it can be mistaken like any other ; but , even when led astray , it remains great . 
We may say of it as of the blind cyclops , Ingens . 
In ' 93 , according as the idea which was floating about was good or evil , according as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm , there leaped forth from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine now savage legions , now heroic bands . 
Savage . 
Let us explain this word . 
When these bristling men , who in the early days of the revolutionary chaos , tattered , howling , wild , with uplifted bludgeon , pike on high , hurled themselves upon ancient Paris in an uproar , what did they want ? 
They wanted an end to oppression , an end to tyranny , an end to the sword , work for men , instruction for the child , social sweetness for the woman , liberty , equality , fraternity , bread for all , the idea for all , the Edenizing of the world . 
Progress ; and that holy , sweet , and good thing , progress , they claimed in terrible wise , driven to extremities as they were , half naked , club in fist , a roar in their mouths . 
They were savages , yes ; but the savages of civilization . 
They proclaimed right furiously ; they were desirous , if only with fear and trembling , to force the human race to paradise . 
They seemed barbarians , and they were saviours . 
They demanded light with the mask of night . 
Facing these men , who were ferocious , we admit , and terrifying , but ferocious and terrifying for good ends , there are other men , smiling , embroidered , gilded , beribboned , starred , in silk stockings , in white plumes , in yellow gloves , in varnished shoes , who , with their elbows on a velvet table , beside a marble chimney-piece , insist gently on demeanor and the preservation of the past , of the Middle Ages , of divine right , of fanaticism , of innocence , of slavery , of the death penalty , of war , glorifying in low tones and with politeness , the sword , the stake , and the scaffold . 
For our part , if we were forced to make a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilized men of barbarism , we should choose the barbarians . 
But , thank Heaven , still another choice is possible . 
No perpendicular fall is necessary , in front any more than in the rear . 
Neither despotism nor terrorism . 
We desire progress with a gentle slope . 
God takes care of that . 
God 's whole policy consists in rendering slopes less steep . 
ENJOLRAS AND HIS LIEUTENANTS It was about this epoch that Enjolras , in view of a possible catastrophe , instituted a kind of mysterious census . 
All were present at a secret meeting at the Cafe Musain . 
Enjolras said , mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical but significant metaphors : -- `` It is proper that we should know where we stand and on whom we may count . 
If combatants are required , they must be provided . 
It can do no harm to have something with which to strike . 
Passers-by always have more chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than when there are none . 
Let us , therefore , reckon a little on the herd . 
How many of us are there ? 
There is no question of postponing this task until to-morrow . 
Revolutionists should always be hurried ; progress has no time to lose . 
Let us mistrust the unexpected . 
Let us not be caught unprepared . 
We must go over all the seams that we have made and see whether they hold fast . 
This business ought to be concluded to-day . 
Courfeyrac , you will see the polytechnic students . 
It is their day to go out . 
To-day is Wednesday . 
Feuilly , you will see those of the Glaciere , will you not ? 
Combeferre has promised me to go to Picpus . 
There is a perfect swarm and an excellent one there . 
Bahorel will visit the Estrapade . 
Prouvaire , the masons are growing lukewarm ; you will bring us news from the lodge of the Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Honore . 
Joly will go to Dupuytren 's clinical lecture , and feel the pulse of the medical school . 
Bossuet will take a little turn in the court and talk with the young law licentiates . 
I will take charge of the Cougourde myself . '' 
`` That arranges everything , '' said Courfeyrac . 
`` No . '' 
`` What else is there ? '' 
`` A very important thing . '' 
`` What is that ? '' 
asked Courfeyrac . 
`` The Barriere du Maine , '' replied Enjolras . 
Enjolras remained for a moment as though absorbed in reflection , then he resumed : -- `` At the Barriere du Maine there are marble-workers , painters , and journeymen in the studios of sculptors . 
They are an enthusiastic family , but liable to cool off . 
I do n't know what has been the matter with them for some time past . 
They are thinking of something else . 
They are becoming extinguished . 
They pass their time playing dominoes . 
There is urgent need that some one should go and talk with them a little , but with firmness . 
They meet at Richefeu 's . 
They are to be found there between twelve and one o'clock . 
Those ashes must be fanned into a glow . 
For that errand I had counted on that abstracted Marius , who is a good fellow on the whole , but he no longer comes to us . 
I need some one for the Barriere du Maine . 
I have no one . '' 
`` What about me ? '' 
said Grantaire . 
`` Here am I. '' `` You ? '' 
`` I. '' `` You indoctrinate republicans ! 
you warm up hearts that have grown cold in the name of principle ! '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Are you good for anything ? '' 
`` I have a vague ambition in that direction , '' said Grantaire . 
`` You do not believe in everything . '' 
`` I believe in you . '' 
`` Grantaire will you do me a service ? '' 
`` Anything . 
I 'll black your boots . '' 
`` Well , do n't meddle with our affairs . 
Sleep yourself sober from your absinthe . '' 
`` You are an ingrate , Enjolras . '' 
`` You the man to go to the Barriere du Maine ! 
You capable of it ! '' 
`` I am capable of descending the Rue de Gres , of crossing the Place Saint-Michel , of sloping through the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince , of taking the Rue de Vaugirard , of passing the Carmelites , of turning into the Rue d'Assas , of reaching the Rue du Cherche-Midi , of leaving behind me the Conseil de Guerre , of pacing the Rue des Vielles Tuileries , of striding across the boulevard , of following the Chaussee du Maine , of passing the barrier , and entering Richefeu 's . 
I am capable of that . 
My shoes are capable of that . '' 
`` Do you know anything of those comrades who meet at Richefeu 's ? '' 
`` Not much . 
We only address each other as thou . '' 
`` What will you say to them ? '' 
`` I will speak to them of Robespierre , pardi ! 
Of Danton . 
Of principles . '' 
`` You ? '' 
`` I . 
But I do n't receive justice . 
When I set about it , I am terrible . 
I have read Prudhomme , I know the Social Contract , I know my constitution of the year Two by heart . 
` The liberty of one citizen ends where the liberty of another citizen begins . ' 
Do you take me for a brute ? 
I have an old bank-bill of the Republic in my drawer . 
The Rights of Man , the sovereignty of the people , sapristi ! 
I am even a bit of a Hebertist . 
I can talk the most superb twaddle for six hours by the clock , watch in hand . '' 
`` Be serious , '' said Enjolras . 
`` I am wild , '' replied Grantaire . 
Enjolras meditated for a few moments , and made the gesture of a man who has taken a resolution . 
`` Grantaire , '' he said gravely , `` I consent to try you . 
You shall go to the Barriere du Maine . '' 
Grantaire lived in furnished lodgings very near the Cafe Musain . 
He went out , and five minutes later he returned . 
He had gone home to put on a Robespierre waistcoat . 
`` Red , '' said he as he entered , and he looked intently at Enjolras . 
Then , with the palm of his energetic hand , he laid the two scarlet points of the waistcoat across his breast . 
And stepping up to Enjolras , he whispered in his ear : -- `` Be easy . '' 
He jammed his hat on resolutely and departed . 
A quarter of an hour later , the back room of the Cafe Musain was deserted . 
All the friends of the A B C were gone , each in his own direction , each to his own task . 
Enjolras , who had reserved the Cougourde of Aix for himself , was the last to leave . 
Those members of the Cougourde of Aix who were in Paris then met on the plain of Issy , in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerous in that side of Paris . 
As Enjolras walked towards this place , he passed the whole situation in review in his own mind . 
The gravity of events was self-evident . 
When facts , the premonitory symptoms of latent social malady , move heavily , the slightest complication stops and entangles them . 
A phenomenon whence arises ruin and new births . 
Enjolras descried a luminous uplifting beneath the gloomy skirts of the future . 
Who knows ? 
Perhaps the moment was at hand . 
The people were again taking possession of right , and what a fine spectacle ! 
The revolution was again majestically taking possession of France and saying to the world : `` The sequel to-morrow ! '' 
Enjolras was content . 
The furnace was being heated . 
He had at that moment a powder train of friends scattered all over Paris . 
He composed , in his own mind , with Combeferre 's philosophical and penetrating eloquence , Feuilly 's cosmopolitan enthusiasm , Courfeyrac 's dash , Bahorel 's smile , Jean Prouvaire 's melancholy , Joly 's science , Bossuet 's sarcasms , a sort of electric spark which took fire nearly everywhere at once . 
All hands to work . 
Surely , the result would answer to the effort . 
This was well . 
This made him think of Grantaire . 
`` Hold , '' said he to himself , `` the Barriere du Maine will not take me far out of my way . 
What if I were to go on as far as Richefeu 's ? 
Let us have a look at what Grantaire is about , and see how he is getting on . '' 
One o'clock was striking from the Vaugirard steeple when Enjolras reached the Richefeu smoking-room . 
He pushed open the door , entered , folded his arms , letting the door fall to and strike his shoulders , and gazed at that room filled with tables , men , and smoke . 
A voice broke forth from the mist of smoke , interrupted by another voice . 
It was Grantaire holding a dialogue with an adversary . 
Grantaire was sitting opposite another figure , at a marble Saint-Anne table , strewn with grains of bran and dotted with dominos . 
He was hammering the table with his fist , and this is what Enjolras heard : -- `` Double-six . '' 
`` Fours . '' 
`` The pig ! 
I have no more . '' 
`` You are dead . 
A two . '' 
`` Six . '' 
`` Three . '' 
`` One . '' 
`` It 's my move . '' 
`` Four points . '' 
`` Not much . '' 
`` It 's your turn . '' 
`` I have made an enormous mistake . '' 
`` You are doing well . '' 
`` Fifteen . '' 
`` Seven more . '' 
`` That makes me twenty-two . '' 
-LSB- Thoughtfully , `` Twenty-two ! '' -RSB- 
`` You were n't expecting that double-six . 
If I had placed it at the beginning , the whole play would have been changed . '' 
`` A two again . '' 
`` One . '' 
`` One ! 
Well , five . '' 
`` I have n't any . '' 
`` It was your play , I believe ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Blank . '' 
`` What luck he has ! 
Ah ! 
You are lucky ! 
-LSB- Long revery . -RSB- 
Two . '' 
`` One . '' 
`` Neither five nor one . 
That 's bad for you . '' 
`` Domino . '' 
`` Plague take it ! '' 
THE LARK 'S MEADOW Marius had witnessed the unexpected termination of the ambush upon whose track he had set Javert ; but Javert had no sooner quitted the building , bearing off his prisoners in three hackney-coaches , than Marius also glided out of the house . 
It was only nine o'clock in the evening . 
Marius betook himself to Courfeyrac . 
Courfeyrac was no longer the imperturbable inhabitant of the Latin Quarter , he had gone to live in the Rue de la Verrerie `` for political reasons '' ; this quarter was one where , at that epoch , insurrection liked to install itself . 
Marius said to Courfeyrac : `` I have come to sleep with you . '' 
Courfeyrac dragged a mattress off his bed , which was furnished with two , spread it out on the floor , and said : `` There . '' 
At seven o'clock on the following morning , Marius returned to the hovel , paid the quarter 's rent which he owed to Ma'am Bougon , had his books , his bed , his table , his commode , and his two chairs loaded on a hand-cart and went off without leaving his address , so that when Javert returned in the course of the morning , for the purpose of questioning Marius as to the events of the preceding evening , he found only Ma'am Bougon , who answered : `` Moved away ! '' 
Ma'am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accomplice of the robbers who had been seized the night before . 
`` Who would ever have said it ? '' 
she exclaimed to the portresses of the quarter , `` a young man like that , who had the air of a girl ! '' 
Marius had two reasons for this prompt change of residence . 
The first was , that he now had a horror of that house , where he had beheld , so close at hand , and in its most repulsive and most ferocious development , a social deformity which is , perhaps , even more terrible than the wicked rich man , the wicked poor man . 
The second was , that he did not wish to figure in the lawsuit which would insue in all probability , and be brought in to testify against Thenardier . 
Javert thought that the young man , whose name he had forgotten , was afraid , and had fled , or perhaps , had not even returned home at the time of the ambush ; he made some efforts to find him , however , but without success . 
A month passed , then another . 
Marius was still with Courfeyrac . 
He had learned from a young licentiate in law , an habitual frequenter of the courts , that Thenardier was in close confinement . 
Every Monday , Marius had five francs handed in to the clerk 's office of La Force for Thenardier . 
As Marius had no longer any money , he borrowed the five francs from Courfeyrac . 
It was the first time in his life that he had ever borrowed money . 
These periodical five francs were a double riddle to Courfeyrac who lent and to Thenardier who received them . 
`` To whom can they go ? '' 
thought Courfeyrac . 
`` Whence can this come to me ? '' 
Thenardier asked himself . 
Moreover , Marius was heart-broken . 
Everything had plunged through a trap-door once more . 
He no longer saw anything before him ; his life was again buried in mystery where he wandered fumblingly . 
He had for a moment beheld very close at hand , in that obscurity , the young girl whom he loved , the old man who seemed to be her father , those unknown beings , who were his only interest and his only hope in this world ; and , at the very moment when he thought himself on the point of grasping them , a gust had swept all these shadows away . 
Not a spark of certainty and truth had been emitted even in the most terrible of collisions . 
No conjecture was possible . 
He no longer knew even the name that he thought he knew . 
It certainly was not Ursule . 
And the Lark was a nickname . 
And what was he to think of the old man ? 
Was he actually in hiding from the police ? 
The white-haired workman whom Marius had encountered in the vicinity of the Invalides recurred to his mind . 
It now seemed probable that that workingman and M. Leblanc were one and the same person . 
So he disguised himself ? 
That man had his heroic and his equivocal sides . 
Why had he not called for help ? 
Why had he fled ? 
Was he , or was he not , the father of the young girl ? 
Was he , in short , the man whom Thenardier thought that he recognized ? 
Thenardier might have been mistaken . 
These formed so many insoluble problems . 
All this , it is true , detracted nothing from the angelic charms of the young girl of the Luxembourg . 
Heart-rending distress ; Marius bore a passion in his heart , and night over his eyes . 
He was thrust onward , he was drawn , and he could not stir . 
All had vanished , save love . 
Of love itself he had lost the instincts and the sudden illuminations . 
Ordinarily , this flame which burns us lights us also a little , and casts some useful gleams without . 
But Marius no longer even heard these mute counsels of passion . 
He never said to himself : `` What if I were to go to such a place ? 
What if I were to try such and such a thing ? '' 
The girl whom he could no longer call Ursule was evidently somewhere ; nothing warned Marius in what direction he should seek her . 
His whole life was now summed up in two words ; absolute uncertainty within an impenetrable fog . 
To see her once again ; he still aspired to this , but he no longer expected it . 
To crown all , his poverty had returned . 
He felt that icy breath close to him , on his heels . 
In the midst of his torments , and long before this , he had discontinued his work , and nothing is more dangerous than discontinued work ; it is a habit which vanishes . 
A habit which is easy to get rid of , and difficult to take up again . 
A certain amount of dreaming is good , like a narcotic in discreet doses . 
It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor , which are sometimes severe , and produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vapor which corrects the over-harsh contours of pure thought , fills in gaps here and there , binds together and rounds off the angles of the ideas . 
But too much dreaming sinks and drowns . 
Woe to the brain-worker who allows himself to fall entirely from thought into revery ! 
He thinks that he can re-ascend with equal ease , and he tells himself that , after all , it is the same thing . 
Error ! 
Thought is the toil of the intelligence , revery its voluptuousness . 
To replace thought with revery is to confound a poison with a food . 
Marius had begun in that way , as the reader will remember . 
Passion had supervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimaeras without object or bottom . 
One no longer emerges from one 's self except for the purpose of going off to dream . 
Idle production . 
Tumultuous and stagnant gulf . 
And , in proportion as labor diminishes , needs increase . 
This is a law . 
Man , in a state of revery , is generally prodigal and slack ; the unstrung mind can not hold life within close bounds . 
There is , in that mode of life , good mingled with evil , for if enervation is baleful , generosity is good and healthful . 
But the poor man who is generous and noble , and who does not work , is lost . 
Resources are exhausted , needs crop up . 
Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well as the most feeble and most vicious are drawn , and which ends in one of two holds , suicide or crime . 
By dint of going outdoors to think , the day comes when one goes out to throw one 's self in the water . 
Excess of revery breeds men like Escousse and Lebras . 
Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace , with his eyes fixed on the girl whom he no longer saw . 
What we have just written seems strange , and yet it is true . 
The memory of an absent being kindles in the darkness of the heart ; the more it has disappeared , the more it beams ; the gloomy and despairing soul sees this light on its horizon ; the star of the inner night . 
She -- that was Marius ' whole thought . 
He meditated of nothing else ; he was confusedly conscious that his old coat was becoming an impossible coat , and that his new coat was growing old , that his shirts were wearing out , that his hat was wearing out , that his boots were giving out , and he said to himself : `` If I could but see her once again before I die ! '' 
One sweet idea alone was left to him , that she had loved him , that her glance had told him so , that she did not know his name , but that she did know his soul , and that , wherever she was , however mysterious the place , she still loved him perhaps . 
Who knows whether she were not thinking of him as he was thinking of her ? 
Sometimes , in those inexplicable hours such as are experienced by every heart that loves , though he had no reasons for anything but sadness and yet felt an obscure quiver of joy , he said to himself : `` It is her thoughts that are coming to me ! '' 
Then he added : `` Perhaps my thoughts reach her also . '' 
This illusion , at which he shook his head a moment later , was sufficient , nevertheless , to throw beams , which at times resembled hope , into his soul . 
From time to time , especially at that evening hour which is the most depressing to even the dreamy , he allowed the purest , the most impersonal , the most ideal of the reveries which filled his brain , to fall upon a notebook which contained nothing else . 
He called this `` writing to her . '' 
It must not be supposed that his reason was deranged . 
Quite the contrary . 
He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly towards any fixed goal , but he was endowed with more clear-sightedness and rectitude than ever . 
Marius surveyed by a calm and real , although peculiar light , what passed before his eyes , even the most indifferent deeds and men ; he pronounced a just criticism on everything with a sort of honest dejection and candid disinterestedness . 
His judgment , which was almost wholly disassociated from hope , held itself aloof and soared on high . 
In this state of mind nothing escaped him , nothing deceived him , and every moment he was discovering the foundation of life , of humanity , and of destiny . 
Happy , even in the midst of anguish , is he to whom God has given a soul worthy of love and of unhappiness ! 
He who has not viewed the things of this world and the heart of man under this double light has seen nothing and knows nothing of the true . 
The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity . 
However , day followed day , and nothing new presented itself . 
It merely seemed to him , that the sombre space which still remained to be traversed by him was growing shorter with every instant . 
He thought that he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss . 
`` What ! '' 
he repeated to himself , `` shall I not see her again before then ! '' 
When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques , left the barrier on one side and followed the old inner boulevard for some distance , you reach the Rue de la Sante , then the Glaciere , and , a little while before arriving at the little river of the Gobelins , you come to a sort of field which is the only spot in the long and monotonous chain of the boulevards of Paris , where Ruysdeel would be tempted to sit down . 
There is something indescribable there which exhales grace , a green meadow traversed by tightly stretched lines , from which flutter rags drying in the wind , and an old market-gardener 's house , built in the time of Louis XIII. , with its great roof oddly pierced with dormer windows , dilapidated palisades , a little water amid poplar-trees , women , voices , laughter ; on the horizon the Pantheon , the pole of the Deaf-Mutes , the Val-de-Grace , black , squat , fantastic , amusing , magnificent , and in the background , the severe square crests of the towers of Notre Dame . 
As the place is worth looking at , no one goes thither . 
Hardly one cart or wagoner passes in a quarter of an hour . 
It chanced that Marius ' solitary strolls led him to this plot of ground , near the water . 
That day , there was a rarity on the boulevard , a passer-by . 
Marius , vaguely impressed with the almost savage beauty of the place , asked this passer-by : -- `` What is the name of this spot ? '' 
The person replied : `` It is the Lark 's meadow . '' 
And he added : `` It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of Ivry . '' 
But after the word `` Lark '' Marius heard nothing more . 
These sudden congealments in the state of revery , which a single word suffices to evoke , do occur . 
The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an idea , and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else . 
The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths of Marius ' melancholy . 
-- `` Stop , '' said he with a sort of unreasoning stupor peculiar to these mysterious asides , `` this is her meadow . 
I shall know where she lives now . '' 
It was absurd , but irresistible . 
And every day he returned to that meadow of the Lark . 
EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF PRISONS Javert 's triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete , but had not been so . 
In the first place , and this constituted the principal anxiety , Javert had not taken the prisoner prisoner . 
The assassinated man who flees is more suspicious than the assassin , and it is probable that this personage , who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians , would be no less fine a prize for the authorities . 
And then , Montparnasse had escaped Javert . 
Another opportunity of laying hands on that `` devil 's dandy '' must be waited for . 
Montparnasse had , in fact , encountered Eponine as she stood on the watch under the trees of the boulevard , and had led her off , preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes with the father . 
It was well that he did so . 
He was free . 
As for Eponine , Javert had caused her to be seized ; a mediocre consolation . 
Eponine had joined Azelma at Les Madelonettes . 
And finally , on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force , one of the principal prisoners , Claquesous , had been lost . 
It was not known how this had been effected , the police agents and the sergeants `` could not understand it at all . '' 
He had converted himself into vapor , he had slipped through the handcuffs , he had trickled through the crevices of the carriage , the fiacre was cracked , and he had fled ; all that they were able to say was , that on arriving at the prison , there was no Claquesous . 
Either the fairies or the police had had a hand in it . 
Had Claquesous melted into the shadows like a snow-flake in water ? 
Had there been unavowed connivance of the police agents ? 
Did this man belong to the double enigma of order and disorder ? 
Was he concentric with infraction and repression ? 
Had this sphinx his fore paws in crime and his hind paws in authority ? 
Javert did not accept such comminations , and would have bristled up against such compromises ; but his squad included other inspectors besides himself , who were more initiated than he , perhaps , although they were his subordinates in the secrets of the Prefecture , and Claquesous had been such a villain that he might make a very good agent . 
It is an excellent thing for ruffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimate juggling terms with the night . 
These double-edged rascals do exist . 
However that may be , Claquesous had gone astray and was not found again . 
Javert appeared to be more irritated than amazed at this . 
As for Marius , `` that booby of a lawyer , '' who had probably become frightened , and whose name Javert had forgotten , Javert attached very little importance to him . 
Moreover , a lawyer can be hunted up at any time . 
But was he a lawyer after all ? 
The investigation had begun . 
The magistrate had thought it advisable not to put one of these men of the band of Patron Minette in close confinement , in the hope that he would chatter . 
This man was Brujon , the long-haired man of the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
He had been let loose in the Charlemagne courtyard , and the eyes of the watchers were fixed on him . 
This name of Brujon is one of the souvenirs of La Force . 
In that hideous courtyard , called the court of the Batiment-Neuf -LRB- New Building -RRB- , which the administration called the court Saint-Bernard , and which the robbers called the Fosseaux-Lions -LRB- The Lion 's Ditch -RRB- , on that wall covered with scales and leprosy , which rose on the left to a level with the roofs , near an old door of rusty iron which led to the ancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force , then turned in a dormitory for ruffians , there could still be seen , twelve years ago , a sort of fortress roughly carved in the stone with a nail , and beneath it this signature : -- BRUJON , 1811 . 
The Brujon of 1811 was the father of the Brujon of 1832 . 
The latter , of whom the reader caught but a glimpse at the Gorbeau house , was a very cunning and very adroit young spark , with a bewildered and plaintive air . 
It was in consequence of this plaintive air that the magistrate had released him , thinking him more useful in the Charlemagne yard than in close confinement . 
Robbers do not interrupt their profession because they are in the hands of justice . 
They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle as that . 
To be in prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning on another crime . 
They are artists , who have one picture in the salon , and who toil , none the less , on a new work in their studios . 
Brujon seemed to be stupefied by prison . 
He could sometimes be seen standing by the hour together in front of the sutler 's window in the Charlemagne yard , staring like an idiot at the sordid list of prices which began with : garlic , 62 centimes , and ended with : cigar , 5 centimes . 
Or he passed his time in trembling , chattering his teeth , saying that he had a fever , and inquiring whether one of the eight and twenty beds in the fever ward was vacant . 
All at once , towards the end of February , 1832 , it was discovered that Brujon , that somnolent fellow , had had three different commissions executed by the errand-men of the establishment , not under his own name , but in the name of three of his comrades ; and they had cost him in all fifty sous , an exorbitant outlay which attracted the attention of the prison corporal . 
Inquiries were instituted , and on consulting the tariff of commissions posted in the convict 's parlor , it was learned that the fifty sous could be analyzed as follows : three commissions ; one to the Pantheon , ten sous ; one to Val-de-Grace , fifteen sous ; and one to the Barriere de Grenelle , twenty-five sous . 
This last was the dearest of the whole tariff . 
Now , at the Pantheon , at the Val-de-Grace , and at the Barriere de Grenelle were situated the domiciles of the three very redoubtable prowlers of the barriers , Kruideniers , alias Bizarre , Glorieux , an ex-convict , and Barre-Carosse , upon whom the attention of the police was directed by this incident . 
It was thought that these men were members of Patron Minette ; two of those leaders , Babet and Gueulemer , had been captured . 
It was supposed that the messages , which had been addressed , not to houses , but to people who were waiting for them in the street , must have contained information with regard to some crime that had been plotted . 
They were in possession of other indications ; they laid hand on the three prowlers , and supposed that they had circumvented some one or other of Brujon 's machinations . 
About a week after these measures had been taken , one night , as the superintendent of the watch , who had been inspecting the lower dormitory in the Batiment-Neuf , was about to drop his chestnut in the box -- this was the means adopted to make sure that the watchmen performed their duties punctually ; every hour a chestnut must be dropped into all the boxes nailed to the doors of the dormitories -- a watchman looked through the peep-hole of the dormitory and beheld Brujon sitting on his bed and writing something by the light of the hall-lamp . 
The guardian entered , Brujon was put in a solitary cell for a month , but they were not able to seize what he had written . 
The police learned nothing further about it . 
What is certain is , that on the following morning , a `` postilion '' was flung from the Charlemagne yard into the Lions ' Ditch , over the five-story building which separated the two court-yards . 
What prisoners call a `` postilion '' is a pallet of bread artistically moulded , which is sent into Ireland , that is to say , over the roofs of a prison , from one courtyard to another . 
Etymology : over England ; from one land to another ; into Ireland . 
This little pellet falls in the yard . 
The man who picks it up opens it and finds in it a note addressed to some prisoner in that yard . 
If it is a prisoner who finds the treasure , he forwards the note to its destination ; if it is a keeper , or one of the prisoners secretly sold who are called sheep in prisons and foxes in the galleys , the note is taken to the office and handed over to the police . 
On this occasion , the postilion reached its address , although the person to whom it was addressed was , at that moment , in solitary confinement . 
This person was no other than Babet , one of the four heads of Patron Minette . 
The postilion contained a roll of paper on which only these two lines were written : -- `` Babet . 
There is an affair in the Rue Plumet . 
A gate on a garden . '' 
This is what Brujon had written the night before . 
In spite of male and female searchers , Babet managed to pass the note on from La Force to the Salpetriere , to a `` good friend '' whom he had and who was shut up there . 
This woman in turn transmitted the note to another woman of her acquaintance , a certain Magnon , who was strongly suspected by the police , though not yet arrested . 
This Magnon , whose name the reader has already seen , had relations with the Thenardier , which will be described in detail later on , and she could , by going to see Eponine , serve as a bridge between the Salpetriere and Les Madelonettes . 
It happened , that at precisely that moment , as proofs were wanting in the investigation directed against Thenardier in the matter of his daughters , Eponine and Azelma were released . 
When Eponine came out , Magnon , who was watching the gate of the Madelonettes , handed her Brujon 's note to Babet , charging her to look into the matter . 
Eponine went to the Rue Plumet , recognized the gate and the garden , observed the house , spied , lurked , and , a few days later , brought to Magnon , who delivers in the Rue Clocheperce , a biscuit , which Magnon transmitted to Babet 's mistress in the Salpetriere . 
A biscuit , in the shady symbolism of prisons , signifies : Nothing to be done . 
So that in less than a week from that time , as Brujon and Babet met in the circle of La Force , the one on his way to the examination , the other on his way from it : -- `` Well ? '' 
asked Brujon , `` the Rue P. ? '' 
`` Biscuit , '' replied Babet . 
Thus did the foetus of crime engendered by Brujon in La Force miscarry . 
This miscarriage had its consequences , however , which were perfectly distinct from Brujon 's programme . 
The reader will see what they were . 
Often when we think we are knotting one thread , we are tying quite another . 
APPARITION TO FATHER MABEUF Marius no longer went to see any one , but he sometimes encountered Father Mabeuf by chance . 
While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be called the cellar stairs , and which lead to places without light , where the happy can be heard walking overhead , M. Mabeuf was descending on his side . 
The Flora of Cauteretz no longer sold at all . 
The experiments on indigo had not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz , which had a bad exposure . 
M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a few plants which love shade and dampness . 
Nevertheless , he did not become discouraged . 
He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes , with a good exposure , to make his trials with indigo `` at his own expense . '' 
For this purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the Flora . 
He had reduced his breakfast to two eggs , and he left one of these for his old servant , to whom he had paid no wages for the last fifteen months . 
And often his breakfast was his only meal . 
He no longer smiled with his infantile smile , he had grown morose and no longer received visitors . 
Marius did well not to dream of going thither . 
Sometimes , at the hour when M. Mabeuf was on his way to the Jardin des Plantes , the old man and the young man passed each other on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
They did not speak , and only exchanged a melancholy sign of the head . 
A heart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when misery looses bonds ! 
Two men who have been friends become two chance passers-by . 
Royal the bookseller was dead . 
M. Mabeuf no longer knew his books , his garden , or his indigo : these were the three forms which happiness , pleasure , and hope had assumed for him . 
This sufficed him for his living . 
He said to himself : `` When I shall have made my balls of blueing , I shall be rich , I will withdraw my copperplates from the pawn-shop , I will put my Flora in vogue again with trickery , plenty of money and advertisements in the newspapers and I will buy , I know well where , a copy of Pierre de Medine 's Art de Naviguer , with wood-cuts , edition of 1655 . '' 
In the meantime , he toiled all day over his plot of indigo , and at night he returned home to water his garden , and to read his books . 
At that epoch , M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years of age . 
One evening he had a singular apparition . 
He had returned home while it was still broad daylight . 
Mother Plutarque , whose health was declining , was ill and in bed . 
He had dined on a bone , on which a little meat lingered , and a bit of bread that he had found on the kitchen table , and had seated himself on an overturned stone post , which took the place of a bench in his garden . 
Near this bench there rose , after the fashion in orchard-gardens , a sort of large chest , of beams and planks , much dilapidated , a rabbit-hutch on the ground floor , a fruit-closet on the first . 
There was nothing in the hutch , but there were a few apples in the fruit-closet , -- the remains of the winter 's provision . 
M. Mabeuf had set himself to turning over and reading , with the aid of his glasses , two books of which he was passionately fond and in which , a serious thing at his age , he was interested . 
His natural timidity rendered him accessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certain degree . 
The first of these books was the famous treatise of President Delancre , De l'inconstance des Demons ; the other was a quarto by Mutor de la Rubaudiere , Sur les Diables de Vauvert et les Gobelins de la Bievre . 
This last-mentioned old volume interested him all the more , because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by goblins in former times . 
The twilight had begun to whiten what was on high and to blacken all below . 
As he read , over the top of the book which he held in his hand , Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants , and among others a magnificent rhododendron which was one of his consolations ; four days of heat , wind , and sun without a drop of rain , had passed ; the stalks were bending , the buds drooping , the leaves falling ; all this needed water , the rhododendron was particularly sad . 
Father Mabeuf was one of those persons for whom plants have souls . 
The old man had toiled all day over his indigo plot , he was worn out with fatigue , but he rose , laid his books on the bench , and walked , all bent over and with tottering footsteps , to the well , but when he had grasped the chain , he could not even draw it sufficiently to unhook it . 
Then he turned round and cast a glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded with stars . 
The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of man beneath an indescribably mournful and eternal joy . 
The night promised to be as arid as the day had been . 
`` Stars everywhere ! '' 
thought the old man ; `` not the tiniest cloud ! 
Not a drop of water ! '' 
And his head , which had been upraised for a moment , fell back upon his breast . 
He raised it again , and once more looked at the sky , murmuring : -- `` A tear of dew ! 
A little pity ! '' 
He tried again to unhook the chain of the well , and could not . 
At that moment , he heard a voice saying : -- `` Father Mabeuf , would you like to have me water your garden for you ? '' 
At the same time , a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible in the hedge , and he beheld emerging from the shrubbery a sort of tall , slender girl , who drew herself up in front of him and stared boldly at him . 
She had less the air of a human being than of a form which had just blossomed forth from the twilight . 
Before Father Mabeuf , who was easily terrified , and who was , as we have said , quick to take alarm , was able to reply by a single syllable , this being , whose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness , had unhooked the chain , plunged in and withdrawn the bucket , and filled the watering-pot , and the goodman beheld this apparition , which had bare feet and a tattered petticoat , running about among the flower-beds distributing life around her . 
The sound of the watering-pot on the leaves filled Father Mabeuf 's soul with ecstasy . 
It seemed to him that the rhododendron was happy now . 
The first bucketful emptied , the girl drew a second , then a third . 
She watered the whole garden . 
There was something about her , as she thus ran about among paths , where her outline appeared perfectly black , waving her angular arms , and with her fichu all in rags , that resembled a bat . 
When she had finished , Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in his eyes , and laid his hand on her brow . 
`` God will bless you , '' said he , `` you are an angel since you take care of the flowers . '' 
`` No , '' she replied . 
`` I am the devil , but that 's all the same to me . '' 
The old man exclaimed , without either waiting for or hearing her response : -- `` What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor , and that I can do nothing for you ! '' 
`` You can do something , '' said she . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Tell me where M. Marius lives . '' 
The old man did not understand . 
`` What Monsieur Marius ? '' 
He raised his glassy eyes and seemed to be seeking something that had vanished . 
`` A young man who used to come here . '' 
In the meantime , M. Mabeuf had searched his memory . 
`` Ah ! 
yes -- '' he exclaimed . 
`` I know what you mean . 
Wait ! 
Monsieur Marius -- the Baron Marius Pontmercy , parbleu ! 
He lives , -- or rather , he no longer lives , -- ah well , I do n't know . '' 
As he spoke , he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron , and he continued : -- `` Hold , I know now . 
He very often passes along the boulevard , and goes in the direction of the Glaciere , Rue Croulebarbe . 
The meadow of the Lark . 
Go there . 
It is not hard to meet him . '' 
When M. Mabeuf straightened himself up , there was no longer any one there ; the girl had disappeared . 
He was decidedly terrified . 
`` Really , '' he thought , `` if my garden had not been watered , I should think that she was a spirit . '' 
An hour later , when he was in bed , it came back to him , and as he fell asleep , at that confused moment when thought , like that fabulous bird which changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea , little by little assumes the form of a dream in order to traverse slumber , he said to himself in a bewildered way : -- `` In sooth , that greatly resembles what Rubaudiere narrates of the goblins . 
Could it have been a goblin ? '' 
AN APPARITION TO MARIUS Some days after this visit of a `` spirit '' to Farmer Mabeuf , one morning , -- it was on a Monday , the day when Marius borrowed the hundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thenardier -- Marius had put this coin in his pocket , and before carrying it to the clerk 's office , he had gone `` to take a little stroll , '' in the hope that this would make him work on his return . 
It was always thus , however . 
As soon as he rose , he seated himself before a book and a sheet of paper in order to scribble some translation ; his task at that epoch consisted in turning into French a celebrated quarrel between Germans , the Gans and Savigny controversy ; he took Savigny , he took Gans , read four lines , tried to write one , could not , saw a star between him and his paper , and rose from his chair , saying : `` I shall go out . 
That will put me in spirits . '' 
And off he went to the Lark 's meadow . 
There he beheld more than ever the star , and less than ever Savigny and Gans . 
He returned home , tried to take up his work again , and did not succeed ; there was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads which were broken in his brain ; then he said to himself : `` I will not go out to-morrow . 
It prevents my working . '' 
And he went out every day . 
He lived in the Lark 's meadow more than in Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
That was his real address : Boulevard de la Sante , at the seventh tree from the Rue Croulebarbe . 
That morning he had quitted the seventh tree and had seated himself on the parapet of the River des Gobelins . 
A cheerful sunlight penetrated the freshly unfolded and luminous leaves . 
He was dreaming of `` Her . '' 
And his meditation turning to a reproach , fell back upon himself ; he reflected dolefully on his idleness , his paralysis of soul , which was gaining on him , and of that night which was growing more dense every moment before him , to such a point that he no longer even saw the sun . 
Nevertheless , athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideas which was not even a monologue , so feeble had action become in him , and he had no longer the force to care to despair , athwart this melancholy absorption , sensations from without did reach him . 
He heard behind him , beneath him , on both banks of the river , the laundresses of the Gobelins beating their linen , and above his head , the birds chattering and singing in the elm-trees . 
On the one hand , the sound of liberty , the careless happiness of the leisure which has wings ; on the other , the sound of toil . 
What caused him to meditate deeply , and almost reflect , were two cheerful sounds . 
All at once , in the midst of his dejected ecstasy , he heard a familiar voice saying : -- `` Come ! 
Here he is ! '' 
He raised his eyes , and recognized that wretched child who had come to him one morning , the elder of the Thenardier daughters , Eponine ; he knew her name now . 
Strange to say , she had grown poorer and prettier , two steps which it had not seemed within her power to take . 
She had accomplished a double progress , towards the light and towards distress . 
She was barefooted and in rags , as on the day when she had so resolutely entered his chamber , only her rags were two months older now , the holes were larger , the tatters more sordid . 
It was the same harsh voice , the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan , the same free , wild , and vacillating glance . 
She had besides , more than formerly , in her face that indescribably terrified and lamentable something which sojourn in a prison adds to wretchedness . 
She had bits of straw and hay in her hair , not like Ophelia through having gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet 's madness , but because she had slept in the loft of some stable . 
And in spite of it all , she was beautiful . 
What a star art thou , O youth ! 
In the meantime , she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joy in her livid countenance , and something which resembled a smile . 
She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech . 
`` So I have met you at last ! '' 
she said at length . 
`` Father Mabeuf was right , it was on this boulevard ! 
How I have hunted for you ! 
If you only knew ! 
Do you know ? 
I have been in the jug . 
A fortnight ! 
They let me out ! 
seeing that there was nothing against me , and that , moreover , I had not reached years of discretion . 
I lack two months of it . 
Oh ! 
how I have hunted for you ! 
These six weeks ! 
So you do n't live down there any more ? '' 
`` No , '' said Marius . 
`` Ah ! 
I understand . 
Because of that affair . 
Those take-downs are disagreeable . 
You cleared out . 
Come now ! 
Why do you wear old hats like this ! 
A young man like you ought to have fine clothes . 
Do you know , Monsieur Marius , Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius , I do n't know what . 
It is n't true that you are a baron ? 
Barons are old fellows , they go to the Luxembourg , in front of the chateau , where there is the most sun , and they read the Quotidienne for a sou . 
I once carried a letter to a baron of that sort . 
He was over a hundred years old . 
Say , where do you live now ? '' 
Marius made no reply . 
`` Ah ! '' 
she went on , `` you have a hole in your shirt . 
I must sew it up for you . '' 
She resumed with an expression which gradually clouded over : -- `` You do n't seem glad to see me . '' 
Marius held his peace ; she remained silent for a moment , then exclaimed : -- `` But if I choose , nevertheless , I could force you to look glad ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
you used to call me thou , '' she retorted . 
`` Well , then , what dost thou mean ? '' 
She bit her lips ; she seemed to hesitate , as though a prey to some sort of inward conflict . 
At last she appeared to come to a decision . 
`` So much the worse , I do n't care . 
You have a melancholy air , I want you to be pleased . 
Only promise me that you will smile . 
I want to see you smile and hear you say : ` Ah , well , that 's good . ' 
Poor Mr. Marius ! 
you know ? 
You promised me that you would give me anything I like -- '' `` Yes ! 
Only speak ! '' 
She looked Marius full in the eye , and said : -- `` I have the address . '' 
Marius turned pale . 
All the blood flowed back to his heart . 
`` What address ? '' 
`` The address that you asked me to get ! '' 
She added , as though with an effort : -- `` The address -- you know very well ! '' 
`` Yes ! '' 
stammered Marius . 
`` Of that young lady . '' 
This word uttered , she sighed deeply . 
Marius sprang from the parapet on which he had been sitting and seized her hand distractedly . 
`` Oh ! 
Well ! 
lead me thither ! 
Tell me ! 
Ask of me anything you wish ! 
Where is it ? '' 
`` Come with me , '' she responded . 
`` I do n't know the street or number very well ; it is in quite the other direction from here , but I know the house well , I will take you to it . '' 
She withdrew her hand and went on , in a tone which could have rent the heart of an observer , but which did not even graze Marius in his intoxicated and ecstatic state : -- `` Oh ! 
how glad you are ! '' 
A cloud swept across Marius ' brow . 
He seized Eponine by the arm : -- `` Swear one thing to me ! '' 
`` Swear ! '' 
said she , `` what does that mean ? 
Come ! 
You want me to swear ? '' 
And she laughed . 
`` Your father ! 
promise me , Eponine ! 
Swear to me that you will not give this address to your father ! '' 
She turned to him with a stupefied air . 
`` Eponine ! 
How do you know that my name is Eponine ? '' 
`` Promise what I tell you ! '' 
But she did not seem to hear him . 
`` That 's nice ! 
You have called me Eponine ! '' 
Marius grasped both her arms at once . 
`` But answer me , in the name of Heaven ! 
pay attention to what I am saying to you , swear to me that you will not tell your father this address that you know ! '' 
`` My father ! '' 
said she . 
`` Ah yes , my father ! 
Be at ease . 
He 's in close confinement . 
Besides , what do I care for my father ! '' 
`` But you do not promise me ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
`` Let go of me ! '' 
she said , bursting into a laugh , `` how you do shake me ! 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
I promise that ! 
I swear that to you ! 
What is that to me ? 
I will not tell my father the address . 
There ! 
Is that right ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` Nor to any one ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` Nor to any one . '' 
`` Now , '' resumed Marius , `` take me there . '' 
`` Immediately ? '' 
`` Immediately . '' 
`` Come along . 
Ah ! 
how pleased he is ! '' 
said she . 
After a few steps she halted . 
`` You are following me too closely , Monsieur Marius . 
Let me go on ahead , and follow me so , without seeming to do it . 
A nice young man like you must not be seen with a woman like me . '' 
No tongue can express all that lay in that word , woman , thus pronounced by that child . 
She proceeded a dozen paces and then halted once more ; Marius joined her . 
She addressed him sideways , and without turning towards him : -- `` By the way , you know that you promised me something ? '' 
Marius fumbled in his pocket . 
All that he owned in the world was the five francs intended for Thenardier the father . 
He took them and laid them in Eponine 's hand . 
She opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground , and gazed at him with a gloomy air . 
`` I do n't want your money , '' said she . 
THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET About the middle of the last century , a chief justice in the Parliament of Paris having a mistress and concealing the fact , for at that period the grand seignors displayed their mistresses , and the bourgeois concealed them , had `` a little house '' built in the Faubourg Saint-Germain , in the deserted Rue Blomet , which is now called Rue Plumet , not far from the spot which was then designated as Combat des Animaux . 
This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion ; two rooms on the ground floor , two chambers on the first floor , a kitchen down stairs , a boudoir up stairs , an attic under the roof , the whole preceded by a garden with a large gate opening on the street . 
This garden was about an acre and a half in extent . 
This was all that could be seen by passers-by ; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard , and at the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of two rooms and a cellar , a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and nurse in case of need . 
This building communicated in the rear by a masked door which opened by a secret spring , with a long , narrow , paved winding corridor , open to the sky , hemmed in with two lofty walls , which , hidden with wonderful art , and lost as it were between garden enclosures and cultivated land , all of whose angles and detours it followed , ended in another door , also with a secret lock which opened a quarter of a league away , almost in another quarter , at the solitary extremity of the Rue du Babylone . 
Through this the chief justice entered , so that even those who were spying on him and following him would merely have observed that the justice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere , and would never have suspected that to go to the Rue de Babylone was to go to the Rue Blomet . 
Thanks to clever purchasers of land , the magistrate had been able to make a secret , sewer-like passage on his own property , and consequently , without interference . 
Later on , he had sold in little parcels , for gardens and market gardens , the lots of ground adjoining the corridor , and the proprietors of these lots on both sides thought they had a party wall before their eyes , and did not even suspect the long , paved ribbon winding between two walls amid their flower-beds and their orchards . 
Only the birds beheld this curiosity . 
It is probable that the linnets and tomtits of the last century gossiped a great deal about the chief justice . 
The pavilion , built of stone in the taste of Mansard , wainscoted and furnished in the Watteau style , rocaille on the inside , old-fashioned on the outside , walled in with a triple hedge of flowers , had something discreet , coquettish , and solemn about it , as befits a caprice of love and magistracy . 
This house and corridor , which have now disappeared , were in existence fifteen years ago . 
In '93 a coppersmith had purchased the house with the idea of demolishing it , but had not been able to pay the price ; the nation made him bankrupt . 
So that it was the house which demolished the coppersmith . 
After that , the house remained uninhabited , and fell slowly to ruin , as does every dwelling to which the presence of man does not communicate life . 
It had remained fitted with its old furniture , was always for sale or to let , and the ten or a dozen people who passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow and illegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since 1819 . 
Towards the end of the Restoration , these same passers-by might have noticed that the bill had disappeared , and even that the shutters on the first floor were open . 
The house was occupied , in fact . 
The windows had short curtains , a sign that there was a woman about . 
In the month of October , 1829 , a man of a certain age had presented himself and had hired the house just as it stood , including , of course , the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone . 
He had had the secret openings of the two doors to this passage repaired . 
The house , as we have just mentioned , was still very nearly furnished with the justice 's old fitting ; the new tenant had ordered some repairs , had added what was lacking here and there , had replaced the paving-stones in the yard , bricks in the floors , steps in the stairs , missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows , and had finally installed himself there with a young girl and an elderly maid-servant , without commotion , rather like a person who is slipping in than like a man who is entering his own house . 
The neighbors did not gossip about him , for the reason that there were no neighbors . 
This unobtrusive tenant was Jean Valjean , the young girl was Cosette . 
The servant was a woman named Toussaint , whom Jean Valjean had saved from the hospital and from wretchedness , and who was elderly , a stammerer , and from the provinces , three qualities which had decided Jean Valjean to take her with him . 
He had hired the house under the name of M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman . 
In all that has been related heretofore , the reader has , doubtless , been no less prompt than Thenardier to recognize Jean Valjean . 
Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus ? 
What had happened ? 
Nothing had happened . 
It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent , so happy that his conscience finally took the alarm . 
He saw Cosette every day , he felt paternity spring up and develop within him more and more , he brooded over the soul of that child , he said to himself that she was his , that nothing could take her from him , that this would last indefinitely , that she would certainly become a nun , being thereto gently incited every day , that thus the convent was henceforth the universe for her as it was for him , that he should grow old there , and that she would grow up there , that she would grow old there , and that he should die there ; that , in short , delightful hope , no separation was possible . 
On reflecting upon this , he fell into perplexity . 
He interrogated himself . 
He asked himself if all that happiness were really his , if it were not composed of the happiness of another , of the happiness of that child which he , an old man , was confiscating and stealing ; if that were not theft ? 
He said to himself , that this child had a right to know life before renouncing it , that to deprive her in advance , and in some sort without consulting her , of all joys , under the pretext of saving her from all trials , to take advantage of her ignorance of her isolation , in order to make an artificial vocation germinate in her , was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lie to God . 
And who knows if , when she came to be aware of all this some day , and found herself a nun to her sorrow , Cosette would not come to hate him ? 
A last , almost selfish thought , and less heroic than the rest , but which was intolerable to him . 
He resolved to quit the convent . 
He resolved on this ; he recognized with anguish , the fact that it was necessary . 
As for objections , there were none . 
Five years ' sojourn between these four walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyed or dispersed the elements of fear . 
He could return tranquilly among men . 
He had grown old , and all had undergone a change . 
Who would recognize him now ? 
And then , to face the worst , there was danger only for himself , and he had no right to condemn Cosette to the cloister for the reason that he had been condemned to the galleys . 
Besides , what is danger in comparison with the right ? 
Finally , nothing prevented his being prudent and taking his precautions . 
As for Cosette 's education , it was almost finished and complete . 
His determination once taken , he awaited an opportunity . 
It was not long in presenting itself . 
Old Fauchelevent died . 
Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and told her that , having come into a little inheritance at the death of his brother , which permitted him henceforth to live without working , he should leave the service of the convent and take his daughter with him ; but that , as it was not just that Cosette , since she had not taken the vows , should have received her education gratuitously , he humbly begged the Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should offer to the community , as indemnity , for the five years which Cosette had spent there , the sum of five thousand francs . 
It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Perpetual Adoration . 
On leaving the convent , he took in his own arms the little valise the key to which he still wore on his person , and would permit no porter to touch it . 
This puzzled Cosette , because of the odor of embalming which proceeded from it . 
Let us state at once , that this trunk never quitted him more . 
He always had it in his chamber . 
It was the first and only thing sometimes , that he carried off in his moving when he moved about . 
Cosette laughed at it , and called this valise his inseparable , saying : `` I am jealous of it . '' 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not reappear in the open air without profound anxiety . 
He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet , and hid himself from sight there . 
Henceforth he was in the possession of the name : -- Ultime Fauchelevent . 
At the same time he hired two other apartments in Paris , in order that he might attract less attention than if he were to remain always in the same quarter , and so that he could , at need , take himself off at the slightest disquietude which should assail him , and in short , so that he might not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had so miraculously escaped from Javert . 
These two apartments were very pitiable , poor in appearance , and in two quarters which were far remote from each other , the one in the Rue de l'Ouest , the other in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
He went from time to time , now to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , now to the Rue de l'Ouest , to pass a month or six weeks , without taking Toussaint . 
He had himself served by the porters , and gave himself out as a gentleman from the suburbs , living on his funds , and having a little temporary resting-place in town . 
This lofty virtue had three domiciles in Paris for the sake of escaping from the police . 
JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD However , properly speaking , he lived in the Rue Plumet , and he had arranged his existence there in the following fashion : -- Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion ; she had the big sleeping-room with the painted pier-glasses , the boudoir with the gilded fillets , the justice 's drawing-room furnished with tapestries and vast arm-chairs ; she had the garden . 
Jean Valjean had a canopied bed of antique damask in three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchased in the Rue du Figuier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher 's , put into Cosette 's chamber , and , in order to redeem the severity of these magnificent old things , he had amalgamated with this bric-a-brac all the gay and graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to young girls , an etagere , a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books , an inkstand , a blotting-book , paper , a work-table incrusted with mother of pearl , a silver-gilt dressing-case , a toilet service in Japanese porcelain . 
Long damask curtains with a red foundation and three colors , like those on the bed , hung at the windows of the first floor . 
On the ground floor , the curtains were of tapestry . 
All winter long , Cosette 's little house was heated from top to bottom . 
Jean Valjean inhabited the sort of porter 's lodge which was situated at the end of the back courtyard , with a mattress on a folding-bed , a white wood table , two straw chairs , an earthenware water-jug , a few old volumes on a shelf , his beloved valise in one corner , and never any fire . 
He dined with Cosette , and he had a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use . 
When Toussaint came , he had said to her : `` It is the young lady who is the mistress of this house . '' 
-- `` And you , monsieur ? '' 
Toussaint replied in amazement . 
-- `` I am a much better thing than the master , I am the father . '' 
Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent , and she regulated their expenditure , which was very modest . 
Every day , Jean Valjean put his arm through Cosette 's and took her for a walk . 
He led her to the Luxembourg , to the least frequented walk , and every Sunday he took her to mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas , because that was a long way off . 
As it was a very poor quarter , he bestowed alms largely there , and the poor people surrounded him in church , which had drawn down upon him Thenardier 's epistle : `` To the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . '' 
He was fond of taking Cosette to visit the poor and the sick . 
No stranger ever entered the house in the Rue Plumet . 
Toussaint brought their provisions , and Jean Valjean went himself for water to a fountain near by on the boulevard . 
Their wood and wine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-work which lay near the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served the chief-justice as a grotto ; for at the epoch of follies and `` Little Houses '' no love was without a grotto . 
In the door opening on the Rue de Babylone , there was a box destined for the reception of letters and papers ; only , as the three inhabitants of the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters , the entire usefulness of that box , formerly the go-between of a love affair , and the confidant of a love-lorn lawyer , was now limited to the tax-collector 's notices , and the summons of the guard . 
For M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman , belonged to the national guard ; he had not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of 1831 . 
The municipal information collected at that time had even reached the convent of the Petit-Picpus , a sort of impenetrable and holy cloud , whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise , and , consequently , worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the townhall . 
Three or four times a year , Jean Valjean donned his uniform and mounted guard ; he did this willingly , however ; it was a correct disguise which mixed him with every one , and yet left him solitary . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his sixtieth birthday , the age of legal exemption ; but he did not appear to be over fifty ; moreover , he had no desire to escape his sergeant-major nor to quibble with Comte de Lobau ; he possessed no civil status , he was concealing his name , he was concealing his identity , so he concealed his age , he concealed everything ; and , as we have just said , he willingly did his duty as a national guard ; the sum of his ambition lay in resembling any other man who paid his taxes . 
This man had for his ideal , within , the angel , without , the bourgeois . 
Let us note one detail , however ; when Jean Valjean went out with Cosette , he dressed as the reader has already seen , and had the air of a retired officer . 
When he went out alone , which was generally at night , he was always dressed in a workingman 's trousers and blouse , and wore a cap which concealed his face . 
Was this precaution or humility ? 
Both . 
Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical side of her destiny , and hardly noticed her father 's peculiarities . 
As for Toussaint , she venerated Jean Valjean , and thought everything he did right . 
