Destiny has some extremities which rise perpendicularly from the impossible , and beyond which life is no longer anything but a precipice . 
Javert had reached one of those extremities . 
One of his anxieties consisted in being constrained to think . 
The very violence of all these conflicting emotions forced him to it . 
Thought was something to which he was unused , and which was peculiarly painful . 
In thought there always exists a certain amount of internal rebellion ; and it irritated him to have that within him . 
Thought on any subject whatever , outside of the restricted circle of his functions , would have been for him in any case useless and a fatigue ; thought on the day which had just passed was a torture . 
Nevertheless , it was indispensable that he should take a look into his conscience , after such shocks , and render to himself an account of himself . 
What he had just done made him shudder . 
He , Javert , had seen fit to decide , contrary to all the regulations of the police , contrary to the whole social and judicial organization , contrary to the entire code , upon a release ; this had suited him ; he had substituted his own affairs for the affairs of the public ; was not this unjustifiable ? 
Every time that he brought himself face to face with this deed without a name which he had committed , he trembled from head to foot . 
Upon what should he decide ? 
One sole resource remained to him ; to return in all haste to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , and commit Jean Valjean to prison . 
It was clear that that was what he ought to do . 
He could not . 
Something barred his way in that direction . 
Something ? 
What ? 
Is there in the world , anything outside of the tribunals , executory sentences , the police and the authorities ? 
Javert was overwhelmed . 
A galley-slave sacred ! 
A convict who could not be touched by the law ! 
And that the deed of Javert ! 
Was it not a fearful thing that Javert and Jean Valjean , the man made to proceed with vigor , the man made to submit , -- that these two men who were both the things of the law , should have come to such a pass , that both of them had set themselves above the law ? 
What then ! 
such enormities were to happen and no one was to be punished ! 
Jean Valjean , stronger than the whole social order , was to remain at liberty , and he , Javert , was to go on eating the government 's bread ! 
His revery gradually became terrible . 
He might , athwart this revery , have also reproached himself on the subject of that insurgent who had been taken to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; but he never even thought of that . 
The lesser fault was lost in the greater . 
Besides , that insurgent was , obviously , a dead man , and , legally , death puts an end to pursuit . 
Jean Valjean was the load which weighed upon his spirit . 
Jean Valjean disconcerted him . 
All the axioms which had served him as points of support all his life long , had crumbled away in the presence of this man . 
Jean Valjean 's generosity towards him , Javert , crushed him . 
Other facts which he now recalled , and which he had formerly treated as lies and folly , now recurred to him as realities . 
M. Madeleine re-appeared behind Jean Valjean , and the two figures were superposed in such fashion that they now formed but one , which was venerable . 
Javert felt that something terrible was penetrating his soul -- admiration for a convict . 
Respect for a galley-slave -- is that a possible thing ? 
He shuddered at it , yet could not escape from it . 
In vain did he struggle , he was reduced to confess , in his inmost heart , the sublimity of that wretch . 
This was odious . 
A benevolent malefactor , merciful , gentle , helpful , clement , a convict , returning good for evil , giving back pardon for hatred , preferring pity to vengeance , preferring to ruin himself rather than to ruin his enemy , saving him who had smitten him , kneeling on the heights of virtue , more nearly akin to an angel than to a man . 
Javert was constrained to admit to himself that this monster existed . 
Things could not go on in this manner . 
Certainly , and we insist upon this point , he had not yielded without resistance to that monster , to that infamous angel , to that hideous hero , who enraged almost as much as he amazed him . 
Twenty times , as he sat in that carriage face to face with Jean Valjean , the legal tiger had roared within him . 
A score of times he had been tempted to fling himself upon Jean Valjean , to seize him and devour him , that is to say , to arrest him . 
What more simple , in fact ? 
To cry out at the first post that they passed : -- `` Here is a fugitive from justice , who has broken his ban ! '' 
to summon the gendarmes and say to them : `` This man is yours ! '' 
then to go off , leaving that condemned man there , to ignore the rest and not to meddle further in the matter . 
This man is forever a prisoner of the law ; the law may do with him what it will . 
What could be more just ? 
Javert had said all this to himself ; he had wished to pass beyond , to act , to apprehend the man , and then , as at present , he had not been able to do it ; and every time that his arm had been raised convulsively towards Jean Valjean 's collar , his hand had fallen back again , as beneath an enormous weight , and in the depths of his thought he had heard a voice , a strange voice crying to him : -- `` It is well . 
Deliver up your savior . 
Then have the basin of Pontius Pilate brought and wash your claws . '' 
Then his reflections reverted to himself and beside Jean Valjean glorified he beheld himself , Javert , degraded . 
A convict was his benefactor ! 
But then , why had he permitted that man to leave him alive ? 
He had the right to be killed in that barricade . 
He should have asserted that right . 
It would have been better to summon the other insurgents to his succor against Jean Valjean , to get himself shot by force . 
His supreme anguish was the loss of certainty . 
He felt that he had been uprooted . 
The code was no longer anything more than a stump in his hand . 
He had to deal with scruples of an unknown species . 
There had taken place within him a sentimental revelation entirely distinct from legal affirmation , his only standard of measurement hitherto . 
To remain in his former uprightness did not suffice . 
A whole order of unexpected facts had cropped up and subjugated him . 
A whole new world was dawning on his soul : kindness accepted and repaid , devotion , mercy , indulgence , violences committed by pity on austerity , respect for persons , no more definitive condemnation , no more conviction , the possibility of a tear in the eye of the law , no one knows what justice according to God , running in inverse sense to justice according to men . 
He perceived amid the shadows the terrible rising of an unknown moral sun ; it horrified and dazzled him . 
An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle . 
He said to himself that it was true that there were exceptional cases , that authority might be put out of countenance , that the rule might be inadequate in the presence of a fact , that everything could not be framed within the text of the code , that the unforeseen compelled obedience , that the virtue of a convict might set a snare for the virtue of the functionary , that destiny did indulge in such ambushes , and he reflected with despair that he himself had not even been fortified against a surprise . 
He was forced to acknowledge that goodness did exist . 
This convict had been good . 
And he himself , unprecedented circumstance , had just been good also . 
So he was becoming depraved . 
He found that he was a coward . 
He conceived a horror of himself . 
Javert 's ideal , was not to be human , to be grand , to be sublime ; it was to be irreproachable . 
Now , he had just failed in this . 
How had he come to such a pass ? 
How had all this happened ? 
He could not have told himself . 
He clasped his head in both hands , but in spite of all that he could do , he could not contrive to explain it to himself . 
He had certainly always entertained the intention of restoring Jean Valjean to the law of which Jean Valjean was the captive , and of which he , Javert , was the slave . 
Not for a single instant while he held him in his grasp had he confessed to himself that he entertained the idea of releasing him . 
It was , in some sort , without his consciousness , that his hand had relaxed and had let him go free . 
All sorts of interrogation points flashed before his eyes . 
He put questions to himself , and made replies to himself , and his replies frightened him . 
He asked himself : `` What has that convict done , that desperate fellow , whom I have pursued even to persecution , and who has had me under his foot , and who could have avenged himself , and who owed it both to his rancor and to his safety , in leaving me my life , in showing mercy upon me ? 
His duty ? 
No . 
Something more . 
And I in showing mercy upon him in my turn -- what have I done ? 
My duty ? 
No . 
Something more . 
So there is something beyond duty ? '' 
Here he took fright ; his balance became disjointed ; one of the scales fell into the abyss , the other rose heavenward , and Javert was no less terrified by the one which was on high than by the one which was below . 
Without being in the least in the world what is called Voltairian or a philosopher , or incredulous , being , on the contrary , respectful by instinct , towards the established church , he knew it only as an august fragment of the social whole ; order was his dogma , and sufficed for him ; ever since he had attained to man 's estate and the rank of a functionary , he had centred nearly all his religion in the police . 
Being , -- and here we employ words without the least irony and in their most serious acceptation , being , as we have said , a spy as other men are priests . 
He had a superior , M. Gisquet ; up to that day he had never dreamed of that other superior , God . 
This new chief , God , he became unexpectedly conscious of , and he felt embarrassed by him . 
This unforeseen presence threw him off his bearings ; he did not know what to do with this superior , he , who was not ignorant of the fact that the subordinate is bound always to bow , that he must not disobey , nor find fault , nor discuss , and that , in the presence of a superior who amazes him too greatly , the inferior has no other resource than that of handing in his resignation . 
But how was he to set about handing in his resignation to God ? 
However things might stand , -- and it was to this point that he reverted constantly , -- one fact dominated everything else for him , and that was , that he had just committed a terrible infraction of the law . 
He had just shut his eyes on an escaped convict who had broken his ban . 
He had just set a galley-slave at large . 
He had just robbed the laws of a man who belonged to them . 
That was what he had done . 
He no longer understood himself . 
The very reasons for his action escaped him ; only their vertigo was left with him . 
Up to that moment he had lived with that blind faith which gloomy probity engenders . 
This faith had quitted him , this probity had deserted him . 
All that he had believed in melted away . 
Truths which he did not wish to recognize were besieging him , inexorably . 
Henceforth , he must be a different man . 
He was suffering from the strange pains of a conscience abruptly operated on for the cataract . 
He saw that which it was repugnant to him to behold . 
He felt himself emptied , useless , put out of joint with his past life , turned out , dissolved . 
Authority was dead within him . 
He had no longer any reason for existing . 
A terrible situation ! 
to be touched . 
To be granite and to doubt ! 
to be the statue of Chastisement cast in one piece in the mould of the law , and suddenly to become aware of the fact that one cherishes beneath one 's breast of bronze something absurd and disobedient which almost resembles a heart ! 
To come to the pass of returning good for good , although one has said to oneself up to that day that that good is evil ! 
to be the watch-dog , and to lick the intruder 's hand ! 
to be ice and melt ! 
to be the pincers and to turn into a hand ! 
to suddenly feel one 's fingers opening ! 
to relax one 's grip , -- what a terrible thing ! 
The man-projectile no longer acquainted with his route and retreating ! 
To be obliged to confess this to oneself : infallibility is not infallible , there may exist error in the dogma , all has not been said when a code speaks , society is not perfect , authority is complicated with vacillation , a crack is possible in the immutable , judges are but men , the law may err , tribunals may make a mistake ! 
to behold a rift in the immense blue pane of the firmament ! 
That which was passing in Javert was the Fampoux of a rectilinear conscience , the derailment of a soul , the crushing of a probity which had been irresistibly launched in a straight line and was breaking against God . 
It certainly was singular that the stoker of order , that the engineer of authority , mounted on the blind iron horse with its rigid road , could be unseated by a flash of light ! 
that the immovable , the direct , the correct , the geometrical , the passive , the perfect , could bend ! 
that there should exist for the locomotive a road to Damascus ! 
God , always within man , and refractory , He , the true conscience , to the false ; a prohibition to the spark to die out ; an order to the ray to remember the sun ; an injunction to the soul to recognize the veritable absolute when confronted with the fictitious absolute , humanity which can not be lost ; the human heart indestructible ; that splendid phenomenon , the finest , perhaps , of all our interior marvels , did Javert understand this ? 
Did Javert penetrate it ? 
Did Javert account for it to himself ? 
Evidently he did not . 
But beneath the pressure of that incontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain bursting . 
He was less the man transfigured than the victim of this prodigy . 
In all this he perceived only the tremendous difficulty of existence . 
It seemed to him that , henceforth , his respiration was repressed forever . 
He was not accustomed to having something unknown hanging over his head . 
Up to this point , everything above him had been , to his gaze , merely a smooth , limpid and simple surface ; there was nothing incomprehensible , nothing obscure ; nothing that was not defined , regularly disposed , linked , precise , circumscribed , exact , limited , closed , fully provided for ; authority was a plane surface ; there was no fall in it , no dizziness in its presence . 
Javert had never beheld the unknown except from below . 
The irregular , the unforeseen , the disordered opening of chaos , the possible slip over a precipice -- this was the work of the lower regions , of rebels , of the wicked , of wretches . 
Now Javert threw himself back , and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedented apparition : a gulf on high . 
What ! 
one was dismantled from top to bottom ! 
one was disconcerted , absolutely ! 
In what could one trust ! 
That which had been agreed upon was giving way ! 
What ! 
the defect in society 's armor could be discovered by a magnanimous wretch ! 
What ! 
an honest servitor of the law could suddenly find himself caught between two crimes -- the crime of allowing a man to escape and the crime of arresting him ! 
everything was not settled in the orders given by the State to the functionary ! 
There might be blind alleys in duty ! 
What , -- all this was real ! 
was it true that an ex-ruffian , weighed down with convictions , could rise erect and end by being in the right ? 
Was this credible ? 
were there cases in which the law should retire before transfigured crime , and stammer its excuses ? 
-- Yes , that was the state of the case ! 
and Javert saw it ! 
and Javert had touched it ! 
and not only could he not deny it , but he had taken part in it . 
These were realities . 
It was abominable that actual facts could reach such deformity . 
If facts did their duty , they would confine themselves to being proofs of the law ; facts -- it is God who sends them . 
Was anarchy , then , on the point of now descending from on high ? 
Thus , -- and in the exaggeration of anguish , and the optical illusion of consternation , all that might have corrected and restrained this impression was effaced , and society , and the human race , and the universe were , henceforth , summed up in his eyes , in one simple and terrible feature , -- thus the penal laws , the thing judged , the force due to legislation , the decrees of the sovereign courts , the magistracy , the government , prevention , repression , official cruelty , wisdom , legal infallibility , the principle of authority , all the dogmas on which rest political and civil security , sovereignty , justice , public truth , all this was rubbish , a shapeless mass , chaos ; he himself , Javert , the spy of order , incorruptibility in the service of the police , the bull-dog providence of society , vanquished and hurled to earth ; and , erect , at the summit of all that ruin , a man with a green cap on his head and a halo round his brow ; this was the astounding confusion to which he had come ; this was the fearful vision which he bore within his soul . 
Was this to be endured ? 
No . 
A violent state , if ever such existed . 
There were only two ways of escaping from it . 
One was to go resolutely to Jean Valjean , and restore to his cell the convict from the galleys . 
The other ... Javert quitted the parapet , and , with head erect this time , betook himself , with a firm tread , towards the station-house indicated by a lantern at one of the corners of the Place du Chatelet . 
On arriving there , he saw through the window a sergeant of police , and he entered . 
Policemen recognize each other by the very way in which they open the door of a station-house . 
Javert mentioned his name , showed his card to the sergeant , and seated himself at the table of the post on which a candle was burning . 
On a table lay a pen , a leaden inkstand and paper , provided in the event of possible reports and the orders of the night patrols . 
This table , still completed by its straw-seated chair , is an institution ; it exists in all police stations ; it is invariably ornamented with a box-wood saucer filled with sawdust and a wafer box of cardboard filled with red wafers , and it forms the lowest stage of official style . 
It is there that the literature of the State has its beginning . 
Javert took a pen and a sheet of paper , and began to write . 
This is what he wrote : A FEW OBSERVATIONS FOR THE GOOD OF THE SERVICE . 
`` In the first place : I beg Monsieur le Prefet to cast his eyes on this . 
`` Secondly : prisoners , on arriving after examination , take off their shoes and stand barefoot on the flagstones while they are being searched . 
Many of them cough on their return to prison . 
This entails hospital expenses . 
`` Thirdly : the mode of keeping track of a man with relays of police agents from distance to distance , is good , but , on important occasions , it is requisite that at least two agents should never lose sight of each other , so that , in case one agent should , for any cause , grow weak in his service , the other may supervise him and take his place . 
`` Fourthly : it is inexplicable why the special regulation of the prison of the Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair , even by paying for it . 
`` Fifthly : in the Madelonettes there are only two bars to the canteen , so that the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand . 
`` Sixthly : the prisoners called barkers , who summon the other prisoners to the parlor , force the prisoner to pay them two sous to call his name distinctly . 
This is a theft . 
`` Seventhly : for a broken thread ten sous are withheld in the weaving shop ; this is an abuse of the contractor , since the cloth is none the worse for it . 
`` Eighthly : it is annoying for visitors to La Force to be obliged to traverse the boys ' court in order to reach the parlor of Sainte-Marie-l'Egyptienne . 
`` Ninthly : it is a fact that any day gendarmes can be overheard relating in the court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put by the magistrates to prisoners . 
For a gendarme , who should be sworn to secrecy , to repeat what he has heard in the examination room is a grave disorder . 
`` Tenthly : Mme. Henry is an honest woman ; her canteen is very neat ; but it is bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap of the secret cells . 
This is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a great civilization . '' 
Javert wrote these lines in his calmest and most correct chirography , not omitting a single comma , and making the paper screech under his pen . 
Below the last line he signed : `` JAVERT , `` Inspector of the 1st class . 
`` The Post of the Place du Chatelet . 
`` June 7th , 1832 , about one o'clock in the morning . '' 
Javert dried the fresh ink on the paper , folded it like a letter , sealed it , wrote on the back : Note for the administration , left it on the table , and quitted the post . 
The glazed and grated door fell to behind him . 
Again he traversed the Place du Chatelet diagonally , regained the quay , and returned with automatic precision to the very point which he had abandoned a quarter of an hour previously , leaned on his elbows and found himself again in the same attitude on the same paving-stone of the parapet . 
He did not appear to have stirred . 
The darkness was complete . 
It was the sepulchral moment which follows midnight . 
A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars . 
Not a single light burned in the houses of the city ; no one was passing ; all of the streets and quays which could be seen were deserted ; Notre-Dame and the towers of the Court-House seemed features of the night . 
A street lantern reddened the margin of the quay . 
The outlines of the bridges lay shapeless in the mist one behind the other . 
Recent rains had swollen the river . 
The spot where Javert was leaning was , it will be remembered , situated precisely over the rapids of the Seine , perpendicularly above that formidable spiral of whirlpools which loose and knot themselves again like an endless screw . 
Javert bent his head and gazed . 
All was black . 
Nothing was to be distinguished . 
A sound of foam was audible ; but the river could not be seen . 
At moments , in that dizzy depth , a gleam of light appeared , and undulated vaguely , water possessing the power of taking light , no one knows whence , and converting it into a snake . 
The light vanished , and all became indistinct once more . 
Immensity seemed thrown open there . 
What lay below was not water , it was a gulf . 
The wall of the quay , abrupt , confused , mingled with the vapors , instantly concealed from sight , produced the effect of an escarpment of the infinite . 
Nothing was to be seen , but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odor of the wet stones could be felt . 
A fierce breath rose from this abyss . 
The flood in the river , divined rather than perceived , the tragic whispering of the waves , the melancholy vastness of the arches of the bridge , the imaginable fall into that gloomy void , into all that shadow was full of horror . 
Javert remained motionless for several minutes , gazing at this opening of shadow ; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembled attention . 
The water roared . 
All at once he took off his hat and placed it on the edge of the quay . 
A moment later , a tall black figure , which a belated passer-by in the distance might have taken for a phantom , appeared erect upon the parapet of the quay , bent over towards the Seine , then drew itself up again , and fell straight down into the shadows ; a dull splash followed ; and the shadow alone was in the secret of the convulsions of that obscure form which had disappeared beneath the water . 
IN WHICH THE TREE WITH THE ZINC PLASTER APPEARS AGAIN Some time after the events which we have just recorded , Sieur Boulatruelle experienced a lively emotion . 
Sieur Boulatruelle was that road-mender of Montfermeil whom the reader has already seen in the gloomy parts of this book . 
Boulatruelle , as the reader may , perchance , recall , was a man who was occupied with divers and troublesome matters . 
He broke stones and damaged travellers on the highway . 
Road-mender and thief as he was , he cherished one dream ; he believed in the treasures buried in the forest of Montfermeil . 
He hoped some day to find the money in the earth at the foot of a tree ; in the meanwhile , he lived to search the pockets of passers-by . 
Nevertheless , for an instant , he was prudent . 
He had just escaped neatly . 
He had been , as the reader is aware , picked up in Jondrette 's garret in company with the other ruffians . 
Utility of a vice : his drunkenness had been his salvation . 
The authorities had never been able to make out whether he had been there in the quality of a robber or a man who had been robbed . 
An order of nolle prosequi , founded on his well authenticated state of intoxication on the evening of the ambush , had set him at liberty . 
He had taken to his heels . 
He had returned to his road from Gagny to Lagny , to make , under administrative supervision , broken stone for the good of the state , with downcast mien , in a very pensive mood , his ardor for theft somewhat cooled ; but he was addicted none the less tenderly to the wine which had recently saved him . 
As for the lively emotion which he had experienced a short time after his return to his road-mender 's turf-thatched cot , here it is : One morning , Boulatruelle , while on his way as was his wont , to his work , and possibly also to his ambush , a little before daybreak caught sight , through the branches of the trees , of a man , whose back alone he saw , but the shape of whose shoulders , as it seemed to him at that distance and in the early dusk , was not entirely unfamiliar to him . 
Boulatruelle , although intoxicated , had a correct and lucid memory , a defensive arm that is indispensable to any one who is at all in conflict with legal order . 
`` Where the deuce have I seen something like that man yonder ? '' 
he said to himself . 
But he could make himself no answer , except that the man resembled some one of whom his memory preserved a confused trace . 
However , apart from the identity which he could not manage to catch , Boulatruelle put things together and made calculations . 
This man did not belong in the country-side . 
He had just arrived there . 
On foot , evidently . 
No public conveyance passes through Montfermeil at that hour . 
He had walked all night . 
Whence came he ? 
Not from a very great distance ; for he had neither haversack , nor bundle . 
From Paris , no doubt . 
Why was he in these woods ? 
why was he there at such an hour ? 
what had he come there for ? 
Boulatruelle thought of the treasure . 
By dint of ransacking his memory , he recalled in a vague way that he had already , many years before , had a similar alarm in connection with a man who produced on him the effect that he might well be this very individual . 
`` By the deuce , '' said Boulatruelle , `` I 'll find him again . 
I 'll discover the parish of that parishioner . 
This prowler of Patron-Minette has a reason , and I 'll know it . 
People ca n't have secrets in my forest if I do n't have a finger in the pie . '' 
He took his pick-axe which was very sharply pointed . 
`` There now , '' he grumbled , `` is something that will search the earth and a man . '' 
And , as one knots one thread to another thread , he took up the line of march at his best pace in the direction which the man must follow , and set out across the thickets . 
When he had compassed a hundred strides , the day , which was already beginning to break , came to his assistance . 
Footprints stamped in the sand , weeds trodden down here and there , heather crushed , young branches in the brushwood bent and in the act of straightening themselves up again with the graceful deliberation of the arms of a pretty woman who stretches herself when she wakes , pointed out to him a sort of track . 
He followed it , then lost it . 
Time was flying . 
He plunged deeper into the woods and came to a sort of eminence . 
An early huntsman who was passing in the distance along a path , whistling the air of Guillery , suggested to him the idea of climbing a tree . 
Old as he was , he was agile . 
There stood close at hand a beech-tree of great size , worthy of Tityrus and of Boulatruelle . 
Boulatruelle ascended the beech as high as he was able . 
The idea was a good one . 
On scrutinizing the solitary waste on the side where the forest is thoroughly entangled and wild , Boulatruelle suddenly caught sight of his man . 
Hardly had he got his eye upon him when he lost sight of him . 
The man entered , or rather , glided into , an open glade , at a considerable distance , masked by large trees , but with which Boulatruelle was perfectly familiar , on account of having noticed , near a large pile of porous stones , an ailing chestnut-tree bandaged with a sheet of zinc nailed directly upon the bark . 
This glade was the one which was formerly called the Blaru-bottom . 
The heap of stones , destined for no one knows what employment , which was visible there thirty years ago , is doubtless still there . 
Nothing equals a heap of stones in longevity , unless it is a board fence . 
They are temporary expedients . 
What a reason for lasting ! 
Boulatruelle , with the rapidity of joy , dropped rather than descended from the tree . 
The lair was unearthed , the question now was to seize the beast . 
That famous treasure of his dreams was probably there . 
It was no small matter to reach that glade . 
By the beaten paths , which indulge in a thousand teasing zigzags , it required a good quarter of an hour . 
In a bee-line , through the underbrush , which is peculiarly dense , very thorny , and very aggressive in that locality , a full half hour was necessary . 
Boulatruelle committed the error of not comprehending this . 
He believed in the straight line ; a respectable optical illusion which ruins many a man . 
The thicket , bristling as it was , struck him as the best road . 
`` Let 's take to the wolves ' Rue de Rivoli , '' said he . 
Boulatruelle , accustomed to taking crooked courses , was on this occasion guilty of the fault of going straight . 
He flung himself resolutely into the tangle of undergrowth . 
He had to deal with holly bushes , nettles , hawthorns , eglantines , thistles , and very irascible brambles . 
He was much lacerated . 
At the bottom of the ravine he found water which he was obliged to traverse . 
At last he reached the Blaru-bottom , after the lapse of forty minutes , sweating , soaked , breathless , scratched , and ferocious . 
There was no one in the glade . 
Boulatruelle rushed to the heap of stones . 
It was in its place . 
It had not been carried off . 
As for the man , he had vanished in the forest . 
He had made his escape . 
Where ? 
in what direction ? 
into what thicket ? 
Impossible to guess . 
And , heartrending to say , there , behind the pile of stones , in front of the tree with the sheet of zinc , was freshly turned earth , a pick-axe , abandoned or forgotten , and a hole . 
The hole was empty . 
`` Thief ! '' 
shrieked Boulatruelle , shaking his fist at the horizon . 
MARIUS , EMERGING FROM CIVIL WAR , MAKES READY FOR DOMESTIC WAR For a long time , Marius was neither dead nor alive . 
For many weeks he lay in a fever accompanied by delirium , and by tolerably grave cerebral symptoms , caused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than by the wounds themselves . 
He repeated Cosette 's name for whole nights in the melancholy loquacity of fever , and with the sombre obstinacy of agony . 
The extent of some of the lesions presented a serious danger , the suppuration of large wounds being always liable to become re-absorbed , and consequently , to kill the sick man , under certain atmospheric conditions ; at every change of weather , at the slightest storm , the physician was uneasy . 
`` Above all things , '' he repeated , `` let the wounded man be subjected to no emotion . '' 
The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult , the fixation of apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having been invented as yet , at that epoch . 
Nicolette used up a sheet `` as big as the ceiling , '' as she put it , for lint . 
It was not without difficulty that the chloruretted lotions and the nitrate of silver overcame the gangrene . 
As long as there was any danger , M. Gillenormand , seated in despair at his grandson 's pillow , was , like Marius , neither alive nor dead . 
Every day , sometimes twice a day , a very well dressed gentleman with white hair , -- such was the description given by the porter , -- came to inquire about the wounded man , and left a large package of lint for the dressings . 
Finally , on the 7th of September , four months to a day , after the sorrowful night when he had been brought back to his grandfather in a dying condition , the doctor declared that he would answer for Marius . 
Convalescence began . 
But Marius was forced to remain for two months more stretched out on a long chair , on account of the results called up by the fracture of his collar-bone . 
There always is a last wound like that which will not close , and which prolongs the dressings indefinitely , to the great annoyance of the sick person . 
However , this long illness and this long convalescence saved him from all pursuit . 
In France , there is no wrath , not even of a public character , which six months will not extinguish . 
Revolts , in the present state of society , are so much the fault of every one , that they are followed by a certain necessity of shutting the eyes . 
Let us add , that the inexcusable Gisquet order , which enjoined doctors to lodge information against the wounded , having outraged public opinion , and not opinion alone , but the King first of all , the wounded were covered and protected by this indignation ; and , with the exception of those who had been made prisoners in the very act of combat , the councils of war did not dare to trouble any one . 
So Marius was left in peace . 
M. Gillenormand first passed through all manner of anguish , and then through every form of ecstasy . 
It was found difficult to prevent his passing every night beside the wounded man ; he had his big arm-chair carried to Marius ' bedside ; he required his daughter to take the finest linen in the house for compresses and bandages . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , like a sage and elderly person , contrived to spare the fine linen , while allowing the grandfather to think that he was obeyed . 
M. Gillenormand would not permit any one to explain to him , that for the preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse linen , nor new linen as old linen . 
He was present at all the dressings of the wounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself . 
When the dead flesh was cut away with scissors , he said : `` Aie ! 
aie ! '' 
Nothing was more touching than to see him with his gentle , senile palsy , offer the wounded man a cup of his cooling-draught . 
He overwhelmed the doctor with questions . 
He did not observe that he asked the same ones over and over again . 
On the day when the doctor announced to him that Marius was out of danger , the good man was in a delirium . 
He made his porter a present of three louis . 
That evening , on his return to his own chamber , he danced a gavotte , using his thumb and forefinger as castanets , and he sang the following song : `` Jeanne est nee a Fougere `` Amour , tu vis en elle ; Vrai nid d'une bergere ; Car c'est dans sa prunelle J'adore son jupon , Que tu mets ton carquois . 
Fripon . 
Narquois ! 
`` Moi , je la chante , et j' aime , Plus que Diane meme , Jeanne et ses durs tetons Bretons . '' 
-LSB- 61 -RSB- -LSB- 61 -RSB- `` Jeanne was born at Fougere , a true shepherd 's nest ; I adore her petticoat , the rogue . 
`` Love , thou dwellest in her ; For 't is in her eyes that thou placest thy quiver , sly scamp ! 
`` As for me , I sing her , and I love , more than Diana herself , Jeanne and her firm Breton breasts . '' 
Then he knelt upon a chair , and Basque , who was watching him through the half-open door , made sure that he was praying . 
Up to that time , he had not believed in God . 
At each succeeding phase of improvement , which became more and more pronounced , the grandfather raved . 
He executed a multitude of mechanical actions full of joy ; he ascended and descended the stairs , without knowing why . 
A pretty female neighbor was amazed one morning at receiving a big bouquet ; it was M. Gillenormand who had sent it to her . 
The husband made a jealous scene . 
M. Gillenormand tried to draw Nicolette upon his knees . 
He called Marius , `` M. le Baron . '' 
He shouted : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
Every moment , he kept asking the doctor : `` Is he no longer in danger ? '' 
He gazed upon Marius with the eyes of a grandmother . 
He brooded over him while he ate . 
He no longer knew himself , he no longer rendered himself an account of himself . 
Marius was the master of the house , there was abdication in his joy , he was the grandson of his grandson . 
In the state of joy in which he then was , he was the most venerable of children . 
In his fear lest he might fatigue or annoy the convalescent , he stepped behind him to smile . 
He was content , joyous , delighted , charming , young . 
His white locks added a gentle majesty to the gay radiance of his visage . 
When grace is mingled with wrinkles , it is adorable . 
There is an indescribable aurora in beaming old age . 
As for Marius , as he allowed them to dress his wounds and care for him , he had but one fixed idea : Cosette . 
After the fever and delirium had left him , he did not again pronounce her name , and it might have been supposed that he no longer thought of her . 
He held his peace , precisely because his soul was there . 
He did not know what had become of Cosette ; the whole affair of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory ; shadows that were almost indistinct , floated through his mind , Eponine , Gavroche , Mabeuf , the Thenardiers , all his friends gloomily intermingled with the smoke of the barricade ; the strange passage of M. Fauchelevent through that adventure produced on him the effect of a puzzle in a tempest ; he understood nothing connected with his own life , he did not know how nor by whom he had been saved , and no one of those around him knew this ; all that they had been able to tell him was , that he had been brought home at night in a hackney-coach , to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; past , present , future were nothing more to him than the mist of a vague idea ; but in that fog there was one immovable point , one clear and precise outline , something made of granite , a resolution , a will ; to find Cosette once more . 
For him , the idea of life was not distinct from the idea of Cosette . 
He had decreed in his heart that he would not accept the one without the other , and he was immovably resolved to exact of any person whatever , who should desire to force him to live , -- from his grandfather , from fate , from hell , -- the restitution of his vanished Eden . 
He did not conceal from himself the fact that obstacles existed . 
Let us here emphasize one detail , he was not won over and was but little softened by all the solicitude and tenderness of his grandfather . 
In the first place , he was not in the secret ; then , in his reveries of an invalid , which were still feverish , possibly , he distrusted this tenderness as a strange and novel thing , which had for its object his conquest . 
He remained cold . 
The grandfather absolutely wasted his poor old smile . 
Marius said to himself that it was all right so long as he , Marius , did not speak , and let things take their course ; but that when it became a question of Cosette , he would find another face , and that his grandfather 's true attitude would be unmasked . 
Then there would be an unpleasant scene ; a recrudescence of family questions , a confrontation of positions , every sort of sarcasm and all manner of objections at one and the same time , Fauchelevent , Coupelevent , fortune , poverty , a stone about his neck , the future . 
Violent resistance ; conclusion : a refusal . 
Marius stiffened himself in advance . 
And then , in proportion as he regained life , the old ulcers of his memory opened once more , he reflected again on the past , Colonel Pontmercy placed himself once more between M. Gillenormand and him , Marius , he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from a person who had been so unjust and so hard to his father . 
And with health , there returned to him a sort of harshness towards his grandfather . 
The old man was gently pained by this . 
M. Gillenormand , without however allowing it to appear , observed that Marius , ever since the latter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness , had not once called him father . 
It is true that he did not say `` monsieur '' to him ; but he contrived not to say either the one or the other , by means of a certain way of turning his phrases . 
Obviously , a crisis was approaching . 
As almost always happens in such cases , Marius skirmished before giving battle , by way of proving himself . 
This is called `` feeling the ground . '' 
One morning it came to pass that M. Gillenormand spoke slightingly of the Convention , apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his hands , and gave vent to a Royalist harangue on Danton , Saint-Juste and Robespierre . 
-- `` The men of '93 were giants , '' said Marius with severity . 
The old man held his peace , and uttered not a sound during the remainder of that day . 
Marius , who had always present to his mind the inflexible grandfather of his early years , interpreted this silence as a profound concentration of wrath , augured from it a hot conflict , and augmented his preparations for the fray in the inmost recesses of his mind . 
He decided that , in case of a refusal , he would tear off his bandages , dislocate his collar-bone , that he would lay bare all the wounds which he had left , and would reject all food . 
His wounds were his munitions of war . 
He would have Cosette or die . 
He awaited the propitious moment with the crafty patience of the sick . 
That moment arrived . 
MARIUS ATTACKED One day , M. Gillenormand , while his daughter was putting in order the phials and cups on the marble of the commode , bent over Marius and said to him in his tenderest accents : `` Look here , my little Marius , if I were in your place , I would eat meat now in preference to fish . 
A fried sole is excellent to begin a convalescence with , but a good cutlet is needed to put a sick man on his feet . '' 
Marius , who had almost entirely recovered his strength , collected the whole of it , drew himself up into a sitting posture , laid his two clenched fists on the sheets of his bed , looked his grandfather in the face , assumed a terrible air , and said : `` This leads me to say something to you . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I wish to marry . '' 
`` Agreed , '' said his grandfather . 
-- And he burst out laughing . 
`` How agreed ? '' 
`` Yes , agreed . 
You shall have your little girl . '' 
Marius , stunned and overwhelmed with the dazzling shock , trembled in every limb . 
M. Gillenormand went on : `` Yes , you shall have her , that pretty little girl of yours . 
She comes every day in the shape of an old gentleman to inquire after you . 
Ever since you were wounded , she has passed her time in weeping and making lint . 
I have made inquiries . 
She lives in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
Ah ! 
There we have it ! 
Ah ! 
so you want her ! 
Well , you shall have her . 
You 're caught . 
You had arranged your little plot , you had said to yourself : -- ` I 'm going to signify this squarely to my grandfather , to that mummy of the Regency and of the Directory , to that ancient beau , to that Dorante turned Geronte ; he has indulged in his frivolities also , that he has , and he has had his love affairs , and his grisettes and his Cosettes ; he has made his rustle , he has had his wings , he has eaten of the bread of spring ; he certainly must remember it . ' 
Ah ! 
you take the cockchafer by the horns . 
That 's good . 
I offer you a cutlet and you answer me : ` By the way , I want to marry . ' 
There 's a transition for you ! 
Ah ! 
you reckoned on a bickering ! 
You do not know that I am an old coward . 
What do you say to that ? 
You are vexed ? 
You did not expect to find your grandfather still more foolish than yourself , you are wasting the discourse which you meant to bestow upon me , Mr. Lawyer , and that 's vexatious . 
Well , so much the worse , rage away . 
I 'll do whatever you wish , and that cuts you short , imbecile ! 
Listen . 
I have made my inquiries , I 'm cunning too ; she is charming , she is discreet , it is not true about the lancer , she has made heaps of lint , she 's a jewel , she adores you , if you had died , there would have been three of us , her coffin would have accompanied mine . 
I have had an idea , ever since you have been better , of simply planting her at your bedside , but it is only in romances that young girls are brought to the bedsides of handsome young wounded men who interest them . 
It is not done . 
What would your aunt have said to it ? 
You were nude three quarters of the time , my good fellow . 
Ask Nicolette , who has not left you for a moment , if there was any possibility of having a woman here . 
And then , what would the doctor have said ? 
A pretty girl does not cure a man of fever . 
In short , it 's all right , let us say no more about it , all 's said , all 's done , it 's all settled , take her . 
Such is my ferocity . 
You see , I perceived that you did not love me . 
I said to myself : ` Here now , I have my little Cosette right under my hand , I 'm going to give her to him , he will be obliged to love me a little then , or he must tell the reason why . ' 
Ah ! 
so you thought that the old man was going to storm , to put on a big voice , to shout no , and to lift his cane at all that aurora . 
Not a bit of it . 
Cosette , so be it ; love , so be it ; I ask nothing better . 
Pray take the trouble of getting married , sir . 
Be happy , my well-beloved child . '' 
That said , the old man burst forth into sobs . 
And he seized Marius ' head , and pressed it with both arms against his breast , and both fell to weeping . 
This is one of the forms of supreme happiness . 
`` Father ! '' 
cried Marius . 
`` Ah , so you love me ! '' 
said the old man . 
An ineffable moment ensued . 
They were choking and could not speak . 
At length the old man stammered : `` Come ! 
his mouth is unstopped at last . 
He has said : ` Father ' to me . '' 
Marius disengaged his head from his grandfather 's arms , and said gently : `` But , father , now that I am quite well , it seems to me that I might see her . '' 
`` Agreed again , you shall see her to-morrow . '' 
`` Father ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Why not to-day ? '' 
`` Well , to-day then . 
Let it be to-day . 
You have called me ` father ' three times , and it is worth it . 
I will attend to it . 
She shall be brought hither . 
Agreed , I tell you . 
It has already been put into verse . 
This is the ending of the elegy of the ` Jeune Malade ' by Andre Chenier , by Andre Chenier whose throat was cut by the ras ... by the giants of ' 93 . '' 
M. Gillenormand fancied that he detected a faint frown on the part of Marius , who , in truth , as we must admit , was no longer listening to him , and who was thinking far more of Cosette than of 1793 . 
The grandfather , trembling at having so inopportunely introduced Andre Chenier , resumed precipitately : `` Cut his throat is not the word . 
The fact is that the great revolutionary geniuses , who were not malicious , that is incontestable , who were heroes , pardi ! 
found that Andre Chenier embarrassed them somewhat , and they had him guillot ... that is to say , those great men on the 7th of Thermidor , besought Andre Chenier , in the interests of public safety , to be so good as to go ... '' M. Gillenormand , clutched by the throat by his own phrase , could not proceed . 
Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it , while his daughter arranged the pillow behind Marius , who was overwhelmed with so many emotions , the old man rushed headlong , with as much rapidity as his age permitted , from the bed-chamber , shut the door behind him , and , purple , choking and foaming at the mouth , his eyes starting from his head , he found himself nose to nose with honest Basque , who was blacking boots in the anteroom . 
He seized Basque by the collar , and shouted full in his face in fury : -- `` By the hundred thousand Javottes of the devil , those ruffians did assassinate him ! '' 
`` Who , sir ? '' 
`` Andre Chenier ! '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said Basque in alarm . 
MADEMOISELLE GILLENORMAND ENDS BY NO LONGER THINKING IT A BAD THING THAT M. FAUCHELEVENT SHOULD HAVE ENTERED WITH SOMETHING UNDER HIS ARM Cosette and Marius beheld each other once more . 
What that interview was like we decline to say . 
There are things which one must not attempt to depict ; the sun is one of them . 
The entire family , including Basque and Nicolette , were assembled in Marius ' chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it . 
Precisely at that moment , the grandfather was on the point of blowing his nose ; he stopped short , holding his nose in his handkerchief , and gazing over it at Cosette . 
She appeared on the threshold ; it seemed to him that she was surrounded by a glory . 
`` Adorable ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
Then he blew his nose noisily . 
Cosette was intoxicated , delighted , frightened , in heaven . 
She was as thoroughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness . 
She stammered all pale , yet flushed , she wanted to fling herself into Marius ' arms , and dared not . 
Ashamed of loving in the presence of all these people . 
People are pitiless towards happy lovers ; they remain when the latter most desire to be left alone . 
Lovers have no need of any people whatever . 
With Cosette , and behind her , there had entered a man with white hair who was grave yet smiling , though with a vague and heartrending smile . 
It was `` Monsieur Fauchelevent '' ; it was Jean Valjean . 
He was very well dressed , as the porter had said , entirely in black , in perfectly new garments , and with a white cravat . 
The porter was a thousand leagues from recognizing in this correct bourgeois , in this probable notary , the fear-inspiring bearer of the corpse , who had sprung up at his door on the night of the 7th of June , tattered , muddy , hideous , haggard , his face masked in blood and mire , supporting in his arms the fainting Marius ; still , his porter 's scent was aroused . 
When M. Fauchelevent arrived with Cosette , the porter had not been able to refrain from communicating to his wife this aside : `` I do n't know why it is , but I ca n't help fancying that I 've seen that face before . '' 
M. Fauchelevent in Marius ' chamber , remained apart near the door . 
He had under his arm , a package which bore considerable resemblance to an octavo volume enveloped in paper . 
The enveloping paper was of a greenish hue , and appeared to be mouldy . 
`` Does the gentleman always have books like that under his arm ? '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , who did not like books , demanded in a low tone of Nicolette . 
`` Well , '' retorted M. Gillenormand , who had overheard her , in the same tone , `` he 's a learned man . 
What then ? 
Is that his fault ? 
Monsieur Boulard , one of my acquaintances , never walked out without a book under his arm either , and he always had some old volume hugged to his heart like that . '' 
And , with a bow , he said aloud : `` Monsieur Tranchelevent ... '' Father Gillenormand did not do it intentionally , but inattention to proper names was an aristocratic habit of his . 
`` Monsieur Tranchelevent , I have the honor of asking you , on behalf of my grandson , Baron Marius Pontmercy , for the hand of Mademoiselle . '' 
Monsieur Tranchelevent bowed . 
`` That 's settled , '' said the grandfather . 
And , turning to Marius and Cosette , with both arms extended in blessing , he cried : `` Permission to adore each other ! '' 
They did not require him to repeat it twice . 
So much the worse ! 
the chirping began . 
They talked low . 
Marius , resting on his elbow on his reclining chair , Cosette standing beside him . 
`` Oh , heavens ! '' 
murmured Cosette , `` I see you once again ! 
it is thou ! 
it is you ! 
The idea of going and fighting like that ! 
But why ? 
It is horrible . 
I have been dead for four months . 
Oh ! 
how wicked it was of you to go to that battle ! 
What had I done to you ? 
I pardon you , but you will never do it again . 
A little while ago , when they came to tell us to come to you , I still thought that I was about to die , but it was from joy . 
I was so sad ! 
I have not taken the time to dress myself , I must frighten people with my looks ! 
What will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar ? 
Do speak ! 
You let me do all the talking . 
We are still in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
It seems that your shoulder was terrible . 
They told me that you could put your fist in it . 
And then , it seems that they cut your flesh with the scissors . 
That is frightful . 
I have cried till I have no eyes left . 
It is queer that a person can suffer like that . 
Your grandfather has a very kindly air . 
Do n't disturb yourself , do n't rise on your elbow , you will injure yourself . 
Oh ! 
how happy I am ! 
So our unhappiness is over ! 
I am quite foolish . 
I had things to say to you , and I no longer know in the least what they were . 
Do you still love me ? 
We live in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
There is no garden . 
I made lint all the time ; stay , sir , look , it is your fault , I have a callous on my fingers . '' 
`` Angel ! '' 
said Marius . 
Angel is the only word in the language which can not be worn out . 
No other word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it . 
Then as there were spectators , they paused and said not a word more , contenting themselves with softly touching each other 's hands . 
M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried : `` Talk loud , the rest of you . 
Make a noise , you people behind the scenes . 
Come , a little uproar , the deuce ! 
so that the children can chatter at their ease . '' 
And , approaching Marius and Cosette , he said to them in a very low voice : `` Call each other thou . 
Do n't stand on ceremony . '' 
Aunt Gillenormand looked on in amazement at this irruption of light in her elderly household . 
There was nothing aggressive about this amazement ; it was not the least in the world like the scandalized and envious glance of an owl at two turtle-doves , it was the stupid eye of a poor innocent seven and fifty years of age ; it was a life which had been a failure gazing at that triumph , love . 
`` Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior , '' said her father to her , `` I told you that this is what would happen to you . '' 
He remained silent for a moment , and then added : `` Look at the happiness of others . '' 
Then he turned to Cosette . 
`` How pretty she is ! 
how pretty she is ! 
She 's a Greuze . 
So you are going to have that all to yourself , you scamp ! 
Ah ! 
my rogue , you are getting off nicely with me , you are happy ; if I were not fifteen years too old , we would fight with swords to see which of us should have her . 
Come now ! 
I am in love with you , mademoiselle . 
It 's perfectly simple . 
It is your right . 
You are in the right . 
Ah ! 
what a sweet , charming little wedding this will make ! 
Our parish is Saint-Denis du Saint Sacrament , but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at Saint-Paul . 
The church is better . 
It was built by the Jesuits . 
It is more coquettish . 
It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague . 
The masterpiece of Jesuit architecture is at Namur . 
It is called Saint-Loup . 
You must go there after you are married . 
It is worth the journey . 
Mademoiselle , I am quite of your mind , I think girls ought to marry ; that is what they are made for . 
There is a certain Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed . 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- It 's a fine thing to remain a spinster , but it is chilly . 
The Bible says : Multiply . 
In order to save the people , Jeanne d'Arc is needed ; but in order to make people , what is needed is Mother Goose . 
So , marry , my beauties . 
I really do not see the use in remaining a spinster ! 
I know that they have their chapel apart in the church , and that they fall back on the Society of the Virgin ; but , sapristi , a handsome husband , a fine fellow , and at the expiration of a year , a big , blond brat who nurses lustily , and who has fine rolls of fat on his thighs , and who musses up your breast in handfuls with his little rosy paws , laughing the while like the dawn , -- that 's better than holding a candle at vespers , and chanting Turris eburnea ! '' 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- In allusion to the expression , coiffer Sainte-Catherine , `` to remain unmarried . '' 
The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels , and began to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more : `` Ainsi , bornant les cours de tes revasseries , Alcippe , il est donc vrai , dans peu tu te maries . '' 
-LSB- 63 -RSB- -LSB- 63 -RSB- `` Thus , hemming in the course of thy musings , Alcippus , it is true that thou wilt wed ere long . '' 
`` By the way ! '' 
`` What is it , father ? '' 
`` Have not you an intimate friend ? '' 
`` Yes , Courfeyrac . '' 
`` What has become of him ? '' 
`` He is dead . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
He seated himself near them , made Cosette sit down , and took their four hands in his aged and wrinkled hands : `` She is exquisite , this darling . 
She 's a masterpiece , this Cosette ! 
She is a very little girl and a very great lady . 
She will only be a Baroness , which is a come down for her ; she was born a Marquise . 
What eyelashes she has ! 
Get it well fixed in your noddles , my children , that you are in the true road . 
Love each other . 
Be foolish about it . 
Love is the folly of men and the wit of God . 
Adore each other . 
Only , '' he added , suddenly becoming gloomy , `` what a misfortune ! 
It has just occurred to me ! 
More than half of what I possess is swallowed up in an annuity ; so long as I live , it will not matter , but after my death , a score of years hence , ah ! 
my poor children , you will not have a sou ! 
Your beautiful white hands , Madame la Baronne , will do the devil the honor of pulling him by the tail . '' 
-LSB- 64 -RSB- -LSB- 64 -RSB- Tirer le diable par la queue , `` to live from hand to mouth . '' 
At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say : `` Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousand francs . '' 
It was the voice of Jean Valjean . 
So far he had not uttered a single word , no one seemed to be aware that he was there , and he had remained standing erect and motionless , behind all these happy people . 
`` What has Mademoiselle Euphrasie to do with the question ? '' 
inquired the startled grandfather . 
`` I am she , '' replied Cosette . 
`` Six hundred thousand francs ? '' 
resumed M. Gillenormand . 
`` Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs , possibly , '' said Jean Valjean . 
And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormand had mistaken for a book . 
Jean Valjean himself opened the package ; it was a bundle of bank-notes . 
They were turned over and counted . 
There were five hundred notes for a thousand francs each , and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred . 
In all , five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs . 
`` This is a fine book , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
murmured the aunt . 
`` This arranges things well , does it not , Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior ? '' 
said the grandfather . 
`` That devil of a Marius has ferreted out the nest of a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams ! 
Just trust to the love affairs of young folks now , will you ! 
Students find studentesses with six hundred thousand francs . 
Cherubino works better than Rothschild . '' 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
repeated Mademoiselle Gillenormand , in a low tone . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four ! 
one might as well say six hundred thousand ! '' 
As for Marius and Cosette , they were gazing at each other while this was going on ; they hardly heeded this detail . 
DEPOSIT YOUR MONEY IN A FOREST RATHER THAN WITH A NOTARY The reader has , no doubt , understood , without necessitating a lengthy explanation , that Jean Valjean , after the Champmathieu affair , had been able , thanks to his first escape of a few days ' duration , to come to Paris and to withdraw in season , from the hands of Laffitte , the sum earned by him , under the name of Monsieur Madeleine , at Montreuil-sur-Mer ; and that fearing that he might be recaptured , -- which eventually happened -- he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest of Montfermeil , in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom . 
The sum , six hundred and thirty thousand francs , all in bank-bills , was not very bulky , and was contained in a box ; only , in order to preserve the box from dampness , he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut shavings . 
In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures , the Bishop 's candlesticks . 
It will be remembered that he had carried off the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer . 
The man seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle , was Jean Valjean . 
Later on , every time that Jean Valjean needed money , he went to get it in the Blaru-bottom . 
Hence the absences which we have mentioned . 
He had a pickaxe somewhere in the heather , in a hiding-place known to himself alone . 
When he beheld Marius convalescent , feeling that the hour was at hand , when that money might prove of service , he had gone to get it ; it was he again , whom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods , but on this occasion , in the morning instead of in the evening . 
Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe . 
The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand , five hundred francs . 
Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself . 
-- `` We shall see hereafter , '' he thought . 
The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand francs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten years , from 1823 to 1833 . 
The five years of his stay in the convent had cost only five thousand francs . 
Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece , where they glittered to the great admiration of Toussaint . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert . 
The story had been told in his presence , and he had verified the fact in the Moniteur , how a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned under a boat belonging to some laundresses , between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf , and that a writing left by this man , otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors , pointed to a fit of mental aberration and a suicide . 
-- `` In fact , '' thought Jean Valjean , `` since he left me at liberty , once having got me in his power , he must have been already mad . '' 
THE TWO OLD MEN DO EVERYTHING , EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWN FASHION , TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY Everything was made ready for the wedding . 
The doctor , on being consulted , declared that it might take place in February . 
It was then December . 
A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed . 
The grandfather was not the least happy of them all . 
He remained for a quarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette . 
`` The wonderful , beautiful girl ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` And she has so sweet and good an air ! 
she is , without exception , the most charming girl that I have ever seen in my life . 
Later on , she 'll have virtues with an odor of violets . 
How graceful ! 
one can not live otherwise than nobly with such a creature . 
Marius , my boy , you are a Baron , you are rich , do n't go to pettifogging , I beg of you . '' 
Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise . 
The transition had not been softened , and they would have been stunned , had they not been dazzled by it . 
`` Do you understand anything about it ? '' 
said Marius to Cosette . 
`` No , '' replied Cosette , `` but it seems to me that the good God is caring for us . '' 
Jean Valjean did everything , smoothed away every difficulty , arranged everything , made everything easy . 
He hastened towards Cosette 's happiness with as much ardor , and , apparently with as much joy , as Cosette herself . 
As he had been a mayor , he understood how to solve that delicate problem , with the secret of which he alone was acquainted , Cosette 's civil status . 
If he were to announce her origin bluntly , it might prevent the marriage , who knows ? 
He extricated Cosette from all difficulties . 
He concocted for her a family of dead people , a sure means of not encountering any objections . 
Cosette was the only scion of an extinct family ; Cosette was not his own daughter , but the daughter of the other Fauchelevent . 
Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners to the convent of the Petit-Picpus . 
Inquiry was made at that convent ; the very best information and the most respectable references abounded ; the good nuns , not very apt and but little inclined to fathom questions of paternity , and not attaching any importance to the matter , had never understood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was the daughter . 
They said what was wanted and they said it with zeal . 
An acte de notoriete was drawn up . 
Cosette became in the eyes of the law , Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent . 
She was declared an orphan , both father and mother being dead . 
Jean Valjean so arranged it that he was appointed , under the name of Fauchelevent , as Cosette 's guardian , with M. Gillenormand as supervising guardian over him . 
As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs , they constituted a legacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person , who desired to remain unknown . 
The original legacy had consisted of five hundred and ninety-four thousand francs ; but ten thousand francs had been expended on the education of Mademoiselle Euphrasie , five thousand francs of that amount having been paid to the convent . 
This legacy , deposited in the hands of a third party , was to be turned over to Cosette at her majority , or at the date of her marriage . 
This , taken as a whole , was very acceptable , as the reader will perceive , especially when the sum due was half a million . 
There were some peculiarities here and there , it is true , but they were not noticed ; one of the interested parties had his eyes blindfolded by love , the others by the six hundred thousand francs . 
Cosette learned that she was not the daughter of that old man whom she had so long called father . 
He was merely a kinsman ; another Fauchelevent was her real father . 
At any other time this would have broken her heart . 
But at the ineffable moment which she was then passing through , it cast but a slight shadow , a faint cloud , and she was so full of joy that the cloud did not last long . 
She had Marius . 
The young man arrived , the old man was effaced ; such is life . 
And then , Cosette had , for long years , been habituated to seeing enigmas around her ; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is always prepared for certain renunciations . 
Nevertheless , she continued to call Jean Valjean : Father . 
Cosette , happy as the angels , was enthusiastic over Father Gillenormand . 
It is true that he overwhelmed her with gallant compliments and presents . 
While Jean Valjean was building up for Cosette a normal situation in society and an unassailable status , M. Gillenormand was superintending the basket of wedding gifts . 
Nothing so amused him as being magnificent . 
He had given to Cosette a robe of Binche guipure which had descended to him from his own grandmother . 
`` These fashions come up again , '' said he , `` ancient things are the rage , and the young women of my old age dress like the old women of my childhood . '' 
He rifled his respectable chests of drawers in Coromandel lacquer , with swelling fronts , which had not been opened for years . 
-- `` Let us hear the confession of these dowagers , '' he said , `` let us see what they have in their paunches . '' 
He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all his wives , of all his mistresses and of all his grandmothers . 
Pekins , damasks , lampas , painted moires , robes of shot gros de Tours , India kerchiefs embroidered in gold that could be washed , dauphines without a right or wrong side , in the piece , Genoa and Alencon point lace , parures in antique goldsmith 's work , ivory bon-bon boxes ornamented with microscopic battles , gewgaws and ribbons -- he lavished everything on Cosette . 
Cosette , amazed , desperately in love with Marius , and wild with gratitude towards M. Gillenormand , dreamed of a happiness without limit clothed in satin and velvet . 
Her wedding basket seemed to her to be upheld by seraphim . 
Her soul flew out into the azure depths , with wings of Mechlin lace . 
The intoxication of the lovers was only equalled , as we have already said , by the ecstasy of the grandfather . 
A sort of flourish of trumpets went on in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Every morning , a fresh offering of bric-a-brac from the grandfather to Cosette . 
All possible knickknacks glittered around her . 
One day Marius , who was fond of talking gravely in the midst of his bliss , said , apropos of I know not what incident : `` The men of the revolution are so great , that they have the prestige of the ages , like Cato and like Phocion , and each one of them seems to me an antique memory . '' 
`` Moire antique ! '' 
exclaimed the old gentleman . 
`` Thanks , Marius . 
That is precisely the idea of which I was in search . '' 
And on the following day , a magnificent dress of tea-rose colored moire antique was added to Cosette 's wedding presents . 
From these fripperies , the grandfather extracted a bit of wisdom . 
`` Love is all very well ; but there must be something else to go with it . 
The useless must be mingled with happiness . 
Happiness is only the necessary . 
Season that enormously with the superfluous for me . 
A palace and her heart . 
Her heart and the Louvre . 
Her heart and the grand waterworks of Versailles . 
Give me my shepherdess and try to make her a duchess . 
Fetch me Phyllis crowned with corn-flowers , and add a hundred thousand francs income . 
Open for me a bucolic perspective as far as you can see , beneath a marble colonnade . 
I consent to the bucolic and also to the fairy spectacle of marble and gold . 
Dry happiness resembles dry bread . 
One eats , but one does not dine . 
I want the superfluous , the useless , the extravagant , excess , that which serves no purpose . 
I remember to have seen , in the Cathedral of Strasburg , a clock , as tall as a three-story house which marked the hours , which had the kindness to indicate the hour , but which had not the air of being made for that ; and which , after having struck midday , or midnight , -- midday , the hour of the sun , or midnight , the hour of love , -- or any other hour that you like , gave you the moon and the stars , the earth and the sea , birds and fishes , Phoebus and Phoebe , and a host of things which emerged from a niche , and the twelve apostles , and the Emperor Charles the Fifth , and Eponine , and Sabinus , and a throng of little gilded goodmen , who played on the trumpet to boot . 
Without reckoning delicious chimes which it sprinkled through the air , on every occasion , without any one 's knowing why . 
Is a petty bald clock-face which merely tells the hour equal to that ? 
For my part , I am of the opinion of the big clock of Strasburg , and I prefer it to the cuckoo clock from the Black Forest . '' 
M. Gillenormand talked nonsense in connection with the wedding , and all the fripperies of the eighteenth century passed pell-mell through his dithyrambs . 
`` You are ignorant of the art of festivals . 
You do not know how to organize a day of enjoyment in this age , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Your nineteenth century is weak . 
It lacks excess . 
It ignores the rich , it ignores the noble . 
In everything it is clean-shaven . 
Your third estate is insipid , colorless , odorless , and shapeless . 
The dreams of your bourgeois who set up , as they express it : a pretty boudoir freshly decorated , violet , ebony and calico . 
Make way ! 
Make way ! 
the Sieur Curmudgeon is marrying Mademoiselle Clutch-penny . 
Sumptuousness and splendor . 
A louis d'or has been stuck to a candle . 
There 's the epoch for you . 
My demand is that I may flee from it beyond the Sarmatians . 
Ah ! 
in 1787 , I predict that all was lost , from the day when I beheld the Duc de Rohan , Prince de Leon , Duc de Chabot , Duc de Montbazon , Marquis de Sonbise , Vicomte de Thouars , peer of France , go to Longchamps in a tapecu ! 
That has borne its fruits . 
In this century , men attend to business , they gamble on ` Change , they win money , they are stingy . 
People take care of their surfaces and varnish them ; every one is dressed as though just out of a band-box , washed , soaped , scraped , shaved , combed , waked , smoothed , rubbed , brushed , cleaned on the outside , irreproachable , polished as a pebble , discreet , neat , and at the same time , death of my life , in the depths of their consciences they have dung-heaps and cesspools that are enough to make a cow-herd who blows his nose in his fingers , recoil . 
I grant to this age the device : ` Dirty Cleanliness . ' 
Do n't be vexed , Marius , give me permission to speak ; I say no evil of the people as you see , I am always harping on your people , but do look favorably on my dealing a bit of a slap to the bourgeoisie . 
I belong to it . 
He who loves well lashes well . 
Thereupon , I say plainly , that now-a-days people marry , but that they no longer know how to marry . 
Ah ! 
it is true , I regret the grace of the ancient manners . 
I regret everything about them , their elegance , their chivalry , those courteous and delicate ways , that joyous luxury which every one possessed , music forming part of the wedding , a symphony above stairs , a beating of drums below stairs , the dances , the joyous faces round the table , the fine-spun gallant compliments , the songs , the fireworks , the frank laughter , the devil 's own row , the huge knots of ribbon . 
I regret the bride 's garter . 
The bride 's garter is cousin to the girdle of Venus . 
On what does the war of Troy turn ? 
On Helen 's garter , parbleu ! 
Why did they fight , why did Diomed the divine break over the head of Meriones that great brazen helmet of ten points ? 
why did Achilles and Hector hew each other up with vast blows of their lances ? 
Because Helen allowed Paris to take her garter . 
With Cosette 's garter , Homer would construct the Iliad . 
He would put in his poem , a loquacious old fellow , like me , and he would call him Nestor . 
My friends , in bygone days , in those amiable days of yore , people married wisely ; they had a good contract , and then they had a good carouse . 
As soon as Cujas had taken his departure , Gamacho entered . 
But , in sooth ! 
the stomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due , and which wants to have its wedding also . 
People supped well , and had at table a beautiful neighbor without a guimpe so that her throat was only moderately concealed . 
Oh ! 
the large laughing mouths , and how gay we were in those days ! 
youth was a bouquet ; every young man terminated in a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses ; whether he was a shepherd or a warrior ; and if , by chance , one was a captain of dragoons , one found means to call oneself Florian . 
People thought much of looking well . 
They embroidered and tinted themselves . 
A bourgeois had the air of a flower , a Marquis had the air of a precious stone . 
People had no straps to their boots , they had no boots . 
They were spruce , shining , waved , lustrous , fluttering , dainty , coquettish , which did not at all prevent their wearing swords by their sides . 
The humming-bird has beak and claws . 
That was the day of the Galland Indies . 
One of the sides of that century was delicate , the other was magnificent ; and by the green cabbages ! 
people amused themselves . 
To-day , people are serious . 
The bourgeois is avaricious , the bourgeoise is a prude ; your century is unfortunate . 
People would drive away the Graces as being too low in the neck . 
Alas ! 
beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness . 
Since the revolution , everything , including the ballet-dancers , has had its trousers ; a mountebank dancer must be grave ; your rigadoons are doctrinarian . 
It is necessary to be majestic . 
People would be greatly annoyed if they did not carry their chins in their cravats . 
The ideal of an urchin of twenty when he marries , is to resemble M. Royer-Collard . 
And do you know what one arrives at with that majesty ? 
at being petty . 
Learn this : joy is not only joyous ; it is great . 
But be in love gayly then , what the deuce ! 
marry , when you marry , with fever and giddiness , and tumult , and the uproar of happiness ! 
Be grave in church , well and good . 
But , as soon as the mass is finished , sarpejou ! 
you must make a dream whirl around the bride . 
A marriage should be royal and chimerical ; it should promenade its ceremony from the cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup . 
I have a horror of a paltry wedding . 
Ventregoulette ! 
be in Olympus for that one day , at least . 
Be one of the gods . 
Ah ! 
people might be sylphs . 
Games and Laughter , argiraspides ; they are stupids . 
My friends , every recently made bridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini . 
Profit by that unique minute in life to soar away to the empyrean with the swans and the eagles , even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into the bourgeoisie of the frogs . 
Do n't economize on the nuptials , do not prune them of their splendors ; do n't scrimp on the day when you beam . 
The wedding is not the housekeeping . 
Oh ! 
if I were to carry out my fancy , it would be gallant , violins would be heard under the trees . 
Here is my programme : sky-blue and silver . 
I would mingle with the festival the rural divinities , I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids . 
The nuptials of Amphitrite , a rosy cloud , nymphs with well dressed locks and entirely naked , an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess , a chariot drawn by marine monsters . 
`` Triton trottait devant , et tirait de sa conque Des sons si ravissants qu'il ravissait quiconque ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- -- there 's a festive programme , there 's a good one , or else I know nothing of such matters , deuce take it ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- `` Triton trotted on before , and drew from his conch-shell sounds so ravishing that he delighted everyone ! '' 
While the grandfather , in full lyrical effusion , was listening to himself , Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at each other . 
Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity . 
Within the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amount of emotions . 
Marius returned , Marius brought back bleeding , Marius brought back from a barricade , Marius dead , then living , Marius reconciled , Marius betrothed , Marius wedding a poor girl , Marius wedding a millionairess . 
The six hundred thousand francs had been her last surprise . 
Then , her indifference of a girl taking her first communion returned to her . 
She went regularly to service , told her beads , read her euchology , mumbled Aves in one corner of the house , while I love you was being whispered in the other , and she beheld Marius and Cosette in a vague way , like two shadows . 
The shadow was herself . 
There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul , neutralized by torpor , a stranger to that which may be designated as the business of living , receives no impressions , either human , or pleasant or painful , with the exception of earthquakes and catastrophes . 
This devotion , as Father Gillenormand said to his daughter , corresponds to a cold in the head . 
You smell nothing of life . 
Neither any bad , nor any good odor . 
Moreover , the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderly spinster 's indecision . 
Her father had acquired the habit of taking her so little into account , that he had not consulted her in the matter of consent to Marius ' marriage . 
He had acted impetuously , according to his wont , having , a despot-turned slave , but a single thought , -- to satisfy Marius . 
As for the aunt , -- it had not even occurred to him that the aunt existed , and that she could have an opinion of her own , and , sheep as she was , this had vexed her . 
Somewhat resentful in her inmost soul , but impassible externally , she had said to herself : `` My father has settled the question of the marriage without reference to me ; I shall settle the question of the inheritance without consulting him . '' 
She was rich , in fact , and her father was not . 
She had reserved her decision on this point . 
It is probable that , had the match been a poor one , she would have left him poor . 
`` So much the worse for my nephew ! 
he is wedding a beggar , let him be a beggar himself ! '' 
But Cosette 's half-million pleased the aunt , and altered her inward situation so far as this pair of lovers were concerned . 
One owes some consideration to six hundred thousand francs , and it was evident that she could not do otherwise than leave her fortune to these young people , since they did not need it . 
It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather -- M. Gillenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber , the finest in the house . 
`` That will make me young again , '' he said . 
`` It 's an old plan of mine . 
I have always entertained the idea of having a wedding in my chamber . '' 
He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles . 
He had the ceiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff , which he had by him in the piece , and which he believed to have emanated from Utrecht with a buttercup-colored satin ground , covered with velvet auricula blossoms . 
-- `` It was with that stuff , '' said he , `` that the bed of the Duchesse d'Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped . '' 
-- On the chimney-piece , he set a little figure in Saxe porcelain , carrying a muff against her nude stomach . 
M. Gillenormand 's library became the lawyer 's study , which Marius needed ; a study , it will be remembered , being required by the council of the order . 
THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS The lovers saw each other every day . 
Cosette came with M. Fauchelevent . 
-- `` This is reversing things , '' said Mademoiselle Gillenormand , `` to have the bride come to the house to do the courting like this . '' 
But Marius ' convalescence had caused the habit to become established , and the arm-chairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue de l'Homme Arme , had rooted it . 
Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other , but did not address each other . 
It seemed as though this had been agreed upon . 
Every girl needs a chaperon . 
Cosette could not have come without M. Fauchelevent . 
In Marius ' eyes , M. Fauchelevent was the condition attached to Cosette . 
He accepted it . 
By dint of discussing political matters , vaguely and without precision , from the point of view of the general amelioration of the fate of all men , they came to say a little more than `` yes '' and `` no . '' 
Once , on the subject of education , which Marius wished to have free and obligatory , multiplied under all forms lavished on every one , like the air and the sun in a word , respirable for the entire population , they were in unison , and they almost conversed . 
M. Fauchelevent talked well , and even with a certain loftiness of language -- still he lacked something indescribable . 
M. Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more , than a man of the world . 
Marius , inwardly , and in the depths of his thought , surrounded with all sorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent , who was to him simply benevolent and cold . 
There were moments when doubts as to his own recollections occurred to him . 
There was a void in his memory , a black spot , an abyss excavated by four months of agony . 
-- Many things had been lost therein . 
He had come to the point of asking himself whether it were really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent , so serious and so calm a man , in the barricade . 
This was not , however , the only stupor which the apparitions and the disappearances of the past had left in his mind . 
It must not be supposed that he was delivered from all those obsessions of the memory which force us , even when happy , even when satisfied , to glance sadly behind us . 
The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that have vanished contains neither thought nor love . 
At times , Marius clasped his face between his hands , and the vague and tumultuous past traversed the twilight which reigned in his brain . 
Again he beheld Mabeuf fall , he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot , he felt beneath his lips the cold brow of Eponine ; Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Bossuet , Grantaire , all his friends rose erect before him , then dispersed into thin air . 
Were all those dear , sorrowful , valiant , charming or tragic beings merely dreams ? 
had they actually existed ? 
The revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke . 
These great fevers create great dreams . 
He questioned himself ; he felt himself ; all these vanished realities made him dizzy . 
Where were they all then ? 
was it really true that all were dead ? 
A fall into the shadows had carried off all except himself . 
It all seemed to him to have disappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre . 
There are curtains like this which drop in life . 
God passes on to the following act . 
And he himself -- was he actually the same man ? 
He , the poor man , was rich ; he , the abandoned , had a family ; he , the despairing , was to marry Cosette . 
It seemed to him that he had traversed a tomb , and that he had entered into it black and had emerged from it white , and in that tomb the others had remained . 
At certain moments , all these beings of the past , returned and present , formed a circle around him , and overshadowed him ; then he thought of Cosette , and recovered his serenity ; but nothing less than this felicity could have sufficed to efface that catastrophe . 
M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings . 
Marius hesitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade was the same as this Fauchelevent in flesh and blood , sitting so gravely beside Cosette . 
The first was , probably , one of those nightmares occasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium . 
However , the natures of both men were rigid , no question from Marius to M. Fauchelevent was possible . 
Such an idea had not even occurred to him . 
We have already indicated this characteristic detail . 
Two men who have a secret in common , and who , by a sort of tacit agreement , exchange not a word on the subject , are less rare than is commonly supposed . 
Once only , did Marius make the attempt . 
He introduced into the conversation the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and , turning to M. Fauchelevent , he said to him : `` Of course , you are acquainted with that street ? '' 
`` What street ? '' 
`` The Rue de la Chanvrerie . '' 
`` I have no idea of the name of that street , '' replied M. Fauchelevent , in the most natural manner in the world . 
The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon the street itself , appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really was . 
`` Decidedly , '' thought he , `` I have been dreaming . 
I have been subject to a hallucination . 
It was some one who resembled him . 
M. Fauchelevent was not there . '' ' 
TWO MEN IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND Marius ' enchantment , great as it was , could not efface from his mind other pre-occupations . 
While the wedding was in preparation , and while awaiting the date fixed upon , he caused difficult and scrupulous retrospective researches to be made . 
He owed gratitude in various quarters ; he owed it on his father 's account , he owed it on his own . 
There was Thenardier ; there was the unknown man who had brought him , Marius , back to M. Gillenormand . 
Marius endeavored to find these two men , not intending to marry , to be happy , and to forget them , and fearing that , were these debts of gratitude not discharged , they would leave a shadow on his life , which promised so brightly for the future . 
It was impossible for him to leave all these arrears of suffering behind him , and he wished , before entering joyously into the future , to obtain a quittance from the past . 
That Thenardier was a villain detracted nothing from the fact that he had saved Colonel Pontmercy . 
Thenardier was a ruffian in the eyes of all the world except Marius . 
And Marius , ignorant of the real scene in the battle field of Waterloo , was not aware of the peculiar detail , that his father , so far as Thenardier was concerned was in the strange position of being indebted to the latter for his life , without being indebted to him for any gratitude . 
None of the various agents whom Marius employed succeeded in discovering any trace of Thenardier . 
Obliteration appeared to be complete in that quarter . 
Madame Thenardier had died in prison pending the trial . 
Thenardier and his daughter Azelma , the only two remaining of that lamentable group , had plunged back into the gloom . 
The gulf of the social unknown had silently closed above those beings . 
On the surface there was not visible so much as that quiver , that trembling , those obscure concentric circles which announce that something has fallen in , and that the plummet may be dropped . 
Madame Thenardier being dead , Boulatruelle being eliminated from the case , Claquesous having disappeared , the principal persons accused having escaped from prison , the trial connected with the ambush in the Gorbeau house had come to nothing . 
That affair had remained rather obscure . 
The bench of Assizes had been obliged to content themselves with two subordinates . 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , and Demi-Liard , alias Deux-Milliards , who had been inconsistently condemned , after a hearing of both sides of the case , to ten years in the galleys . 
Hard labor for life had been the sentence pronounced against the escaped and contumacious accomplices . 
Thenardier , the head and leader , had been , through contumacy , likewise condemned to death . 
This sentence was the only information remaining about Thenardier , casting upon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside a bier . 
Moreover , by thrusting Thenardier back into the very remotest depths , through a fear of being re-captured , this sentence added to the density of the shadows which enveloped this man . 
As for the other person , as for the unknown man who had saved Marius , the researches were at first to some extent successful , then came to an abrupt conclusion . 
They succeeded in finding the carriage which had brought Marius to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire on the evening of the 6th of June . 
The coachman declared that , on the 6th of June , in obedience to the commands of a police-agent , he had stood from three o'clock in the afternoon until nightfall on the Quai des Champs-Elysees , above the outlet of the Grand Sewer ; that , towards nine o'clock in the evening , the grating of the sewer , which abuts on the bank of the river , had opened ; that a man had emerged therefrom , bearing on his shoulders another man , who seemed to be dead ; that the agent , who was on the watch at that point , had arrested the living man and had seized the dead man ; that , at the order of the police-agent , he , the coachman , had taken `` all those folks '' into his carriage ; that they had first driven to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; that they had there deposited the dead man ; that the dead man was Monsieur Marius , and that he , the coachman , recognized him perfectly , although he was alive `` this time '' ; that afterwards , they had entered the vehicle again , that he had whipped up his horses ; a few paces from the gate of the Archives , they had called to him to halt ; that there , in the street , they had paid him and left him , and that the police-agent had led the other man away ; that he knew nothing more ; that the night had been very dark . 
Marius , as we have said , recalled nothing . 
He only remembered that he had been seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when he was falling backwards into the barricade ; then , everything vanished so far as he was concerned . 
He had only regained consciousness at M. Gillenormand 's . 
He was lost in conjectures . 
He could not doubt his own identity . 
