to you , my dearly beloved , my children , to you , my innocent creatures ! 
Is it nothing to hold one 's peace ? 
is it a simple matter to keep silence ? 
No , it is not simple . 
There is a silence which lies . 
And my lie , and my fraud and my indignity , and my cowardice and my treason and my crime , I should have drained drop by drop , I should have spit it out , then swallowed it again , I should have finished at midnight and have begun again at midday , and my ` good morning ' would have lied , and my ` good night ' would have lied , and I should have slept on it , I should have eaten it , with my bread , and I should have looked Cosette in the face , and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile of the damned soul , and I should have been an abominable villain ! 
Why should I do it ? 
in order to be happy . 
In order to be happy . 
Have I the right to be happy ? 
I stand outside of life , Sir . '' 
Jean Valjean paused . 
Marius listened . 
Such chains of ideas and of anguishes can not be interrupted . 
Jean Valjean lowered his voice once more , but it was no longer a dull voice -- it was a sinister voice . 
`` You ask why I speak ? 
I am neither denounced , nor pursued , nor tracked , you say . 
Yes ! 
I am denounced ! 
yes ! 
I am tracked ! 
By whom ? 
By myself . 
It is I who bar the passage to myself , and I drag myself , and I push myself , and I arrest myself , and I execute myself , and when one holds oneself , one is firmly held . '' 
And , seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and extending it towards Marius : `` Do you see that fist ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Do n't you think that it holds that collar in such a wise as not to release it ? 
Well ! 
conscience is another grasp ! 
If one desires to be happy , sir , one must never understand duty ; for , as soon as one has comprehended it , it is implacable . 
One would say that it punished you for comprehending it ; but no , it rewards you ; for it places you in a hell , where you feel God beside you . 
One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is at peace with himself . '' 
And , with a poignant accent , he added : `` Monsieur Pontmercy , this is not common sense , I am an honest man . 
It is by degrading myself in your eyes that I elevate myself in my own . 
This has happened to me once before , but it was less painful then ; it was a mere nothing . 
Yes , an honest man . 
I should not be so if , through my fault , you had continued to esteem me ; now that you despise me , I am so . 
I have that fatality hanging over me that , not being able to ever have anything but stolen consideration , that consideration humiliates me , and crushes me inwardly , and , in order that I may respect myself , it is necessary that I should be despised . 
Then I straighten up again . 
I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience . 
I know well that that is most improbable . 
But what would you have me do about it ? 
it is the fact . 
I have entered into engagements with myself ; I keep them . 
There are encounters which bind us , there are chances which involve us in duties . 
You see , Monsieur Pontmercy , various things have happened to me in the course of my life . '' 
Again Jean Valjean paused , swallowing his saliva with an effort , as though his words had a bitter after-taste , and then he went on : `` When one has such a horror hanging over one , one has not the right to make others share it without their knowledge , one has not the right to make them slip over one 's own precipice without their perceiving it , one has not the right to let one 's red blouse drag upon them , one has no right to slyly encumber with one 's misery the happiness of others . 
It is hideous to approach those who are healthy , and to touch them in the dark with one 's ulcer . 
In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lent me his name , I have no right to use it ; he could give it to me , but I could not take it . 
A name is an I . 
You see , sir , that I have thought somewhat , I have read a little , although I am a peasant ; and you see that I express myself properly . 
I understand things . 
I have procured myself an education . 
Well , yes , to abstract a name and to place oneself under it is dishonest . 
Letters of the alphabet can be filched , like a purse or a watch . 
To be a false signature in flesh and blood , to be a living false key , to enter the house of honest people by picking their lock , never more to look straightforward , to forever eye askance , to be infamous within the I , no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
It is better to suffer , to bleed , to weep , to tear one 's skin from the flesh with one 's nails , to pass nights writhing in anguish , to devour oneself body and soul . 
That is why I have just told you all this . 
Wantonly , as you say . '' 
He drew a painful breath , and hurled this final word : `` In days gone by , I stole a loaf of bread in order to live ; to-day , in order to live , I will not steal a name . '' 
`` To live ! '' 
interrupted Marius . 
`` You do not need that name in order to live ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I understand the matter , '' said Jean Valjean , raising and lowering his head several times in succession . 
A silence ensued . 
Both held their peace , each plunged in a gulf of thoughts . 
Marius was sitting near a table and resting the corner of his mouth on one of his fingers , which was folded back . 
Jean Valjean was pacing to and fro . 
He paused before a mirror , and remained motionless . 
Then , as though replying to some inward course of reasoning , he said , as he gazed at the mirror , which he did not see : `` While , at present , I am relieved . '' 
He took up his march again , and walked to the other end of the drawing-room . 
At the moment when he turned round , he perceived that Marius was watching his walk . 
Then he said , with an inexpressible intonation : `` I drag my leg a little . 
Now you understand why ! '' 
Then he turned fully round towards Marius : `` And now , sir , imagine this : I have said nothing , I have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , I have taken my place in your house , I am one of you , I am in my chamber , I come to breakfast in the morning in slippers , in the evening all three of us go to the play , I accompany Madame Pontmercy to the Tuileries , and to the Place Royale , we are together , you think me your equal ; one fine day you are there , and I am there , we are conversing , we are laughing ; all at once , you hear a voice shouting this name : ` Jean Valjean ! ' 
and behold , that terrible hand , the police , darts from the darkness , and abruptly tears off my mask ! '' 
Again he paused ; Marius had sprung to his feet with a shudder . 
Jean Valjean resumed : `` What do you say to that ? '' 
Marius ' silence answered for him . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` You see that I am right in not holding my peace . 
Be happy , be in heaven , be the angel of an angel , exist in the sun , be content therewith , and do not trouble yourself about the means which a poor damned wretch takes to open his breast and force his duty to come forth ; you have before you , sir , a wretched man . '' 
Marius slowly crossed the room , and , when he was quite close to Jean Valjean , he offered the latter his hand . 
But Marius was obliged to step up and take that hand which was not offered , Jean Valjean let him have his own way , and it seemed to Marius that he pressed a hand of marble . 
`` My grandfather has friends , '' said Marius ; `` I will procure your pardon . '' 
`` It is useless , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` I am believed to be dead , and that suffices . 
The dead are not subjected to surveillance . 
They are supposed to rot in peace . 
Death is the same thing as pardon . '' 
And , disengaging the hand which Marius held , he added , with a sort of inexorable dignity : `` Moreover , the friend to whom I have recourse is the doing of my duty ; and I need but one pardon , that of my conscience . '' 
At that moment , a door at the other end of the drawing-room opened gently half way , and in the opening Cosette 's head appeared . 
They saw only her sweet face , her hair was in charming disorder , her eyelids were still swollen with sleep . 
She made the movement of a bird , which thrusts its head out of its nest , glanced first at her husband , then at Jean Valjean , and cried to them with a smile , so that they seemed to behold a smile at the heart of a rose : `` I will wager that you are talking politics . 
How stupid that is , instead of being with me ! '' 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
`` Cosette ! 
... '' stammered Marius . 
And he paused . 
One would have said that they were two criminals . 
Cosette , who was radiant , continued to gaze at both of them . 
There was something in her eyes like gleams of paradise . 
`` I have caught you in the very act , '' said Cosette . 
`` Just now , I heard my father Fauchelevent through the door saying : ` Conscience ... doing my duty ... ' That is politics , indeed it is . 
I will not have it . 
People should not talk politics the very next day . 
It is not right . '' 
`` You are mistaken . 
Cosette , '' said Marius , `` we are talking business . 
We are discussing the best investment of your six hundred thousand francs ... '' `` That is not it at all '' interrupted Cosette . 
`` I am coming . 
Does any body want me here ? '' 
And , passing resolutely through the door , she entered the drawing-room . 
She was dressed in a voluminous white dressing-gown , with a thousand folds and large sleeves which , starting from the neck , fell to her feet . 
In the golden heavens of some ancient gothic pictures , there are these charming sacks fit to clothe the angels . 
She contemplated herself from head to foot in a long mirror , then exclaimed , in an outburst of ineffable ecstasy : `` There was once a King and a Queen . 
Oh ! 
how happy I am ! '' 
That said , she made a curtsey to Marius and to Jean Valjean . 
`` There , '' said she , `` I am going to install myself near you in an easy-chair , we breakfast in half an hour , you shall say anything you like , I know well that men must talk , and I will be very good . '' 
Marius took her by the arm and said lovingly to her : `` We are talking business . '' 
`` By the way , '' said Cosette , `` I have opened my window , a flock of pierrots has arrived in the garden , -- Birds , not maskers . 
To-day is Ash-Wednesday ; but not for the birds . '' 
`` I tell you that we are talking business , go , my little Cosette , leave us alone for a moment . 
We are talking figures . 
That will bore you . '' 
`` You have a charming cravat on this morning , Marius . 
You are very dandified , monseigneur . 
No , it will not bore me . '' 
`` I assure you that it will bore you . '' 
`` No . 
Since it is you . 
I shall not understand you , but I shall listen to you . 
When one hears the voices of those whom one loves , one does not need to understand the words that they utter . 
That we should be here together -- that is all that I desire . 
I shall remain with you , bah ! '' 
`` You are my beloved Cosette ! 
Impossible . '' 
`` Impossible ! '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Very good , '' said Cosette . 
`` I was going to tell you some news . 
I could have told you that your grandfather is still asleep , that your aunt is at mass , that the chimney in my father Fauchelevent 's room smokes , that Nicolette has sent for the chimney-sweep , that Toussaint and Nicolette have already quarrelled , that Nicolette makes sport of Toussaint 's stammer . 
Well , you shall know nothing . 
Ah ! 
it is impossible ? 
you shall see , gentlemen , that I , in my turn , can say : It is impossible . 
Then who will be caught ? 
I beseech you , my little Marius , let me stay here with you two . '' 
`` I swear to you , that it is indispensable that we should be alone . '' 
`` Well , am I anybody ? '' 
Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word . 
Cosette turned to him : `` In the first place , father , I want you to come and embrace me . 
What do you mean by not saying anything instead of taking my part ? 
who gave me such a father as that ? 
You must perceive that my family life is very unhappy . 
My husband beats me . 
Come , embrace me instantly . '' 
Jean Valjean approached . 
Cosette turned toward Marius . 
`` As for you , I shall make a face at you . '' 
Then she presented her brow to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean advanced a step toward her . 
Cosette recoiled . 
`` Father , you are pale . 
Does your arm hurt you ? '' 
`` It is well , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Did you sleep badly ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Are you sad ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Embrace me if you are well , if you sleep well , if you are content , I will not scold you . '' 
And again she offered him her brow . 
Jean Valjean dropped a kiss upon that brow whereon rested a celestial gleam . 
`` Smile . '' 
Jean Valjean obeyed . 
It was the smile of a spectre . 
`` Now , defend me against my husband . '' 
`` Cosette ! 
... '' ejaculated Marius . 
`` Get angry , father . 
Say that I must stay . 
You can certainly talk before me . 
So you think me very silly . 
What you say is astonishing ! 
business , placing money in a bank a great matter truly . 
Men make mysteries out of nothing . 
I am very pretty this morning . 
Look at me , Marius . '' 
And with an adorable shrug of the shoulders , and an indescribably exquisite pout , she glanced at Marius . 
`` I love you ! '' 
said Marius . 
`` I adore you ! '' 
said Cosette . 
And they fell irresistibly into each other 's arms . 
`` Now , '' said Cosette , adjusting a fold of her dressing-gown , with a triumphant little grimace , `` I shall stay . '' 
`` No , not that , '' said Marius , in a supplicating tone . 
`` We have to finish something . '' 
`` Still no ? '' 
Marius assumed a grave tone : `` I assure you , Cosette , that it is impossible . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you put on your man 's voice , sir . 
That is well , I go . 
You , father , have not upheld me . 
Monsieur my father , monsieur my husband , you are tyrants . 
I shall go and tell grandpapa . 
If you think that I am going to return and talk platitudes to you , you are mistaken . 
I am proud . 
I shall wait for you now . 
You shall see , that it is you who are going to be bored without me . 
I am going , it is well . '' 
And she left the room . 
Two seconds later , the door opened once more , her fresh and rosy head was again thrust between the two leaves , and she cried to them : `` I am very angry indeed . '' 
The door closed again , and the shadows descended once more . 
It was as though a ray of sunlight should have suddenly traversed the night , without itself being conscious of it . 
Marius made sure that the door was securely closed . 
`` Poor Cosette ! '' 
he murmured , `` when she finds out ... '' At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb . 
He fixed on Marius a bewildered eye . 
`` Cosette ! 
oh yes , it is true , you are going to tell Cosette about this . 
That is right . 
Stay , I had not thought of that . 
One has the strength for one thing , but not for another . 
Sir , I conjure you , I entreat now , sir , give me your most sacred word of honor , that you will not tell her . 
Is it not enough that you should know it ? 
I have been able to say it myself without being forced to it , I could have told it to the universe , to the whole world , -- it was all one to me . 
But she , she does not know what it is , it would terrify her . 
What , a convict ! 
we should be obliged to explain matters to her , to say to her : ` He is a man who has been in the galleys . ' 
She saw the chain-gang pass by one day . 
Oh ! 
My God ! '' 
... He dropped into an arm-chair and hid his face in his hands . 
His grief was not audible , but from the quivering of his shoulders it was evident that he was weeping . 
Silent tears , terrible tears . 
There is something of suffocation in the sob . 
He was seized with a sort of convulsion , he threw himself against the back of the chair as though to gain breath , letting his arms fall , and allowing Marius to see his face inundated with tears , and Marius heard him murmur , so low that his voice seemed to issue from fathomless depths : `` Oh ! 
would that I could die ! '' 
`` Be at your ease , '' said Marius , `` I will keep your secret for myself alone . '' 
x And , less touched , perhaps , than he ought to have been , but forced , for the last hour , to familiarize himself with something as unexpected as it was dreadful , gradually beholding the convict superposed before his very eyes , upon M. Fauchelevent , overcome , little by little , by that lugubrious reality , and led , by the natural inclination of the situation , to recognize the space which had just been placed between that man and himself , Marius added : `` It is impossible that I should not speak a word to you with regard to the deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted . 
That is an act of probity . 
It is just that some recompense should be bestowed on you . 
Fix the sum yourself , it shall be counted out to you . 
Do not fear to set it very high . '' 
`` I thank you , sir , '' replied Jean Valjean , gently . 
He remained in thought for a moment , mechanically passing the tip of his fore-finger across his thumb-nail , then he lifted up his voice : `` All is nearly over . 
But one last thing remains for me ... '' `` What is it ? '' 
Jean Valjean struggled with what seemed a last hesitation , and , without voice , without breath , he stammered rather than said : `` Now that you know , do you think , sir , you , who are the master , that I ought not to see Cosette any more ? '' 
`` I think that would be better , '' replied Marius coldly . 
`` I shall never see her more , '' murmured Jean Valjean . 
And he directed his steps towards the door . 
He laid his hand on the knob , the latch yielded , the door opened . 
Jean Valjean pushed it open far enough to pass through , stood motionless for a second , then closed the door again and turned to Marius . 
He was no longer pale , he was livid . 
There were no longer any tears in his eyes , but only a sort of tragic flame . 
His voice had regained a strange composure . 
`` Stay , sir , '' he said . 
`` If you will allow it , I will come to see her . 
I assure you that I desire it greatly . 
If I had not cared to see Cosette , I should not have made to you the confession that I have made , I should have gone away ; but , as I desired to remain in the place where Cosette is , and to continue to see her , I had to tell you about it honestly . 
You follow my reasoning , do you not ? 
it is a matter easily understood . 
You see , I have had her with me for more than nine years . 
We lived first in that hut on the boulevard , then in the convent , then near the Luxembourg . 
That was where you saw her for the first time . 
You remember her blue plush hat . 
Then we went to the Quartier des Invalides , where there was a railing on a garden , the Rue Plumet . 
I lived in a little back court-yard , whence I could hear her piano . 
That was my life . 
We never left each other . 
That lasted for nine years and some months . 
I was like her own father , and she was my child . 
I do not know whether you understand , Monsieur Pontmercy , but to go away now , never to see her again , never to speak to her again , to no longer have anything , would be hard . 
If you do not disapprove of it , I will come to see Cosette from time to time . 
I will not come often . 
I will not remain long . 
You shall give orders that I am to be received in the little waiting-room . 
On the ground floor . 
I could enter perfectly well by the back door , but that might create surprise perhaps , and it would be better , I think , for me to enter by the usual door . 
Truly , sir , I should like to see a little more of Cosette . 
As rarely as you please . 
Put yourself in my place , I have nothing left but that . 
And then , we must be cautious . 
If I no longer come at all , it would produce a bad effect , it would be considered singular . 
What I can do , by the way , is to come in the afternoon , when night is beginning to fall . '' 
`` You shall come every evening , '' said Marius , `` and Cosette will be waiting for you . '' 
`` You are kind , sir , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Marius saluted Jean Valjean , happiness escorted despair to the door , and these two men parted . 
THE OBSCURITIES WHICH A REVELATION CAN CONTAIN Marius was quite upset . 
The sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the man beside whom he had seen Cosette , was now explained to him . 
There was something enigmatic about that person , of which his instinct had warned him . 
This enigma was the most hideous of disgraces , the galleys . 
This M. Fauchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean . 
To abruptly find such a secret in the midst of one 's happiness resembles the discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves . 
Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such a neighborhood ? 
Was this an accomplished fact ? 
Did the acceptance of that man form a part of the marriage now consummated ? 
Was there nothing to be done ? 
Had Marius wedded the convict as well ? 
In vain may one be crowned with light and joy , in vain may one taste the grand purple hour of life , happy love , such shocks would force even the archangel in his ecstasy , even the demigod in his glory , to shudder . 
As is always the case in changes of view of this nature , Marius asked himself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
Had he been wanting in divination ? 
Had he been wanting in prudence ? 
Had he involuntarily dulled his wits ? 
A little , perhaps . 
Had he entered upon this love affair , which had ended in his marriage to Cosette , without taking sufficient precautions to throw light upon the surroundings ? 
He admitted , -- it is thus , by a series of successive admissions of ourselves in regard to ourselves , that life amends us , little by little , -- he admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature , a sort of internal cloud peculiar to many organizations , and which , in paroxysms of passion and sorrow , dilates as the temperature of the soul changes , and invades the entire man , to such a degree as to render him nothing more than a conscience bathed in a mist . 
We have more than once indicated this characteristic element of Marius ' individuality . 
He recalled that , in the intoxication of his love , in the Rue Plumet , during those six or seven ecstatic weeks , he had not even spoke to Cosette of that drama in the Gorbeau hovel , where the victim had taken up such a singular line of silence during the struggle and the ensuing flight . 
How had it happened that he had not mentioned this to Cosette ? 
Yet it was so near and so terrible ! 
How had it come to pass that he had not even named the Thenardiers , and , particularly , on the day when he had encountered Eponine ? 
He now found it almost difficult to explain his silence of that time . 
Nevertheless , he could account for it . 
He recalled his benumbed state , his intoxication with Cosette , love absorbing everything , that catching away of each other into the ideal , and perhaps also , like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled with this violent and charming state of the soul , a vague , dull instinct impelling him to conceal and abolish in his memory that redoubtable adventure , contact with which he dreaded , in which he did not wish to play any part , his agency in which he had kept secret , and in which he could be neither narrator nor witness without being an accuser . 
Moreover , these few weeks had been a flash of lightning ; there had been no time for anything except love . 
In short , having weighed everything , turned everything over in his mind , examined everything , whatever might have been the consequences if he had told Cosette about the Gorbeau ambush , even if he had discovered that Jean Valjean was a convict , would that have changed him , Marius ? 
Would that have changed her , Cosette ? 
Would he have drawn back ? 
Would he have adored her any the less ? 
Would he have refrained from marrying her ? 
No . 
Then there was nothing to regret , nothing with which he need reproach himself . 
All was well . 
There is a deity for those drunken men who are called lovers . 
Marius blind , had followed the path which he would have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight . 
Love had bandaged his eyes , in order to lead him whither ? 
To paradise . 
But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernal accompaniment . 
Marius ' ancient estrangement towards this man , towards this Fauchelevent who had turned into Jean Valjean , was at present mingled with horror . 
In this horror , let us state , there was some pity , and even a certain surprise . 
This thief , this thief guilty of a second offence , had restored that deposit . 
And what a deposit ! 
Six hundred thousand francs . 
He alone was in the secret of that deposit . 
He might have kept it all , he had restored it all . 
Moreover , he had himself revealed his situation . 
Nothing forced him to this . 
If any one learned who he was , it was through himself . 
In this avowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation , there was acceptance of peril . 
For a condemned man , a mask is not a mask , it is a shelter . 
A false name is security , and he had rejected that false name . 
He , the galley-slave , might have hidden himself forever in an honest family ; he had withstood this temptation . 
And with what motive ? 
Through a conscientious scruple . 
He himself explained this with the irresistible accents of truth . 
In short , whatever this Jean Valjean might be , he was , undoubtedly , a conscience which was awakening . 
There existed some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun ; and , to all appearances , scruples had for a long time already controlled this man . 
Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar natures . 
An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul . 
Jean Valjean was sincere . 
This sincerity , visible , palpable , irrefragable , evident from the very grief that it caused him , rendered inquiries useless , and conferred authority on all that that man had said . 
Here , for Marius , there was a strange reversal of situations . 
What breathed from M. Fauchelevent ? 
distrust . 
What did Jean Valjean inspire ? 
confidence . 
In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Marius struck , he admitted the active principle , he admitted the passive principle , and he tried to reach a balance . 
But all this went on as in a storm . 
Marius , while endeavoring to form a clear idea of this man , and while pursuing Jean Valjean , so to speak , in the depths of his thought , lost him and found him again in a fatal mist . 
The deposit honestly restored , the probity of the confession -- these were good . 
This produced a lightening of the cloud , then the cloud became black once more . 
Troubled as were Marius ' memories , a shadow of them returned to him . 
After all , what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic ? 
Why had that man taken to flight on the arrival of the police , instead of entering a complaint ? 
Here Marius found the answer . 
Because that man was a fugitive from justice , who had broken his ban . 
Another question : Why had that man come to the barricade ? 
For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which had re-appeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application of heat . 
This man had been in the barricade . 
He had not fought there . 
What had he come there for ? 
In the presence of this question a spectre sprang up and replied : `` Javert . '' 
Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjean dragging the pinioned Javert out of the barricade , and he still heard behind the corner of the little Rue Mondetour that frightful pistol shot . 
Obviously , there was hatred between that police spy and the galley-slave . 
The one was in the other 's way . 
Jean Valjean had gone to the barricade for the purpose of revenging himself . 
He had arrived late . 
He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there . 
The Corsican vendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the law there ; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are but half turned towards good ; and those hearts are so constituted that a criminal , who is in the path of repentance , may be scrupulous in the matter of theft and unscrupulous in the matter of vengeance . 
Jean Valjean had killed Javert . 
At least , that seemed to be evident . 
This was the final question , to be sure ; but to this there was no reply . 
This question Marius felt like pincers . 
How had it come to pass that Jean Valjean 's existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a period ? 
What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed that child in contact with that man ? 
Are there then chains for two which are forged on high ? 
and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel with the demon ? 
So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in the mysterious galleys of wretchedness ? 
In that defiling of condemned persons which is called human destiny , can two brows pass side by side , the one ingenuous , the other formidable , the one all bathed in the divine whiteness of dawn , the other forever blemished by the flash of an eternal lightning ? 
Who could have arranged that inexplicable pairing off ? 
In what manner , in consequence of what prodigy , had any community of life been established between this celestial little creature and that old criminal ? 
Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf , and , what was still more incomprehensible , have attached the wolf to the lamb ? 
For the wolf loved the lamb , for the fierce creature adored the feeble one , for , during the space of nine years , the angel had had the monster as her point of support . 
Cosette 's childhood and girlhood , her advent in the daylight , her virginal growth towards life and light , had been sheltered by that hideous devotion . 
Here questions exfoliated , so to speak , into innumerable enigmas , abysses yawned at the bottoms of abysses , and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without becoming dizzy . 
What was this man-precipice ? 
The old symbols of Genesis are eternal ; in human society , such as it now exists , and until a broader day shall effect a change in it , there will always be two men , the one superior , the other subterranean ; the one which is according to good is Abel ; the other which is according to evil is Cain . 
What was this tender Cain ? 
What was this ruffian religiously absorbed in the adoration of a virgin , watching over her , rearing her , guarding her , dignifying her , and enveloping her , impure as he was himself , with purity ? 
What was that cess-pool which had venerated that innocence to such a point as not to leave upon it a single spot ? 
What was this Jean Valjean educating Cosette ? 
What was this figure of the shadows which had for its only object the preservation of the rising of a star from every shadow and from every cloud ? 
That was Jean Valjean 's secret ; that was also God 's secret . 
In the presence of this double secret , Marius recoiled . 
The one , in some sort , reassured him as to the other . 
God was as visible in this affair as was Jean Valjean . 
God has his instruments . 
He makes use of the tool which he wills . 
He is not responsible to men . 
Do we know how God sets about the work ? 
Jean Valjean had labored over Cosette . 
He had , to some extent , made that soul . 
That was incontestable . 
Well , what then ? 
The workman was horrible ; but the work was admirable . 
God produces his miracles as seems good to him . 
He had constructed that charming Cosette , and he had employed Jean Valjean . 
It had pleased him to choose this strange collaborator for himself . 
What account have we to demand of him ? 
Is this the first time that the dung-heap has aided the spring to create the rose ? 
Marius made himself these replies , and declared to himself that they were good . 
He had not dared to press Jean Valjean on all the points which we have just indicated , but he did not confess to himself that he did not dare to do it . 
He adored Cosette , he possessed Cosette , Cosette was splendidly pure . 
That was sufficient for him . 
What enlightenment did he need ? 
Cosette was a light . 
Does light require enlightenment ? 
He had everything ; what more could he desire ? 
All , -- is not that enough ? 
Jean Valjean 's personal affairs did not concern him . 
And bending over the fatal shadow of that man , he clung fast , convulsively , to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch : `` I am nothing to Cosette . 
Ten years ago I did not know that she was in existence . '' 
Jean Valjean was a passer-by . 
He had said so himself . 
Well , he had passed . 
Whatever he was , his part was finished . 
Henceforth , there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence to Cosette . 
Cosette had sought the azure in a person like herself , in her lover , her husband , her celestial male . 
Cosette , as she took her flight , winged and transfigured , left behind her on the earth her hideous and empty chrysalis , Jean Valjean . 
In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved , he always returned to a certain horror for Jean Valjean . 
A sacred horror , perhaps , for , as we have just pointed out , he felt a quid divinum in that man . 
But do what he would , and seek what extenuation he would , he was certainly forced to fall back upon this : the man was a convict ; that is to say , a being who has not even a place in the social ladder , since he is lower than the very lowest rung . 
After the very last of men comes the convict . 
The convict is no longer , so to speak , in the semblance of the living . 
The law has deprived him of the entire quantity of humanity of which it can deprive a man . 
Marius , on penal questions , still held to the inexorable system , though he was a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on the subject of those whom the law strikes . 
He had not yet accomplished all progress , we admit . 
He had not yet come to distinguish between that which is written by man and that which is written by God , between law and right . 
He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes to dispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable . 
He was not shocked by the word vindicte . 
He found it quite simple that certain breaches of the written law should be followed by eternal suffering , and he accepted , as the process of civilization , social damnation . 
He still stood at this point , though safe to advance infallibly later on , since his nature was good , and , at bottom , wholly formed of latent progress . 
In this stage of his ideas , Jean Valjean appeared to him hideous and repulsive . 
He was a man reproved , he was the convict . 
That word was for him like the sound of the trump on the Day of Judgment ; and , after having reflected upon Jean Valjean for a long time , his final gesture had been to turn away his head . 
Vade retro . 
Marius , if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact , while interrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said : `` You are confessing me , '' had not , nevertheless , put to him two or three decisive questions . 
It was not that they had not presented themselves to his mind , but that he had been afraid of them . 
The Jondrette attic ? 
The barricade ? 
Javert ? 
Who knows where these revelations would have stopped ? 
Jean Valjean did not seem like a man who would draw back , and who knows whether Marius , after having urged him on , would not have himself desired to hold him back ? 
Has it not happened to all of us , in certain supreme conjunctures , to stop our ears in order that we may not hear the reply , after we have asked a question ? 
It is especially when one loves that one gives way to these exhibitions of cowardice . 
It is not wise to question sinister situations to the last point , particularly when the indissoluble side of our life is fatally intermingled with them . 
What a terrible light might have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean , and who knows whether that hideous glare would not have darted forth as far as Cosette ? 
Who knows whether a sort of infernal glow would not have lingered behind it on the brow of that angel ? 
The spattering of a lightning-flash is of the thunder also . 
Fatality has points of juncture where innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of the reflections which give color . 
The purest figures may forever preserve the reflection of a horrible association . 
Rightly or wrongly , Marius had been afraid . 
He already knew too much . 
He sought to dull his senses rather than to gain further light . 
In dismay he bore off Cosette in his arms and shut his eyes to Jean Valjean . 
That man was the night , the living and horrible night . 
How should he dare to seek the bottom of it ? 
It is a terrible thing to interrogate the shadow . 
Who knows what its reply will be ? 
The dawn may be blackened forever by it . 
In this state of mind the thought that that man would , henceforth , come into any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity to Marius . 
He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidable questions , before which he had recoiled , and from which an implacable and definitive decision might have sprung . 
He felt that he was too good , too gentle , too weak , if we must say the word . 
This weakness had led him to an imprudent concession . 
He had allowed himself to be touched . 
He had been in the wrong . 
He ought to have simply and purely rejected Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean played the part of fire , and that is what he should have done , and have freed his house from that man . 
He was vexed with himself , he was angry with that whirlwind of emotions which had deafened , blinded , and carried him away . 
He was displeased with himself . 
What was he to do now ? 
Jean Valjean 's visits were profoundly repugnant to him . 
What was the use in having that man in his house ? 
What did the man want ? 
Here , he became dismayed , he did not wish to dig down , he did not wish to penetrate deeply ; he did not wish to sound himself . 
He had promised , he had allowed himself to be drawn into a promise ; Jean Valjean held his promise ; one must keep one 's word even to a convict , above all to a convict . 
Still , his first duty was to Cosette . 
In short , he was carried away by the repugnance which dominated him . 
Marius turned over all this confusion of ideas in his mind , passing from one to the other , and moved by all of them . 
Hence arose a profound trouble . 
It was not easy for him to hide this trouble from Cosette , but love is a talent , and Marius succeeded in doing it . 
However , without any apparent object , he questioned Cosette , who was as candid as a dove is white and who suspected nothing ; he talked of her childhood and her youth , and he became more and more convinced that that convict had been everything good , paternal and respectable that a man can be towards Cosette . 
All that Marius had caught a glimpse of and had surmised was real . 
That sinister nettle had loved and protected that lily . 
THE LOWER CHAMBER On the following day , at nightfall , Jean Valjean knocked at the carriage gate of the Gillenormand house . 
It was Basque who received him . 
Basque was in the courtyard at the appointed hour , as though he had received his orders . 
It sometimes happens that one says to a servant : `` You will watch for Mr. So and So , when he arrives . '' 
Basque addressed Jean Valjean without waiting for the latter to approach him : `` Monsieur le Baron has charged me to inquire whether monsieur desires to go upstairs or to remain below ? '' 
`` I will remain below , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
Basque , who was perfectly respectful , opened the door of the waiting-room and said : `` I will go and inform Madame . '' 
The room which Jean Valjean entered was a damp , vaulted room on the ground floor , which served as a cellar on occasion , which opened on the street , was paved with red squares and was badly lighted by a grated window . 
This chamber was not one of those which are harassed by the feather-duster , the pope 's head brush , and the broom . 
The dust rested tranquilly there . 
Persecution of the spiders was not organized there . 
A fine web , which spread far and wide , and was very black and ornamented with dead flies , formed a wheel on one of the window-panes . 
The room , which was small and low-ceiled , was furnished with a heap of empty bottles piled up in one corner . 
The wall , which was daubed with an ochre yellow wash , was scaling off in large flakes . 
At one end there was a chimney-piece painted in black with a narrow shelf . 
A fire was burning there ; which indicated that Jean Valjean 's reply : `` I will remain below , '' had been foreseen . 
Two arm-chairs were placed at the two corners of the fireplace . 
Between the chairs an old bedside rug , which displayed more foundation thread than wool , had been spread by way of a carpet . 
The chamber was lighted by the fire on the hearth and the twilight falling through the window . 
Jean Valjean was fatigued . 
For days he had neither eaten nor slept . 
He threw himself into one of the arm-chairs . 
Basque returned , set a lighted candle on the chimney-piece and retired . 
Jean Valjean , his head drooping and his chin resting on his breast , perceived neither Basque nor the candle . 
All at once , he drew himself up with a start . 
Cosette was standing beside him . 
He had not seen her enter , but he had felt that she was there . 
He turned round . 
He gazed at her . 
She was adorably lovely . 
But what he was contemplating with that profound gaze was not her beauty but her soul . 
`` Well , '' exclaimed Cosette , `` father , I knew that you were peculiar , but I never should have expected this . 
What an idea ! 
Marius told me that you wish me to receive you here . '' 
`` Yes , it is my wish . '' 
`` I expected that reply . 
Good . 
I warn you that I am going to make a scene for you . 
Let us begin at the beginning . 
Embrace me , father . '' 
And she offered him her cheek . 
Jean Valjean remained motionless . 
`` You do not stir . 
I take note of it . 
Attitude of guilt . 
But never mind , I pardon you . 
Jesus Christ said : Offer the other cheek . 
Here it is . '' 
And she presented her other cheek . 
Jean Valjean did not move . 
It seemed as though his feet were nailed to the pavement . 
`` This is becoming serious , '' said Cosette . 
`` What have I done to you ? 
I declare that I am perplexed . 
You owe me reparation . 
You will dine with us . '' 
`` I have dined . '' 
`` That is not true . 
I will get M. Gillenormand to scold you . 
Grandfathers are made to reprimand fathers . 
Come . 
Go upstairs with me to the drawing-room . 
Immediately . '' 
`` Impossible . '' 
Here Cosette lost ground a little . 
She ceased to command and passed to questioning . 
`` But why ? 
and you choose the ugliest chamber in the house in which to see me . 
It 's horrible here . '' 
`` Thou knowest ... '' Jean Valjean caught himself up . 
`` You know , madame , that I am peculiar , I have my freaks . '' 
Cosette struck her tiny hands together . 
`` Madame ! 
... You know ! 
... more novelties ! 
What is the meaning of this ? '' 
Jean Valjean directed upon her that heartrending smile to which he occasionally had recourse : `` You wished to be Madame . 
You are so . '' 
`` Not for you , father . '' 
`` Do not call me father . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Call me ` Monsieur Jean . ' 
` Jean , ' if you like . '' 
`` You are no longer my father ? 
I am no longer Cosette ? 
` Monsieur Jean ' ? 
What does this mean ? 
why , these are revolutions , are n't they ? 
what has taken place ? 
come , look me in the face . 
And you wo n't live with us ! 
And you wo n't have my chamber ! 
What have I done to you ? 
Has anything happened ? '' 
`` Nothing . '' 
`` Well then ? '' 
`` Everything is as usual . '' 
`` Why do you change your name ? '' 
`` You have changed yours , surely . '' 
He smiled again with the same smile as before and added : `` Since you are Madame Pontmercy , I certainly can be Monsieur Jean . '' 
`` I do n't understand anything about it . 
All this is idiotic . 
I shall ask permission of my husband for you to be ` Monsieur Jean . ' 
I hope that he will not consent to it . 
You cause me a great deal of pain . 
One does have freaks , but one does not cause one 's little Cosette grief . 
That is wrong . 
You have no right to be wicked , you who are so good . '' 
He made no reply . 
She seized his hands with vivacity , and raising them to her face with an irresistible movement , she pressed them against her neck beneath her chin , which is a gesture of profound tenderness . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she said to him , `` be good ! '' 
And she went on : `` This is what I call being good : being nice and coming and living here , -- there are birds here as there are in the Rue Plumet , -- living with us , quitting that hole of a Rue de l'Homme Arme , not giving us riddles to guess , being like all the rest of the world , dining with us , breakfasting with us , being my father . '' 
He loosed her hands . 
`` You no longer need a father , you have a husband . '' 
Cosette became angry . 
`` I no longer need a father ! 
One really does not know what to say to things like that , which are not common sense ! '' 
`` If Toussaint were here , '' resumed Jean Valjean , like a person who is driven to seek authorities , and who clutches at every branch , `` she would be the first to agree that it is true that I have always had ways of my own . 
There is nothing new in this . 
I always have loved my black corner . '' 
`` But it is cold here . 
One can not see distinctly . 
It is abominable , that it is , to wish to be Monsieur Jean ! 
I will not have you say ` you ' to me . 
`` Just now , as I was coming hither , '' replied Jean Valjean , `` I saw a piece of furniture in the Rue Saint Louis . 
It was at a cabinet-maker 's . 
If I were a pretty woman , I would treat myself to that bit of furniture . 
A very neat toilet table in the reigning style . 
What you call rosewood , I think . 
It is inlaid . 
The mirror is quite large . 
There are drawers . 
It is pretty . '' 
`` Hou ! 
the villainous bear ! '' 
replied Cosette . 
And with supreme grace , setting her teeth and drawing back her lips , she blew at Jean Valjean . 
She was a Grace copying a cat . 
`` I am furious , '' she resumed . 
`` Ever since yesterday , you have made me rage , all of you . 
I am greatly vexed . 
I do n't understand . 
You do not defend me against Marius . 
Marius will not uphold me against you . 
I am all alone . 
I arrange a chamber prettily . 
If I could have put the good God there I would have done it . 
My chamber is left on my hands . 
My lodger sends me into bankruptcy . 
I order a nice little dinner of Nicolette . 
We will have nothing to do with your dinner , Madame . 
And my father Fauchelevent wants me to call him ` Monsieur Jean , ' and to receive him in a frightful , old , ugly cellar , where the walls have beards , and where the crystal consists of empty bottles , and the curtains are of spiders ' webs ! 
You are singular , I admit , that is your style , but people who get married are granted a truce . 
You ought not to have begun being singular again instantly . 
So you are going to be perfectly contented in your abominable Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
I was very desperate indeed there , that I was . 
What have you against me ? 
You cause me a great deal of grief . 
Fi ! '' 
And , becoming suddenly serious , she gazed intently at Jean Valjean and added : `` Are you angry with me because I am happy ? '' 
Ingenuousness sometimes unconsciously penetrates deep . 
This question , which was simple for Cosette , was profound for Jean Valjean . 
Cosette had meant to scratch , and she lacerated . 
Jean Valjean turned pale . 
He remained for a moment without replying , then , with an inexpressible intonation , and speaking to himself , he murmured : `` Her happiness was the object of my life . 
Now God may sign my dismissal . 
Cosette , thou art happy ; my day is over . '' 
`` Ah , you have said thou to me ! '' 
exclaimed Cosette . 
And she sprang to his neck . 
Jean Valjean , in bewilderment , strained her wildly to his breast . 
It almost seemed to him as though he were taking her back . 
`` Thanks , father ! '' 
said Cosette . 
This enthusiastic impulse was on the point of becoming poignant for Jean Valjean . 
He gently removed Cosette 's arms , and took his hat . 
`` Well ? '' 
said Cosette . 
`` I leave you , Madame , they are waiting for you . '' 
And , from the threshold , he added : `` I have said thou to you . 
Tell your husband that this shall not happen again . 
Pardon me . '' 
Jean Valjean quitted the room , leaving Cosette stupefied at this enigmatical farewell . 
ANOTHER STEP BACKWARDS On the following day , at the same hour , Jean Valjean came . 
Cosette asked him no questions , was no longer astonished , no longer exclaimed that she was cold , no longer spoke of the drawing-room , she avoided saying either `` father '' or `` Monsieur Jean . '' 
She allowed herself to be addressed as you . 
She allowed herself to be called Madame . 
Only , her joy had undergone a certain diminution . 
She would have been sad , if sadness had been possible to her . 
It is probable that she had had with Marius one of those conversations in which the beloved man says what he pleases , explains nothing , and satisfies the beloved woman . 
The curiosity of lovers does not extend very far beyond their own love . 
The lower room had made a little toilet . 
Basque had suppressed the bottles , and Nicolette the spiders . 
All the days which followed brought Jean Valjean at the same hour . 
He came every day , because he had not the strength to take Marius ' words otherwise than literally . 
Marius arranged matters so as to be absent at the hours when Jean Valjean came . 
The house grew accustomed to the novel ways of M. Fauchelevent . 
Toussaint helped in this direction : `` Monsieur has always been like that , '' she repeated . 
The grandfather issued this decree : -- `` He 's an original . '' 
And all was said . 
Moreover , at the age of ninety-six , no bond is any longer possible , all is merely juxtaposition ; a newcomer is in the way . 
There is no longer any room ; all habits are acquired . 
M. Fauchelevent , M. Tranchelevent , Father Gillenormand asked nothing better than to be relieved from `` that gentleman . '' 
He added : -- `` Nothing is more common than those originals . 
They do all sorts of queer things . 
They have no reason . 
The Marquis de Canaples was still worse . 
He bought a palace that he might lodge in the garret . 
These are fantastic appearances that people affect . '' 
No one caught a glimpse of the sinister foundation . 
And moreover , who could have guessed such a thing ? 
There are marshes of this description in India . 
The water seems extraordinary , inexplicable , rippling though there is no wind , and agitated where it should be calm . 
One gazes at the surface of these causeless ebullitions ; one does not perceive the hydra which crawls on the bottom . 
Many men have a secret monster in this same manner , a dragon which gnaws them , a despair which inhabits their night . 
Such a man resembles other men , he goes and comes . 
No one knows that he bears within him a frightful parasitic pain with a thousand teeth , which lives within the unhappy man , and of which he is dying . 
No one knows that this man is a gulf . 
He is stagnant but deep . 
From time to time , a trouble of which the onlooker understands nothing appears on his surface . 
A mysterious wrinkle is formed , then vanishes , then re-appears ; an air-bubble rises and bursts . 
It is the breathing of the unknown beast . 
Certain strange habits : arriving at the hour when other people are taking their leave , keeping in the background when other people are displaying themselves , preserving on all occasions what may be designated as the wall-colored mantle , seeking the solitary walk , preferring the deserted street , avoiding any share in conversation , avoiding crowds and festivals , seeming at one 's ease and living poorly , having one 's key in one 's pocket , and one 's candle at the porter 's lodge , however rich one may be , entering by the side door , ascending the private staircase , -- all these insignificant singularities , fugitive folds on the surface , often proceed from a formidable foundation . 
Many weeks passed in this manner . 
A new life gradually took possession of Cosette : the relations which marriage creates , visits , the care of the house , pleasures , great matters . 
Cosette 's pleasures were not costly , they consisted in one thing : being with Marius . 
The great occupation of her life was to go out with him , to remain with him . 
It was for them a joy that was always fresh , to go out arm in arm , in the face of the sun , in the open street , without hiding themselves , before the whole world , both of them completely alone . 
Cosette had one vexation . 
Toussaint could not get on with Nicolette , the soldering of two elderly maids being impossible , and she went away . 
The grandfather was well ; Marius argued a case here and there ; Aunt Gillenormand peacefully led that life aside which sufficed for her , beside the new household . 
Jean Valjean came every day . 
The address as thou disappeared , the you , the `` Madame , '' the `` Monsieur Jean , '' rendered him another person to Cosette . 
The care which he had himself taken to detach her from him was succeeding . 
She became more and more gay and less and less tender . 
Yet she still loved him sincerely , and he felt it . 
One day she said to him suddenly : `` You used to be my father , you are no longer my father , you were my uncle , you are no longer my uncle , you were Monsieur Fauchelevent , you are Jean . 
Who are you then ? 
I do n't like all this . 
If I did not know how good you are , I should be afraid of you . '' 
He still lived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , because he could not make up his mind to remove to a distance from the quarter where Cosette dwelt . 
At first , he only remained a few minutes with Cosette , and then went away . 
Little by little he acquired the habit of making his visits less brief . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of the authorization of the days which were lengthening , he arrived earlier and departed later . 
One day Cosette chanced to say `` father '' to him . 
A flash of joy illuminated Jean Valjean 's melancholy old countenance . 
He caught her up : `` Say Jean . '' 
-- `` Ah ! 
truly , '' she replied with a burst of laughter , `` Monsieur Jean . '' 
-- `` That is right , '' said he . 
And he turned aside so that she might not see him wipe his eyes . 
THEY RECALL THE GARDEN OF THE RUE PLUMET This was the last time . 
After that last flash of light , complete extinction ensued . 
No more familiarity , no more good-morning with a kiss , never more that word so profoundly sweet : `` My father ! '' 
He was at his own request and through his own complicity driven out of all his happinesses one after the other ; and he had this sorrow , that after having lost Cosette wholly in one day , he was afterwards obliged to lose her again in detail . 
The eye eventually becomes accustomed to the light of a cellar . 
In short , it sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day . 
His whole life was concentrated in that one hour . 
He seated himself close to her , he gazed at her in silence , or he talked to her of years gone by , of her childhood , of the convent , of her little friends of those bygone days . 
One afternoon , -- it was on one of those early days in April , already warm and fresh , the moment of the sun 's great gayety , the gardens which surrounded the windows of Marius and Cosette felt the emotion of waking , the hawthorn was on the point of budding , a jewelled garniture of gillyflowers spread over the ancient walls , snapdragons yawned through the crevices of the stones , amid the grass there was a charming beginning of daisies , and buttercups , the white butterflies of the year were making their first appearance , the wind , that minstrel of the eternal wedding , was trying in the trees the first notes of that grand , auroral symphony which the old poets called the springtide , -- Marius said to Cosette : -- `` We said that we would go back to take a look at our garden in the Rue Plumet . 
Let us go thither . 
We must not be ungrateful . '' 
-- And away they flitted , like two swallows towards the spring . 
This garden of the Rue Plumet produced on them the effect of the dawn . 
They already had behind them in life something which was like the springtime of their love . 
The house in the Rue Plumet being held on a lease , still belonged to Cosette . 
They went to that garden and that house . 
There they found themselves again , there they forgot themselves . 
That evening , at the usual hour , Jean Valjean came to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
-- `` Madame went out with Monsieur and has not yet returned , '' Basque said to him . 
He seated himself in silence , and waited an hour . 
Cosette did not return . 
He departed with drooping head . 
Cosette was so intoxicated with her walk to `` their garden , '' and so joyous at having `` lived a whole day in her past , '' that she talked of nothing else on the morrow . 
She did not notice that she had not seen Jean Valjean . 
`` In what way did you go thither ? '' 
Jean Valjean asked her . '' 
`` On foot . '' 
`` And how did you return ? '' 
`` In a hackney carriage . '' 
For some time , Jean Valjean had noticed the economical life led by the young people . 
He was troubled by it . 
Marius ' economy was severe , and that word had its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean . 
He hazarded a query : `` Why do you not have a carriage of your own ? 
A pretty coupe would only cost you five hundred francs a month . 
You are rich . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Cosette . 
`` It is like Toussaint , '' resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` She is gone . 
You have not replaced her . 
Why ? '' 
`` Nicolette suffices . '' 
`` But you ought to have a maid . '' 
`` Have I not Marius ? '' 
`` You ought to have a house of your own , your own servants , a carriage , a box at the theatre . 
There is nothing too fine for you . 
Why not profit by your riches ? 
Wealth adds to happiness . '' 
Cosette made no reply . 
Jean Valjean 's visits were not abridged . 
Far from it . 
When it is the heart which is slipping , one does not halt on the downward slope . 
When Jean Valjean wished to prolong his visit and to induce forgetfulness of the hour , he sang the praises of Marius ; he pronounced him handsome , noble , courageous , witty , eloquent , good . 
Cosette outdid him . 
Jean Valjean began again . 
They were never weary . 
Marius -- that word was inexhaustible ; those six letters contained volumes . 
In this manner , Jean Valjean contrived to remain a long time . 
It was so sweet to see Cosette , to forget by her side ! 
It alleviated his wounds . 
It frequently happened that Basque came twice to announce : `` M. Gillenormand sends me to remind Madame la Baronne that dinner is served . '' 
On those days , Jean Valjean was very thoughtful on his return home . 
Was there , then , any truth in that comparison of the chrysalis which had presented itself to the mind of Marius ? 
Was Jean Valjean really a chrysalis who would persist , and who would come to visit his butterfly ? 
One day he remained still longer than usual . 
On the following day he observed that there was no fire on the hearth . 
-- `` Hello ! '' 
he thought . 
`` No fire . '' 
-- And he furnished the explanation for himself . 
-- `` It is perfectly simple . 
It is April . 
The cold weather has ceased . '' 
`` Heavens ! 
how cold it is here ! '' 
exclaimed Cosette when she entered . 
`` Why , no , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Was it you who told Basque not to make a fire then ? '' 
`` Yes , since we are now in the month of May . '' 
`` But we have a fire until June . 
One is needed all the year in this cellar . '' 
`` I thought that a fire was unnecessary . '' 
`` That is exactly like one of your ideas ! '' 
retorted Cosette . 
On the following day there was a fire . 
But the two arm-chairs were arranged at the other end of the room near the door . '' 
-- What is the meaning of this ? '' 
thought Jean Valjean . 
He went for the arm-chairs and restored them to their ordinary place near the hearth . 
This fire lighted once more encouraged him , however . 
He prolonged the conversation even beyond its customary limits . 
As he rose to take his leave , Cosette said to him : `` My husband said a queer thing to me yesterday . '' 
`` What was it ? '' 
`` He said to me : ` Cosette , we have an income of thirty thousand livres . 
Twenty-seven that you own , and three that my grandfather gives me . ' 
I replied : ` That makes thirty . ' 
He went on : ` Would you have the courage to live on the three thousand ? ' 
I answered : ` Yes , on nothing . 
Provided that it was with you . ' 
And then I asked : ` Why do you say that to me ? ' 
He replied : ` I wanted to know . ' '' 
Jean Valjean found not a word to answer . 
Cosette probably expected some explanation from him ; he listened in gloomy silence . 
He went back to the Rue de l'Homme Arme ; he was so deeply absorbed that he mistook the door and instead of entering his own house , he entered the adjoining dwelling . 
It was only after having ascended nearly two stories that he perceived his error and went down again . 
His mind was swarming with conjectures . 
It was evident that Marius had his doubts as to the origin of the six hundred thousand francs , that he feared some source that was not pure , who knows ? 
that he had even , perhaps , discovered that the money came from him , Jean Valjean , that he hesitated before this suspicious fortune , and was disinclined to take it as his own , -- preferring that both he and Cosette should remain poor , rather than that they should be rich with wealth that was not clean . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean began vaguely to surmise that he was being shown the door . 
On the following day , he underwent something like a shock on entering the ground-floor room . 
The arm-chairs had disappeared . 
There was not a single chair of any sort . 
`` Ah , what 's this ! '' 
exclaimed Cosette as she entered , `` no chairs ! 
Where are the arm-chairs ? '' 
`` They are no longer here , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` This is too much ! '' 
Jean Valjean stammered : `` It was I who told Basque to remove them . '' 
`` And your reason ? '' 
`` I have only a few minutes to stay to-day . '' 
`` A brief stay is no reason for remaining standing . '' 
`` I think that Basque needed the chairs for the drawing-room . 
`` Why ? '' 
`` You have company this evening , no doubt . '' 
`` We expect no one . '' 
Jean Valjean had not another word to say . 
Cosette shrugged her shoulders . 
`` To have the chairs carried off ! 
The other day you had the fire put out . 
How odd you are ! '' 
`` Adieu ! '' 
murmured Jean Valjean . 
He did not say : `` Adieu , Cosette . '' 
But he had not the strength to say : `` Adieu , Madame . '' 
He went away utterly overwhelmed . 
This time he had understood . 
On the following day he did not come . 
Cosette only observed the fact in the evening . 
`` Why , '' said she , `` Monsieur Jean has not been here today . '' 
And she felt a slight twinge at her heart , but she hardly perceived it , being immediately diverted by a kiss from Marius . 
On the following day he did not come . 
Cosette paid no heed to this , passed her evening and slept well that night , as usual , and thought of it only when she woke . 
She was so happy ! 
She speedily despatched Nicolette to M. Jean 's house to inquire whether he were ill , and why he had not come on the previous evening . 
Nicolette brought back the reply of M. Jean that he was not ill . 
He was busy . 
He would come soon . 
As soon as he was able . 
Moreover , he was on the point of taking a little journey . 
Madame must remember that it was his custom to take trips from time to time . 
They were not to worry about him . 
They were not to think of him . 
Nicolette on entering M. Jean 's had repeated to him her mistress ' very words . 
That Madame had sent her to inquire why M. Jean bad not come on the preceding evening . '' 
-- It is two days since I have been there , '' said Jean Valjean gently . 
But the remark passed unnoticed by Nicolette , who did not report it to Cosette . 
ATTRACTION AND EXTINCTION During the last months of spring and the first months of summer in 1833 , the rare passersby in the Marais , the petty shopkeepers , the loungers on thresholds , noticed an old man neatly clad in black , who emerged every day at the same hour , towards nightfall , from the Rue de l'Homme Arme , on the side of the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie , passed in front of the Blancs Manteaux , gained the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , and , on arriving at the Rue de l'Echarpe , turned to the left , and entered the Rue Saint-Louis . 
There he walked at a slow pace , with his head strained forward , seeing nothing , hearing nothing , his eye immovably fixed on a point which seemed to be a star to him , which never varied , and which was no other than the corner of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
The nearer he approached the corner of the street the more his eye lighted up ; a sort of joy illuminated his pupils like an inward aurora , he had a fascinated and much affected air , his lips indulged in obscure movements , as though he were talking to some one whom he did not see , he smiled vaguely and advanced as slowly as possible . 
One would have said that , while desirous of reaching his destination , he feared the moment when he should be close at hand . 
When only a few houses remained between him and that street which appeared to attract him his pace slackened , to such a degree that , at times , one might have thought that he was no longer advancing at all . 
The vacillation of his head and the fixity of his eyeballs suggested the thought of the magnetic needle seeking the pole . 
Whatever time he spent on arriving , he was obliged to arrive at last ; he reached the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; then he halted , he trembled , he thrust his head with a sort of melancholy timidity round the corner of the last house , and gazed into that street , and there was in that tragic look something which resembled the dazzling light of the impossible , and the reflection from a paradise that was closed to him . 
Then a tear , which had slowly gathered in the corner of his lids , and had become large enough to fall , trickled down his cheek , and sometimes stopped at his mouth . 
The old man tasted its bitter flavor . 
Thus he remained for several minutes as though made of stone , then he returned by the same road and with the same step , and , in proportion as he retreated , his glance died out . 
Little by little , this old man ceased to go as far as the corner of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; he halted half way in the Rue Saint-Louis ; sometimes a little further off , sometimes a little nearer . 
One day he stopped at the corner of the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine and looked at the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire from a distance . 
Then he shook his head slowly from right to left , as though refusing himself something , and retraced his steps . 
Soon he no longer came as far as the Rue Saint-Louis . 
He got as far as the Rue Pavee , shook his head and turned back ; then he went no further than the Rue des Trois-Pavillons ; then he did not overstep the Blancs-Manteaux . 
One would have said that he was a pendulum which was no longer wound up , and whose oscillations were growing shorter before ceasing altogether . 
Every day he emerged from his house at the same hour , he undertook the same trip , but he no longer completed it , and , perhaps without himself being aware of the fact , he constantly shortened it . 
His whole countenance expressed this single idea : What is the use ? 
-- His eye was dim ; no more radiance . 
His tears were also exhausted ; they no longer collected in the corner of his eye-lid ; that thoughtful eye was dry . 
The old man 's head was still craned forward ; his chin moved at times ; the folds in his gaunt neck were painful to behold . 
Sometimes , when the weather was bad , he had an umbrella under his arm , but he never opened it . 
The good women of the quarter said : `` He is an innocent . '' 
The children followed him and laughed . 
BOOK NINTH . 
-- SUPREME SHADOW , SUPREME DAWN PITY FOR THE UNHAPPY , BUT INDULGENCE FOR THE HAPPY It is a terrible thing to be happy ! 
How content one is ! 
How all-sufficient one finds it ! 
How , being in possession of the false object of life , happiness , one forgets the true object , duty ! 
Let us say , however , that the reader would do wrong were he to blame Marius . 
Marius , as we have explained , before his marriage , had put no questions to M. Fauchelevent , and , since that time , he had feared to put any to Jean Valjean . 
He had regretted the promise into which he had allowed himself to be drawn . 
He had often said to himself that he had done wrong in making that concession to despair . 
He had confined himself to gradually estranging Jean Valjean from his house and to effacing him , as much as possible , from Cosette 's mind . 
He had , in a manner , always placed himself between Cosette and Jean Valjean , sure that , in this way , she would not perceive nor think of the latter . 
It was more than effacement , it was an eclipse . 
Marius did what he considered necessary and just . 
He thought that he had serious reasons which the reader has already seen , and others which will be seen later on , for getting rid of Jean Valjean without harshness , but without weakness . 
Chance having ordained that he should encounter , in a case which he had argued , a former employee of the Laffitte establishment , he had acquired mysterious information , without seeking it , which he had not been able , it is true , to probe , out of respect for the secret which he had promised to guard , and out of consideration for Jean Valjean 's perilous position . 
He believed at that moment that he had a grave duty to perform : the restitution of the six hundred thousand francs to some one whom he sought with all possible discretion . 
In the meanwhile , he abstained from touching that money . 
As for Cosette , she had not been initiated into any of these secrets ; but it would be harsh to condemn her also . 
There existed between Marius and her an all-powerful magnetism , which caused her to do , instinctively and almost mechanically , what Marius wished . 
She was conscious of Marius ' will in the direction of `` Monsieur Jean , '' she conformed to it . 
Her husband had not been obliged to say anything to her ; she yielded to the vague but clear pressure of his tacit intentions , and obeyed blindly . 
Her obedience in this instance consisted in not remembering what Marius forgot . 
She was not obliged to make any effort to accomplish this . 
Without her knowing why herself , and without his having any cause to accuse her of it , her soul had become so wholly her husband 's that that which was shrouded in gloom in Marius ' mind became overcast in hers . 
Let us not go too far , however ; in what concerns Jean Valjean , this forgetfulness and obliteration were merely superficial . 
She was rather heedless than forgetful . 
At bottom , she was sincerely attached to the man whom she had so long called her father ; but she loved her husband still more dearly . 
This was what had somewhat disturbed the balance of her heart , which leaned to one side only . 
It sometimes happened that Cosette spoke of Jean Valjean and expressed her surprise . 
Then Marius calmed her : `` He is absent , I think . 
Did not he say that he was setting out on a journey ? '' 
-- `` That is true , '' thought Cosette . 
`` He had a habit of disappearing in this fashion . 
But not for so long . '' 
Two or three times she despatched Nicolette to inquire in the Rue de l'Homme Arme whether M. Jean had returned from his journey . 
Jean Valjean caused the answer `` no '' to be given . 
Cosette asked nothing more , since she had but one need on earth , Marius . 
Let us also say that , on their side , Cosette and Marius had also been absent . 
They had been to Vernon . 
Marius had taken Cosette to his father 's grave . 
Marius gradually won Cosette away from Jean Valjean . 
Cosette allowed it . 
Moreover that which is called , far too harshly in certain cases , the ingratitude of children , is not always a thing so deserving of reproach as it is supposed . 
It is the ingratitude of nature . 
Nature , as we have elsewhere said , `` looks before her . '' 
Nature divides living beings into those who are arriving and those who are departing . 
Those who are departing are turned towards the shadows , those who are arriving towards the light . 
Hence a gulf which is fatal on the part of the old , and involuntary on the part of the young . 
This breach , at first insensible , increases slowly , like all separations of branches . 
The boughs , without becoming detached from the trunk , grow away from it . 
It is no fault of theirs . 
Youth goes where there is joy , festivals , vivid lights , love . 
Old age goes towards the end . 
They do not lose sight of each other , but there is no longer a close connection . 
Young people feel the cooling off of life ; old people , that of the tomb . 
Let us not blame these poor children . 
LAST FLICKERINGS OF A LAMP WITHOUT OIL One day , Jean Valjean descended his staircase , took three steps in the street , seated himself on a post , on that same stone post where Gavroche had found him meditating on the night between the 5th and the 6th of June ; he remained there a few moments , then went up stairs again . 
This was the last oscillation of the pendulum . 
On the following day he did not leave his apartment . 
