`` Enjolras said : ` Joly is ill , Grantaire is drunk . ' 
It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet . 
If he had come for me , I would have followed him . 
So much the worse for Enjolras ! 
I wo n't go to his funeral . '' 
This resolution once arrived at , Bossuet , Joly , and Grantaire did not stir from the wine-shop . 
By two o'clock in the afternoon , the table at which they sat was covered with empty bottles . 
Two candles were burning on it , one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green , the other in the neck of a cracked carafe . 
Grantaire had seduced Joly and Bossuet to wine ; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards cheerfulness . 
As for Grantaire , he had got beyond wine , that merely moderate inspirer of dreams , ever since mid-day . 
Wine enjoys only a conventional popularity with serious drinkers . 
There is , in fact , in the matter of inebriety , white magic and black magic ; wine is only white magic . 
Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams . 
The blackness of a terrible fit of drunkenness yawning before him , far from arresting him , attracted him . 
He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass . 
The beer-glass is the abyss . 
Having neither opium nor hashish on hand , and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight , he had had recourse to that fearful mixture of brandy , stout , absinthe , which produces the most terrible of lethargies . 
It is of these three vapors , beer , brandy , and absinthe , that the lead of the soul is composed . 
They are three grooms ; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them ; and there are formed there in a membranous smoke , vaguely condensed into the wing of the bat , three mute furies , Nightmare , Night , and Death , which hover about the slumbering Psyche . 
Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase ; far from it . 
He was tremendously gay , and Bossuet and Joly retorted . 
They clinked glasses . 
Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words and ideas , a peculiarity of gesture ; he rested his left fist on his knee with dignity , his arm forming a right angle , and , with cravat untied , seated astride a stool , his full glass in his right hand , he hurled solemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote : -- `` Let the doors of the palace be thrown open ! 
Let every one be a member of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup . 
Let us drink . '' 
And turning to Madame Hucheloup , he added : -- `` Woman ancient and consecrated by use , draw near that I may contemplate thee ! '' 
And Joly exclaimed : -- `` Matelote and Gibelotte , dod ' t gib Grantaire anything more to drink . 
He has already devoured , since this bording , in wild prodigality , two francs and ninety-five centibes . '' 
And Grantaire began again : -- `` Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission , and putting them on the table in the guise of candles ? '' 
Bossuet , though very drunk , preserved his equanimity . 
He was seated on the sill of the open window , wetting his back in the falling rain , and gazing at his two friends . 
All at once , he heard a tumult behind him , hurried footsteps , cries of `` To arms ! '' 
He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis , at the end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , Enjolras passing , gun in hand , and Gavroche with his pistol , Feuilly with his sword , Courfeyrac with his sword , and Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss , Combeferre with his gun , Bahorel with his gun , and the whole armed and stormy rabble which was following them . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long . 
Bossuet improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his mouth , and shouted : -- `` Courfeyrac ! 
Courfeyrac ! 
Hohee ! '' 
Courfeyrac heard the shout , caught sight of Bossuet , and advanced a few paces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie , shouting : `` What do you want ? '' 
which crossed a `` Where are you going ? '' 
`` To make a barricade , '' replied Courfeyrac . 
`` Well , here ! 
This is a good place ! 
Make it here ! '' 
`` That 's true , Aigle , '' said Courfeyrac . 
And at a signal from Courfeyrac , the mob flung themselves into the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE The spot was , in fact , admirably adapted , the entrance to the street widened out , the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit . 
Corinthe created an obstacle , the Rue Mondetour was easily barricaded on the right and the left , no attack was possible except from the Rue Saint-Denis , that is to say , in front , and in full sight . 
Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal . 
Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob . 
There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight . 
In the space of a flash of lightning , in the rear , to right and left , shops , stables , area-doors , windows , blinds , attic skylights , shutters of every description were closed , from the ground floor to the roof . 
A terrified old woman fixed a mattress in front of her window on two clothes-poles for drying linen , in order to deaden the effect of musketry . 
The wine-shop alone remained open ; and that for a very good reason , that the mob had rushed into it . 
-- `` Ah my God ! 
Ah my God ! '' 
sighed Mame Hucheloup . 
Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac . 
Joly , who had placed himself at the window , exclaimed : -- `` Courfeyrac , you ought to have brought an umbrella . 
You will gatch gold . '' 
In the meantime , in the space of a few minutes , twenty iron bars had been wrenched from the grated front of the wine-shop , ten fathoms of street had been unpaved ; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in its passage , and overturned , the dray of a lime-dealer named Anceau ; this dray contained three barrels of lime , which they placed beneath the piles of paving-stones : Enjolras raised the cellar trap , and all the widow Hucheloup 's empty casks were used to flank the barrels of lime ; Feuilly , with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of fans , had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps of blocks of rough stone . 
Blocks which were improvised like the rest and procured no one knows where . 
The beams which served as props were torn from the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks . 
When Bossuet and Courfeyrac turned round , half the street was already barred with a rampart higher than a man . 
There is nothing like the hand of the populace for building everything that is built by demolishing . 
Matelote and Gibelotte had mingled with the workers . 
Gibelotte went and came loaded with rubbish . 
Her lassitude helped on the barricade . 
She served the barricade as she would have served wine , with a sleepy air . 
An omnibus with two white horses passed the end of the street . 
Bossuet strode over the paving-stones , ran to it , stopped the driver , made the passengers alight , offered his hand to `` the ladies , '' dismissed the conductor , and returned , leading the vehicle and the horses by the bridle . 
`` Omnibuses , '' said he , `` do not pass the Corinthe . 
Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum . '' 
An instant later , the horses were unharnessed and went off at their will , through the Rue Mondetour , and the omnibus lying on its side completed the bar across the street . 
Mame Hucheloup , quite upset , had taken refuge in the first story . 
Her eyes were vague , and stared without seeing anything , and she cried in a low tone . 
Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from her throat . 
`` The end of the world has come , '' she muttered . 
Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup 's fat , red , wrinkled neck , and said to Grantaire : `` My dear fellow , I have always regarded a woman 's neck as an infinitely delicate thing . '' 
But Grantaire attained to the highest regions of dithryamb . 
Matelote had mounted to the first floor once more , Grantaire seized her round her waist , and gave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window . 
`` Matelote is homely ! '' 
he cried : `` Matelote is of a dream of ugliness ! 
Matelote is a chimaera . 
This is the secret of her birth : a Gothic Pygmalion , who was making gargoyles for cathedrals , fell in love with one of them , the most horrible , one fine morning . 
He besought Love to give it life , and this produced Matelote . 
Look at her , citizens ! 
She has chromate-of-lead-colored hair , like Titian 's mistress , and she is a good girl . 
I guarantee that she will fight well . 
Every good girl contains a hero . 
As for Mother Hucheloup , she 's an old warrior . 
Look at her moustaches ! 
She inherited them from her husband . 
A hussar indeed ! 
She will fight too . 
These two alone will strike terror to the heart of the banlieue . 
Comrades , we shall overthrow the government as true as there are fifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formic acid ; however , that is a matter of perfect indifference to me . 
Gentlemen , my father always detested me because I could not understand mathematics . 
I understand only love and liberty . 
I am Grantaire , the good fellow . 
Having never had any money , I never acquired the habit of it , and the result is that I have never lacked it ; but , if I had been rich , there would have been no more poor people ! 
You would have seen ! 
Oh , if the kind hearts only had fat purses , how much better things would go ! 
I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild 's fortune ! 
How much good he would do ! 
Matelote , embrace me ! 
You are voluptuous and timid ! 
You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister , and lips which claim the kiss of a lover . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , you cask ! '' 
said Courfeyrac . 
Grantaire retorted : -- `` I am the capitoul -LSB- 52 -RSB- and the master of the floral games ! '' 
-LSB- 52 -RSB- Municipal officer of Toulouse . 
Enjolras , who was standing on the crest of the barricade , gun in hand , raised his beautiful , austere face . 
Enjolras , as the reader knows , had something of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition . 
He would have perished at Thermopylae with Leonidas , and burned at Drogheda with Cromwell . 
`` Grantaire , '' he shouted , `` go get rid of the fumes of your wine somewhere else than here . 
This is the place for enthusiasm , not for drunkenness . 
Do n't disgrace the barricade ! '' 
This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire . 
One would have said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face . 
He seemed to be rendered suddenly sober . 
He sat down , put his elbows on a table near the window , looked at Enjolras with indescribable gentleness , and said to him : -- `` Let me sleep here . '' 
`` Go and sleep somewhere else , '' cried Enjolras . 
But Grantaire , still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him , replied : -- `` Let me sleep here , -- until I die . '' 
Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes : -- `` Grantaire , you are incapable of believing , of thinking , of willing , of living , and of dying . '' 
Grantaire replied in a grave tone : -- `` You will see . '' 
He stammered a few more unintelligible words , then his head fell heavily on the table , and , as is the usual effect of the second period of inebriety , into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him , an instant later he had fallen asleep . 
AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP Bahorel , in ecstasies over the barricade , shouted : -- `` Here 's the street in its low-necked dress ! 
How well it looks ! '' 
Courfeyrac , as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent , sought to console the widowed proprietress . 
`` Mother Hucheloup , were n't you complaining the other day because you had had a notice served on you for infringing the law , because Gibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window ? '' 
`` Yes , my good Monsieur Courfeyrac . 
Ah ! 
good Heavens , are you going to put that table of mine in your horror , too ? 
And it was for the counterpane , and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the attic window into the street , that the government collected a fine of a hundred francs . 
If that is n't an abomination , what is ! '' 
`` Well , Mother Hucheloup , we are avenging you . '' 
Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit which she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account . 
She was satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman , who , having received a box on the ear from her husband , went to complain to her father , and cried for vengeance , saying : `` Father , you owe my husband affront for affront . '' 
The father asked : `` On which cheek did you receive the blow ? '' 
`` On the left cheek . '' 
The father slapped her right cheek and said : `` Now you are satisfied . 
Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter 's ears , and that I have accordingly boxed his wife 's . '' 
The rain had ceased . 
Recruits had arrived . 
Workmen had brought under their blouses a barrel of powder , a basket containing bottles of vitriol , two or three carnival torches , and a basket filled with fire-pots , `` left over from the King 's festival . '' 
This festival was very recent , having taken place on the 1st of May . 
It was said that these munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pepin . 
They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis , and all the lanterns in the surrounding streets , de Mondetour , du Cygne , des Precheurs , and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie . 
Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac directed everything . 
Two barricades were now in process of construction at once , both of them resting on the Corinthe house and forming a right angle ; the larger shut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the other closed the Rue Mondetour , on the side of the Rue de Cygne . 
This last barricade , which was very narrow , was constructed only of casks and paving-stones . 
There were about fifty workers on it ; thirty were armed with guns ; for , on their way , they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer 's shop . 
Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than this troop . 
One had a round-jacket , a cavalry sabre , and two holster-pistols , another was in his shirt-sleeves , with a round hat , and a powder-horn slung at his side , a third wore a plastron of nine sheets of gray paper and was armed with a saddler 's awl . 
There was one who was shouting : `` Let us exterminate them to the last man and die at the point of our bayonet . '' 
This man had no bayonet . 
Another spread out over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman , the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription in red worsted : Public Order . 
There were a great many guns bearing the numbers of the legions , few hats , no cravats , many bare arms , some pikes . 
Add to this , all ages , all sorts of faces , small , pale young men , and bronzed longshoremen . 
All were in haste ; and as they helped each other , they discussed the possible chances . 
That they would receive succor about three o'clock in the morning -- that they were sure of one regiment , that Paris would rise . 
Terrible sayings with which was mingled a sort of cordial joviality . 
One would have pronounced them brothers , but they did not know each other 's names . 
Great perils have this fine characteristic , that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers . 
A fire had been lighted in the kitchen , and there they were engaged in moulding into bullets , pewter mugs , spoons , forks , and all the brass table-ware of the establishment . 
In the midst of it all , they drank . 
Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables with glasses of wine . 
In the billiard-hall , Mame Hucheloup , Matelote , and Gibelotte , variously modified by terror , which had stupefied one , rendered another breathless , and roused the third , were tearing up old dish-cloths and making lint ; three insurgents were assisting them , three bushy-haired , jolly blades with beards and moustaches , who plucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble . 
The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Enjolras had observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue des Billettes , was at work on the smaller barricade and was making himself useful there . 
Gavroche was working on the larger one . 
As for the young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings , and who had inquired for M. Marius , he had disappeared at about the time when the omnibus had been overturned . 
Gavroche , completely carried away and radiant , had undertaken to get everything in readiness . 
He went , came , mounted , descended , re-mounted , whistled , and sparkled . 
He seemed to be there for the encouragement of all . 
Had he any incentive ? 
Yes , certainly , his poverty ; had he wings ? 
yes , certainly , his joy . 
Gavroche was a whirlwind . 
He was constantly visible , he was incessantly audible . 
He filled the air , as he was everywhere at once . 
He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity ; no halt was possible with him . 
The enormous barricade felt him on its haunches . 
He troubled the loungers , he excited the idle , he reanimated the weary , he grew impatient over the thoughtful , he inspired gayety in some , and breath in others , wrath in others , movement in all , now pricking a student , now biting an artisan ; he alighted , paused , flew off again , hovered over the tumult , and the effort , sprang from one party to another , murmuring and humming , and harassed the whole company ; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach . 
Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his little lungs . 
`` Courage ! 
more paving-stones ! 
more casks ! 
more machines ! 
Where are you now ? 
A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with ! 
Your barricade is very small . 
It must be carried up . 
Put everything on it , fling everything there , stick it all in . 
Break down the house . 
A barricade is Mother Gibou 's tea . 
Hullo , here 's a glass door . '' 
This elicited an exclamation from the workers . 
`` A glass door ? 
what do you expect us to do with a glass door , tubercle ? '' 
`` Hercules yourselves ! '' 
retorted Gavroche . 
`` A glass door is an excellent thing in a barricade . 
It does not prevent an attack , but it prevents the enemy taking it . 
So you 've never prigged apples over a wall where there were broken bottles ? 
A glass door cuts the corns of the National Guard when they try to mount on the barricade . 
Pardi ! 
glass is a treacherous thing . 
Well , you have n't a very wildly lively imagination , comrades . '' 
However , he was furious over his triggerless pistol . 
He went from one to another , demanding : `` A gun , I want a gun ! 
Why do n't you give me a gun ? '' 
`` Give you a gun ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` Come now ! '' 
said Gavroche , `` why not ? 
I had one in 1830 when we had a dispute with Charles X. '' Enjolras shrugged his shoulders . 
`` When there are enough for the men , we will give some to the children . '' 
Gavroche wheeled round haughtily , and answered : -- `` If you are killed before me , I shall take yours . '' 
`` Gamin ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the street created a diversion ! 
Gavroche shouted to him : -- `` Come with us , young fellow ! 
well now , do n't we do anything for this old country of ours ? '' 
The dandy fled . 
PREPARATIONS The journals of the day which said that that nearly impregnable structure , of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , as they call it , reached to the level of the first floor , were mistaken . 
The fact is , that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet . 
It was built in such a manner that the combatants could , at their will , either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale its crest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top of each other and arranged as steps in the interior . 
On the outside , the front of the barricade , composed of piles of paving-stones and casks bound together by beams and planks , which were entangled in the wheels of Anceau 's dray and of the overturned omnibus , had a bristling and inextricable aspect . 
An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been made between the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which was furthest from the wine-shop , so that an exit was possible at this point . 
The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with ropes , and a red flag , fastened to this pole , floated over the barricade . 
The little Mondetour barricade , hidden behind the wine-shop building , was not visible . 
The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt . 
Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other fragment of the Rue Mondetour which opens through the Rue des Precheurs an issue into the Halles , wishing , no doubt , to preserve a possible communication with the outside , and not entertaining much fear of an attack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue des Precheurs . 
With the exception of this issue which was left free , and which constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a branch and taking into account , also , the narrow cutting arranged on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the interior of the barricade , where the wine-shop formed a salient angle , presented an irregular square , closed on all sides . 
There existed an interval of twenty paces between the grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of the street , so that one might say that the barricade rested on these houses , all inhabited , but closed from top to bottom . 
All this work was performed without any hindrance , in less than an hour , and without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skin cap or a single bayonet make their appearance . 
The very bourgeois who still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a glance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie , caught sight of the barricade , and redoubled their pace . 
The two barricades being finished , and the flag run up , a table was dragged out of the wine-shop ; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table . 
Enjolras brought the square coffer , and Courfeyrac opened it . 
This coffer was filled with cartridges . 
When the mob saw the cartridges , a tremor ran through the bravest , and a momentary silence ensued . 
Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile . 
Each one received thirty cartridges . 
Many had powder , and set about making others with the bullets which they had run . 
As for the barrel of powder , it stood on a table on one side , near the door , and was held in reserve . 
The alarm beat which ran through all Paris , did not cease , but it had finally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they no longer paid any attention . 
This noise retreated at times , and again drew near , with melancholy undulations . 
They loaded the guns and carbines , all together , without haste , with solemn gravity . 
Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside the barricades , one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the second in the Rue des Precheurs , the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Then , the barricades having been built , the posts assigned , the guns loaded , the sentinels stationed , they waited , alone in those redoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer , surrounded by those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated , enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which was drawing on , in the midst of that silence through which something could be felt advancing , and which had about it something tragic and terrifying , isolated , armed , determined , and tranquil . 
WAITING During those hours of waiting , what did they do ? 
We must needs tell , since this is a matter of history . 
While the men made bullets and the women lint , while a large saucepan of melted brass and lead , destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a glowing brazier , while the sentinels watched , weapon in hand , on the barricade , while Enjolras , whom it was impossible to divert , kept an eye on the sentinels , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Feuilly , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and some others , sought each other out and united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their student life , and , in one corner of this wine-shop which had been converted into a casement , a couple of paces distant from the redoubt which they had built , with their carbines loaded and primed resting against the backs of their chairs , these fine young fellows , so close to a supreme hour , began to recite love verses . 
What verses ? 
These : -- Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie , Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux , Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux , Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age , Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans , Et que , dans notre humble et petit menage , Tout , meme l'hiver , nous etait printemps ? 
Beaux jours ! 
Manuel etait fier et sage , Paris s ` asseyait a de saints banquets , Foy lancait la foudre , et votre corsage Avait une epingle ou je me piquais . 
Tout vous contemplait . 
Avocat sans causes , Quand je vous menais au Prado diner , Vous etiez jolie au point que les roses Me faisaient l'effet de se retourner . 
Je les entendais dire : Est elle belle ! 
Comme elle sent bon ! 
Quels cheveux a flots ! 
Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile , Son bonnet charmant est a peine eclos . 
J'errais avec toi , pressant ton bras souple . 
Les passants crovaient que l'amour charme Avait marie , dans notre heureux couple , Le doux mois d'avril au beau mois de mai . 
Nous vivions caches , contents , porte close , Devorant l'amour , bon fruit defendu , Ma bouche n'avait pas dit une chose Que deja ton coeur avait repondu . 
La Sorbonne etait l'endroit bucolique Ou je t ` adorais du soir au matin . 
C'est ainsi qu'une ame amoureuse applique La carte du Tendre au pays Latin . 
O place Maubert ! 
o place Dauphine ! 
Quand , dans le taudis frais et printanier , Tu tirais ton bas sur ton jambe fine , Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier . 
J'ai fort lu Platon , mais rien ne m ` en reste ; Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais , Tu me demontrais la bonte celeste Avec une fleur que tu me donnais . 
Je t ` obeissais , tu m ' etais soumise ; O grenier dore ! 
te lacer ! 
te voir Aller et venir des l'aube en chemise , Mirant ton jeune front a ton vieux miroir . 
Et qui done pourrait perde la memoire De ces temps d'aurore et de firmament , De rubans , de fleurs , de gaze et de moire , Ou l'amour begaye un argot charmant ? 
Nos jardins etaient un pot de tulipe ; Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon ; Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe , Et je te donnais le tasse en japon . 
Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire ! 
Ton manchon brule , ton boa perdu ! 
Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare Qu'un soir pour souper nons avons vendu ! 
J'etais mendiant et toi charitable . 
Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds . 
Dante in folio nous servait de table Pour manger gaiment un cent de marrons . 
La premiere fois qu'en mon joyeux bouge Je pris un baiser a ton levre en feu , Quand tu t ` en allais decoiffee et rouge , Je restai tout pale et je crus en Dieu ! 
Te rappelles-tu nos bonheurs sans nombre , Et tous ces fichus changes en chiffons ? 
Oh que de soupirs , de nos coeurs pleins d'ombre , Se sont envoles dans les cieux profonds ! 
-LSB- 53 -RSB- -LSB- 53 -RSB- Do you remember our sweet life , when we were both so young , and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well dressed and in love ? 
When , by adding your age to my age , we could not count forty years between us , and when , in our humble and tiny household , everything was spring to us even in winter . 
Fair days ! 
Manuel was proud and wise , Paris sat at sacred banquets , Foy launched thunderbolts , and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself . 
Everything gazed upon you . 
A briefless lawyer , when I took you to the Prado to dine , you were so beautiful that the roses seemed to me to turn round , and I heard them say : Is she not beautiful ! 
How good she smells ! 
What billowing hair ! 
Beneath her mantle she hides a wing . 
Her charming bonnet is hardly unfolded . 
I wandered with thee , pressing thy supple arm . 
The passers-by thought that love bewitched had wedded , in our happy couple , the gentle month of April to the fair month of May . 
We lived concealed , content , with closed doors , devouring love , that sweet forbidden fruit . 
My mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart had already responded . 
The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored thee from eve till morn . 
'T is thus that an amorous soul applies the chart of the Tender to the Latin country . 
O Place Maubert ! 
O Place Dauphine ! 
When in the fresh spring-like hut thou didst draw thy stocking on thy delicate leg , I saw a star in the depths of the garret . 
I have read a great deal of Plato , but nothing of it remains by me ; better than Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me celestial goodness with a flower which thou gavest to me , I obeyed thee , thou didst submit to me ; oh gilded garret ! 
to lace thee ! 
to behold thee going and coming from dawn in thy chemise , gazing at thy young brow in thine ancient mirror ! 
And who , then , would forego the memory of those days of aurora and the firmament , of flowers , of gauze and of moire , when love stammers a charming slang ? 
Our gardens consisted of a pot of tulips ; thou didst mask the window with thy petticoat ; I took the earthenware bowl and I gave thee the Japanese cup . 
And those great misfortunes which made us laugh ! 
Thy cuff scorched , thy boa lost ! 
And that dear portrait of the divine Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup ! 
I was a beggar and thou wert charitable . 
I kissed thy fresh round arms in haste . 
A folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a centime 's worth of chestnuts . 
The first time that , in my joyous den , I snatched a kiss from thy fiery lip , when thou wentest forth , dishevelled and blushing , I turned deathly pale and I believed in God . 
Dost thou recall our innumerable joys , and all those fichus changed to rags ? 
Oh ! 
what sighs from our hearts full of gloom fluttered forth to the heavenly depths ! 
The hour , the spot , these souvenirs of youth recalled , a few stars which began to twinkle in the sky , the funeral repose of those deserted streets , the imminence of the inexorable adventure , which was in preparation , gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low tone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire , who , as we have said , was a gentle poet . 
In the meantime , a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade , and in the large one , one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on Shrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks , on their way to la Courtille . 
These torches , as the reader has seen , came from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed on three sides to shelter it from the wind , and disposed in such a fashion that all the light fell on the flag . 
The street and the barricade remained sunk in gloom , and nothing was to be seen except the red flag formidably illuminated as by an enormous dark-lantern . 
This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag , with an indescribable and terrible purple . 
THE MAN RECRUITED IN THE RUE DES BILLETTES Night was fully come , nothing made its appearance . 
All that they heard was confused noises , and at intervals , fusillades ; but these were rare , badly sustained and distant . 
This respite , which was thus prolonged , was a sign that the Government was taking its time , and collecting its forces . 
These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand . 
Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong souls on the threshold of redoubtable events . 
He went in search of Gavroche , who had set to making cartridges in the tap-room , by the dubious light of two candles placed on the counter by way of precaution , on account of the powder which was scattered on the tables . 
These two candles cast no gleam outside . 
The insurgents had , moreover , taken pains not to have any light in the upper stories . 
Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment , but not precisely with his cartridges . 
The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered the tap-room and had seated himself at the table which was the least lighted . 
A musket of large model had fallen to his share , and he held it between his legs . 
Gavroche , who had been , up to that moment , distracted by a hundred `` amusing '' things , had not even seen this man . 
When he entered , Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes , admiring his gun ; then , all at once , when the man was seated , the street urchin sprang to his feet . 
Any one who had spied upon that man up to that moment , would have seen that he was observing everything in the barricade and in the band of insurgents , with singular attention ; but , from the moment when he had entered this room , he had fallen into a sort of brown study , and no longer seemed to see anything that was going on . 
The gamin approached this pensive personage , and began to step around him on tiptoe , as one walks in the vicinity of a person whom one is afraid of waking . 
At the same time , over his childish countenance which was , at once so impudent and so serious , so giddy and so profound , so gay and so heart-breaking , passed all those grimaces of an old man which signify : Ah bah ! 
impossible ! 
My sight is bad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
can this be ? 
no , it is not ! 
but yes ! 
why , no ! 
etc. . 
Gavroche balanced on his heels , clenched both fists in his pockets , moved his neck around like a bird , expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity of his lower lip . 
He was astounded , uncertain , incredulous , convinced , dazzled . 
He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart , discovering a Venus among the blowsy females , and the air of an amateur recognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs . 
His whole being was at work , the instinct which scents out , and the intelligence which combines . 
It was evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche 's life . 
It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras accosted him . 
`` You are small , '' said Enjolras , `` you will not be seen . 
Go out of the barricade , slip along close to the houses , skirmish about a bit in the streets , and come back and tell me what is going on . '' 
Gavroche raised himself on his haunches . 
`` So the little chaps are good for something ! 
that 's very lucky ! 
I 'll go ! 
In the meanwhile , trust to the little fellows , and distrust the big ones . '' 
And Gavroche , raising his head and lowering his voice , added , as he indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes : `` Do you see that big fellow there ? '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He 's a police spy . '' 
`` Are you sure of it ? '' 
`` It is n't two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port Royal , where I was taking the air , by my ear . '' 
Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand . 
The man left the room , and returned almost immediately , accompanied by three others . 
The four men , four porters with broad shoulders , went and placed themselves without doing anything to attract his attention , behind the table on which the man of the Rue des Billettes was leaning with his elbows . 
They were evidently ready to hurl themselves upon him . 
Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him : -- `` Who are you ? '' 
At this abrupt query , the man started . 
He plunged his gaze deep into Enjolras ' clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter 's meaning . 
He smiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful , more energetic , and more resolute could be seen in the world , and replied with haughty gravity : -- `` I see what it is . 
Well , yes ! '' 
`` You are a police spy ? '' 
`` I am an agent of the authorities . '' 
`` And your name ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Enjolras made a sign to the four men . 
In the twinkling of an eye , before Javert had time to turn round , he was collared , thrown down , pinioned and searched . 
They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of glass , and bearing on one side the arms of France , engraved , and with this motto : Supervision and vigilance , and on the other this note : `` JAVERT , inspector of police , aged fifty-two , '' and the signature of the Prefect of Police of that day , M. Gisquet . 
Besides this , he had his watch and his purse , which contained several gold pieces . 
They left him his purse and his watch . 
Under the watch , at the bottom of his fob , they felt and seized a paper in an envelope , which Enjolras unfolded , and on which he read these five lines , written in the very hand of the Prefect of Police : -- `` As soon as his political mission is accomplished , Inspector Javert will make sure , by special supervision , whether it is true that the malefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine , near the Jena bridge . '' 
The search ended , they lifted Javert to his feet , bound his arms behind his back , and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name . 
Gavroche , who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved of everything with a silent toss of his head , stepped up to Javert and said to him : -- `` It 's the mouse who has caught the cat . '' 
All this was so rapidly executed , that it was all over when those about the wine-shop noticed it . 
Javert had not uttered a single cry . 
At the sight of Javert bound to the post , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Combeferre , and the men scattered over the two barricades came running up . 
Javert , with his back to the post , and so surrounded with ropes that he could not make a movement , raised his head with the intrepid serenity of the man who has never lied . 
`` He is a police spy , '' said Enjolras . 
And turning to Javert : `` You will be shot ten minutes before the barricade is taken . '' 
Javert replied in his most imperious tone : -- `` Why not at once ? '' 
`` We are saving our powder . '' 
`` Then finish the business with a blow from a knife . '' 
`` Spy , '' said the handsome Enjolras , `` we are judges and not assassins . '' 
Then he called Gavroche : -- `` Here you ! 
go about your business ! 
Do what I told you ! '' 
`` I 'm going ! '' 
cried Gavroche . 
And halting as he was on the point of setting out : -- `` By the way , you will give me his gun ! '' 
and he added : `` I leave you the musician , but I want the clarionet . '' 
The gamin made the military salute and passed gayly through the opening in the large barricade . 
MANY INTERROGATION POINTS WITH REGARD TO A CERTAIN LE CABUC WHOSE NAME MAY NOT HAVE BEEN LE CABUC The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete , the reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a revolutionary birth , which contain convulsion mingled with effort , in their exact and real relief , were we to omit , in the sketch here outlined , an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurred almost immediately after Gavroche 's departure . 
Mobs , as the reader knows , are like a snowball , and collect as they roll along , a throng of tumultuous men . 
These men do not ask each other whence they come . 
Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac , there had been a person wearing the jacket of a street porter , which was very threadbare on the shoulders , who gesticulated and vociferated , and who had the look of a drunken savage . 
This man , whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc , and who was , moreover , an utter stranger to those who pretended to know him , was very drunk , or assumed the appearance of being so , and had seated himself with several others at a table which they had dragged outside of the wine-shop . 
This Cabuc , while making those who vied with him drunk seemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house at the extremity of the barricade , whose five stories commanded the whole street and faced the Rue Saint-Denis . 
All at once he exclaimed : -- `` Do you know , comrades , it is from that house yonder that we must fire . 
When we are at the windows , the deuce is in it if any one can advance into the street ! '' 
`` Yes , but the house is closed , '' said one of the drinkers . 
`` Let us knock ! '' 
`` They will not open . '' 
`` Let us break in the door ! '' 
Le Cabuc runs to the door , which had a very massive knocker , and knocks . 
The door opens not . 
He strikes a second blow . 
No one answers . 
A third stroke . 
The same silence . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
shouts Cabuc . 
Nothing stirs . 
Then he seizes a gun and begins to batter the door with the butt end . 
It was an ancient alley door , low , vaulted , narrow , solid , entirely of oak , lined on the inside with a sheet of iron and iron stays , a genuine prison postern . 
The blows from the butt end of the gun made the house tremble , but did not shake the door . 
Nevertheless , it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed , for a tiny , square window was finally seen to open on the third story , and at this aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired old man , who was the porter , and who held a candle . 
The man who was knocking paused . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said the porter , `` what do you want ? '' 
`` Open ! '' 
said Cabuc . 
`` That can not be , gentlemen . '' 
`` Open , nevertheless . '' 
`` Impossible , gentlemen . '' 
Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter ; but as he was below , and as it was very dark , the porter did not see him . 
`` Will you open , yes or no ? '' 
`` No , gentlemen . '' 
`` Do you say no ? '' 
`` I say no , my goo -- '' The porter did not finish . 
The shot was fired ; the ball entered under his chin and came out at the nape of his neck , after traversing the jugular vein . 
The old man fell back without a sigh . 
The candle fell and was extinguished , and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless head lying on the sill of the small window , and a little whitish smoke which floated off towards the roof . 
`` There ! '' 
said Le Cabuc , dropping the butt end of his gun to the pavement . 
He had hardly uttered this word , when he felt a hand laid on his shoulder with the weight of an eagle 's talon , and he heard a voice saying to him : -- `` On your knees . '' 
The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras ' cold , white face . 
Enjolras held a pistol in his hand . 
He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge . 
He had seized Cabuc 's collar , blouse , shirt , and suspender with his left hand . 
`` On your knees ! '' 
he repeated . 
And , with an imperious motion , the frail young man of twenty years bent the thickset and sturdy porter like a reed , and brought him to his knees in the mire . 
Le Cabuc attempted to resist , but he seemed to have been seized by a superhuman hand . 
Enjolras , pale , with bare neck and dishevelled hair , and his woman 's face , had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis . 
His dilated nostrils , his downcast eyes , gave to his implacable Greek profile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which , as the ancient world viewed the matter , befit Justice . 
The whole barricade hastened up , then all ranged themselves in a circle at a distance , feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the presence of the thing which they were about to behold . 
Le Cabuc , vanquished , no longer tried to struggle , and trembled in every limb . 
Enjolras released him and drew out his watch . 
`` Collect yourself , '' said he . 
`` Think or pray . 
You have one minute . '' 
`` Mercy ! '' 
murmured the murderer ; then he dropped his head and stammered a few inarticulate oaths . 
Enjolras never took his eyes off of him : he allowed a minute to pass , then he replaced his watch in his fob . 
That done , he grasped Le Cabuc by the hair , as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and shrieked , and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear . 
Many of those intrepid men , who had so tranquilly entered upon the most terrible of adventures , turned aside their heads . 
An explosion was heard , the assassin fell to the pavement face downwards . 
Enjolras straightened himself up , and cast a convinced and severe glance around him . 
Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said : -- `` Throw that outside . '' 
Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch , which was still agitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled , and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondetour . 
Enjolras was thoughtful . 
It is impossible to say what grandiose shadows slowly spread over his redoubtable serenity . 
All at once he raised his voice . 
A silence fell upon them . 
`` Citizens , '' said Enjolras , `` what that man did is frightful , what I have done is horrible . 
He killed , therefore I killed him . 
I had to do it , because insurrection must have its discipline . 
Assassination is even more of a crime here than elsewhere ; we are under the eyes of the Revolution , we are the priests of the Republic , we are the victims of duty , and must not be possible to slander our combat . 
I have , therefore , tried that man , and condemned him to death . 
As for myself , constrained as I am to do what I have done , and yet abhorring it , I have judged myself also , and you shall soon see to what I have condemned myself . '' 
Those who listened to him shuddered . 
`` We will share thy fate , '' cried Combeferre . 
`` So be it , '' replied Enjolras . 
`` One word more . 
In executing this man , I have obeyed necessity ; but necessity is a monster of the old world , necessity 's name is Fatality . 
Now , the law of progress is , that monsters shall disappear before the angels , and that Fatality shall vanish before Fraternity . 
It is a bad moment to pronounce the word love . 
No matter , I do pronounce it . 
And I glorify it . 
Love , the future is thine . 
Death , I make use of thee , but I hate thee . 
Citizens , in the future there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts ; neither ferocious ignorance , nor bloody retaliation . 
As there will be no more Satan , there will be no more Michael . 
In the future no one will kill any one else , the earth will beam with radiance , the human race will love . 
The day will come , citizens , when all will be concord , harmony , light , joy and life ; it will come , and it is in order that it may come that we are about to die . '' 
Enjolras ceased . 
His virgin lips closed ; and he remained for some time standing on the spot where he had shed blood , in marble immobility . 
His staring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones . 
Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other 's hands silently , and , leaning against each other in an angle of the barricade , they watched with an admiration in which there was some compassion , that grave young man , executioner and priest , composed of light , like crystal , and also of rock . 
Let us say at once that later on , after the action , when the bodies were taken to the morgue and searched , a police agent 's card was found on Le Cabuc . 
The author of this book had in his hands , in 1848 , the special report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832 . 
We will add , that if we are to believe a tradition of the police , which is strange but probably well founded , Le Cabuc was Claquesous . 
The fact is , that dating from the death of Le Cabuc , there was no longer any question of Claquesous . 
Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of his disappearance ; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with the invisible . 
His life had been all shadows , his end was night . 
The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotion of that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly terminated , when Courfeyrac again beheld on the barricade , the small young man who had inquired of him that morning for Marius . 
This lad , who had a bold and reckless air , had come by night to join the insurgents . 
BOOK THIRTEENTH . 
-- MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , had produced on him the effect of the voice of destiny . 
He wished to die ; the opportunity presented itself ; he knocked at the door of the tomb , a hand in the darkness offered him the key . 
These melancholy openings which take place in the gloom before despair , are tempting . 
Marius thrust aside the bar which had so often allowed him to pass , emerged from the garden , and said : `` I will go . '' 
Mad with grief , no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in his brain , incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after those two months passed in the intoxication of youth and love , overwhelmed at once by all the reveries of despair , he had but one desire remaining , to make a speedy end of all . 
He set out at rapid pace . 
He found himself most opportunely armed , as he had Javert 's pistols with him . 
The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse , had vanished from his sight in the street . 
Marius , who had emerged from the Rue Plumet by the boulevard , traversed the Esplanade and the bridge of the Invalides , the Champs Elysees , the Place Louis XV. , and reached the Rue de Rivoli . 
The shops were open there , the gas was burning under the arcades , women were making their purchases in the stalls , people were eating ices in the Cafe Laiter , and nibbling small cakes at the English pastry-cook 's shop . 
Only a few posting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hotel des Princes and the Hotel Meurice . 
Marius entered the Rue Saint-Honore through the Passage Delorme . 
There the shops were closed , the merchants were chatting in front of their half-open doors , people were walking about , the street lanterns were lighted , beginning with the first floor , all the windows were lighted as usual . 
There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal . 
Marius followed the Rue Saint-Honore . 
In proportion as he left the Palais-Royal behind him , there were fewer lighted windows , the shops were fast shut , no one was chatting on the thresholds , the street grew sombre , and , at the same time , the crowd increased in density . 
For the passers-by now amounted to a crowd . 
No one could be seen to speak in this throng , and yet there arose from it a dull , deep murmur . 
Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec , there were `` assemblages '' , motionless and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as stones in the midst of running water . 
At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires , the crowd no longer walked . 
It formed a resisting , massive , solid , compact , almost impenetrable block of people who were huddled together , and conversing in low tones . 
There were hardly any black coats or round hats now , but smock frocks , blouses , caps , and bristling and cadaverous heads . 
This multitude undulated confusedly in the nocturnal gloom . 
Its whisperings had the hoarse accent of a vibration . 
Although not one of them was walking , a dull trampling was audible in the mire . 
Beyond this dense portion of the throng , in the Rue du Roule , in the Rue des Prouvaires , and in the extension of the Rue Saint-Honore , there was no longer a single window in which a candle was burning . 
Only the solitary and diminishing rows of lanterns could be seen vanishing into the street in the distance . 
The lanterns of that date resembled large red stars , hanging to ropes , and shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a huge spider . 
These streets were not deserted . 
There could be descried piles of guns , moving bayonets , and troops bivouacking . 
No curious observer passed that limit . 
There circulation ceased . 
There the rabble ended and the army began . 
Marius willed with the will of a man who hopes no more . 
He had been summoned , he must go . 
He found a means to traverse the throng and to pass the bivouac of the troops , he shunned the patrols , he avoided the sentinels . 
He made a circuit , reached the Rue de Bethisy , and directed his course towards the Halles . 
At the corner of the Rue des Bourdonnais , there were no longer any lanterns . 
After having passed the zone of the crowd , he had passed the limits of the troops ; he found himself in something startling . 
There was no longer a passer-by , no longer a soldier , no longer a light , there was no one ; solitude , silence , night , I know not what chill which seized hold upon one . 
Entering a street was like entering a cellar . 
He continued to advance . 
He took a few steps . 
Some one passed close to him at a run . 
Was it a man ? 
Or a woman ? 
Were there many of them ? 
he could not have told . 
It had passed and vanished . 
Proceeding from circuit to circuit , he reached a lane which he judged to be the Rue de la Poterie ; near the middle of this street , he came in contact with an obstacle . 
He extended his hands . 
It was an overturned wagon ; his foot recognized pools of water , gullies , and paving-stones scattered and piled up . 
A barricade had been begun there and abandoned . 
He climbed over the stones and found himself on the other side of the barrier . 
He walked very near the street-posts , and guided himself along the walls of the houses . 
A little beyond the barricade , it seemed to him that he could make out something white in front of him . 
He approached , it took on a form . 
It was two white horses ; the horses of the omnibus harnessed by Bossuet in the morning , who had been straying at random all day from street to street , and had finally halted there , with the weary patience of brutes who no more understand the actions of men , than man understands the actions of Providence . 
Marius left the horses behind him . 
As he was approaching a street which seemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social , a shot coming no one knows whence , and traversing the darkness at random , whistled close by him , and the bullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above his head over a hairdresser 's shop . 
This pierced shaving-dish was still to be seen in 1848 , in the Rue du Contrat-Social , at the corner of the pillars of the market . 
This shot still betokened life . 
From that instant forth he encountered nothing more . 
The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps . 
Nevertheless , Marius pressed forward . 
AN OWL 'S VIEW OF PARIS A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing of the bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle . 
All that old quarter of the Halles , which is like a city within a city , through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin , where a thousand lanes cross , and of which the insurgents had made their redoubt and their stronghold , would have appeared to him like a dark and enormous cavity hollowed out in the centre of Paris . 
There the glance fell into an abyss . 
Thanks to the broken lanterns , thanks to the closed windows , there all radiance , all life , all sound , all movement ceased . 
The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watch everywhere , and maintained order , that is to say , night . 
The necessary tactics of insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity , to multiply every combatant by the possibilities which that obscurity contains . 
At dusk , every window where a candle was burning received a shot . 
The light was extinguished , sometimes the inhabitant was killed . 
Hence nothing was stirring . 
There was nothing but fright , mourning , stupor in the houses ; and in the streets , a sort of sacred horror . 
Not even the long rows of windows and stores , the indentations of the chimneys , and the roofs , and the vague reflections which are cast back by the wet and muddy pavements , were visible . 
An eye cast upward at that mass of shadows might , perhaps , have caught a glimpse here and there , at intervals , of indistinct gleams which brought out broken and eccentric lines , and profiles of singular buildings , something like the lights which go and come in ruins ; it was at such points that the barricades were situated . 
The rest was a lake of obscurity , foggy , heavy , and funereal , above which , in motionless and melancholy outlines , rose the tower of Saint-Jacques , the church of Saint-Merry , and two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giants and the night makes phantoms . 
All around this deserted and disquieting labyrinth , in the quarters where the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated , and where a few street lanterns still burned , the aerial observer might have distinguished the metallic gleam of swords and bayonets , the dull rumble of artillery , and the swarming of silent battalions whose ranks were swelling from minute to minute ; a formidable girdle which was slowly drawing in and around the insurrection . 
The invested quarter was no longer anything more than a monstrous cavern ; everything there appeared to be asleep or motionless , and , as we have just seen , any street which one might come to offered nothing but darkness . 
A wild darkness , full of traps , full of unseen and formidable shocks , into which it was alarming to penetrate , and in which it was terrible to remain , where those who entered shivered before those whom they awaited , where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming . 
Invisible combatants were entrenched at every corner of the street ; snares of the sepulchre concealed in the density of night . 
All was over . 
No more light was to be hoped for , henceforth , except the lightning of guns , no further encounter except the abrupt and rapid apparition of death . 
Where ? 
How ? 
When ? 
No one knew , but it was certain and inevitable . 
In this place which had been marked out for the struggle , the Government and the insurrection , the National Guard , and popular societies , the bourgeois and the uprising , groping their way , were about to come into contact . 
The necessity was the same for both . 
The only possible issue thenceforth was to emerge thence killed or conquerors . 
A situation so extreme , an obscurity so powerful , that the most timid felt themselves seized with resolution , and the most daring with terror . 
Moreover , on both sides , the fury , the rage , and the determination were equal . 
For the one party , to advance meant death , and no one dreamed of retreating ; for the other , to remain meant death , and no one dreamed of flight . 
It was indispensable that all should be ended on the following day , that triumph should rest either here or there , that the insurrection should prove itself a revolution or a skirmish . 
The Government understood this as well as the parties ; the most insignificant bourgeois felt it . 
Hence a thought of anguish which mingled with the impenetrable gloom of this quarter where all was at the point of being decided ; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence a catastrophe was on the point of emerging . 
Here only one sound was audible , a sound as heart-rending as the death rattle , as menacing as a malediction , the tocsin of Saint-Merry . 
Nothing could be more blood-curdling than the clamor of that wild and desperate bell , wailing amid the shadows . 
As it often happens , nature seemed to have fallen into accord with what men were about to do . 
Nothing disturbed the harmony of the whole effect . 
The stars had disappeared , heavy clouds filled the horizon with their melancholy folds . 
A black sky rested on these dead streets , as though an immense winding-sheet were being outspread over this immense tomb . 
While a battle that was still wholly political was in preparation in the same locality which had already witnessed so many revolutionary events , while youth , the secret associations , the schools , in the name of principles , and the middle classes , in the name of interests , were approaching preparatory to dashing themselves together , clasping and throwing each other , while each one hastened and invited the last and decisive hour of the crisis , far away and quite outside of this fatal quarter , in the most profound depths of the unfathomable cavities of that wretched old Paris which disappears under the splendor of happy and opulent Paris , the sombre voice of the people could be heard giving utterance to a dull roar . 
A fearful and sacred voice which is composed of the roar of the brute and of the word of God , which terrifies the weak and which warns the wise , which comes both from below like the voice of the lion , and from on high like the voice of the thunder . 
THE EXTREME EDGE Marius had reached the Halles . 
There everything was still calmer , more obscure and more motionless than in the neighboring streets . 
One would have said that the glacial peace of the sepulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spread over the heavens . 
Nevertheless , a red glow brought out against this black background the lofty roofs of the houses which barred the Rue de la Chanvrerie on the Saint-Eustache side . 
It was the reflection of the torch which was burning in the Corinthe barricade . 
Marius directed his steps towards that red light . 
It had drawn him to the Marche-aux-Poirees , and he caught a glimpse of the dark mouth of the Rue des Precheurs . 
He entered it . 
The insurgents ' sentinel , who was guarding the other end , did not see him . 
He felt that he was very close to that which he had come in search of , and he walked on tiptoe . 
In this manner he reached the elbow of that short section of the Rue Mondetour which was , as the reader will remember , the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with the outside world . 
At the corner of the last house , on his left , he thrust his head forward , and looked into the fragment of the Rue Mondetour . 
A little beyond the angle of the lane and the Rue de la Chanvrerie which cast a broad curtain of shadow , in which he was himself engulfed , he perceived some light on the pavement , a bit of the wine-shop , and beyond , a flickering lamp within a sort of shapeless wall , and men crouching down with guns on their knees . 
All this was ten fathoms distant from him . 
It was the interior of the barricade . 
The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest of the wine-shop , the large barricade , and the flag from him . 
Marius had but a step more to take . 
Then the unhappy young man seated himself on a post , folded his arms , and fell to thinking about his father . 
He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy , who had been so proud a soldier , who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic , and had touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon , who had beheld Genoa , Alexandria , Milan , Turin , Madrid , Vienna , Dresden , Berlin , Moscow , who had left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that same blood , which he , Marius , had in his veins , who had grown gray before his time in discipline and command , who had lived with his sword-belt buckled , his epaulets falling on his breast , his cockade blackened with powder , his brow furrowed with his helmet , in barracks , in camp , in the bivouac , in ambulances , and who , at the expiration of twenty years , had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek , a smiling countenance , tranquil , admirable , pure as a child , having done everything for France and nothing against her . 
He said to himself that his day had also come now , that his hour had struck , that following his father , he too was about to show himself brave , intrepid , bold , to run to meet the bullets , to offer his breast to bayonets , to shed his blood , to seek the enemy , to seek death , that he was about to wage war in his turn and descend to the field of battle , and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend was the street , and that the war in which he was about to engage was civil war ! 
He beheld civil war laid open like a gulf before him , and into this he was about to fall . 
Then he shuddered . 
He thought of his father 's sword , which his grandfather had sold to a second-hand dealer , and which he had so mournfully regretted . 
He said to himself that that chaste and valiant sword had done well to escape from him , and to depart in wrath into the gloom ; that if it had thus fled , it was because it was intelligent and because it had foreseen the future ; that it had had a presentiment of this rebellion , the war of the gutters , the war of the pavements , fusillades through cellar-windows , blows given and received in the rear ; it was because , coming from Marengo and Friedland , it did not wish to go to the Rue de la Chanvrerie ; it was because , after what it had done with the father , it did not wish to do this for the son ! 
He told himself that if that sword were there , if after taking possession of it at his father 's pillow , he had dared to take it and carry it off for this combat of darkness between Frenchmen in the streets , it would assuredly have scorched his hands and burst out aflame before his eyes , like the sword of the angel ! 
He told himself that it was fortunate that it was not there and that it had disappeared , that that was well , that that was just , that his grandfather had been the true guardian of his father 's glory , and that it was far better that the colonel 's sword should be sold at auction , sold to the old-clothes man , thrown among the old junk , than that it should , to-day , wound the side of his country . 
And then he fell to weeping bitterly . 
This was horrible . 
But what was he to do ? 
Live without Cosette he could not . 
Since she was gone , he must needs die . 
Had he not given her his word of honor that he would die ? 
She had gone knowing that ; this meant that it pleased her that Marius should die . 
And then , it was clear that she no longer loved him , since she had departed thus without warning , without a word , without a letter , although she knew his address ! 
What was the good of living , and why should he live now ? 
And then , what ! 
should he retreat after going so far ? 
should he flee from danger after having approached it ? 
should he slip away after having come and peeped into the barricade ? 
slip away , all in a tremble , saying : `` After all , I have had enough of it as it is . 
I have seen it , that suffices , this is civil war , and I shall take my leave ! '' 
Should he abandon his friends who were expecting him ? 
Who were in need of him possibly ! 
who were a mere handful against an army ! 
Should he be untrue at once to his love , to country , to his word ? 
Should he give to his cowardice the pretext of patriotism ? 
But this was impossible , and if the phantom of his father was there in the gloom , and beheld him retreating , he would beat him on the loins with the flat of his sword , and shout to him : `` March on , you poltroon ! '' 
Thus a prey to the conflicting movements of his thoughts , he dropped his head . 
All at once he raised it . 
A sort of splendid rectification had just been effected in his mind . 
There is a widening of the sphere of thought which is peculiar to the vicinity of the grave ; it makes one see clearly to be near death . 
The vision of the action into which he felt that he was , perhaps , on the point of entering , appeared to him no more as lamentable , but as superb . 
The war of the street was suddenly transfigured by some unfathomable inward working of his soul , before the eye of his thought . 
All the tumultuous interrogation points of revery recurred to him in throngs , but without troubling him . 
He left none of them unanswered . 
Let us see , why should his father be indignant ? 
Are there not cases where insurrection rises to the dignity of duty ? 
What was there that was degrading for the son of Colonel Pontmercy in the combat which was about to begin ? 
It is no longer Montmirail nor Champaubert ; it is something quite different . 
The question is no longer one of sacred territory , -- but of a holy idea . 
The country wails , that may be , but humanity applauds . 
But is it true that the country does wail ? 
France bleeds , but liberty smiles ; and in the presence of liberty 's smile , France forgets her wound . 
And then if we look at things from a still more lofty point of view , why do we speak of civil war ? 
Civil war -- what does that mean ? 
Is there a foreign war ? 
Is not all war between men war between brothers ? 
War is qualified only by its object . 
There is no such thing as foreign or civil war ; there is only just and unjust war . 
Until that day when the grand human agreement is concluded , war , that at least which is the effort of the future , which is hastening on against the past , which is lagging in the rear , may be necessary . 
What have we to reproach that war with ? 
War does not become a disgrace , the sword does not become a disgrace , except when it is used for assassinating the right , progress , reason , civilization , truth . 
Then war , whether foreign or civil , is iniquitous ; it is called crime . 
Outside the pale of that holy thing , justice , by what right does one form of man despise another ? 
By what right should the sword of Washington disown the pike of Camille Desmoulins ? 
Leonidas against the stranger , Timoleon against the tyrant , which is the greater ? 
the one is the defender , the other the liberator . 
Shall we brand every appeal to arms within a city 's limits without taking the object into a consideration ? 
Then note the infamy of Brutus , Marcel , Arnould von Blankenheim , Coligny , Hedgerow war ? 
War of the streets ? 
Why not ? 
That was the war of Ambiorix , of Artevelde , of Marnix , of Pelagius . 
But Ambiorix fought against Rome , Artevelde against France , Marnix against Spain , Pelagius against the Moors ; all against the foreigner . 
Well , the monarchy is a foreigner ; oppression is a stranger ; the right divine is a stranger . 
Despotism violates the moral frontier , an invasion violates the geographical frontier . 
Driving out the tyrant or driving out the English , in both cases , regaining possession of one 's own territory . 
There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices ; after philosophy , action is required ; live force finishes what the idea has sketched out ; Prometheus chained begins , Arostogeiton ends ; the encyclopedia enlightens souls , the 10th of August electrifies them . 
After AEschylus , Thrasybulus ; after Diderot , Danton . 
Multitudes have a tendency to accept the master . 
Their mass bears witness to apathy . 
A crowd is easily led as a whole to obedience . 
Men must be stirred up , pushed on , treated roughly by the very benefit of their deliverance , their eyes must be wounded by the true , light must be hurled at them in terrible handfuls . 
They must be a little thunderstruck themselves at their own well-being ; this dazzling awakens them . 
Hence the necessity of tocsins and wars . 
Great combatants must rise , must enlighten nations with audacity , and shake up that sad humanity which is covered with gloom by the right divine , Caesarian glory , force , fanaticism , irresponsible power , and absolute majesty ; a rabble stupidly occupied in the contemplation , in their twilight splendor , of these sombre triumphs of the night . 
Down with the tyrant ! 
Of whom are you speaking ? 
Do you call Louis Philippe the tyrant ? 
No ; no more than Louis XVI . 
Both of them are what history is in the habit of calling good kings ; but principles are not to be parcelled out , the logic of the true is rectilinear , the peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance ; no concessions , then ; all encroachments on man should be repressed . 
There is a divine right in Louis XVI. , there is because a Bourbon in Louis Philippe ; both represent in a certain measure the confiscation of right , and , in order to clear away universal insurrection , they must be combated ; it must be done , France being always the one to begin . 
When the master falls in France , he falls everywhere . 
In short , what cause is more just , and consequently , what war is greater , than that which re-establishes social truth , restores her throne to liberty , restores the people to the people , restores sovereignty to man , replaces the purple on the head of France , restores equity and reason in their plenitude , suppresses every germ of antagonism by restoring each one to himself , annihilates the obstacle which royalty presents to the whole immense universal concord , and places the human race once more on a level with the right ? 
These wars build up peace . 
An enormous fortress of prejudices , privileges , superstitions , lies , exactions , abuses , violences , iniquities , and darkness still stands erect in this world , with its towers of hatred . 
It must be cast down . 
This monstrous mass must be made to crumble . 
To conquer at Austerlitz is grand ; to take the Bastille is immense . 
There is no one who has not noticed it in his own case -- the soul , -- and therein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity , has a strange aptitude for reasoning almost coldly in the most violent extremities , and it often happens that heartbroken passion and profound despair in the very agony of their blackest monologues , treat subjects and discuss theses . 
Logic is mingled with convulsion , and the thread of the syllogism floats , without breaking , in the mournful storm of thought . 
This was the situation of Marius ' mind . 
As he meditated thus , dejected but resolute , hesitating in every direction , and , in short , shuddering at what he was about to do , his glance strayed to the interior of the barricade . 
The insurgents were here conversing in a low voice , without moving , and there was perceptible that quasi-silence which marks the last stage of expectation . 
Overhead , at the small window in the third story Marius descried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularly attentive . 
This was the porter who had been killed by Le Cabuc . 
Below , by the lights of the torch , which was thrust between the paving-stones , this head could be vaguely distinguished . 
Nothing could be stranger , in that sombre and uncertain gleam , than that livid , motionless , astonished face , with its bristling hair , its eyes fixed and staring , and its yawning mouth , bent over the street in an attitude of curiosity . 
One would have said that the man who was dead was surveying those who were about to die . 
A long trail of blood which had flowed from that head , descended in reddish threads from the window to the height of the first floor , where it stopped . 
THE FLAG : ACT FIRST As yet , nothing had come . 
Ten o'clock had sounded from Saint-Merry . 
Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves , carbines in hand , near the outlet of the grand barricade . 
They no longer addressed each other , they listened , seeking to catch even the faintest and most distant sound of marching . 
Suddenly , in the midst of the dismal calm , a clear , gay , young voice , which seemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis , rose and began to sing distinctly , to the old popular air of `` By the Light of the Moon , '' this bit of poetry , terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock : -- Mon nez est en larmes , Mon ami Bugeaud , Prete moi tes gendarmes Pour leur dire un mot . 
En capote bleue , La poule au shako , Voici la banlieue ! 
Co-cocorico ! 
-LSB- 54 -RSB- -LSB- 54 -RSB- My nose is in tears , my friend Bugeaud , lend me thy gendarmes that I may say a word to them . 
With a blue capote and a chicken in his shako , here 's the banlieue , co-cocorico . 
They pressed each other 's hands . 
`` That is Gavroche , '' said Enjolras . 
`` He is warning us , '' said Combeferre . 
A hasty rush troubled the deserted street ; they beheld a being more agile than a clown climb over the omnibus , and Gavroche bounded into the barricade , all breathless , saying : -- `` My gun ! 
Here they are ! '' 
An electric quiver shot through the whole barricade , and the sound of hands seeking their guns became audible . 
`` Would you like my carbine ? '' 
said Enjolras to the lad . 
`` I want a big gun , '' replied Gavroche . 
And he seized Javert 's gun . 
Two sentinels had fallen back , and had come in almost at the same moment as Gavroche . 
They were the sentinels from the end of the street , and the vidette of the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The vidette of the Lane des Precheurs had remained at his post , which indicated that nothing was approaching from the direction of the bridges and Halles . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie , of which a few paving-stones alone were dimly visible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag , offered to the insurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into a smoke . 
Each man had taken up his position for the conflict . 
Forty-three insurgents , among whom were Enjolras , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and Gavroche , were kneeling inside the large barricade , with their heads on a level with the crest of the barrier , the barrels of their guns and carbines aimed on the stones as though at loop-holes , attentive , mute , ready to fire . 
Six , commanded by Feuilly , had installed themselves , with their guns levelled at their shoulders , at the windows of the two stories of Corinthe . 
Several minutes passed thus , then a sound of footsteps , measured , heavy , and numerous , became distinctly audible in the direction of Saint-Leu . 
This sound , faint at first , then precise , then heavy and sonorous , approached slowly , without halt , without intermission , with a tranquil and terrible continuity . 
Nothing was to be heard but this . 
It was that combined silence and sound , of the statue of the commander , but this stony step had something indescribably enormous and multiple about it which awakened the idea of a throng , and , at the same time , the idea of a spectre . 
One thought one heard the terrible statue Legion marching onward . 
This tread drew near ; it drew still nearer , and stopped . 
It seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heard at the end of the street . 
Nothing was to be seen , however , but at the bottom of that dense obscurity there could be distinguished a multitude of metallic threads , as fine as needles and almost imperceptible , which moved about like those indescribable phosphoric networks which one sees beneath one 's closed eyelids , in the first mists of slumber at the moment when one is dropping off to sleep . 
These were bayonets and gun-barrels confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of the torch . 
A pause ensued , as though both sides were waiting . 
All at once , from the depths of this darkness , a voice , which was all the more sinister , since no one was visible , and which appeared to be the gloom itself speaking , shouted : -- `` Who goes there ? '' 
At the same time , the click of guns , as they were lowered into position , was heard . 
Enjolras replied in a haughty and vibrating tone : -- `` The French Revolution ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted the voice . 
A flash empurpled all the facades in the street as though the door of a furnace had been flung open , and hastily closed again . 
A fearful detonation burst forth on the barricade . 
The red flag fell . 
The discharge had been so violent and so dense that it had cut the staff , that is to say , the very tip of the omnibus pole . 
Bullets which had rebounded from the cornices of the houses penetrated the barricade and wounded several men . 
The impression produced by this first discharge was freezing . 
The attack had been rough , and of a nature to inspire reflection in the boldest . 
It was evident that they had to deal with an entire regiment at the very least . 
`` Comrades ! '' 
shouted Courfeyrac , `` let us not waste our powder . 
Let us wait until they are in the street before replying . '' 
`` And , above all , '' said Enjolras , `` let us raise the flag again . '' 
He picked up the flag , which had fallen precisely at his feet . 
Outside , the clatter of the ramrods in the guns could be heard ; the troops were re-loading their arms . 
Enjolras went on : -- `` Who is there here with a bold heart ? 
Who will plant the flag on the barricade again ? '' 
Not a man responded . 
To mount on the barricade at the very moment when , without any doubt , it was again the object of their aim , was simply death . 
The bravest hesitated to pronounce his own condemnation . 
Enjolras himself felt a thrill . 
He repeated : -- `` Does no one volunteer ? '' 
THE FLAG : ACT SECOND Since they had arrived at Corinthe , and had begun the construction of the barricade , no attention had been paid to Father Mabeuf . 
M. Mabeuf had not quitted the mob , however ; he had entered the ground-floor of the wine-shop and had seated himself behind the counter . 
There he had , so to speak , retreated into himself . 
He no longer seemed to look or to think . 
Courfeyrac and others had accosted him two or three times , warning him of his peril , beseeching him to withdraw , but he did not hear them . 
When they were not speaking to him , his mouth moved as though he were replying to some one , and as soon as he was addressed , his lips became motionless and his eyes no longer had the appearance of being alive . 
Several hours before the barricade was attacked , he had assumed an attitude which he did not afterwards abandon , with both fists planted on his knees and his head thrust forward as though he were gazing over a precipice . 
Nothing had been able to move him from this attitude ; it did not seem as though his mind were in the barricade . 
When each had gone to take up his position for the combat , there remained in the tap-room where Javert was bound to the post , only a single insurgent with a naked sword , watching over Javert , and himself , Mabeuf . 
At the moment of the attack , at the detonation , the physical shock had reached him and had , as it were , awakened him ; he started up abruptly , crossed the room , and at the instant when Enjolras repeated his appeal : `` Does no one volunteer ? '' 
the old man was seen to make his appearance on the threshold of the wine-shop . 
His presence produced a sort of commotion in the different groups . 
A shout went up : -- `` It is the voter ! 
It is the member of the Convention ! 
It is the representative of the people ! '' 
It is probable that he did not hear them . 
He strode straight up to Enjolras , the insurgents withdrawing before him with a religious fear ; he tore the flag from Enjolras , who recoiled in amazement and then , since no one dared to stop or to assist him , this old man of eighty , with shaking head but firm foot , began slowly to ascend the staircase of paving-stones arranged in the barricade . 
This was so melancholy and so grand that all around him cried : `` Off with your hats ! '' 
At every step that he mounted , it was a frightful spectacle ; his white locks , his decrepit face , his lofty , bald , and wrinkled brow , his amazed and open mouth , his aged arm upholding the red banner , rose through the gloom and were enlarged in the bloody light of the torch , and the bystanders thought that they beheld the spectre of '93 emerging from the earth , with the flag of terror in his hand . 
When he had reached the last step , when this trembling and terrible phantom , erect on that pile of rubbish in the presence of twelve hundred invisible guns , drew himself up in the face of death and as though he were more powerful than it , the whole barricade assumed amid the darkness , a supernatural and colossal form . 
There ensued one of those silences which occur only in the presence of prodigies . 
In the midst of this silence , the old man waved the red flag and shouted : -- `` Long live the Revolution ! 
Long live the Republic ! 
Fraternity ! 
Equality ! 
and Death ! '' 
Those in the barricade heard a low and rapid whisper , like the murmur of a priest who is despatching a prayer in haste . 
It was probably the commissary of police who was making the legal summons at the other end of the street . 
Then the same piercing voice which had shouted : `` Who goes there ? '' 
shouted : -- `` Retire ! '' 
M. Mabeuf , pale , haggard , his eyes lighted up with the mournful flame of aberration , raised the flag above his head and repeated : -- `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
said the voice . 
A second discharge , similar to the first , rained down upon the barricade . 
The old man fell on his knees , then rose again , dropped the flag and fell backwards on the pavement , like a log , at full length , with outstretched arms . 
Rivulets of blood flowed beneath him . 
His aged head , pale and sad , seemed to be gazing at the sky . 
One of those emotions which are superior to man , which make him forget even to defend himself , seized upon the insurgents , and they approached the body with respectful awe . 
`` What men these regicides were ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
Courfeyrac bent down to Enjolras ' ear : -- `` This is for yourself alone , I do not wish to dampen the enthusiasm . 
But this man was anything rather than a regicide . 
I knew him . 
His name was Father Mabeuf . 
I do not know what was the matter with him to-day . 
But he was a brave blockhead . 
Just look at his head . '' 
`` The head of a blockhead and the heart of a Brutus , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then he raised his voice : -- `` Citizens ! 
This is the example which the old give to the young . 
We hesitated , he came ! 
We were drawing back , he advanced ! 
This is what those who are trembling with age teach to those who tremble with fear ! 
This aged man is august in the eyes of his country . 
He has had a long life and a magnificent death ! 
Now , let us place the body under cover , that each one of us may defend this old man dead as he would his father living , and may his presence in our midst render the barricade impregnable ! '' 
A murmur of gloomy and energetic assent followed these words . 
Enjolras bent down , raised the old man 's head , and fierce as he was , he kissed him on the brow , then , throwing wide his arms , and handling this dead man with tender precaution , as though he feared to hurt it , he removed his coat , showed the bloody holes in it to all , and said : -- `` This is our flag now . '' 
GAVROCHE WOULD HAVE DONE BETTER TO ACCEPT ENJOLRAS ' CARBINE They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup 's over Father Mabeuf . 
Six men made a litter of their guns ; on this they laid the body , and bore it , with bared heads , with solemn slowness , to the large table in the tap-room . 
These men , wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which they were engaged , thought no more of the perilous situation in which they stood . 
When the corpse passed near Javert , who was still impassive , Enjolras said to the spy : -- `` It will be your turn presently ! '' 
During all this time , Little Gavroche , who alone had not quitted his post , but had remained on guard , thought he espied some men stealthily approaching the barricade . 
All at once he shouted : -- `` Look out ! '' 
Courfeyrac , Enjolras , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Joly , Bahorel , Bossuet , and all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop . 
It was almost too late . 
They saw a glistening density of bayonets undulating above the barricade . 
Municipal guards of lofty stature were making their way in , some striding over the omnibus , others through the cut , thrusting before them the urchin , who retreated , but did not flee . 
The moment was critical . 
It was that first , redoubtable moment of inundation , when the stream rises to the level of the levee and when the water begins to filter through the fissures of dike . 
A second more and the barricade would have been taken . 
Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering , and killed him on the spot with a blow from his gun ; the second killed Bahorel with a blow from his bayonet . 
Another had already overthrown Courfeyrac , who was shouting : `` Follow me ! '' 
The largest of all , a sort of colossus , marched on Gavroche with his bayonet fixed . 
The urchin took in his arms Javert 's immense gun , levelled it resolutely at the giant , and fired . 
No discharge followed . 
Javert 's gun was not loaded . 
The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the child . 
Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche , the gun slipped from the soldier 's grasp , a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the centre of the forehead , and he fell over on his back . 
A second bullet struck the other guard , who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast , and laid him low on the pavement . 
This was the work of Marius , who had just entered the barricade . 
THE BARREL OF POWDER Marius , still concealed in the turn of the Rue Mondetour , had witnessed , shuddering and irresolute , the first phase of the combat . 
But he had not long been able to resist that mysterious and sovereign vertigo which may be designated as the call of the abyss . 
In the presence of the imminence of the peril , in the presence of the death of M. Mabeuf , that melancholy enigma , in the presence of Bahorel killed , and Courfeyrac shouting : `` Follow me ! '' 
of that child threatened , of his friends to succor or to avenge , all hesitation had vanished , and he had flung himself into the conflict , his two pistols in hand . 
With his first shot he had saved Gavroche , and with the second delivered Courfeyrac . 
Amid the sound of the shots , amid the cries of the assaulted guards , the assailants had climbed the entrenchment , on whose summit Municipal Guards , soldiers of the line and National Guards from the suburbs could now be seen , gun in hand , rearing themselves to more than half the height of their bodies . 
They already covered more than two-thirds of the barrier , but they did not leap into the enclosure , as though wavering in the fear of some trap . 
They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into a lion 's den . 
The light of the torch illuminated only their bayonets , their bear-skin caps , and the upper part of their uneasy and angry faces . 
Marius had no longer any weapons ; he had flung away his discharged pistols after firing them ; but he had caught sight of the barrel of powder in the tap-room , near the door . 
As he turned half round , gazing in that direction , a soldier took aim at him . 
At the moment when the soldier was sighting Marius , a hand was laid on the muzzle of the gun and obstructed it . 
This was done by some one who had darted forward , -- the young workman in velvet trousers . 
The shot sped , traversed the hand and possibly , also , the workman , since he fell , but the ball did not strike Marius . 
All this , which was rather to be apprehended than seen through the smoke , Marius , who was entering the tap-room , hardly noticed . 
Still , he had , in a confused way , perceived that gun-barrel aimed at him , and the hand which had blocked it , and he had heard the discharge . 
But in moments like this , the things which one sees vacillate and are precipitated , and one pauses for nothing . 
One feels obscurely impelled towards more darkness still , and all is cloud . 
The insurgents , surprised but not terrified , had rallied . 
Enjolras had shouted : `` Wait ! 
Do n't fire at random ! '' 
In the first confusion , they might , in fact , wound each other . 
The majority of them had ascended to the window on the first story and to the attic windows , whence they commanded the assailants . 
The most determined , with Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , and Combeferre , had proudly placed themselves with their backs against the houses at the rear , unsheltered and facing the ranks of soldiers and guards who crowned the barricade . 
All this was accomplished without haste , with that strange and threatening gravity which precedes engagements . 
They took aim , point blank , on both sides : they were so close that they could talk together without raising their voices . 
When they had reached this point where the spark is on the brink of darting forth , an officer in a gorget extended his sword and said : -- `` Lay down your arms ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
replied Enjolras . 
The two discharges took place at the same moment , and all disappeared in smoke . 
An acrid and stifling smoke in which dying and wounded lay with weak , dull groans . 
When the smoke cleared away , the combatants on both sides could be seen to be thinned out , but still in the same positions , reloading in silence . 
All at once , a thundering voice was heard , shouting : -- `` Be off with you , or I 'll blow up the barricade ! '' 
All turned in the direction whence the voice proceeded . 
Marius had entered the tap-room , and had seized the barrel of powder , then he had taken advantage of the smoke , and the sort of obscure mist which filled the entrenched enclosure , to glide along the barricade as far as that cage of paving-stones where the torch was fixed . 
To tear it from the torch , to replace it by the barrel of powder , to thrust the pile of stones under the barrel , which was instantly staved in , with a sort of horrible obedience , -- all this had cost Marius but the time necessary to stoop and rise again ; and now all , National Guards , Municipal Guards , officers , soldiers , huddled at the other extremity of the barricade , gazed stupidly at him , as he stood with his foot on the stones , his torch in his hand , his haughty face illuminated by a fatal resolution , drooping the flame of the torch towards that redoubtable pile where they could make out the broken barrel of powder , and giving vent to that startling cry : -- `` Be off with you , or I 'll blow up the barricade ! '' 
Marius on that barricade after the octogenarian was the vision of the young revolution after the apparition of the old . 
`` Blow up the barricade ! '' 
said a sergeant , `` and yourself with it ! '' 
Marius retorted : `` And myself also . '' 
And he dropped the torch towards the barrel of powder . 
But there was no longer any one on the barrier . 
The assailants , abandoning their dead and wounded , flowed back pell-mell and in disorder towards the extremity of the street , and there were again lost in the night . 
It was a headlong flight . 
The barricade was free . 
END OF THE VERSES OF JEAN PROUVAIRE All flocked around Marius . 
Courfeyrac flung himself on his neck . 
`` Here you are ! '' 
`` What luck ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` You came in opportunely ! '' 
ejaculated Bossuet . 
`` If it had not been for you , I should have been dead ! '' 
began Courfeyrac again . 
`` If it had not been for you , I should have been gobbled up ! '' 
added Gavroche . 
Marius asked : -- `` Where is the chief ? '' 
`` You are he ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long ; now it was a whirlwind . 
This whirlwind which was within him , produced on him the effect of being outside of him and of bearing him away . 
It seemed to him that he was already at an immense distance from life . 
His two luminous months of joy and love , ending abruptly at that frightful precipice , Cosette lost to him , that barricade , M. Mabeuf getting himself killed for the Republic , himself the leader of the insurgents , -- all these things appeared to him like a tremendous nightmare . 
He was obliged to make a mental effort to recall the fact that all that surrounded him was real . 
Marius had already seen too much of life not to know that nothing is more imminent than the impossible , and that what it is always necessary to foresee is the unforeseen . 
He had looked on at his own drama as a piece which one does not understand . 
In the mists which enveloped his thoughts , he did not recognize Javert , who , bound to his post , had not so much as moved his head during the whole of the attack on the barricade , and who had gazed on the revolt seething around him with the resignation of a martyr and the majesty of a judge . 
Marius had not even seen him . 
In the meanwhile , the assailants did not stir , they could be heard marching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did not venture into it , either because they were awaiting orders or because they were awaiting reinforcements before hurling themselves afresh on this impregnable redoubt . 
The insurgents had posted sentinels , and some of them , who were medical students , set about caring for the wounded . 
They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop , with the exception of the two tables reserved for lint and cartridges , and of the one on which lay Father Mabeuf ; they had added them to the barricade , and had replaced them in the tap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widow Hucheloup and her servants . 
On these mattresses they had laid the wounded . 
As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe , no one knew what had become of them . 
They were finally found , however , hidden in the cellar . 
A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade . 
The roll was called . 
One of the insurgents was missing . 
And who was it ? 
One of the dearest . 
One of the most valiant . 
Jean Prouvaire . 
He was sought among the wounded , he was not there . 
He was sought among the dead , he was not there . 
He was evidently a prisoner . 
Combeferre said to Enjolras : -- `` They have our friend ; we have their agent . 
Are you set on the death of that spy ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Enjolras ; `` but less so than on the life of Jean Prouvaire . '' 
This took place in the tap-room near Javert 's post . 
`` Well , '' resumed Combeferre , `` I am going to fasten my handkerchief to my cane , and go as a flag of truce , to offer to exchange our man for theirs . '' 
`` Listen , '' said Enjolras , laying his hand on Combeferre 's arm . 
At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms . 
They heard a manly voice shout : -- `` Vive la France ! 
Long live France ! 
Long live the future ! '' 
They recognized the voice of Prouvaire . 
A flash passed , a report rang out . 
Silence fell again . 
`` They have killed him , '' exclaimed Combeferre . 
Enjolras glanced at Javert , and said to him : -- `` Your friends have just shot you . '' 
THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE A peculiarity of this species of war is , that the attack of the barricades is almost always made from the front , and that the assailants generally abstain from turning the position , either because they fear ambushes , or because they are afraid of getting entangled in the tortuous streets . 
The insurgents ' whole attention had been directed , therefore , to the grand barricade , which was , evidently , the spot always menaced , and there the struggle would infallibly recommence . 
But Marius thought of the little barricade , and went thither . 
It was deserted and guarded only by the fire-pot which trembled between the paving-stones . 
Moreover , the Mondetour alley , and the branches of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne were profoundly calm . 
As Marius was withdrawing , after concluding his inspection , he heard his name pronounced feebly in the darkness . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
He started , for he recognized the voice which had called to him two hours before through the gate in the Rue Plumet . 
Only , the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath . 
He looked about him , but saw no one . 
Marius thought he had been mistaken , that it was an illusion added by his mind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him . 
He advanced a step , in order to quit the distant recess where the barricade lay . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
repeated the voice . 
This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly ; he looked and saw nothing . 
`` At your feet , '' said the voice . 
He bent down , and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itself towards him . 
It was crawling along the pavement . 
It was this that had spoken to him . 
