-- THE EXCELLENCE OF MISFORTUNE MARIUS INDIGENT Life became hard for Marius . 
It was nothing to eat his clothes and his watch . 
He ate of that terrible , inexpressible thing that is called de la vache enrage ; that is to say , he endured great hardships and privations . 
A terrible thing it is , containing days without bread , nights without sleep , evenings without a candle , a hearth without a fire , weeks without work , a future without hope , a coat out at the elbows , an old hat which evokes the laughter of young girls , a door which one finds locked on one at night because one 's rent is not paid , the insolence of the porter and the cook-shop man , the sneers of neighbors , humiliations , dignity trampled on , work of whatever nature accepted , disgusts , bitterness , despondency . 
Marius learned how all this is eaten , and how such are often the only things which one has to devour . 
At that moment of his existence when a man needs his pride , because he needs love , he felt that he was jeered at because he was badly dressed , and ridiculous because he was poor . 
At the age when youth swells the heart with imperial pride , he dropped his eyes more than once on his dilapidated boots , and he knew the unjust shame and the poignant blushes of wretchedness . 
Admirable and terrible trial from which the feeble emerge base , from which the strong emerge sublime . 
A crucible into which destiny casts a man , whenever it desires a scoundrel or a demi-god . 
For many great deeds are performed in petty combats . 
There are instances of bravery ignored and obstinate , which defend themselves step by step in that fatal onslaught of necessities and turpitudes . 
Noble and mysterious triumphs which no eye beholds , which are requited with no renown , which are saluted with no trumpet blast . 
Life , misfortune , isolation , abandonment , poverty , are the fields of battle which have their heroes ; obscure heroes , who are , sometimes , grander than the heroes who win renown . 
Firm and rare natures are thus created ; misery , almost always a step-mother , is sometimes a mother ; destitution gives birth to might of soul and spirit ; distress is the nurse of pride ; unhappiness is a good milk for the magnanimous . 
There came a moment in Marius ' life , when he swept his own landing , when he bought his sou 's worth of Brie cheese at the fruiterer 's , when he waited until twilight had fallen to slip into the baker 's and purchase a loaf , which he carried off furtively to his attic as though he had stolen it . 
Sometimes there could be seen gliding into the butcher 's shop on the corner , in the midst of the bantering cooks who elbowed him , an awkward young man , carrying big books under his arm , who had a timid yet angry air , who , on entering , removed his hat from a brow whereon stood drops of perspiration , made a profound bow to the butcher 's astonished wife , asked for a mutton cutlet , paid six or seven sous for it , wrapped it up in a paper , put it under his arm , between two books , and went away . 
It was Marius . 
On this cutlet , which he cooked for himself , he lived for three days . 
On the first day he ate the meat , on the second he ate the fat , on the third he gnawed the bone . 
Aunt Gillenormand made repeated attempts , and sent him the sixty pistoles several times . 
Marius returned them on every occasion , saying that he needed nothing . 
He was still in mourning for his father when the revolution which we have just described was effected within him . 
From that time forth , he had not put off his black garments . 
But his garments were quitting him . 
The day came when he had no longer a coat . 
The trousers would go next . 
What was to be done ? 
Courfeyrac , to whom he had , on his side , done some good turns , gave him an old coat . 
For thirty sous , Marius got it turned by some porter or other , and it was a new coat . 
But this coat was green . 
Then Marius ceased to go out until after nightfall . 
This made his coat black . 
As he wished always to appear in mourning , he clothed himself with the night . 
In spite of all this , he got admitted to practice as a lawyer . 
He was supposed to live in Courfeyrac 's room , which was decent , and where a certain number of law-books backed up and completed by several dilapidated volumes of romance , passed as the library required by the regulations . 
He had his letters addressed to Courfeyrac 's quarters . 
When Marius became a lawyer , he informed his grandfather of the fact in a letter which was cold but full of submission and respect . 
M. Gillenormand trembled as he took the letter , read it , tore it in four pieces , and threw it into the waste-basket . 
Two or three days later , Mademoiselle Gillenormand heard her father , who was alone in his room , talking aloud to himself . 
He always did this whenever he was greatly agitated . 
She listened , and the old man was saying : `` If you were not a fool , you would know that one can not be a baron and a lawyer at the same time . '' 
MARIUS POOR It is the same with wretchedness as with everything else . 
It ends by becoming bearable . 
It finally assumes a form , and adjusts itself . 
One vegetates , that is to say , one develops in a certain meagre fashion , which is , however , sufficient for life . 
This is the mode in which the existence of Marius Pontmercy was arranged : He had passed the worst straits ; the narrow pass was opening out a little in front of him . 
By dint of toil , perseverance , courage , and will , he had managed to draw from his work about seven hundred francs a year . 
He had learned German and English ; thanks to Courfeyrac , who had put him in communication with his friend the publisher , Marius filled the modest post of utility man in the literature of the publishing house . 
He drew up prospectuses , translated newspapers , annotated editions , compiled biographies , etc. ; net product , year in and year out , seven hundred francs . 
He lived on it . 
How ? 
Not so badly . 
We will explain . 
Marius occupied in the Gorbeau house , for an annual sum of thirty francs , a den minus a fireplace , called a cabinet , which contained only the most indispensable articles of furniture . 
This furniture belonged to him . 
He gave three francs a month to the old principal tenant to come and sweep his hole , and to bring him a little hot water every morning , a fresh egg , and a penny roll . 
He breakfasted on this egg and roll . 
His breakfast varied in cost from two to four sous , according as eggs were dear or cheap . 
At six o'clock in the evening he descended the Rue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau 's , opposite Basset 's , the stamp-dealer 's , on the corner of the Rue des Mathurins . 
He ate no soup . 
He took a six-sou plate of meat , a half-portion of vegetables for three sous , and a three-sou dessert . 
For three sous he got as much bread as he wished . 
As for wine , he drank water . 
When he paid at the desk where Madam Rousseau , at that period still plump and rosy majestically presided , he gave a sou to the waiter , and Madam Rousseau gave him a smile . 
Then he went away . 
For sixteen sous he had a smile and a dinner . 
This Restaurant Rousseau , where so few bottles and so many water carafes were emptied , was a calming potion rather than a restaurant . 
It no longer exists . 
The proprietor had a fine nickname : he was called Rousseau the Aquatic . 
Thus , breakfast four sous , dinner sixteen sous ; his food cost him twenty sous a day ; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs a year . 
Add the thirty francs for rent , and the thirty-six francs to the old woman , plus a few trifling expenses ; for four hundred and fifty francs , Marius was fed , lodged , and waited on . 
His clothing cost him a hundred francs , his linen fifty francs , his washing fifty francs ; the whole did not exceed six hundred and fifty francs . 
He was rich . 
He sometimes lent ten francs to a friend . 
Courfeyrac had once been able to borrow sixty francs of him . 
As far as fire was concerned , as Marius had no fireplace , he had `` simplified matters . '' 
Marius always had two complete suits of clothes , the one old , `` for every day '' ; the other , brand new for special occasions . 
Both were black . 
He had but three shirts , one on his person , the second in the commode , and the third in the washerwoman 's hands . 
He renewed them as they wore out . 
They were always ragged , which caused him to button his coat to the chin . 
It had required years for Marius to attain to this flourishing condition . 
Hard years ; difficult , some of them , to traverse , others to climb . 
Marius had not failed for a single day . 
He had endured everything in the way of destitution ; he had done everything except contract debts . 
He did himself the justice to say that he had never owed any one a sou . 
A debt was , to him , the beginning of slavery . 
He even said to himself , that a creditor is worse than a master ; for the master possesses only your person , a creditor possesses your dignity and can administer to it a box on the ear . 
Rather than borrow , he went without food . 
He had passed many a day fasting . 
Feeling that all extremes meet , and that , if one is not on one 's guard , lowered fortunes may lead to baseness of soul , he kept a jealous watch on his pride . 
Such and such a formality or action , which , in any other situation would have appeared merely a deference to him , now seemed insipidity , and he nerved himself against it . 
His face wore a sort of severe flush . 
He was timid even to rudeness . 
During all these trials he had felt himself encouraged and even uplifted , at times , by a secret force that he possessed within himself . 
The soul aids the body , and at certain moments , raises it . 
It is the only bird which bears up its own cage . 
Besides his father 's name , another name was graven in Marius ' heart , the name of Thenardier . 
Marius , with his grave and enthusiastic nature , surrounded with a sort of aureole the man to whom , in his thoughts , he owed his father 's life , -- that intrepid sergeant who had saved the colonel amid the bullets and the cannon-balls of Waterloo . 
He never separated the memory of this man from the memory of his father , and he associated them in his veneration . 
It was a sort of worship in two steps , with the grand altar for the colonel and the lesser one for Thenardier . 
What redoubled the tenderness of his gratitude towards Thenardier , was the idea of the distress into which he knew that Thenardier had fallen , and which had engulfed the latter . 
Marius had learned at Montfermeil of the ruin and bankruptcy of the unfortunate inn-keeper . 
Since that time , he had made unheard-of efforts to find traces of him and to reach him in that dark abyss of misery in which Thenardier had disappeared . 
Marius had beaten the whole country ; he had gone to Chelles , to Bondy , to Gourney , to Nogent , to Lagny . 
He had persisted for three years , expending in these explorations the little money which he had laid by . 
No one had been able to give him any news of Thenardier : he was supposed to have gone abroad . 
His creditors had also sought him , with less love than Marius , but with as much assiduity , and had not been able to lay their hands on him . 
Marius blamed himself , and was almost angry with himself for his lack of success in his researches . 
It was the only debt left him by the colonel , and Marius made it a matter of honor to pay it . 
`` What , '' he thought , `` when my father lay dying on the field of battle , did Thenardier contrive to find him amid the smoke and the grape-shot , and bear him off on his shoulders , and yet he owed him nothing , and I , who owe so much to Thenardier , can not join him in this shadow where he is lying in the pangs of death , and in my turn bring him back from death to life ! 
Oh ! 
I will find him ! '' 
To find Thenardier , in fact , Marius would have given one of his arms , to rescue him from his misery , he would have sacrificed all his blood . 
To see Thenardier , to render Thenardier some service , to say to him : `` You do not know me ; well , I do know you ! 
Here I am . 
Dispose of me ! '' 
This was Marius ' sweetest and most magnificent dream . 
MARIUS GROWN UP At this epoch , Marius was twenty years of age . 
It was three years since he had left his grandfather . 
Both parties had remained on the same terms , without attempting to approach each other , and without seeking to see each other . 
Besides , what was the use of seeing each other ? 
Marius was the brass vase , while Father Gillenormand was the iron pot . 
We admit that Marius was mistaken as to his grandfather 's heart . 
He had imagined that M. Gillenormand had never loved him , and that that crusty , harsh , and smiling old fellow who cursed , shouted , and stormed and brandished his cane , cherished for him , at the most , only that affection , which is at once slight and severe , of the dotards of comedy . 
Marius was in error . 
There are fathers who do not love their children ; there exists no grandfather who does not adore his grandson . 
At bottom , as we have said , M. Gillenormand idolized Marius . 
He idolized him after his own fashion , with an accompaniment of snappishness and boxes on the ear ; but , this child once gone , he felt a black void in his heart ; he would allow no one to mention the child to him , and all the while secretly regretted that he was so well obeyed . 
At first , he hoped that this Buonapartist , this Jacobin , this terrorist , this Septembrist , would return . 
But the weeks passed by , years passed ; to M. Gillenormand 's great despair , the `` blood-drinker '' did not make his appearance . 
`` I could not do otherwise than turn him out , '' said the grandfather to himself , and he asked himself : `` If the thing were to do over again , would I do it ? '' 
His pride instantly answered `` yes , '' but his aged head , which he shook in silence , replied sadly `` no . '' 
He had his hours of depression . 
He missed Marius . 
Old men need affection as they need the sun . 
It is warmth . 
Strong as his nature was , the absence of Marius had wrought some change in him . 
Nothing in the world could have induced him to take a step towards `` that rogue '' ; but he suffered . 
He never inquired about him , but he thought of him incessantly . 
He lived in the Marais in a more and more retired manner ; he was still merry and violent as of old , but his merriment had a convulsive harshness , and his violences always terminated in a sort of gentle and gloomy dejection . 
He sometimes said : `` Oh ! 
if he only would return , what a good box on the ear I would give him ! '' 
As for his aunt , she thought too little to love much ; Marius was no longer for her much more than a vague black form ; and she eventually came to occupy herself with him much less than with the cat or the paroquet which she probably had . 
What augmented Father Gillenormand 's secret suffering was , that he locked it all up within his breast , and did not allow its existence to be divined . 
His sorrow was like those recently invented furnaces which consume their own smoke . 
It sometimes happened that officious busybodies spoke to him of Marius , and asked him : `` What is your grandson doing ? '' 
`` What has become of him ? '' 
The old bourgeois replied with a sigh , that he was a sad case , and giving a fillip to his cuff , if he wished to appear gay : `` Monsieur le Baron de Pontmercy is practising pettifogging in some corner or other . '' 
While the old man regretted , Marius applauded himself . 
As is the case with all good-hearted people , misfortune had eradicated his bitterness . 
He only thought of M. Gillenormand in an amiable light , but he had set his mind on not receiving anything more from the man who had been unkind to his father . 
This was the mitigated translation of his first indignation . 
Moreover , he was happy at having suffered , and at suffering still . 
It was for his father 's sake . 
The hardness of his life satisfied and pleased him . 
He said to himself with a sort of joy that -- it was certainly the least he could do ; that it was an expiation ; -- that , had it not been for that , he would have been punished in some other way and later on for his impious indifference towards his father , and such a father ! 
that it would not have been just that his father should have all the suffering , and he none of it ; and that , in any case , what were his toils and his destitution compared with the colonel 's heroic life ? 
that , in short , the only way for him to approach his father and resemble him , was to be brave in the face of indigence , as the other had been valiant before the enemy ; and that that was , no doubt , what the colonel had meant to imply by the words : `` He will be worthy of it . '' 
Words which Marius continued to wear , not on his breast , since the colonel 's writing had disappeared , but in his heart . 
And then , on the day when his grandfather had turned him out of doors , he had been only a child , now he was a man . 
He felt it . 
Misery , we repeat , had been good for him . 
Poverty in youth , when it succeeds , has this magnificent property about it , that it turns the whole will towards effort , and the whole soul towards aspiration . 
Poverty instantly lays material life bare and renders it hideous ; hence inexpressible bounds towards the ideal life . 
The wealthy young man has a hundred coarse and brilliant distractions , horse races , hunting , dogs , tobacco , gaming , good repasts , and all the rest of it ; occupations for the baser side of the soul , at the expense of the loftier and more delicate sides . 
The poor young man wins his bread with difficulty ; he eats ; when he has eaten , he has nothing more but meditation . 
He goes to the spectacles which God furnishes gratis ; he gazes at the sky , space , the stars , flowers , children , the humanity among which he is suffering , the creation amid which he beams . 
He gazes so much on humanity that he perceives its soul , he gazes upon creation to such an extent that he beholds God . 
He dreams , he feels himself great ; he dreams on , and feels himself tender . 
From the egotism of the man who suffers he passes to the compassion of the man who meditates . 
An admirable sentiment breaks forth in him , forgetfulness of self and pity for all . 
As he thinks of the innumerable enjoyments which nature offers , gives , and lavishes to souls which stand open , and refuses to souls that are closed , he comes to pity , he the millionnaire of the mind , the millionnaire of money . 
All hatred departs from his heart , in proportion as light penetrates his spirit . 
And is he unhappy ? 
No . 
The misery of a young man is never miserable . 
The first young lad who comes to hand , however poor he may be , with his strength , his health , his rapid walk , his brilliant eyes , his warmly circulating blood , his black hair , his red lips , his white teeth , his pure breath , will always arouse the envy of an aged emperor . 
And then , every morning , he sets himself afresh to the task of earning his bread ; and while his hands earn his bread , his dorsal column gains pride , his brain gathers ideas . 
His task finished , he returns to ineffable ecstasies , to contemplation , to joys ; he beholds his feet set in afflictions , in obstacles , on the pavement , in the nettles , sometimes in the mire ; his head in the light . 
He is firm serene , gentle , peaceful , attentive , serious , content with little , kindly ; and he thanks God for having bestowed on him those two forms of riches which many a rich man lacks : work , which makes him free ; and thought , which makes him dignified . 
This is what had happened with Marius . 
To tell the truth , he inclined a little too much to the side of contemplation . 
From the day when he had succeeded in earning his living with some approach to certainty , he had stopped , thinking it good to be poor , and retrenching time from his work to give to thought ; that is to say , he sometimes passed entire days in meditation , absorbed , engulfed , like a visionary , in the mute voluptuousness of ecstasy and inward radiance . 
He had thus propounded the problem of his life : to toil as little as possible at material labor , in order to toil as much as possible at the labor which is impalpable ; in other words , to bestow a few hours on real life , and to cast the rest to the infinite . 
As he believed that he lacked nothing , he did not perceive that contemplation , thus understood , ends by becoming one of the forms of idleness ; that he was contenting himself with conquering the first necessities of life , and that he was resting from his labors too soon . 
It was evident that , for this energetic and enthusiastic nature , this could only be a transitory state , and that , at the first shock against the inevitable complications of destiny , Marius would awaken . 
In the meantime , although he was a lawyer , and whatever Father Gillenormand thought about the matter , he was not practising , he was not even pettifogging . 
Meditation had turned him aside from pleading . 
To haunt attorneys , to follow the court , to hunt up cases -- what a bore ! 
Why should he do it ? 
He saw no reason for changing the manner of gaining his livelihood ! 
The obscure and ill-paid publishing establishment had come to mean for him a sure source of work which did not involve too much labor , as we have explained , and which sufficed for his wants . 
One of the publishers for whom he worked , M. Magimel , I think , offered to take him into his own house , to lodge him well , to furnish him with regular occupation , and to give him fifteen hundred francs a year . 
To be well lodged ! 
Fifteen hundred francs ! 
No doubt . 
But renounce his liberty ! 
Be on fixed wages ! 
A sort of hired man of letters ! 
According to Marius ' opinion , if he accepted , his position would become both better and worse at the same time , he acquired comfort , and lost his dignity ; it was a fine and complete unhappiness converted into a repulsive and ridiculous state of torture : something like the case of a blind man who should recover the sight of one eye . 
He refused . 
Marius dwelt in solitude . 
Owing to his taste for remaining outside of everything , and through having been too much alarmed , he had not entered decidedly into the group presided over by Enjolras . 
They had remained good friends ; they were ready to assist each other on occasion in every possible way ; but nothing more . 
Marius had two friends : one young , Courfeyrac ; and one old , M. Mabeuf . 
He inclined more to the old man . 
In the first place , he owed to him the revolution which had taken place within him ; to him he was indebted for having known and loved his father . 
`` He operated on me for a cataract , '' he said . 
The churchwarden had certainly played a decisive part . 
It was not , however , that M. Mabeuf had been anything but the calm and impassive agent of Providence in this connection . 
He had enlightened Marius by chance and without being aware of the fact , as does a candle which some one brings ; he had been the candle and not the some one . 
As for Marius ' inward political revolution , M. Mabeuf was totally incapable of comprehending it , of willing or of directing it . 
As we shall see M. Mabeuf again , later on , a few words will not be superfluous . 
M. MABEUF On the day when M. Mabeuf said to Marius : `` Certainly I approve of political opinions , '' he expressed the real state of his mind . 
All political opinions were matters of indifference to him , and he approved them all , without distinction , provided they left him in peace , as the Greeks called the Furies `` the beautiful , the good , the charming , '' the Eumenides . 
M. Mabeuf 's political opinion consisted in a passionate love for plants , and , above all , for books . 
Like all the rest of the world , he possessed the termination in ist , without which no one could exist at that time , but he was neither a Royalist , a Bonapartist , a Chartist , an Orleanist , nor an Anarchist ; he was a bouquinist , a collector of old books . 
He did not understand how men could busy themselves with hating each other because of silly stuff like the charter , democracy , legitimacy , monarchy , the republic , etc. , when there were in the world all sorts of mosses , grasses , and shrubs which they might be looking at , and heaps of folios , and even of 32mos , which they might turn over . 
He took good care not to become useless ; having books did not prevent his reading , being a botanist did not prevent his being a gardener . 
When he made Pontmercy 's acquaintance , this sympathy had existed between the colonel and himself -- that what the colonel did for flowers , he did for fruits . 
M. Mabeuf had succeeded in producing seedling pears as savory as the pears of St. Germain ; it is from one of his combinations , apparently , that the October Mirabelle , now celebrated and no less perfumed than the summer Mirabelle , owes its origin . 
He went to mass rather from gentleness than from piety , and because , as he loved the faces of men , but hated their noise , he found them assembled and silent only in church . 
Feeling that he must be something in the State , he had chosen the career of warden . 
However , he had never succeeded in loving any woman as much as a tulip bulb , nor any man as much as an Elzevir . 
He had long passed sixty , when , one day , some one asked him : `` Have you never been married ? '' 
`` I have forgotten , '' said he . 
When it sometimes happened to him -- and to whom does it not happen ? 
-- to say : `` Oh ! 
if I were only rich ! '' 
it was not when ogling a pretty girl , as was the case with Father Gillenormand , but when contemplating an old book . 
He lived alone with an old housekeeper . 
He was somewhat gouty , and when he was asleep , his aged fingers , stiffened with rheumatism , lay crooked up in the folds of his sheets . 
He had composed and published a Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz , with colored plates , a work which enjoyed a tolerable measure of esteem and which sold well . 
People rang his bell , in the Rue Mesieres , two or three times a day , to ask for it . 
He drew as much as two thousand francs a year from it ; this constituted nearly the whole of his fortune . 
Although poor , he had had the talent to form for himself , by dint of patience , privations , and time , a precious collection of rare copies of every sort . 
He never went out without a book under his arm , and he often returned with two . 
The sole decoration of the four rooms on the ground floor , which composed his lodgings , consisted of framed herbariums , and engravings of the old masters . 
The sight of a sword or a gun chilled his blood . 
He had never approached a cannon in his life , even at the Invalides . 
He had a passable stomach , a brother who was a cure , perfectly white hair , no teeth , either in his mouth or his mind , a trembling in every limb , a Picard accent , an infantile laugh , the air of an old sheep , and he was easily frightened . 
Add to this , that he had no other friendship , no other acquaintance among the living , than an old bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques , named Royal . 
His dream was to naturalize indigo in France . 
His servant was also a sort of innocent . 
The poor good old woman was a spinster . 
Sultan , her cat , which might have mewed Allegri 's miserere in the Sixtine Chapel , had filled her heart and sufficed for the quantity of passion which existed in her . 
None of her dreams had ever proceeded as far as man . 
She had never been able to get further than her cat . 
Like him , she had a mustache . 
Her glory consisted in her caps , which were always white . 
She passed her time , on Sundays , after mass , in counting over the linen in her chest , and in spreading out on her bed the dresses in the piece which she bought and never had made up . 
She knew how to read . 
M. Mabeuf had nicknamed her Mother Plutarque . 
M. Mabeuf had taken a fancy to Marius , because Marius , being young and gentle , warmed his age without startling his timidity . 
Youth combined with gentleness produces on old people the effect of the sun without wind . 
When Marius was saturated with military glory , with gunpowder , with marches and countermarches , and with all those prodigious battles in which his father had given and received such tremendous blows of the sword , he went to see M. Mabeuf , and M. Mabeuf talked to him of his hero from the point of view of flowers . 
His brother the cure died about 1830 , and almost immediately , as when the night is drawing on , the whole horizon grew dark for M. Mabeuf . 
A notary 's failure deprived him of the sum of ten thousand francs , which was all that he possessed in his brother 's right and his own . 
The Revolution of July brought a crisis to publishing . 
In a period of embarrassment , the first thing which does not sell is a Flora . 
The Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz stopped short . 
Weeks passed by without a single purchaser . 
Sometimes M. Mabeuf started at the sound of the bell . 
`` Monsieur , '' said Mother Plutarque sadly , `` it is the water-carrier . '' 
In short , one day , M. Mabeuf quitted the Rue Mesieres , abdicated the functions of warden , gave up Saint-Sulpice , sold not a part of his books , but of his prints , -- that to which he was the least attached , -- and installed himself in a little house on the Rue Montparnasse , where , however , he remained but one quarter for two reasons : in the first place , the ground floor and the garden cost three hundred francs , and he dared not spend more than two hundred francs on his rent ; in the second , being near Faton 's shooting-gallery , he could hear the pistol-shots ; which was intolerable to him . 
He carried off his Flora , his copper-plates , his herbariums , his portfolios , and his books , and established himself near the Salpetriere , in a sort of thatched cottage of the village of Austerlitz , where , for fifty crowns a year , he got three rooms and a garden enclosed by a hedge , and containing a well . 
He took advantage of this removal to sell off nearly all his furniture . 
On the day of his entrance into his new quarters , he was very gay , and drove the nails on which his engravings and herbariums were to hang , with his own hands , dug in his garden the rest of the day , and at night , perceiving that Mother Plutarque had a melancholy air , and was very thoughtful , he tapped her on the shoulder and said to her with a smile : `` We have the indigo ! '' 
Only two visitors , the bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques and Marius , were admitted to view the thatched cottage at Austerlitz , a brawling name which was , to tell the truth , extremely disagreeable to him . 
However , as we have just pointed out , brains which are absorbed in some bit of wisdom , or folly , or , as it often happens , in both at once , are but slowly accessible to the things of actual life . 
Their own destiny is a far-off thing to them . 
There results from such concentration a passivity , which , if it were the outcome of reasoning , would resemble philosophy . 
One declines , descends , trickles away , even crumbles away , and yet is hardly conscious of it one 's self . 
It always ends , it is true , in an awakening , but the awakening is tardy . 
In the meantime , it seems as though we held ourselves neutral in the game which is going on between our happiness and our unhappiness . 
We are the stake , and we look on at the game with indifference . 
It is thus that , athwart the cloud which formed about him , when all his hopes were extinguished one after the other , M. Mabeuf remained rather puerilely , but profoundly serene . 
His habits of mind had the regular swing of a pendulum . 
Once mounted on an illusion , he went for a very long time , even after the illusion had disappeared . 
A clock does not stop short at the precise moment when the key is lost . 
M. Mabeuf had his innocent pleasures . 
These pleasures were inexpensive and unexpected ; the merest chance furnished them . 
One day , Mother Plutarque was reading a romance in one corner of the room . 
She was reading aloud , finding that she understood better thus . 
To read aloud is to assure one 's self of what one is reading . 
There are people who read very loud , and who have the appearance of giving themselves their word of honor as to what they are perusing . 
It was with this sort of energy that Mother Plutarque was reading the romance which she had in hand . 
M. Mabeuf heard her without listening to her . 
In the course of her reading , Mother Plutarque came to this phrase . 
It was a question of an officer of dragoons and a beauty : -- '' -- The beauty pouted , and the dragoon -- '' Here she interrupted herself to wipe her glasses . 
`` Bouddha and the Dragon , '' struck in M. Mabeuf in a low voice . 
`` Yes , it is true that there was a dragon , which , from the depths of its cave , spouted flame through his maw and set the heavens on fire . 
Many stars had already been consumed by this monster , which , besides , had the claws of a tiger . 
Bouddha went into its den and succeeded in converting the dragon . 
That is a good book that you are reading , Mother Plutarque . 
There is no more beautiful legend in existence . '' 
And M. Mabeuf fell into a delicious revery . 
POVERTY A GOOD NEIGHBOR FOR MISERY Marius liked this candid old man who saw himself gradually falling into the clutches of indigence , and who came to feel astonishment , little by little , without , however , being made melancholy by it . 
Marius met Courfeyrac and sought out M. Mabeuf . 
Very rarely , however ; twice a month at most . 
Marius ' pleasure consisted in taking long walks alone on the outer boulevards , or in the Champs-de-Mars , or in the least frequented alleys of the Luxembourg . 
He often spent half a day in gazing at a market garden , the beds of lettuce , the chickens on the dung-heap , the horse turning the water-wheel . 
The passers-by stared at him in surprise , and some of them thought his attire suspicious and his mien sinister . 
He was only a poor young man dreaming in an objectless way . 
It was during one of his strolls that he had hit upon the Gorbeau house , and , tempted by its isolation and its cheapness , had taken up his abode there . 
He was known there only under the name of M. Marius . 
Some of his father 's old generals or old comrades had invited him to go and see them , when they learned about him . 
Marius had not refused their invitations . 
They afforded opportunities of talking about his father . 
Thus he went from time to time , to Comte Pajol , to General Bellavesne , to General Fririon , to the Invalides . 
There was music and dancing there . 
On such evenings , Marius put on his new coat . 
But he never went to these evening parties or balls except on days when it was freezing cold , because he could not afford a carriage , and he did not wish to arrive with boots otherwise than like mirrors . 
He said sometimes , but without bitterness : `` Men are so made that in a drawing-room you may be soiled everywhere except on your shoes . 
In order to insure a good reception there , only one irreproachable thing is asked of you ; your conscience ? 
No , your boots . '' 
All passions except those of the heart are dissipated by revery . 
Marius ' political fevers vanished thus . 
The Revolution of 1830 assisted in the process , by satisfying and calming him . 
He remained the same , setting aside his fits of wrath . 
He still held the same opinions . 
Only , they had been tempered . 
To speak accurately , he had no longer any opinions , he had sympathies . 
To what party did he belong ? 
To the party of humanity . 
Out of humanity he chose France ; out of the Nation he chose the people ; out of the people he chose the woman . 
It was to that point above all , that his pity was directed . 
Now he preferred an idea to a deed , a poet to a hero , and he admired a book like Job more than an event like Marengo . 
And then , when , after a day spent in meditation , he returned in the evening through the boulevards , and caught a glimpse through the branches of the trees of the fathomless space beyond , the nameless gleams , the abyss , the shadow , the mystery , all that which is only human seemed very pretty indeed to him . 
He thought that he had , and he really had , in fact , arrived at the truth of life and of human philosophy , and he had ended by gazing at nothing but heaven , the only thing which Truth can perceive from the bottom of her well . 
This did not prevent him from multiplying his plans , his combinations , his scaffoldings , his projects for the future . 
In this state of revery , an eye which could have cast a glance into Marius ' interior would have been dazzled with the purity of that soul . 
In fact , had it been given to our eyes of the flesh to gaze into the consciences of others , we should be able to judge a man much more surely according to what he dreams , than according to what he thinks . 
There is will in thought , there is none in dreams . 
Revery , which is utterly spontaneous , takes and keeps , even in the gigantic and the ideal , the form of our spirit . 
Nothing proceeds more directly and more sincerely from the very depth of our soul , than our unpremeditated and boundless aspirations towards the splendors of destiny . 
In these aspirations , much more than in deliberate , rational coordinated ideas , is the real character of a man to be found . 
Our chimeras are the things which the most resemble us . 
Each one of us dreams of the unknown and the impossible in accordance with his nature . 
Towards the middle of this year 1831 , the old woman who waited on Marius told him that his neighbors , the wretched Jondrette family , had been turned out of doors . 
Marius , who passed nearly the whole of his days out of the house , hardly knew that he had any neighbors . 
`` Why are they turned out ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Because they do not pay their rent ; they owe for two quarters . '' 
`` How much is it ? '' 
`` Twenty francs , '' said the old woman . 
Marius had thirty francs saved up in a drawer . 
`` Here , '' he said to the old woman , `` take these twenty-five francs . 
Pay for the poor people and give them five francs , and do not tell them that it was I. '' THE SUBSTITUTE It chanced that the regiment to which Lieutenant Theodule belonged came to perform garrison duty in Paris . 
This inspired Aunt Gillenormand with a second idea . 
She had , on the first occasion , hit upon the plan of having Marius spied upon by Theodule ; now she plotted to have Theodule take Marius ' place . 
At all events and in case the grandfather should feel the vague need of a young face in the house , -- these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet to ruin , -- it was expedient to find another Marius . 
`` Take it as a simple erratum , '' she thought , `` such as one sees in books . 
For Marius , read Theodule . '' 
A grandnephew is almost the same as a grandson ; in default of a lawyer one takes a lancer . 
One morning , when M. Gillenormand was about to read something in the Quotidienne , his daughter entered and said to him in her sweetest voice ; for the question concerned her favorite : -- `` Father , Theodule is coming to present his respects to you this morning . '' 
`` Who 's Theodule ? '' 
`` Your grandnephew . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the grandfather . 
Then he went back to his reading , thought no more of his grandnephew , who was merely some Theodule or other , and soon flew into a rage , which almost always happened when he read . 
The `` sheet '' which he held , although Royalist , of course , announced for the following day , without any softening phrases , one of these little events which were of daily occurrence at that date in Paris : `` That the students of the schools of law and medicine were to assemble on the Place du Pantheon , at midday , -- to deliberate . '' 
The discussion concerned one of the questions of the moment , the artillery of the National Guard , and a conflict between the Minister of War and `` the citizen 's militia , '' on the subject of the cannon parked in the courtyard of the Louvre . 
The students were to `` deliberate '' over this . 
It did not take much more than this to swell M. Gillenormand 's rage . 
He thought of Marius , who was a student , and who would probably go with the rest , to `` deliberate , at midday , on the Place du Pantheon . '' 
As he was indulging in this painful dream , Lieutenant Theodule entered clad in plain clothes as a bourgeois , which was clever of him , and was discreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
The lancer had reasoned as follows : `` The old druid has not sunk all his money in a life pension . 
It is well to disguise one 's self as a civilian from time to time . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand said aloud to her father : -- `` Theodule , your grandnephew . '' 
And in a low voice to the lieutenant : -- `` Approve of everything . '' 
And she withdrew . 
The lieutenant , who was but little accustomed to such venerable encounters , stammered with some timidity : `` Good day , uncle , '' -- and made a salute composed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of the military salute finished off as a bourgeois salute . 
`` Ah ! 
so it 's you ; that is well , sit down , '' said the old gentleman . 
That said , he totally forgot the lancer . 
Theodule seated himself , and M. Gillenormand rose . 
M. Gillenormand began to pace back and forth , his hands in his pockets , talking aloud , and twitching , with his irritated old fingers , at the two watches which he wore in his two fobs . 
`` That pack of brats ! 
they convene on the Place du Pantheon ! 
by my life ! 
urchins who were with their nurses but yesterday ! 
If one were to squeeze their noses , milk would burst out . 
And they deliberate to-morrow , at midday . 
What are we coming to ? 
What are we coming to ? 
It is clear that we are making for the abyss . 
That is what the descamisados have brought us to ! 
To deliberate on the citizen artillery ! 
To go and jabber in the open air over the jibes of the National Guard ! 
And with whom are they to meet there ? 
Just see whither Jacobinism leads . 
I will bet anything you like , a million against a counter , that there will be no one there but returned convicts and released galley-slaves . 
The Republicans and the galley-slaves , -- they form but one nose and one handkerchief . 
Carnot used to say : ` Where would you have me go , traitor ? ' 
Fouche replied : ` Wherever you please , imbecile ! ' 
That 's what the Republicans are like . '' 
`` That is true , '' said Theodule . 
M. Gillenormand half turned his head , saw Theodule , and went on : -- `` When one reflects that that scoundrel was so vile as to turn carbonaro ! 
Why did you leave my house ? 
To go and become a Republican ! 
Pssst ! 
In the first place , the people want none of your republic , they have common sense , they know well that there always have been kings , and that there always will be ; they know well that the people are only the people , after all , they make sport of it , of your republic -- do you understand , idiot ? 
Is it not a horrible caprice ? 
To fall in love with Pere Duchesne , to make sheep 's - eyes at the guillotine , to sing romances , and play on the guitar under the balcony of ' 93 -- it 's enough to make one spit on all these young fellows , such fools are they ! 
They are all alike . 
Not one escapes . 
It suffices for them to breathe the air which blows through the street to lose their senses . 
The nineteenth century is poison . 
The first scamp that happens along lets his beard grow like a goat 's , thinks himself a real scoundrel , and abandons his old relatives . 
He 's a Republican , he 's a romantic . 
What does that mean , romantic ? 
Do me the favor to tell me what it is . 
All possible follies . 
A year ago , they ran to Hernani . 
Now , I just ask you , Hernani ! 
antitheses ! 
abominations which are not even written in French ! 
And then , they have cannons in the courtyard of the Louvre . 
Such are the rascalities of this age ! '' 
`` You are right , uncle , '' said Theodule . 
M. Gillenormand resumed : -- `` Cannons in the courtyard of the Museum ! 
For what purpose ? 
Do you want to fire grape-shot at the Apollo Belvedere ? 
What have those cartridges to do with the Venus de Medici ? 
Oh ! 
the young men of the present day are all blackguards ! 
What a pretty creature is their Benjamin Constant ! 
And those who are not rascals are simpletons ! 
They do all they can to make themselves ugly , they are badly dressed , they are afraid of women , in the presence of petticoats they have a mendicant air which sets the girls into fits of laughter ; on my word of honor , one would say the poor creatures were ashamed of love . 
They are deformed , and they complete themselves by being stupid ; they repeat the puns of Tiercelin and Potier , they have sack coats , stablemen 's waistcoats , shirts of coarse linen , trousers of coarse cloth , boots of coarse leather , and their rigmarole resembles their plumage . 
One might make use of their jargon to put new soles on their old shoes . 
And all this awkward batch of brats has political opinions , if you please . 
Political opinions should be strictly forbidden . 
They fabricate systems , they recast society , they demolish the monarchy , they fling all laws to the earth , they put the attic in the cellar 's place and my porter in the place of the King , they turn Europe topsy-turvy , they reconstruct the world , and all their love affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of the laundresses as these women climb into their carts . 
Ah ! 
Marius ! 
Ah ! 
you blackguard ! 
to go and vociferate on the public place ! 
to discuss , to debate , to take measures ! 
They call that measures , just God ! 
Disorder humbles itself and becomes silly . 
I have seen chaos , I now see a mess . 
Students deliberating on the National Guard , -- such a thing could not be seen among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches ! 
Savages who go naked , with their noddles dressed like a shuttlecock , with a club in their paws , are less of brutes than those bachelors of arts ! 
The four-penny monkeys ! 
And they set up for judges ! 
Those creatures deliberate and ratiocinate ! 
The end of the world is come ! 
This is plainly the end of this miserable terraqueous globe ! 
A final hiccough was required , and France has emitted it . 
Deliberate , my rascals ! 
Such things will happen so long as they go and read the newspapers under the arcades of the Odeon . 
That costs them a sou , and their good sense , and their intelligence , and their heart and their soul , and their wits . 
They emerge thence , and decamp from their families . 
All newspapers are pests ; all , even the Drapeau Blanc ! 
At bottom , Martainville was a Jacobin . 
Ah ! 
just Heaven ! 
you may boast of having driven your grandfather to despair , that you may ! '' 
`` That is evident , '' said Theodule . 
And profiting by the fact that M. Gillenormand was taking breath , the lancer added in a magisterial manner : -- `` There should be no other newspaper than the Moniteur , and no other book than the Annuaire Militaire . '' 
M. Gillenormand continued : -- `` It is like their Sieyes ! 
A regicide ending in a senator ; for that is the way they always end . 
They give themselves a scar with the address of thou as citizens , in order to get themselves called , eventually , Monsieur le Comte . 
Monsieur le Comte as big as my arm , assassins of September . 
The philosopher Sieyes ! 
I will do myself the justice to say , that I have never had any better opinion of the philosophies of all those philosophers , than of the spectacles of the grimacer of Tivoli ! 
One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in mantles of violet velvet sown with bees , with hats a la Henri IV . 
They were hideous . 
One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger 's court . 
Citizens , I declare to you , that your progress is madness , that your humanity is a dream , that your revolution is a crime , that your republic is a monster , that your young and virgin France comes from the brothel , and I maintain it against all , whoever you may be , whether journalists , economists , legists , or even were you better judges of liberty , of equality , and fraternity than the knife of the guillotine ! 
And that I announce to you , my flne fellows ! '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
cried the lieutenant , `` that is wonderfully true . '' 
M. Gillenormand paused in a gesture which he had begun , wheeled round , stared Lancer Theodule intently in the eyes , and said to him : -- `` You are a fool . '' 
THE SOBRIQUET : MODE OF FORMATION OF FAMILY NAMES Marius was , at this epoch , a handsome young man , of medium stature , with thick and intensely black hair , a lofty and intelligent brow , well-opened and passionate nostrils , an air of calmness and sincerity , and with something indescribably proud , thoughtful , and innocent over his whole countenance . 
His profile , all of whose lines were rounded , without thereby losing their firmness , had a certain Germanic sweetness , which has made its way into the French physiognomy by way of Alsace and Lorraine , and that complete absence of angles which rendered the Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans , and which distinguishes the leonine from the aquiline race . 
He was at that period of life when the mind of men who think is composed , in nearly equal parts , of depth and ingenuousness . 
A grave situation being given , he had all that is required to be stupid : one more turn of the key , and he might be sublime . 
His manners were reserved , cold , polished , not very genial . 
As his mouth was charming , his lips the reddest , and his teeth the whitest in the world , his smile corrected the severity of his face , as a whole . 
At certain moments , that pure brow and that voluptuous smile presented a singular contrast . 
His eyes were small , but his glance was large . 
At the period of his most abject misery , he had observed that young girls turned round when he passed by , and he fled or hid , with death in his soul . 
He thought that they were staring at him because of his old clothes , and that they were laughing at them ; the fact is , that they stared at him because of his grace , and that they dreamed of him . 
This mute misunderstanding between him and the pretty passers-by had made him shy . 
He chose none of them for the excellent reason that he fled from all of them . 
He lived thus indefinitely , -- stupidly , as Courfeyrac said . 
Courfeyrac also said to him : `` Do not aspire to be venerable '' -LSB- they called each other thou ; it is the tendency of youthful friendships to slip into this mode of address -RSB- . 
`` Let me give you a piece of advice , my dear fellow . 
Do n't read so many books , and look a little more at the lasses . 
The jades have some good points about them , O Marius ! 
By dint of fleeing and blushing , you will become brutalized . '' 
On other occasions , Courfeyrac encountered him and said : -- `` Good morning , Monsieur l'Abbe ! '' 
When Courfeyrac had addressed to him some remark of this nature , Marius avoided women , both young and old , more than ever for a week to come , and he avoided Courfeyrac to boot . 
Nevertheless , there existed in all the immensity of creation , two women whom Marius did not flee , and to whom he paid no attention whatever . 
In truth , he would have been very much amazed if he had been informed that they were women . 
One was the bearded old woman who swept out his chamber , and caused Courfeyrac to say : `` Seeing that his servant woman wears his beard , Marius does not wear his own beard . '' 
The other was a sort of little girl whom he saw very often , and whom he never looked at . 
For more than a year , Marius had noticed in one of the walks of the Luxembourg , the one which skirts the parapet of the Pepiniere , a man and a very young girl , who were almost always seated side by side on the same bench , at the most solitary end of the alley , on the Rue de l'Ouest side . 
Every time that that chance which meddles with the strolls of persons whose gaze is turned inwards , led Marius to that walk , -- and it was nearly every day , -- he found this couple there . 
The man appeared to be about sixty years of age ; he seemed sad and serious ; his whole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to military men who have retired from the service . 
If he had worn a decoration , Marius would have said : `` He is an ex-officer . '' 
He had a kindly but unapproachable air , and he never let his glance linger on the eyes of any one . 
He wore blue trousers , a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed hat , which always appeared to be new , a black cravat , a quaker shirt , that is to say , it was dazzlingly white , but of coarse linen . 
A grisette who passed near him one day , said : `` Here 's a very tidy widower . '' 
His hair was very white . 
The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seated herself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted , she was a sort of child thirteen or fourteen years of age , so thin as to be almost homely , awkward , insignificant , and with a possible promise of handsome eyes . 
Only , they were always raised with a sort of displeasing assurance . 
Her dress was both aged and childish , like the dress of the scholars in a convent ; it consisted of a badly cut gown of black merino . 
They had the air of being father and daughter . 
Marius scanned this old man , who was not yet aged , and this little girl , who was not yet a person , for a few days , and thereafter paid no attention to them . 
They , on their side , did not appear even to see him . 
They conversed together with a peaceful and indifferent air . 
The girl chattered incessantly and merrily . 
The old man talked but little , and , at times , he fixed on her eyes overflowing with an ineffable paternity . 
Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk . 
He invariably found them there . 
This is the way things went : -- Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest from their bench ; he walked the whole length of the alley , passed in front of them , then returned to the extremity whence he had come , and began again . 
This he did five or six times in the course of his promenade , and the promenade was taken five or six times a week , without its having occurred to him or to these people to exchange a greeting . 
That personage , and that young girl , although they appeared , -- and perhaps because they appeared , -- to shun all glances , had , naturally , caused some attention on the part of the five or six students who strolled along the Pepiniere from time to time ; the studious after their lectures , the others after their game of billiards . 
Courfeyrac , who was among the last , had observed them several times , but , finding the girl homely , he had speedily and carefully kept out of the way . 
He had fled , discharging at them a sobriquet , like a Parthian dart . 
Impressed solely with the child 's gown and the old man 's hair , he had dubbed the daughter Mademoiselle Lanoire , and the father , Monsieur Leblanc , so that as no one knew them under any other title , this nickname became a law in the default of any other name . 
The students said : `` Ah ! 
Monsieur Leblanc is on his bench . '' 
And Marius , like the rest , had found it convenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc . 
We shall follow their example , and we shall say M. Leblanc , in order to facilitate this tale . 
So Marius saw them nearly every day , at the same hour , during the first year . 
He found the man to his taste , but the girl insipid . 
LUX FACTA EST During the second year , precisely at the point in this history which the reader has now reached , it chanced that this habit of the Luxembourg was interrupted , without Marius himself being quite aware why , and nearly six months elapsed , during which he did not set foot in the alley . 
One day , at last , he returned thither once more ; it was a serene summer morning , and Marius was in joyous mood , as one is when the weather is fine . 
It seemed to him that he had in his heart all the songs of the birds that he was listening to , and all the bits of blue sky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees . 
He went straight to `` his alley , '' and when he reached the end of it he perceived , still on the same bench , that well-known couple . 
Only , when he approached , it certainly was the same man ; but it seemed to him that it was no longer the same girl . 
The person whom he now beheld was a tall and beautiful creature , possessed of all the most charming lines of a woman at the precise moment when they are still combined with all the most ingenuous graces of the child ; a pure and fugitive moment , which can be expressed only by these two words , -- `` fifteen years . '' 
She had wonderful brown hair , shaded with threads of gold , a brow that seemed made of marble , cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf , a pale flush , an agitated whiteness , an exquisite mouth , whence smiles darted like sunbeams , and words like music , a head such as Raphael would have given to Mary , set upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributed to a Venus . 
And , in order that nothing might be lacking to this bewitching face , her nose was not handsome -- it was pretty ; neither straight nor curved , neither Italian nor Greek ; it was the Parisian nose , that is to say , spiritual , delicate , irregular , pure , -- which drives painters to despair , and charms poets . 
When Marius passed near her , he could not see her eyes , which were constantly lowered . 
He saw only her long chestnut lashes , permeated with shadow and modesty . 
This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listened to what the white-haired old man was saying to her , and nothing could be more fascinating than that fresh smile , combined with those drooping eyes . 
For a moment , Marius thought that she was another daughter of the same man , a sister of the former , no doubt . 
But when the invariable habit of his stroll brought him , for the second time , near the bench , and he had examined her attentively , he recognized her as the same . 
In six months the little girl had become a young maiden ; that was all . 
Nothing is more frequent than this phenomenon . 
There is a moment when girls blossom out in the twinkling of an eye , and become roses all at once . 
One left them children but yesterday ; today , one finds them disquieting to the feelings . 
This child had not only grown , she had become idealized . 
As three days in April suffice to cover certain trees with flowers , six months had sufficed to clothe her with beauty . 
Her April had arrived . 
One sometimes sees people , who , poor and mean , seem to wake up , pass suddenly from indigence to luxury , indulge in expenditures of all sorts , and become dazzling , prodigal , magnificent , all of a sudden . 
That is the result of having pocketed an income ; a note fell due yesterday . 
The young girl had received her quarterly income . 
And then , she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat , her merino gown , her scholar 's shoes , and red hands ; taste had come to her with beauty ; she was a well-dressed person , clad with a sort of rich and simple elegance , and without affectation . 
She wore a dress of black damask , a cape of the same material , and a bonnet of white crape . 
Her white gloves displayed the delicacy of the hand which toyed with the carved , Chinese ivory handle of a parasol , and her silken shoe outlined the smallness of her foot . 
When one passed near her , her whole toilette exhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume . 
As for the man , he was the same as usual . 
The second time that Marius approached her , the young girl raised her eyelids ; her eyes were of a deep , celestial blue , but in that veiled azure , there was , as yet , nothing but the glance of a child . 
She looked at Marius indifferently , as she would have stared at the brat running beneath the sycamores , or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the bench , and Marius , on his side , continued his promenade , and thought about something else . 
He passed near the bench where the young girl sat , five or six times , but without even turning his eyes in her direction . 
On the following days , he returned , as was his wont , to the Luxembourg ; as usual , he found there `` the father and daughter ; '' but he paid no further attention to them . 
He thought no more about the girl now that she was beautiful than he had when she was homely . 
He passed very near the bench where she sat , because such was his habit . 
EFFECT OF THE SPRING One day , the air was warm , the Luxembourg was inundated with light and shade , the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that morning , the sparrows were giving vent to little twitters in the depths of the chestnut-trees . 
Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature , he was not thinking of anything , he simply lived and breathed , he passed near the bench , the young girl raised her eyes to him , the two glances met . 
What was there in the young girl 's glance on this occasion ? 
Marius could not have told . 
There was nothing and there was everything . 
It was a strange flash . 
She dropped her eyes , and he pursued his way . 
What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of a child ; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened , then abruptly closed again . 
There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner . 
Woe to him who chances to be there ! 
That first gaze of a soul which does not , as yet , know itself , is like the dawn in the sky . 
It is the awakening of something radiant and strange . 
Nothing can give any idea of the dangerous charm of that unexpected gleam , which flashes suddenly and vaguely forth from adorable shadows , and which is composed of all the innocence of the present , and of all the passion of the future . 
It is a sort of undecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance , and which waits . 
It is a snare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself , and in which she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it . 
It is a virgin looking like a woman . 
It is rare that a profound revery does not spring from that glance , where it falls . 
All purities and all candors meet in that celestial and fatal gleam which , more than all the best-planned tender glances of coquettes , possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming , in the depths of the soul , of that sombre flower , impregnated with perfume and with poison , which is called love . 
That evening , on his return to his garret , Marius cast his eyes over his garments , and perceived , for the first time , that he had been so slovenly , indecorous , and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk in the Luxembourg with his `` every-day clothes , '' that is to say , with a hat battered near the band , coarse carter 's boots , black trousers which showed white at the knees , and a black coat which was pale at the elbows . 
BEGINNING OF A GREAT MALADY On the following day , at the accustomed hour , Marius drew from his wardrobe his new coat , his new trousers , his new hat , and his new boots ; he clothed himself in this complete panoply , put on his gloves , a tremendous luxury , and set off for the Luxembourg . 
On the way thither , he encountered Courfeyrac , and pretended not to see him . 
Courfeyrac , on his return home , said to his friends : -- `` I have just met Marius ' new hat and new coat , with Marius inside them . 
He was going to pass an examination , no doubt . 
He looked utterly stupid . '' 
On arriving at the Luxembourg , Marius made the tour of the fountain basin , and stared at the swans ; then he remained for a long time in contemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black with mould , and one of whose hips was missing . 
Near the basin there was a bourgeois forty years of age , with a prominent stomach , who was holding by the hand a little urchin of five , and saying to him : `` Shun excess , my son , keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy . '' 
Marius listened to this bourgeois . 
Then he made the circuit of the basin once more . 
At last he directed his course towards `` his alley , '' slowly , and as if with regret . 
One would have said that he was both forced to go there and withheld from doing so . 
He did not perceive it himself , and thought that he was doing as he always did . 
On turning into the walk , he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at the other end , `` on their bench . '' 
He buttoned his coat up to the very top , pulled it down on his body so that there might be no wrinkles , examined , with a certain complaisance , the lustrous gleams of his trousers , and marched on the bench . 
This march savored of an attack , and certainly of a desire for conquest . 
So I say that he marched on the bench , as I should say : `` Hannibal marched on Rome . '' 
However , all his movements were purely mechanical , and he had interrupted none of the habitual preoccupations of his mind and labors . 
At that moment , he was thinking that the Manuel du Baccalaureat was a stupid book , and that it must have been drawn up by rare idiots , to allow of three tragedies of Racine and only one comedy of Moliere being analyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind . 
There was a piercing whistling going on in his ears . 
As he approached the bench , he held fast to the folds in his coat , and fixed his eyes on the young girl . 
It seemed to him that she filled the entire extremity of the alley with a vague blue light . 
In proportion as he drew near , his pace slackened more and more . 
On arriving at some little distance from the bench , and long before he had reached the end of the walk , he halted , and could not explain to himself why he retraced his steps . 
He did not even say to himself that he would not go as far as the end . 
It was only with difficulty that the young girl could have perceived him in the distance and noted his fine appearance in his new clothes . 
Nevertheless , he held himself very erect , in case any one should be looking at him from behind . 
He attained the opposite end , then came back , and this time he approached a little nearer to the bench . 
He even got to within three intervals of trees , but there he felt an indescribable impossibility of proceeding further , and he hesitated . 
He thought he saw the young girl 's face bending towards him . 
But he exerted a manly and violent effort , subdued his hesitation , and walked straight ahead . 
A few seconds later , he rushed in front of the bench , erect and firm , reddening to the very ears , without daring to cast a glance either to the right or to the left , with his hand thrust into his coat like a statesman . 
At the moment when he passed , -- under the cannon of the place , -- he felt his heart beat wildly . 
As on the preceding day , she wore her damask gown and her crape bonnet . 
He heard an ineffable voice , which must have been `` her voice . '' 
She was talking tranquilly . 
She was very pretty . 
He felt it , although he made no attempt to see her . 
`` She could not , however , '' he thought , `` help feeling esteem and consideration for me , if she only knew that I am the veritable author of the dissertation on Marcos Obregon de la Ronde , which M. Francois de Neufchateau put , as though it were his own , at the head of his edition of Gil Blas . '' 
He went beyond the bench as far as the extremity of the walk , which was very near , then turned on his heel and passed once more in front of the lovely girl . 
This time , he was very pale . 
Moreover , all his emotions were disagreeable . 
As he went further from the bench and the young girl , and while his back was turned to her , he fancied that she was gazing after him , and that made him stumble . 
He did not attempt to approach the bench again ; he halted near the middle of the walk , and there , a thing which he never did , he sat down , and reflecting in the most profoundly indistinct depths of his spirit , that after all , it was hard that persons whose white bonnet and black gown he admired should be absolutely insensible to his splendid trousers and his new coat . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour , he rose , as though he were on the point of again beginning his march towards that bench which was surrounded by an aureole . 
But he remained standing there , motionless . 
For the first time in fifteen months , he said to himself that that gentleman who sat there every day with his daughter , had , on his side , noticed him , and probably considered his assiduity singular . 
For the first time , also , he was conscious of some irreverence in designating that stranger , even in his secret thoughts , by the sobriquet of M. le Blanc . 
He stood thus for several minutes , with drooping head , tracing figures in the sand , with the cane which he held in his hand . 
Then he turned abruptly in the direction opposite to the bench , to M. Leblanc and his daughter , and went home . 
That day he forgot to dine . 
At eight o'clock in the evening he perceived this fact , and as it was too late to go down to the Rue Saint-Jacques , he said : `` Never mind ! '' 
and ate a bit of bread . 
He did not go to bed until he had brushed his coat and folded it up with great care . 
DIVRS CLAPS OF THUNDER FALL ON MA'AM BOUGON On the following day , Ma'am Bougon , as Courfeyrac styled the old portress-principal-tenant , housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel , Ma'am Bougon , whose name was , in reality , Madame Burgon , as we have found out , but this iconoclast , Courfeyrac , respected nothing , -- Ma'am Bougon observed , with stupefaction , that M. Marius was going out again in his new coat . 
He went to the Luxembourg again , but he did not proceed further than his bench midway of the alley . 
He seated himself there , as on the preceding day , surveying from a distance , and clearly making out , the white bonnet , the black dress , and above all , that blue light . 
He did not stir from it , and only went home when the gates of the Luxembourg closed . 
He did not see M. Leblanc and his daughter retire . 
He concluded that they had quitted the garden by the gate on the Rue de l'Ouest . 
Later on , several weeks afterwards , when he came to think it over , he could never recall where he had dined that evening . 
On the following day , which was the third , Ma'am Bougon was thunderstruck . 
Marius went out in his new coat . 
`` Three days in succession ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
She tried to follow him , but Marius walked briskly , and with immense strides ; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois . 
She lost sight of him in two minutes , and returned breathless , three-quarters choked with asthma , and furious . 
`` If there is any sense , '' she growled , `` in putting on one 's best clothes every day , and making people run like this ! '' 
Marius betook himself to the Luxembourg . 
The young girl was there with M. Leblanc . 
Marius approached as near as he could , pretending to be busy reading a book , but he halted afar off , then returned and seated himself on his bench , where he spent four hours in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk , and who produced on him the impression that they were making sport of him . 
A fortnight passed thus . 
Marius went to the Luxembourg no longer for the sake of strolling there , but to seat himself always in the same spot , and that without knowing why . 
Once arrived there , he did not stir . 
He put on his new coat every morning , for the purpose of not showing himself , and he began all over again on the morrow . 
She was decidedly a marvellous beauty . 
The only remark approaching a criticism , that could be made , was , that the contradiction between her gaze , which was melancholy , and her smile , which was merry , gave a rather wild effect to her face , which sometimes caused this sweet countenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming . 
TAKEN PRISONER On one of the last days of the second week , Marius was seated on his bench , as usual , holding in his hand an open book , of which he had not turned a page for the last two hours . 
All at once he started . 
An event was taking place at the other extremity of the walk . 
Leblanc and his daughter had just left their seat , and the daughter had taken her father 's arm , and both were advancing slowly , towards the middle of the alley where Marius was . 
Marius closed his book , then opened it again , then forced himself to read ; he trembled ; the aureole was coming straight towards him . 
`` Ah ! 
good Heavens ! '' 
thought he , `` I shall not have time to strike an attitude . '' 
Still the white-haired man and the girl advanced . 
It seemed to him that this lasted for a century , and that it was but a second . 
`` What are they coming in this direction for ? '' 
he asked himself . 
`` What ! 
She will pass here ? 
Her feet will tread this sand , this walk , two paces from me ? '' 
He was utterly upset , he would have liked to be very handsome , he would have liked to own the cross . 
He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps . 
He imagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him . 
`` Is that gentleman going to address me ? '' 
he thought to himself . 
He dropped his head ; when he raised it again , they were very near him . 
The young girl passed , and as she passed , she glanced at him . 
She gazed steadily at him , with a pensive sweetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot . 
It seemed to him that she was reproaching him for having allowed so long a time to elapse without coming as far as her , and that she was saying to him : `` I am coming myself . '' 
Marius was dazzled by those eyes fraught with rays and abysses . 
He felt his brain on fire . 
She had come to him , what joy ! 
And then , how she had looked at him ! 
She appeared to him more beautiful than he had ever seen her yet . 
Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminine and angelic , with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing and Dante kneel . 
It seemed to him that he was floating free in the azure heavens . 
At the same time , he was horribly vexed because there was dust on his boots . 
He thought he felt sure that she had looked at his boots too . 
He followed her with his eyes until she disappeared . 
Then he started up and walked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman . 
It is possible that , at times , he laughed to himself and talked aloud . 
He was so dreamy when he came near the children 's nurses , that each one of them thought him in love with her . 
He quitted the Luxembourg , hoping to find her again in the street . 
He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odeon , and said to him : `` Come and dine with me . '' 
They went off to Rousseau 's and spent six francs . 
Marius ate like an ogre . 
He gave the waiter six sous . 
At dessert , he said to Courfeyrac . 
`` Have you read the paper ? 
What a fine discourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered ! '' 
He was desperately in love . 
After dinner , he said to Courfeyrac : `` I will treat you to the play . '' 
They went to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frederick in l'Auberge des Adrets . 
Marius was enormously amused . 
At the same time , he had a redoubled attack of shyness . 
On emerging from the theatre , he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who was stepping across a gutter , and Courfeyrac , who said : `` I should like to put that woman in my collection , '' almost horrified him . 
Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Cafe Voltaire on the following morning . 
Marius went thither , and ate even more than on the preceding evening . 
He was very thoughtful and very merry . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laugh uproariously . 
He tenderly embraced some man or other from the provinces , who was presented to him . 
A circle of students formed round the table , and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State which was uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne , then the conversation fell upon the faults and omissions in Guicherat 's dictionaries and grammars . 
Marius interrupted the discussion to exclaim : `` But it is very agreeable , all the same to have the cross ! '' 
`` That 's queer ! '' 
whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire . 
`` No , '' responded Prouvaire , `` that 's serious . '' 
It was serious ; in fact , Marius had reached that first violent and charming hour with which grand passions begin . 
A glance had wrought all this . 
When the mine is charged , when the conflagration is ready , nothing is more simple . 
A glance is a spark . 
It was all over with him . 
Marius loved a woman . 
His fate was entering the unknown . 
The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels , which are tranquil in appearance yet formidable . 
You pass close to them every day , peaceably and with impunity , and without a suspicion of anything . 
A moment arrives when you forget that the thing is there . 
You go and come , dream , speak , laugh . 
All at once you feel yourself clutched ; all is over . 
The wheels hold you fast , the glance has ensnared you . 
It has caught you , no matter where or how , by some portion of your thought which was fluttering loose , by some distraction which had attacked you . 
You are lost . 
The whole of you passes into it . 
A chain of mysterious forces takes possession of you . 
You struggle in vain ; no more human succor is possible . 
You go on falling from gearing to gearing , from agony to agony , from torture to torture , you , your mind , your fortune , your future , your soul ; and , according to whether you are in the power of a wicked creature , or of a noble heart , you will not escape from this terrifying machine otherwise than disfigured with shame , or transfigured by passion . 
ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO CONJECTURES Isolation , detachment , from everything , pride , independence , the taste of nature , the absence of daily and material activity , the life within himself , the secret conflicts of chastity , a benevolent ecstasy towards all creation , had prepared Marius for this possession which is called passion . 
His worship of his father had gradually become a religion , and , like all religions , it had retreated to the depths of his soul . 
Something was required in the foreground . 
Love came . 
A full month elapsed , during which Marius went every day to the Luxembourg . 
When the hour arrived , nothing could hold him back . 
-- `` He is on duty , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Marius lived in a state of delight . 
It is certain that the young girl did look at him . 
He had finally grown bold , and approached the bench . 
Still , he did not pass in front of it any more , in obedience to the instinct of timidity and to the instinct of prudence common to lovers . 
He considered it better not to attract `` the attention of the father . '' 
He combined his stations behind the trees and the pedestals of the statues with a profound diplomacy , so that he might be seen as much as possible by the young girl and as little as possible by the old gentleman . 
Sometimes , he remained motionless by the half-hour together in the shade of a Leonidas or a Spartacus , holding in his hand a book , above which his eyes , gently raised , sought the beautiful girl , and she , on her side , turned her charming profile towards him with a vague smile . 
While conversing in the most natural and tranquil manner in the world with the white-haired man , she bent upon Marius all the reveries of a virginal and passionate eye . 
Ancient and time-honored manoeuvre which Eve understood from the very first day of the world , and which every woman understands from the very first day of her life ! 
her mouth replied to one , and her glance replied to another . 
It must be supposed , that M. Leblanc finally noticed something , for often , when Marius arrived , he rose and began to walk about . 
He had abandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by the Gladiator , near the other end of the walk , as though with the object of seeing whether Marius would pursue them thither . 
Marius did not understand , and committed this error . 
`` The father '' began to grow inexact , and no longer brought `` his daughter '' every day . 
Sometimes , he came alone . 
Then Marius did not stay . 
Another blunder . 
Marius paid no heed to these symptoms . 
From the phase of timidity , he had passed , by a natural and fatal progress , to the phase of blindness . 
His love increased . 
He dreamed of it every night . 
And then , an unexpected bliss had happened to him , oil on the fire , a redoubling of the shadows over his eyes . 
One evening , at dusk , he had found , on the bench which `` M. Leblanc and his daughter '' had just quitted , a handkerchief , a very simple handkerchief , without embroidery , but white , and fine , and which seemed to him to exhale ineffable perfume . 
He seized it with rapture . 
This handkerchief was marked with the letters U. F. Marius knew nothing about this beautiful child , -- neither her family name , her Christian name nor her abode ; these two letters were the first thing of her that he had gained possession of , adorable initials , upon which he immediately began to construct his scaffolding . 
U was evidently the Christian name . 
`` Ursule ! '' 
he thought , `` what a delicious name ! '' 
He kissed the handkerchief , drank it in , placed it on his heart , on his flesh , during the day , and at night , laid it beneath his lips that he might fall asleep on it . 
`` I feel that her whole soul lies within it ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
This handkerchief belonged to the old gentleman , who had simply let it fall from his pocket . 
In the days which followed the finding of this treasure , he only displayed himself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing the handkerchief and laying it on his heart . 
The beautiful child understood nothing of all this , and signified it to him by imperceptible signs . 
`` O modesty ! '' 
said Marius . 
THE VETERANS THEMSELVES CAN BE HAPPY Since we have pronounced the word modesty , and since we conceal nothing , we ought to say that once , nevertheless , in spite of his ecstasies , `` his Ursule '' caused him very serious grief . 
It was on one of the days when she persuaded M. Leblanc to leave the bench and stroll along the walk . 
A brisk May breeze was blowing , which swayed the crests of the plaintain-trees . 
The father and daughter , arm in arm , had just passed Marius ' bench . 
Marius had risen to his feet behind them , and was following them with his eyes , as was fitting in the desperate situation of his soul . 
All at once , a gust of wind , more merry than the rest , and probably charged with performing the affairs of Springtime , swept down from the nursery , flung itself on the alley , enveloped the young girl in a delicious shiver , worthy of Virgil 's nymphs , and the fawns of Theocritus , and lifted her dress , the robe more sacred than that of Isis , almost to the height of her garter . 
A leg of exquisite shape appeared . 
Marius saw it . 
He was exasperated and furious . 
The young girl had hastily thrust down her dress , with a divinely troubled motion , but he was none the less angry for all that . 
He was alone in the alley , it is true . 
But there might have been some one there . 
And what if there had been some one there ! 
Can any one comprehend such a thing ? 
What she had just done is horrible ! 
-- Alas , the poor child had done nothing ; there had been but one culprit , the wind ; but Marius , in whom quivered the Bartholo who exists in Cherubin , was determined to be vexed , and was jealous of his own shadow . 
It is thus , in fact , that the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens in the human heart , and takes possession of it , even without any right . 
Moreover , setting aside even that jealousy , the sight of that charming leg had contained nothing agreeable for him ; the white stocking of the first woman he chanced to meet would have afforded him more pleasure . 
When `` his Ursule , '' after having reached the end of the walk , retraced her steps with M. Leblanc , and passed in front of the bench on which Marius had seated himself once more , Marius darted a sullen and ferocious glance at her . 
The young girl gave way to that slight straightening up with a backward movement , accompanied by a raising of the eyelids , which signifies : `` Well , what is the matter ? '' 
This was `` their first quarrel . '' 
Marius had hardly made this scene at her with his eyes , when some one crossed the walk . 
It was a veteran , very much bent , extremely wrinkled , and pale , in a uniform of the Louis XV . 
pattern , bearing on his breast the little oval plaque of red cloth , with the crossed swords , the soldier 's cross of Saint-Louis , and adorned , in addition , with a coat-sleeve , which had no arm within it , with a silver chin and a wooden leg . 
Marius thought he perceived that this man had an extremely well satisfied air . 
It even struck him that the aged cynic , as he hobbled along past him , addressed to him a very fraternal and very merry wink , as though some chance had created an understanding between them , and as though they had shared some piece of good luck together . 
What did that relic of Mars mean by being so contented ? 
What had passed between that wooden leg and the other ? 
Marius reached a paroxysm of jealousy . 
-- `` Perhaps he was there ! '' 
he said to himself ; `` perhaps he saw ! '' 
-- And he felt a desire to exterminate the veteran . 
With the aid of time , all points grow dull . 
Marius ' wrath against `` Ursule , '' just and legitimate as it was , passed off . 
He finally pardoned her ; but this cost him a great effort ; he sulked for three days . 
Nevertheless , in spite of all this , and because of all this , his passion augmented and grew to madness . 
ECLIPSE The reader has just seen how Marius discovered , or thought that he discovered , that She was named Ursule . 
Appetite grows with loving . 
To know that her name was Ursule was a great deal ; it was very little . 
In three or four weeks , Marius had devoured this bliss . 
He wanted another . 
He wanted to know where she lived . 
He had committed his first blunder , by falling into the ambush of the bench by the Gladiator . 
He had committed a second , by not remaining at the Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone . 
He now committed a third , and an immense one . 
He followed `` Ursule . '' 
She lived in the Rue de l'Ouest , in the most unfrequented spot , in a new , three-story house , of modest appearance . 
From that moment forth , Marius added to his happiness of seeing her at the Luxembourg the happiness of following her home . 
His hunger was increasing . 
He knew her first name , at least , a charming name , a genuine woman 's name ; he knew where she lived ; he wanted to know who she was . 
One evening , after he had followed them to their dwelling , and had seen them disappear through the carriage gate , he entered in their train and said boldly to the porter : -- `` Is that the gentleman who lives on the first floor , who has just come in ? '' 
`` No , '' replied the porter . 
`` He is the gentleman on the third floor . '' 
Another step gained . 
This success emboldened Marius . 
`` On the front ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
said the porter , `` the house is only built on the street . '' 
`` And what is that gentleman 's business ? '' 
began Marius again . 
`` He is a gentleman of property , sir . 
A very kind man who does good to the unfortunate , though not rich himself . '' 
`` What is his name ? '' 
resumed Marius . 
The porter raised his head and said : -- `` Are you a police spy , sir ? '' 
Marius went off quite abashed , but delighted . 
He was getting on . 
`` Good , '' thought he , `` I know that her name is Ursule , that she is the daughter of a gentleman who lives on his income , and that she lives there , on the third floor , in the Rue de l'Ouest . '' 
On the following day , M. Leblanc and his daughter made only a very brief stay in the Luxembourg ; they went away while it was still broad daylight . 
Marius followed them to the Rue de l'Ouest , as he had taken up the habit of doing . 
On arriving at the carriage entrance M. Leblanc made his daughter pass in first , then paused , before crossing the threshold , and stared intently at Marius . 
On the next day they did not come to the Luxembourg . 
Marius waited for them all day in vain . 
At nightfall , he went to the Rue de l'Ouest , and saw a light in the windows of the third story . 
He walked about beneath the windows until the light was extinguished . 
The next day , no one at the Luxembourg . 
Marius waited all day , then went and did sentinel duty under their windows . 
This carried him on to ten o'clock in the evening . 
His dinner took care of itself . 
Fever nourishes the sick man , and love the lover . 
He spent a week in this manner . 
M. Leblanc no longer appeared at the Luxembourg . 
Marius indulged in melancholy conjectures ; he dared not watch the porte cochere during the day ; he contented himself with going at night to gaze upon the red light of the windows . 
At times he saw shadows flit across them , and his heart began to beat . 
On the eighth day , when he arrived under the windows , there was no light in them . 
`` Hello ! '' 
he said , `` the lamp is not lighted yet . 
But it is dark . 
Can they have gone out ? '' 
He waited until ten o'clock . 
Until midnight . 
Until one in the morning . 
Not a light appeared in the windows of the third story , and no one entered the house . 
He went away in a very gloomy frame of mind . 
On the morrow , -- for he only existed from morrow to morrow , there was , so to speak , no to-day for him , -- on the morrow , he found no one at the Luxembourg ; he had expected this . 
At dusk , he went to the house . 
No light in the windows ; the shades were drawn ; the third floor was totally dark . 
Marius rapped at the porte cochere , entered , and said to the porter : -- `` The gentleman on the third floor ? '' 
`` Has moved away , '' replied the porter . 
Marius reeled and said feebly : -- `` How long ago ? '' 
`` Yesterday . '' 
`` Where is he living now ? '' 
`` I do n't know anything about it . '' 
`` So he has not left his new address ? '' 
`` No . '' 
And the porter , raising his eyes , recognized Marius . 
`` Come ! 
So it 's you ! '' 
said he ; `` but you are decidedly a spy then ? '' 
BOOK SEVENTH . 
-- PATRON MINETTE MINES AND MINERS Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance , a third lower floor . 
The social soil is everywhere undermined , sometimes for good , sometimes for evil . 
These works are superposed one upon the other . 
There are superior mines and inferior mines . 
There is a top and a bottom in this obscure sub-soil , which sometimes gives way beneath civilization , and which our indifference and heedlessness trample under foot . 
The Encyclopedia , in the last century , was a mine that was almost open to the sky . 
The shades , those sombre hatchers of primitive Christianity , only awaited an opportunity to bring about an explosion under the Caesars and to inundate the human race with light . 
For in the sacred shadows there lies latent light . 
Volcanoes are full of a shadow that is capable of flashing forth . 
Every form begins by being night . 
The catacombs , in which the first mass was said , were not alone the cellar of Rome , they were the vaults of the world . 
Beneath the social construction , that complicated marvel of a structure , there are excavations of all sorts . 
There is the religious mine , the philosophical mine , the economic mine , the revolutionary mine . 
Such and such a pick-axe with the idea , such a pick with ciphers . 
Such another with wrath . 
People hail and answer each other from one catacomb to another . 
Utopias travel about underground , in the pipes . 
There they branch out in every direction . 
They sometimes meet , and fraternize there . 
Jean-Jacques lends his pick to Diogenes , who lends him his lantern . 
Sometimes they enter into combat there . 
Calvin seizes Socinius by the hair . 
But nothing arrests nor interrupts the tension of all these energies toward the goal , and the vast , simultaneous activity , which goes and comes , mounts , descends , and mounts again in these obscurities , and which immense unknown swarming slowly transforms the top and the bottom and the inside and the outside . 
Society hardly even suspects this digging which leaves its surface intact and changes its bowels . 
There are as many different subterranean stages as there are varying works , as there are extractions . 
What emerges from these deep excavations ? 
The future . 
The deeper one goes , the more mysterious are the toilers . 
The work is good , up to a degree which the social philosophies are able to recognize ; beyond that degree it is doubtful and mixed ; lower down , it becomes terrible . 
At a certain depth , the excavations are no longer penetrable by the spirit of civilization , the limit breathable by man has been passed ; a beginning of monsters is possible . 
The descending scale is a strange one ; and each one of the rungs of this ladder corresponds to a stage where philosophy can find foothold , and where one encounters one of these workmen , sometimes divine , sometimes misshapen . 
Below John Huss , there is Luther ; below Luther , there is Descartes ; below Descartes , there is Voltaire ; below Voltaire , there is Condorcet ; below Condorcet , there is Robespierre ; below Robespierre , there is Marat ; below Marat there is Babeuf . 
And so it goes on . 
Lower down , confusedly , at the limit which separates the indistinct from the invisible , one perceives other gloomy men , who perhaps do not exist as yet . 
The men of yesterday are spectres ; those of to-morrow are forms . 
The eye of the spirit distinguishes them but obscurely . 
The embryonic work of the future is one of the visions of philosophy . 
A world in limbo , in the state of foetus , what an unheard-of spectre ! 
Saint-Simon , Owen , Fourier , are there also , in lateral galleries . 
Surely , although a divine and invisible chain unknown to themselves , binds together all these subterranean pioneers who , almost always , think themselves isolated , and who are not so , their works vary greatly , and the light of some contrasts with the blaze of others . 
The first are paradisiacal , the last are tragic . 
Nevertheless , whatever may be the contrast , all these toilers , from the highest to the most nocturnal , from the wisest to the most foolish , possess one likeness , and this is it : disinterestedness . 
Marat forgets himself like Jesus . 
They throw themselves on one side , they omit themselves , they think not of themselves . 
They have a glance , and that glance seeks the absolute . 
The first has the whole heavens in his eyes ; the last , enigmatical though he may be , has still , beneath his eyelids , the pale beam of the infinite . 
Venerate the man , whoever he may be , who has this sign -- the starry eye . 
The shadowy eye is the other sign . 
With it , evil commences . 
Reflect and tremble in the presence of any one who has no glance at all . 
The social order has its black miners . 
There is a point where depth is tantamount to burial , and where light becomes extinct . 
Below all these mines which we have just mentioned , below all these galleries , below this whole immense , subterranean , venous system of progress and utopia , much further on in the earth , much lower than Marat , lower than Babeuf , lower , much lower , and without any connection with the upper levels , there lies the last mine . 
A formidable spot . 
This is what we have designated as the le troisieme dessous . 
It is the grave of shadows . 
It is the cellar of the blind . 
Inferi . 
This communicates with the abyss . 
THE LOWEST DEPTHS There disinterestedness vanishes . 
The demon is vaguely outlined ; each one is for himself . 
The I in the eyes howls , seeks , fumbles , and gnaws . 
The social Ugolino is in this gulf . 
The wild spectres who roam in this grave , almost beasts , almost phantoms , are not occupied with universal progress ; they are ignorant both of the idea and of the word ; they take no thought for anything but the satisfaction of their individual desires . 
They are almost unconscious , and there exists within them a sort of terrible obliteration . 
They have two mothers , both step-mothers , ignorance and misery . 
They have a guide , necessity ; and for all forms of satisfaction , appetite . 
They are brutally voracious , that is to say , ferocious , not after the fashion of the tyrant , but after the fashion of the tiger . 
From suffering these spectres pass to crime ; fatal affiliation , dizzy creation , logic of darkness . 
That which crawls in the social third lower level is no longer complaint stifled by the absolute ; it is the protest of matter . 
Man there becomes a dragon . 
To be hungry , to be thirsty -- that is the point of departure ; to be Satan -- that is the point reached . 
From that vault Lacenaire emerges . 
We have just seen , in Book Fourth , one of the compartments of the upper mine , of the great political , revolutionary , and philosophical excavation . 
There , as we have just said , all is pure , noble , dignified , honest . 
There , assuredly , one might be misled ; but error is worthy of veneration there , so thoroughly does it imply heroism . 
The work there effected , taken as a whole has a name : Progress . 
The moment has now come when we must take a look at other depths , hideous depths . 
There exists beneath society , we insist upon this point , and there will exist , until that day when ignorance shall be dissipated , the great cavern of evil . 
This cavern is below all , and is the foe of all . 
It is hatred , without exception . 
This cavern knows no philosophers ; its dagger has never cut a pen . 
Its blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness of the inkstand . 
Never have the fingers of night which contract beneath this stifling ceiling , turned the leaves of a book nor unfolded a newspaper . 
Babeuf is a speculator to Cartouche ; Marat is an aristocrat to Schinderhannes . 
This cavern has for its object the destruction of everything . 
Of everything . 
Including the upper superior mines , which it execrates . 
It not only undermines , in its hideous swarming , the actual social order ; it undermines philosophy , it undermines human thought , it undermines civilization , it undermines revolution , it undermines progress . 
Its name is simply theft , prostitution , murder , assassination . 
It is darkness , and it desires chaos . 
Its vault is formed of ignorance . 
All the others , those above it , have but one object -- to suppress it . 
It is to this point that philosophy and progress tend , with all their organs simultaneously , by their amelioration of the real , as well as by their contemplation of the absolute . 
Destroy the cavern Ignorance and you destroy the lair Crime . 
Let us condense , in a few words , a part of what we have just written . 
The only social peril is darkness . 
Humanity is identity . 
All men are made of the same clay . 
There is no difference , here below , at least , in predestination . 
The same shadow in front , the same flesh in the present , the same ashes afterwards . 
But ignorance , mingled with the human paste , blackens it . 
This incurable blackness takes possession of the interior of a man and is there converted into evil . 
BABET , GUEULEMER , CLAQUESOUS , AND MONTPARNASSE A quartette of ruffians , Claquesous , Gueulemer , Babet , and Montparnasse governed the third lower floor of Paris , from 1830 to 1835 . 
