She , too , was dressed entirely in black , with her magnificent black shawl on her shoulders . 
She walked to the witness-box with her smooth , noiseless tread , with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure . 
She looked steadily at the President , turning her eyes neither to the right nor to the left . 
To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment , and not at all pale , as the ladies alleged afterwards . 
They declared , too , that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression . 
I believe that she was simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and inquisitive eyes of our scandal-loving public . 
She was proud and could not stand contempt . 
She was one of those people who flare up , angry and eager to retaliate , at the mere suggestion of contempt . 
There was an element of timidity , too , of course , and inward shame at her own timidity , so it was not strange that her tone kept changing . 
At one moment it was angry , contemptuous and rough , and at another there was a sincere note of self-condemnation . 
Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperate plunge ; as though she felt , `` I do n't care what happens , I 'll say it ... '' Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch , she remarked curtly , `` That 's all nonsense , and was it my fault that he would pester me ? '' 
But a minute later she added , `` It was all my fault . 
I was laughing at them both - at the old man and at him , too - and I brought both of them to this . 
It was all on account of me it happened . '' 
Samsonov 's name came up somehow . 
`` That 's nobody 's business , '' she snapped at once , with a sort of insolent defiance . 
`` He was my benefactor ; he took me when I had n't a shoe to my foot , when my family had turned me out . '' 
The President reminded her , though very politely , that she must answer the questions directly , without going off into irrelevant details . 
Grushenka crimsoned and her eyes flashed . 
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen , but had only heard from `` that wicked wretch '' that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope with notes for three thousand in it . 
`` But that was all foolishness . 
I was only laughing . 
I would n't have gone to him for anything . '' 
`` To whom are you referring as ` that wicked wretch ' ? '' 
inquired the prosecutor . 
`` The lackey , Smerdyakov , who murdered his master and hanged himself last night . '' 
She was , of course , at once asked what ground she had for such a definite accusation ; but it appeared that she , too , had no grounds for it . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself ; you can believe him . 
The woman who came between us has ruined him ; she is the cause of it all , let me tell you , '' Grushenka added . 
She seemed to be quivering with hatred , and there was a vindictive note in her voice . 
She was again asked to whom she was referring . 
`` The young lady , Katerina Ivanovna there . 
She sent for me , offered me chocolate , tried to fascinate me . 
There 's not much true shame about her , I can tell you that ... '' At this point the President checked her sternly , begging her to moderate her language . 
But the jealous woman 's heart was burning , and she did not care what she did . 
`` When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe , '' the prosecutor asked , `` everyone saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out : ` It 's all my fault . 
We 'll go to Siberia together ! ' 
So you already believed him to have murdered his father ? '' 
`` I do n't remember what I felt at the time , '' answered Grushenka . 
`` Everyone was crying out that he had killed his father , and I felt that it was my fault , that it was on my account he had murdered him . 
But when he said he was n't guilty , I believed him at once , and I believe him now and always shall believe him . 
He is not the man to tell a lie . '' 
Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
I remember that among other things he asked about Rakitin and the twenty-five roubles `` you paid him for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you . '' 
`` There was nothing strange about his taking the money , '' sneered Grushenka , with angry contempt . 
`` He was always coming to me for money : he used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me , chiefly for luxuries : he had enough to keep him without my help . '' 
`` What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin ? '' 
Fetyukovitch asked , in spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President . 
`` Why , he is my cousin . 
His mother was my mother 's sister . 
