He understands it ! 
Monster and parricide ! 
Your father 's blood cries out against you ! '' 
the old captain of police roared suddenly , stepping up to Mitya . 
He was beside himself , crimson in the face and quivering all over . 
`` This is impossible ! '' 
cried the small young man . 
`` Mihail Makarovitch , Mihail Makarovitch , this wo n't do ! 
... I beg you 'll allow me to speak . 
I should never have expected such behaviour from you ... '' `` This is delirium , gentlemen , raving delirium , '' cried the captain of police ; `` look at him : drunk , at this time of night , in the company of a disreputable woman , with the blood of his father on his hands ... . 
It 's delirium ! 
... '' `` I beg you most earnestly , dear Mihail Makarovitch , to restrain your feelings , '' the prosecutor said in a rapid whisper to the old police captain , `` or I shall be forced to resort to - '' But the little lawyer did not allow him to finish . 
He turned to Mitya , and delivered himself in a loud , firm , dignified voice : `` Ex-Lieutenant Karamazov , it is my duty to inform you that you are charged with the murder of your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , perpetrated this night ... '' He said something more , and the prosecutor , too , put in something , but though Mitya heard them he did not understand them . 
He stared at them all with wild eyes . 
The Preliminary Investigation The Beginning of Perhotin 's Official Career PYOTR ILYITCH PERHOTIN , whom we left knocking at the strong locked gates of the widow Morozov 's house , ended , of course , by making himself heard . 
Fenya , who was still excited by the fright she had had two hours before , and too much `` upset '' to go to bed , was almost frightened into hysterics on hearing the furious knocking at the gate . 
Though she had herself seen him drive away , she fancied that it must be Dmitri Fyodorovitch knocking again , no one else could knock so savagely . 
She ran to the house-porter , who had already waked up and gone out to the gate , and began imploring him not to open it . 
But having questioned Pyotr Ilyitch , and learned that he wanted to see Fenya on very `` important business , '' the man made up his mind at last to open . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was admitted into Fenya 's kitchen , but the girl begged him to allow the houseporter to be present , `` because of her misgivings . '' 
He began questioning her and at once learnt the most vital fact , that is , that when Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run out to look for Grushenka , he had snatched up a pestle from the mortar , and that when he returned , the pestle was not with him and his hands were smeared with blood . 
`` And the blood was simply flowing , dripping from him , dripping ! '' 
Fenya kept exclaiming . 
This horrible detail was simply the product of her disordered imagination . 
But although not `` dripping , '' Pyotr Ilyitch had himself seen those hands stained with blood , and had helped to wash them . 
Moreover , the question he had to decide was , not how soon the blood had dried , but where Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run with the pestle , or rather , whether it really was to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , and how he could satisfactorily ascertain . 
Pyotr Ilyitch persisted in returning to this point , and though he found out nothing conclusive , yet he carried away a conviction that Dmitri Fyodorovitch could have gone nowhere but to his father 's house , and that , therefore , something must have happened there . 
`` And when he came back , '' Fenya added with excitement . 
`` I told him the whole story , and then I began asking him , ` Why have you got blood on your hands , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? ' 
and he answered that that was human blood , and that he had just killed someone . 
He confessed it all to me , and suddenly ran off like a madman . 
I sat down and began thinking , where 's he run off to now like a madman ? 
He 'll go to Mokroe , I thought , and kill my mistress there . 
I ran out to beg him not to kill her . 
I was running to his lodgings , but I looked at Plotnikov 's shop , and saw him just setting off , and there was no blood on his hands then . '' 
-LRB- Fenya had noticed this and remembered it . -RRB- 
Fenya 's old grandmother confirmed her evidence as far as she was capable . 
After asking some further questions , Pyotr Ilyitch left the house , even more upset and uneasy than he had been when he entered it . 
The most direct and the easiest thing for him to do would have been to go straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , to find out whether anything had happened there , and if so , what ; and only to go to the police captain , as Pyotr Ilyitch firmly intended doing , when he had satisfied himself of the fact . 
But the night was dark , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's gates were strong , and he would have to knock again . 
His acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch was of the slightest , and what if , after he had been knocking , they opened to him , and nothing had happened ? 
Fyodor Pavlovitch in his jeering way would go telling the story all over the town , how a stranger , called Perhotin , had broken in upon him at midnight to ask if anyone had killed him . 
It would make a scandal . 
And scandal was what Pyotr Ilyitch dreaded more than anything in the world . 
Yet the feeling that possessed him was so strong , that though he stamped his foot angrily and swore at himself , he set off again , not to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's but to Madame Hohlakov 's . 
He decided that if she denied having just given Dmitri Fyodorovitch three thousand roubles , he would go straight to the police captain , but if she admitted having given him the money , he would go home and let the matter rest till next morning . 
It is , of course , perfectly evident that there was even more likelihood of causing scandal by going at eleven o'clock at night to a fashionable lady , a complete stranger , and perhaps rousing her from her bed to ask her an amazing question , than by going to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
But that is just how it is , sometimes , especially in cases like the present one , with the decisions of the most precise and phlegmatic people . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was by no means phlegmatic at that moment . 
He remembered all his life how a haunting uneasiness gradually gained possession of him , growing more and more painful and driving him on , against his will . 
