`` Would you like to get married ? 
Shall I find you a wife ? '' 
But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger , and made no reply . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture . 
The great thing was that he had absolute confidence in his honesty . 
It happened once , when Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk , that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three hundred-rouble notes which he had only just received . 
He only missed them next day , and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw the notes lying on the table . 
Where had they come from ? 
Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the day before . 
`` Well , my lad , I 've never met anyone like you , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said shortly , and gave him ten roubles . 
We may add that he not only believed in his honesty , but had , for some reason , a liking for him , although the young man looked as morosely at him as at everyone and was always silent . 
He rarely spoke . 
If it had occurred to anyone to wonder at the time what the young man was interested in , and what was in his mind , it would have been impossible to tell by looking at him . 
Yet he used sometimes to stop suddenly in the house , or even in the yard or street , and would stand still for ten minutes , lost in thought . 
A physiognomist studying his face would have said that there was no thought in it , no reflection , but only a sort of contemplation . 
There is a remarkable picture by the painter Kramskoy , called `` Contemplation . '' 
There is a forest in winter , and on a roadway through the forest , in absolute solitude , stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark shoes . 
He stands , as it were , lost in thought . 
Yet he is not thinking ; he is `` contemplating . '' 
If anyone touched him he would start and look at one as though awakening and bewildered . 
It 's true he would come to himself immediately ; but if he were asked what he had been thinking about , he would remember nothing . 
Yet probably he has , hidden within himself , the impression which had dominated him during the period of contemplation . 
Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards them imperceptibly , and even unconsciously . 
How and why , of course , he does not know either . 
He may suddenly , after hoarding impressions for many years , abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his soul 's salvation , or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native village , and perhaps do both . 
There are a good many `` contemplatives '' among the peasantry . 
Well , Smerdyakov was probably one of them , and he probably was greedily hoarding up his impressions , hardly knowing why . 
The Controversy BUT Balaam 's ass had suddenly spoken . 
The subject was a strange one . 
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases , and had heard from the shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared in the newspaper of that day . 
This soldier had been taken prisoner in some remote part of Asia , and was threatened with an immediate agonising death if he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam . 
He refused to deny his faith , and was tortured , flayed alive , and died , praising and glorifying Christ . 
Grigory had related the story at table . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch always liked , over the dessert after dinner , to laugh and talk , if only with Grigory . 
This afternoon he was in a particularly good-humoured and expansive mood . 
Sipping his brandy and listening to the story , he observed that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that , and to take his skin to some monastery . 
`` That would make the people flock , and bring the money in . '' 
Grigory frowned , seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched , but , as usual , was beginning to scoff . 
At that moment Smerdyakov , who was standing by the door , smiled . 
Smerdyakov often waited at table towards the end of dinner , and since Ivan 's arrival in our town he had done so every day . 
`` What are you grinning at ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , catching the smile instantly , and knowing that it referred to Grigory . 
`` Well , my opinion is , '' Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in a loud voice , `` that if that laudable soldier 's exploit was so very great there would have been , to my thinking , no sin in it if he had on such an emergency renounced , so to speak , the name of Christ and his own christening , to save by that same his life , for good deeds , by which , in the course of years to expiate his cowardice . '' 
`` How could it not be a sin ? 
You 're talking nonsense . 
For that you 'll go straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton , '' put in Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It was at this point that Alyosha came in , and Fyodor Pavlovitch , as we have seen , was highly delighted at his appearance . 
`` We 're on your subject , your subject , '' he chuckled gleefully , making Alyosha sit down to listen . 
`` As for mutton , that 's not so , and there 'll be nothing there for this , and there should n't be either , if it 's according to justice , '' Smerdyakov maintained stoutly . 
`` How do you mean ` according to justice ' ? '' 
