`` I 'm drunk now , that 's what it is ... . 
And are n't you drunk ? 
And why is n't Mitya drinking ? 
Why do n't you drink , Mitya ? 
I 'm drunk , and you do n't drink ... '' `` I am drunk ! 
I 'm drunk as it is ... drunk with you ... and now I 'll be drunk with wine , too . '' 
He drank off another glass , and - he thought it strange himself - that glass made him completely drunk . 
He was suddenly drunk , although till that moment he had been quite sober , he remembered that . 
From that moment everything whirled about him , as though he were delirious . 
He walked , laughed , talked to everybody , without knowing what he was doing . 
Only one persistent burning sensation made itself felt continually , `` like a red-hot coal in his heart , '' he said afterwards . 
He went up to her , sat beside her , gazed at her , listened to her ... . 
She became very talkative , kept calling everyone to her , and beckoned to different girls out of the chorus . 
When the girl came up , she either kissed her , or made the sign of the cross over her . 
In another minute she might have cried . 
She was greatly amused by the `` little old man , '' as she called Maximov . 
He ran up every minute to kiss her hands , each little finger , '' and finally he danced another dance to an old song , which he sang himself . 
He danced with special vigour to the refrain : The little pig says - umph ! 
umph ! 
umph ! 
The little calf says - moo , moo , moo , The little duck says - quack , quack , quack , The little goose says - ga , ga , ga. . 
The hen goes strutting through the porch ; Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo , she 'll say , Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo , she 'll say ! 
`` Give him something , Mitya , '' said Grushenka . 
`` Give him a present , he 's poor , you know . 
Ah , the poor , the insulted ! 
... Do you know , Mitya , I shall go into a nunnery . 
No , I really shall one day . 
Alyosha said something to me to-day that I shall remember all my life ... . 
Yes ... . 
But to-day let us dance . 
To-morrow to the nunnery , but to-day we 'll dance . 
I want to play to-day , good people , and what of it ? 
God will forgive us . 
If I were God , I 'd forgive everyone : ` My dear sinners , from this day forth I forgive you . ' 
I 'm going to beg forgiveness : ` Forgive me , good people , a silly wench . ' 
I 'm a beast , that 's what I am . 
But I want to pray . 
I gave a little onion . 
Wicked as I 've been , I want to pray . 
Mitya , let them dance , do n't stop them . 
Everyone in the world is good . 
Everyone - even the worst of them . 
The world 's a nice place . 
Though we 're bad the world 's all right . 
We 're good and bad , good and bad ... . 
Come , tell me , I 've something to ask you : come here everyone , and I 'll ask you : Why am I so good ? 
You know I am good . 
I 'm very good ... . 
Come , why am I so good ? '' 
So Grushenka babbled on , getting more and more drunk . 
