Ivan knew that he ought to get up and show anger , and Smerdyakov stood before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or not . 
So at least it seemed to Ivan . 
At last he moved to get up . 
Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment . 
`` I 'm in an awful position , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't know how to help myself , '' he said resolutely and distinctly , and at his last word he sighed . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again . 
`` They are both utterly crazy , they are no better than little children , '' Smerdyakov went on . 
`` I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin worrying me every minute , ` Has she come ? 
Why has n't she come ? ' 
and so on up till midnight and even after midnight . 
And if Agrafena Alexandrovna does n't come -LRB- for very likely she does not mean to come at all -RRB- then he will be at me again to-morrow morning , ` Why has n't she come ? 
When will she come ? ' 
- as though I were to blame for it . 
On the other side it 's no better . 
As soon as it gets dark , or even before , your brother will appear with his gun in his hands : ` Look out , you rogue , you soup-maker . 
If you miss her and do n't let me know she 's been - I 'll kill you before anyone . ' 
When the night 's over , in the morning , he , too , like Fyodor Pavlovitch , begins worrying me to death . 
` Why has n't she come ? 
Will she come soon ? ' 
And he , too , thinks me to blame because his lady has n't come . 
And every day and every hour they get angrier and angrier , so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a fright . 
I ca n't depend them , sir . '' 
`` And why have you meddled ? 
Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
said Ivan irritably . 
`` How could I help meddling ? 
Though , indeed , I have n't meddled at all , if you want to know the truth of the matter . 
I kept quiet from the very beginning , not daring to answer ; but he pitched on me to be his servant . 
He has had only one thing to say since : ` I 'll kill you , you scoundrel , if you miss her . ' 
I feel certain , sir , that I shall have a long fit to-morrow . '' 
`` What do you mean by ' a long fit ' ? '' 
`` A long fit , lasting a long time - several hours , or perhaps a day or two . 
Once it went on for three days . 
I fell from the garret that time . 
The struggling ceased and then began again , and for three days I could n't come back to my senses . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube , the doctor here , and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy , too ... . 
I might have died . '' 
`` But they say one ca n't tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming . 
What makes you say you will have one to-morrow ? '' 
Ivan inquired , with a peculiar , irritable curiosity . 
`` That 's just so . 
You ca n't tell beforehand . '' 
`` Besides , you fell from the garret then . '' 
`` I climb up to the garret every day . 
I might fall from the garret again to-morrow . 
And , if not , I might fall down the cellar steps . 
I have to go into the cellar every day , too . '' 
Ivan took a long look at him . 
