Salvation will come from the people , from their faith and their meekness . 
Fathers and teachers , watch over the people 's faith and this will not be a dream . 
I 've been struck all my life in our great people by their dignity , their true and seemly dignity . 
I 've seen it myself , I can testify to it , I 've seen it and marvelled at it , I 've seen it in spite of the degraded sins and poverty-stricken appearance of our peasantry . 
They are not servile , and even after two centuries of serfdom they are free in manner and bearing , yet without insolence , and not revengeful and not envious . 
`` You are rich and noble , you are clever and talented , well , be so , God bless you . 
I respect you , but I know that I too am a man . 
By the very fact that I respect you without envy I prove my dignity as a man . '' 
In truth if they do n't say this -LRB- for they do n't know how to say this yet -RRB- , that is how they act . 
I have seen it myself , I have known it myself , and , would you believe it , the poorer our Russian peasant is , the more noticeable is that serene goodness , for the rich among them are for the most part corrupted already , and much of that is due to our carelessness and indifference . 
But God will save His people , for Russia is great in her humility . 
I dream of seeing , and seem to see clearly already , our future . 
It will come to pass that even the most corrupt of our rich will end by being ashamed of his riches before the poor , and the poor , seeing his humility , will understand and give way before him , will respond joyfully and kindly to his honourable shame . 
Believe me that it will end in that ; things are moving to that . 
Equality is to be found only in the spiritual dignity of man , and that will only be understood among us . 
If we were brothers , there would be fraternity , but before that they will never agree about the division of wealth . 
We preserve the image of Christ , and it will shine forth like a precious diamond to the whole world . 
So may it be , so may it be ! 
Fathers and teachers , a touching incident befell me once . 
In my wanderings I met in the town of K. my old orderly , Afanasy . 
It was eight years since I had parted from him . 
He chanced to see me in the market-place , recognised me , ran up to me , and how delighted he was ! 
He simply pounced on me : `` Master dear , is it you ? 
Is it really you I see ? '' 
He took me home with him . 
He was no longer in the army , he was married and already had two little children . 
He and his wife earned their living as costermongers in the market-place . 
His room was poor , but bright and clean . 
He made me sit down , set the samovar , sent for his wife , as though my appearance were a festival for them . 
He brought me his children : `` Bless them , Father . '' 
`` Is it for me to bless them ? 
I am only a humble monk . 
I will pray for them . 
And for you , Afanasy Pavlovitch , I have prayed every day since that day , for it all came from you , '' said I. And I explained that to him as well as I could . 
And what do you think ? 
The man kept gazing at me and could not believe that I , his former master , an officer , was now before him in such a guise and position ; it made him shed tears . 
`` Why are you weeping ? '' 
said I , `` better rejoice over me , dear friend , whom I can never forget , for my path is a glad and joyful one . '' 
He did not say much , but kept sighing and shaking his head over me tenderly . 
`` What has become of your fortune ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I gave it to the monastery , '' I answered ; `` we live in common . '' 
After tea I began saying good-bye , and suddenly he brought out half a rouble as an offering to the monastery , and another half-rouble I saw him thrusting hurriedly into my hand : `` That 's for you in your wanderings , it may be of use to you , Father . '' 
I took his half-rouble , bowed to him and his wife , and went out rejoicing . 
And on my way I thought : `` Here we are both now , he at home and I on the road , sighing and shaking our heads , no doubt , and yet smiling joyfully in the gladness of our hearts , remembering how God brought about our meeting . '' 
I have never seen him again since then . 
I had been his master and he my servant , but now when we exchanged a loving kiss with softened hearts , there was a great human bond between us . 
I have thought a great deal about that , and now what I think is this : Is it so inconceivable that that grand and simple-hearted unity might in due time become universal among the Russian people ? 
I believe that it will come to pass and that the time is at hand . 
And of servants I will add this : In old days when I was young I was often angry with servants ; `` the cook had served something too hot , the orderly had not brushed my clothes . '' 
