` It was an old cotton rag of hers lying about . ' 
` And do you remember that clearly ? ' 
` No , I do n't . ' 
And he was angry , very angry , and yet imagine not remembering it ! 
At the most terrible moments of man 's life , for instance when he is being led to execution , he remembers just such trifles . 
He will forget anything but some green roof that has flashed past him on the road , or a jackdaw on a cross - that he will remember . 
He concealed the making of that little bag from his household , he must have remembered his humiliating fear that someone might come in and find him needle in hand , how at the slightest sound he slipped behind the screen -LRB- there is a screen in his lodgings -RRB- . 
`` But , gentlemen of the jury , why do I tell you all this , all these details , trifles ? '' 
cried Ippolit Kirillovitch suddenly . 
`` Just because the prisoner still persists in these absurdities to this moment . 
He has not explained anything since that fatal night two months ago , he has not added one actual illuminating fact to his former fantastic statements ; all those are trivialities . 
` You must believe it on my honour . ' 
Oh , we are glad to believe it , we are eager to believe it , even if only on his word of honour ! 
Are we jackals thirsting for human blood ? 
Show us a single fact in the prisoner 's favour and we shall rejoice ; but let it be a substantial , real fact , and not a conclusion drawn from the prisoner 's expression by his own brother , or that when he beat himself on the breast he must have meant to point to the little bag , in the darkness , too . 
We shall rejoice at the new fact , we shall be the first to repudiate our charge , we shall hasten to repudiate it . 
But now justice cries out and we persist , we can not repudiate anything . '' 
Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to his final peroration . 
He looked as though he was in a fever , he spoke of the blood that cried for vengeance , the blood of the father murdered by his son , with the base motive of robbery ! 
He pointed to the tragic and glaring consistency of the facts . 
`` And whatever you may hear from the talented and celebrated counsel for the defence , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch could not resist adding , `` whatever eloquent and touching appeals may be made to your sensibilities , remember that at this moment you are in a temple of justice . 
Remember that you are the champions of our justice , the champions of our holy Russia , of her principles , her family , everything that she holds sacred ! 
Yes , you represent Russia here at this moment , and your verdict will be heard not in this hall only but will re-echo throughout the whole of Russia , and all Russia will hear you , as her champions and her judges , and she will be encouraged or disheartened by your verdict . 
Do not disappoint Russia and her expectations . 
Our fatal troika dashes on in her headlong flight perhaps to destruction and in all Russia for long past men have stretched out imploring hands and called a halt to its furious reckless course . 
And if other nations stand aside from that troika that may be , not from respect , as the poet would fain believe , but simply from horror . 
From horror , perhaps from disgust . 
And well it is that they stand aside , but maybe they will cease one day to do so and will form a firm wall confronting the hurrying apparition and will check the frenzied rush of our lawlessness , for the sake of their own safety , enlightenment and civilisation . 
Already we have heard voices of alarm from Europe , they already begin to sound . 
Do not tempt them ! 
Do not heap up their growing hatred by a sentence justifying the murder of a father by his son I Though Ippolit Kirillovitch was genuinely moved , he wound up his speech with this rhetorical appeal - and the effect produced by him was extraordinary . 
When he had finished his speech , he went out hurriedly and , as I have mentioned before , almost fainted in the adjoining room . 
There was no applause in the court , but serious persons were pleased . 
The ladies were not so well satisfied , though even they were pleased with his eloquence , especially as they had no apprehensions as to the upshot of the trial and had full trust in Fetyukovitch . 
`` He will speak at last and of course carry all before him . '' 
Everyone looked at Mitya ; he sat silent through the whole of the prosecutor 's speech , clenching his teeth , with his hands clasped , and his head bowed . 
Only from time to time he raised his head and listened , especially when Grushenka was spoken of . 
When the prosecutor mentioned Rakitin 's opinion of her , a smile of contempt and anger passed over his face and he murmured rather audibly , `` The Bernards ! '' 
When Ippolit Kirillovitch described how he had questioned and tortured him at Mokroe , Mitya raised his head and listened with intense curiosity . 
At one point he seemed about to jump up and cry out , but controlled himself and only shrugged his shoulders disdainfully . 
People talked afterwards of the end of the speech , of the prosecutor 's feat in examining the prisoner at Mokroe , and jeered at Ippolit Kirillovitch . 
`` The man could not resist boasting of his cleverness , '' they said . 
The court was adjourned , but only for a short interval , a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes at most . 
There was a hum of conversation and exclamations in the audience . 
I remember some of them . 
`` A weighty speech , '' a gentleman in one group observed gravely . 
`` He brought in too much psychology , '' said another voice . 
`` But it was all true , the absolute truth ! '' 
`` Yes , he is first rate at it . '' 
`` He summed it all up . '' 
