That was his fence for the moment and behind it he hoped to throw up a barricade of some sort . 
His first compromising exclamations he hastened to explain by declaring that he was responsible for the death of the servant Grigory only . 
` Of that bloodshed I am guilty , but who has killed my father , gentlemen , who has killed him ? 
Who can have killed him , if not I ? ' 
Do you hear , he asked us that , us , who had come to ask him that question ! 
Do you hear that uttered with such premature haste - ` if not I ' - the animal cunning , the naivete the Karamazov impatience of it ? ' 
I did n't kill him and you must n't think I did ! 
I wanted to kill him , gentlemen , I wanted to kill him , ' he hastens to admit -LRB- he was in a hurry , in a terrible hurry -RRB- , ` but still I am not guilty , it is not I murdered him . ' 
He concedes to us that he wanted to murder him , as though to say , you can see for yourselves how truthful I am , so you 'll believe all the sooner that I did n't murder him . 
Oh , in such cases the criminal is often amazingly shallow and credulous . 
`` At that point one of the lawyers asked him , as it were incidentally , the most simple question , ` Was n't it Smerdyakov killed him ? ' 
Then , as we expected , he was horribly angry at our having anticipated him and caught him unawares , before he had time to pave the way to choose and snatch the moment when it would be most natural to bring in Smerdyakov 's name . 
He rushed at once to the other extreme , as he always does , and began to assure us that Smerdyakov could not have killed him , was not capable of it . 
But do n't believe him , that was only his cunning ; he did n't really give up the idea of Smerdyakov ; on the contrary , he meant to bring him forward again ; for , indeed , he had no one else to bring forward , but he would do that later , because for the moment that line was spoiled for him . 
He would bring him forward perhaps next day , or even a few days later , choosing an opportunity to cry out to us , ` You know I was more sceptical about Smerdyakov than you , you remember that yourselves , but now I am convinced . 
He killed him , he must have done ! ' 
And for the present he falls back upon a gloomy and irritable denial . 
Impatience and anger prompted him , however , to the most inept and incredible explanation of how he looked into his father 's window and how he respectfully withdrew . 
The worst of it was that he was unaware of the position of affairs , of the evidence given by Grigory . 
`` We proceeded to search him . 
The search angered , but encouraged him , the whole three thousand had not been found on him , only half of it . 
And no doubt only at that moment of angry silence , the fiction of the little bag first occurred to him . 
No doubt he was conscious himself of the improbability of the story and strove painfully to make it sound more likely , to weave it into a romance that would sound plausible . 
In such cases the first duty , the chief task of the investigating lawyers , is to prevent the criminal being prepared , to pounce upon him unexpectedly so that he may blurt out his cherished ideas in all their simplicity , improbability and inconsistency . 
The criminal can only be made to speak by the sudden and apparently incidental communication of some new fact , of some circumstance of great importance in the case , of which he had no previous idea and could not have foreseen . 
We had such a fact in readiness - that was Grigory 's evidence about the open door through which the prisoner had run out . 
He had completely forgotten about that door and had not even suspected that Grigory could have seen it . 
`` The effect of it was amazing . 
He leapt up and shouted to us , ` Then Smerdyakov murdered him , it was Smerdyakov ! ' 
and so betrayed the basis of the defence he was keeping back , and betrayed it in its most improbable shape , for Smerdyakov could only have committed the murder after he had knocked Grigory down and run away . 
When we told him that Grigory saw the door was open before he fell down , and had heard Smerdyakov behind the screen as he came out of his bedroom - Karamazov was positively crushed . 
My esteemed and witty colleague , Nikolay Parfenovitch , told me afterwards that he was almost moved to tears at the sight of him . 
And to improve matters , the prisoner hastened to tell us about the much-talked-of little bag - so be it , you shall hear this romance ! 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , I have told you already why I consider this romance not only an absurdity , but the most improbable invention that could have been brought forward in the circumstances . 
If one tried for a bet to invent the most unlikely story , one could hardly find anything more incredible . 
The worst of such stories is that the triumphant romancers can always be put to confusion and crushed by the very details in which real life is so rich and which these unhappy and involuntary storytellers neglect as insignificant trifles . 
Oh , they have no thought to spare for such details , their minds are concentrated on their grand invention as a whole , and fancy anyone daring to pull them up for a trifle ! 
But that 's how they are caught . 
The prisoner was asked the question , ` Where did you get the stuff for your little bag and who made it for you ? ' ' 
I made it myself . ' 
` And where did you get the linen ? ' 
The prisoner was positively offended , he thought it almost insulting to ask him such a trivial question , and would you believe it , his resentment was genuine ! 
But they are all like that . ' 
I tore it off my shirt . 
`` Then we shall find that shirt among your linen to-morrow , with a piece torn off . ' 
And only fancy , gentlemen of the jury , if we really had found that torn shirt -LRB- and how could we have failed to find it in his chest of drawers or trunk ? -RRB- 
that would have been a fact , a material fact in support of his statement ! 
But he was incapable of that reflection . ' 
I do n't remember , it may not have been off my shirt , I sewed it up in one of my landlady 's caps . ' 
` What sort of a cap ? ' 
