`` Good Lord ! 
just as it was with Lizaveta Smerdyashtchaya ! '' 
she thought distractedly . 
She went timidly down the steps and saw that the gate into the garden was open . 
`` He must be out there , poor dear , '' she thought . 
She went up to the gate and all at once she distinctly heard Grigory calling her by name , Marfa ! 
Marfa ! '' 
in a weak , moaning , dreadful voice . 
`` Lord , preserve us from harm ! '' 
Marfa Ignatyevna murmured , and ran towards the voice , and that was how she found Grigory . 
But she found him not by the fence where he had been knocked down , but about twenty paces off . 
It appeared later , that he had crawled away on coming to himself , and probably had been a long time getting so far , losing consciousness several times . 
She noticed at once that he was covered with blood , and screamed at the top of her voice . 
Grigory was muttering incoherently : `` He has murdered ... his father murdered ... . 
Why scream , silly ... run ... fetch someone ... '' But Marfa continued screaming , and seeing that her master 's window was open and that there was a candle alight in the window , she ran there and began calling Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
But peeping in at the window , she saw a fearful sight . 
Her master was lying on his back , motionless , on the floor . 
His light-coloured dressing-gown and white shirt were soaked with blood . 
The candle on the table brightly lighted up the blood and the motionless dead face of Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Terror-stricken , Marfa rushed away from the window , ran out of the garden , drew the bolt of the big gate and ran headlong by the back way to the neighbour , Marya Konndratyevna . 
Both mother and daughter were asleep , but they waked up at Marfa 's desperate and persistent screaming and knocking at the shutter . 
Marfa , shrieking and screaming incoherently , managed to tell them the main fact , and to beg for assistance . 
It happened that Foma had come back from his wanderings and was staying the night with them . 
They got him up immediately and all three ran to the scene of the crime . 
On the way , Marya Kondratyevna remembered that at about eight o'clock she heard a dreadful scream from their garden , and this was no doubt Grigory 's scream , `` Parricide ! '' 
uttered when he caught hold of Mitya 's leg . 
`` Some one person screamed out and then was silent , '' Marya Kondratyevna explained as she ran . 
Running to the place where Grigory lay , the two women with the help of Foma carried him to the lodge . 
They lighted a candle and saw that Smerdyakov was no better , that he was writhing in convulsions , his eyes fixed in a squint , and that foam was flowing from his lips . 
They moistened Grigory 's forehead with water mixed with vinager , and the water revived him at once . 
He asked immediately : `` Is the master murdered ? '' 
Then Foma and both the women ran to the house and saw this time that not only the window , but also the door into the garden was wide open , though Fyodor Pavlovitch had for the last week locked himself in every night and did not allow even Grigory to come in on any pretext . 
Seeing that door open , they were afraid to go in to Fyodor Pavlovitch `` for fear anything should happen afterwards . '' 
And when they returned to Grigory , the old man told them to go straight to the police captain . 
Marya Kondratyevna ran there and gave the alarm to the whole party at the police captain 's . 
She arrived only five minutes before Pyotr Ilyitch , so that his story came , not as his own surmise and theory , but as the direct conformation by a witness , of the theory held by all , as to the identity of the criminal -LRB- a theory he had in the bottom of his heart refused to believe till that moment -RRB- . 
It was resolved to act with energy . 
The deputy police inspector of the town was commissioned to take four witnesses , to enter Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house and there to open an inquiry on the spot , according to the regular forms , which I will not go into here . 
The district doctor , a zealous man , new to his work , almost insisted on accompanying the police captain , the prosecutor , and the investigating lawyer . 
I will note briefly that Fyodor Pavlovitch was found to be quite dead , with his skull battered in . 
But with what ? 
Most likely with the same weapon with which Grigory had been attacked . 
And immediately that weapon was found , Grigory , to whom all possible medical assistance was at once given , described in a weak and breaking voice how he had been knocked down . 
They began looking with a lantern by the fence and found the brass pestle dropped in a most conspicuous place on the garden path . 
There were no signs of disturbance in the room where Fyodor Pavlovitch was lying . 
But by the bed , behind the screen , they picked up from the floor a big and thick envelope with the inscription : `` A present of three thousand roubles for my angel Grushenka , if she is willing to come . '' 
And below had been added by Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` For my little chicken . '' 
There were three seals of red sealing-wax on the envelope , but it had been torn open and was empty : the money had been removed . 
They found also on the floor a piece of narrow pink ribbon , with which the envelope had been tied up . 
One piece of Pyotr Ilyitch 's evidence made a great impression on the prosecutor and the investigating magistrate , namely , his idea that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would shoot himself before daybreak , that he had resolved to do so , had spoken of it to Ilyitch , had taken the pistols , loaded them before him , written a letter , put it in his pocket , etc. . 
