All the art he had used had been to take them , one by one , to Ilusha , without `` sheepish sentimentality , '' appearing to do so casually and without design . 
It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering . 
He was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy shown him by these boys , who had been his enemies . 
Krassotkin was the only one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha 's heart . 
Perhaps the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin , who had been his one friend and protector . 
Clever little Smurov , who was the first to make it up with Ilusha , thought it was so . 
But when Smurov hinted to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something , the latter cut him short , bidding Smurov tell `` Karamazov '' at once that he knew best what to do , that he wanted no one 's advice , and that , if he went to see Ilusha , he would choose his own time for he had `` his own reasons . '' 
That was a fortnight before this Sunday . 
That was why Alyosha had not been to see him , as he had meant to . 
But though he waited he sent Smurov to him twice again . 
Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt , impatient refusal , sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more , that if he came himself , he , Krassotkin , would not go to Ilusha at all . 
Up to the very last day , Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that morning , and only the evening before , as he parted from Smurov , Kolya abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning , for he would go with him to the Snegiryovs , but warned him on no account to say he was coming , as he wanted to drop in casually . 
Smurov obeyed . 
Smurov 's fancy that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had dropped that `` they must be asses not to find the dog , if it was alive . '' 
When Smurov , waiting for an opportunity , timidly hinted at his guess about the dog , Krassotkin flew into a violent rage . 
`` I 'm not such an ass as to go hunting about the town for other people 's dogs when I 've got a dog of my own ! 
And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a pin ? 
Sheepish sentimentality , thats what it is ! 
For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons in the corner . 
He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha and bit his finger . 
He was taken ill the same day , though for a month afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and passage . 
But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without help from his father . 
His father was terribly concerned about him . 
He even gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die . 
And often , especially after leading him round the room on his arm and putting him back to bed , he would run to a dark corner in the passage and , leaning his head against the wall , he would break into paroxysms of violent weeping , stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha . 
Returning to the room , he would usually begin doing something to amuse and comfort his precious boy : he would tell him stories , funny anecdotes , or would mimic comic people he had happened to meet , even imitate the howls and cries of animals . 
But Ilusha could not bear to see his father fooling and playing the buffoon . 
Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked it , he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt , and he was continually haunted by the memory of the `` wisp of tow '' and that `` terrible day . '' 
Nina , Ilusha 's gentle , crippled sister , did not like her father 's buffoonery either -LRB- Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg to study at the university -RRB- . 
But the half-imbecile mother was greatly diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or performing something . 
It was the only way she could be amused ; all the rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now everyone had forgotten her , that no one treated her with respect , that she was slighted , and so on . 
But during the last few days she had completely changed . 
She began looking constantly at Ilusha 's bed in the corner and seemed lost in thought . 
She was more silent , quieter , and , if she cried , she cried quietly so as not to be heard . 
The captain noticed the change in her with mournful perplexity . 
The boys ' visits at first only angered her , but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her , and at last she liked them so much that , if the boys had given up coming , she would have felt dreary without them . 
When the children told some story or played a game , she laughed and clapped her hands . 
She called some of them to her and kissed them . 
She was particularly fond of Smurov . 
As for the captain , the presence in his room of the children , who came to cheer up Ilusha , filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy . 
He even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression and that that would hasten his recovery . 
In spite of his alarm about Ilusha , he had not , till lately , felt one minute 's doubt of his boy 's ultimate recovery . 
He met his little visitors with homage , waited upon them hand and foot ; he was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back , but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up . 
He began buying little things for them , gingerbread and nuts , gave them tea and cut them sandwiches . 
It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money . 
He had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha had predicted he would . 
And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna , learning more about their circumstances and Ilusha 's illness , visited them herself , made the acquaintance of the family , and succeeded in fascinating the half-imbecile mother . 
Since then she had been lavish in helping them , and the captain , terror-stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying , forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance . 
All this time Doctor Herzenstube , who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna , came punctually every other day , but little was gained by his visits and he dosed the invalid mercilessly . 
But on that Sunday morning a new doctor was expected , who had come from Moscow , where he had a great reputation . 
