Come along . '' 
Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin . 
`` If your little brother Ivan could see this would n't he be surprised ! 
By the way , your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning , did you know ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Alyosha listlessly , and suddenly the image of his brother Dmitri rose before his mind . 
But only for a minute , and though it reminded him of something that must not be put off for a moment , some duty , some terrible obligation , even that reminder made no impression on him , did not reach his heart and instantly faded out of his mind and was forgotten . 
But , a long while afterwards , Alyosha remembered this . 
`` Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a ` liberal booby with no talents whatsoever . ' 
Once you , too , could not resist letting me know I was ` dishonourable . ' 
Well ! 
I should like to see what your talents and sense of honour will do for you now . '' 
This phrase Rakitin finished to himself in a whisper . 
`` Listen ! '' 
he said aloud , `` Let 's go by the path beyond the monastery straight to the town . 
H 'm ! 
I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov 's by the way . 
Only fancy , I 've written to tell her everything that happened , and would you believe it , she answered me instantly in pencil -LRB- the lady has a passion for writing notes -RRB- that ` she would never have expected such conduct from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima . ' 
That was her very word : ` conduct . ' 
She is angry too . 
Eh , you are a set ! 
Stay ! '' 
he cried suddenly again . 
He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha by the shoulder made him stop too . 
`` Do you know , Alyosha , '' he peeped inquisitively into his eyes , absorbed in a sudden new thought which had dawned on him , and though he was laughing outwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea aloud , so difficult he still found it to believe in the strange and unexpected mood in which he now saw Alyosha . 
`` Alyosha , do you know where we had better go ? '' 
he brought out at last timidly , and insinuatingly . 
`` I do n't care ... where you like . '' 
`` Let 's go to Grushenka , eh ? 
Will you come ? '' 
pronounced Rakitin at last , trembling with timid suspense . 
`` Let 's go to Grushenka , '' Alyosha answered calmly , at once , and this prompt and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost started back . 
`` Well ! 
I say ! '' 
he cried in amazement , but seizing Alyosha firmly by the arm be led him along the path , still dreading that he would change his mind . 
They walked along in silence ; Rakitin was positively afraid to talk . 
`` And how glad she will be , how delighted ! '' 
he muttered , but lapsed into silence again . 
And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking Alyosha to her . 
He was a practical person and never undertook anything without a prospect of gain for himself . 
His object in this case was twofold , first a revengeful desire to see `` the downfall of the righteous , '' and Alyosha 's fall `` from the saints to the sinners , '' over which he was already gloating in his imagination , and in the second place he had in view a certain material gain for himself , of which more will be said later . 
`` So the critical moment has come , '' he thought to himself with spiteful glee , `` and we shall catch it on the hop , for it 's just what we want . '' 
An Onion GRUSHENKA lived in the busiest part of the town , near the cathedral square , in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house of the widow Morozov . 
The house was a large stone building of two stories , old and very ugly . 
The widow led a secluded life with her two unmarried nieces , who were also elderly women . 
She had no need to let her lodge , but everyone knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a lodger , four years before , solely to please her kinsman , the merchant Samsonov , who was known to the girl 's protector . 
It was said that the jealous old man 's object in placing his `` favourite '' with the widow Morozov was that the old woman should keep a sharp eye on her new lodger 's conduct . 
But this sharp eye soon proved to be unnecessary , and in the end the widow Morozov seldom met Grushenka and did not worry her by looking after her in any way . 
It is true that four years had passed since the old man had brought the slim , delicate , shy , timid , dreamy , and sad girl of eighteen from the chief town of the province , and much had happened since then . 
Little was known of the girl 's history in the town and that little was vague . 
Nothing more had been learnt during the last four years , even after many persons had become interested in the beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovna had meanwhile developed . 
