Yes , I am the soul of honour , while in Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothing else . 
I came here perhaps to have a look and speak my mind . 
My son , Alexey , is here , being saved . 
I am his father ; I care for his welfare , and it is my duty to care . 
While I 've been playing the fool , I have been listening and having a look on the sly ; and now I want to give you the last act of the performance . 
You know how things are with us ? 
As a thing falls , so it lies . 
As a thing once has fallen , so it must lie for ever . 
Not a bit of it ! 
I want to get up again . 
Holy Father , I am indignant with you . 
Confession is a great sacrament , before which I am ready to bow down reverently ; but there in the cell , they all kneel down and confess aloud . 
Can it be right to confess aloud ? 
It was ordained by the holy Fathers to confess in secret : then only your confession will be a mystery , and so it was of old . 
But how can I explain to him before everyone that I did this and that ... well , you understand what - sometimes it would not be proper to talk about it - so it is really a scandal ! 
No , Fathers , one might be carried along with you to the Flagellants , I dare say ... . 
at the first opportunity I shall write to the Synod , and I shall take my son , Alexey , home . '' 
We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look for the weak spot . 
There had been at one time malicious rumours which had even reached the Archbishop -LRB- not only regarding our monastery , but in others where the institution of elders existed -RRB- that too much respect was paid to the elders , even to the detriment of the authority of the Superior , that the elders abused the sacrament of confession and so on and so on - absurd charges which had died away of themselves everywhere . 
But the spirit of folly , which had caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch and was bearing him on the current of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy , prompted him with this old slander . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not understand a word of it , and he could not even put it sensibly , for on this occasion no one had been kneeling and confessing aloud in the elder 's cell , so that he could not have seen anything of the kind . 
He was only speaking from confused memory of old slanders . 
But as soon as he had uttered his foolish tirade , he felt he had been talking absurd nonsense , and at once longed to prove to his audience , and above all to himself , that he had not been talking nonsense . 
And , though he knew perfectly well that with each word he would be adding more and more absurdity , he could not restrain himself , and plunged forward blindly . 
`` How disgraceful ! '' 
cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
`` Pardon me ! '' 
said the Father Superior . 
`` It was said of old , ` Many have begun to speak against me and have uttered evil sayings about me . 
And hearing it I have said to myself : it is the correction of the Lord and He has sent it to heal my vain soul . ' 
And so we humbly thank you , honoured guest ! '' 
and he made Fyodor Pavlovitch a low bow . 
`` Tut - tut - tut - sanctimoniousness and stock phrases ! 
Old phrases and old gestures . 
The old lies and formal prostrations . 
We know all about them . 
A kiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart , as in Schiller 's Robbers . 
I do n't like falsehood , Fathers , I want the truth . 
But the truth is not to be found in eating gudgeon and that I proclaim aloud ! 
Father monks , why do you fast ? 
Why do you expect reward in heaven for that ? 
Why , for reward like that I will come and fast too ! 
No , saintly monk , you try being virtuous in the world , do good to society , without shutting yourself up in a monastery at other people 's expense , and without expecting a reward up aloft for it - you 'll find that a bit harder . 
I can talk sense , too , Father Superior . 
What have they got here ? '' 
He went up to the table . 
`` Old port wine , mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers . 
Fie , fie , fathers ! 
That is something beyond gudgeon . 
Look at the bottles the fathers have brought out , he he he ! 
