But allow me to say : do you really think that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing but the lust of power , of filthy earthly gain ? 
Is that Father Paissy 's teaching ? '' 
`` No , no , on the contrary , Father Paissy did once say something rather the same as you ... but of course it 's not the same , not a bit the same , '' Alyosha hastily corrected himself . 
`` A precious admission , in spite of your ` not a bit the same . ' 
I ask you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material gain ? 
Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow and loving humanity ? 
You see , only suppose that there was one such man among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain-if there 's only one like my old Inquisitor , who had himself eaten roots in the desert and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and perfect . 
But yet all his life he loved humanity , and suddenly his eyes were opened , and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attain perfection and freedom , if at the same time one gains the conviction that millions of God 's creatures have been created as a mockery , that they will never be capable of using their freedom , that these poor rebels can never turn into giants to complete the tower , that it was not for such geese that the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony . 
Seeing all that he turned back and joined - the clever people . 
Surely that could have happened ? '' 
`` Joined whom , what clever people ? '' 
cried Alyosha , completely carried away . 
`` They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets ... . 
Perhaps nothing but Atheism , that 's all their secret . 
Your Inquisitor does not believe in God , that 's his secret ! '' 
`` What if it is so ! 
At last you have guessed it . 
It 's perfectly true , it 's true that that 's the whole secret , but is n't that suffering , at least for a man like that , who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could not shake off his incurable love of humanity ? 
In his old age he reached the clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spirit could build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble , unruly , ` incomplete , empirical creatures created in jest . ' 
And so , convinced of this , he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit , the dread spirit of death and destruction , and therefore accept lying and deception , and lead men consciously to death and destruction , and yet deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being led , that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think themselves happy . 
And note , the deception is in the name of Him in Whose ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long . 
Is not that tragic ? 
And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army ` filled with the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain ' - would not one such be enough to make a tragedy ? 
More than that , one such standing at the head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with all its armies and Jesuits , its highest idea . 
I tell you frankly that I firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood at the head of the movement . 
Who knows , there may have been some such even among the Roman Popes . 
Who knows , perhaps the spirit of that accursed old man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way , is to be found even now in a whole multitude of such old men , existing not by chance but by agreement , as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the mystery , to guard it from the weak and the unhappy , so as to make them happy . 
No doubt it is so , and so it must be indeed . 
I fancy that even among the Masons there 's something of the same mystery at the bottom , and that that 's why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals breaking up the unity of the idea , while it is so essential that there should be one flock and one shepherd ... . 
But from the way I defend my idea I might be an author impatient of your criticism . 
Enough of it . '' 
`` You are perhaps a Mason yourself ! '' 
broke suddenly from Alyosha . 
`` You do n't believe in God , '' he added , speaking this time very sorrowfully . 
He fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically . 
`` How does your poem end ? '' 
he asked , suddenly looking down . 
`` Or was it the end ? '' 
`` I meant to end it like this . 
When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him . 
His silence weighed down upon him . 
He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time , looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply . 
The old man longed for him to say something , however bitter and terrible . 
But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips . 
That was all his answer . 
The old man shuddered . 
His lips moved . 
He went to the door , opened it , and said to Him : ` Go , and come no more ... come not at all , never , never ! ' 
And he let Him out into the dark alleys of the town . 
The Prisoner went away . '' 
