What 's the time ? '' 
`` Nearly twelve '' `` No , no , no ! '' 
Ivan cried suddenly . 
`` It was not a dream . 
He was here ; he was sitting here , on that sofa . 
When you knocked at the window , I threw a glass at him ... this one . 
Wait a minute . 
I was asleep last time , but this dream was not a dream . 
It has happened before . 
I have dreams now , Alyosha ... yet they are not dreams , but reality . 
I walk about , talk and see ... though I am asleep . 
But he was sitting here , on that sofa there ... . 
He is frightfully stupid , Alyosha , frightfully stupid . '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly and began pacing about the room . 
`` Who is stupid ? 
Of whom are you talking , brother ? '' 
Alyosha asked anxiously again . 
`` The devil ! 
He 's taken to visiting me . 
He 's been here twice , almost three times . 
He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and not Satan , with scorched wings , in thunder and lightning . 
But he is not Satan : that 's a lie . 
He is an impostor . 
He is simply a devil - a paltry , trivial devil . 
He goes to the baths . 
If you undressed him , you 'd be sure to find he had a tail , long and smooth like a Danish dog 's , a yard long , dun colour ... . 
Alyosha , you are cold . 
You 've been in the snow . 
Would you like some tea ? 
What ? 
Is it cold ? 
Shall I tell her to bring some ? 
C'est a ne pas mettre un chien dehors ... '' Alyosha ran to the washing-stand , wetted the towel , persuaded Ivan to sit down again , and put the wet towel round his head . 
He sat down beside him . 
`` What were you telling me just now about Lise ? '' 
Ivan began again . 
-LRB- He was becoming very talkative . -RRB- 
`` I like Lise . 
I said something nasty about her . 
It was a lie . 
I like her ... I am afraid for Katya to-morrow . 
I am more afraid of her than of anything . 
On account of the future . 
She will cast me off to-morrow and trample me under foot . 
She thinks that I am ruining Mitya from jealousy on her account ! 
Yes , she thinks that ! 
But it 's not so . 
To-morrow the cross , but not the gallows . 
No , I sha n't hang myself . 
Do you know , I can never commit suicide , Alyosha . 
