`` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have one more , and then another , and then I 'll stop . 
No , stay , you interrupted me . 
At Mokroe I was talking to an old man , and he told me : ` There 's nothing we like so much as sentencing girls to be thrashed , and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them . 
And the girl he has thrashed to-day , the young man will ask in marriage to-morrow . 
So it quite suits the girls , too , ' he said . 
There 's a set of de Sades for you ! 
But it 's clever , anyway . 
Shall we go over and have a look at it , eh ? 
Alyosha , are you blushing ? 
Do n't be bashful , child . 
I 'm sorry I did n't stay to dinner at the Superior 's and tell the monks about the girls at Mokroe . 
Alyosha , do n't be angry that I offended your Superior this morning . 
I lost my temper . 
If there is a God , if He exists , then , of course , I 'm to blame , and I shall have to answer for it . 
But if there is n't a God at all , what do they deserve , your fathers ? 
It 's not enough to cut their heads off , for they keep back progress . 
Would you believe it , Ivan , that that lacerates my sentiments ? 
No , you do n't believe it as I see from your eyes . 
You believe what people say , that I 'm nothing but a buffoon . 
Alyosha , do you believe that I 'm nothing but a buffoon ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe it . '' 
`` And I believe you do n't , and that you speak the truth . 
You look sincere and you speak sincerely . 
But not Ivan . 
Ivan 's supercilious ... . 
I 'd make an end of your monks , though , all the same . 
I 'd take all that mystic stuff and suppress it , once for all , all over Russia , so as to bring all the fools to reason . 
And the gold and the silver that would flow into the mint ! '' 
`` But why suppress it ? '' 
asked Ivan . 
`` That Truth may prevail . 
That 's why . '' 
`` Well , if Truth were to prevail , you know , you 'd be the first to be robbed and suppressed . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I dare say you 're right . 
Ah , I 'm an ass ! '' 
burst out Fyodor Pavlovitch , striking himself lightly on the forehead . 
`` Well , your monastery may stand then , Alyosha , if that 's how it is . 
And we clever people will sit snug and enjoy our brandy . 
You know , Ivan , it must have been so ordained by the Almighty Himself . 
Ivan , speak , is there a God or not ? 
Stay , speak the truth , speak seriously . 
Why are you laughing again ? '' 
`` I 'm laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now about Smerdyakov 's belief in the existence of two saints who could move mountains . '' 
`` Why , am I like him now , then ? '' 
`` Very much . '' 
`` Well , that shows I 'm a Russian , too , and I have a Russian characteristic . 
And you may be caught in the same way , though you are a philosopher . 
Shall I catch you ? 
