Why , why did I degrade myself by confessing my secret to you ? 
it 's a joke to you . 
I see that from your eyes . 
You led me on to it , prosecutor ! 
Sing a hymn of triumph if you can ... . 
Damn you , you torturers ! '' 
He bent his head , and hid his face in his hands . 
The lawyers were silent . 
A minute later he raised his head and looked at them almost vacantly . 
His face now expressed complete , hopeless despair , and he sat mute and passive as though hardly conscious of what was happening . 
In the meantime they had to finish what they were about . 
They had immediately to begin examining the witnesses . 
It was by now eight o'clock in the morning . 
The lights had been extinguished long ago . 
Mihail Makarovitch and Kalganov , who had been continually in and out of the room all the while the interrogation had been going on , had now both gone out again . 
The lawyers , too , looked very tired . 
It was a wretched morning , the whole sky was overcast , and the rain streamed down in bucketfuls . 
Mitya gazed blankly out of window . 
`` May I look out of window ? '' 
he asked Nikolay Parfenovitch , suddenly . 
`` Oh , as much as you like , '' the latter replied . 
Mitya got up and went to the window ... . 
The rain lashed against its little greenish panes . 
He could see the muddy road just below the house , and farther away , in the rain and mist , a row of poor , black , dismal huts , looking even blacker and poorer in the rain . 
Mitya thought of `` Phoebus the golden-haired , and how he had meant to shoot himself at his first ray . 
`` Perhaps it would be even better on a morning like this , '' he thought with a smile , and suddenly , flinging his hand downwards , he turned to his `` torturers . '' 
`` Gentlemen , '' he cried , `` I see that I am lost ! 
But she ? 
Tell me about her , I beseech you . 
Surely she need not be ruined with me ? 
She 's innocent , you know , she was out of her mind when she cried last night ` It 's all my fault ! ' 
She 's done nothing , nothing ! 
I 've been grieving over her all night as I sat with you ... . 
Ca n't you , wo n't you tell me what you are going to do with her now ? '' 
`` You can set your mind quite at rest on that score , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' the prosecutor answered at once , with evident alacrity . 
`` We have , so far , no grounds for interfering with the lady in whom you are so interested . 
I trust that it may be the same in the later development of the case ... . 
On the contrary , we 'll do everything that lies in our power in that matter . 
Set your mind completely at rest . '' 
`` Gentlemen , I thank you . 
I knew that you were honest , straightforward people in spite of everything . 
You 've taken a load off my heart ... . 
Well , what are we to do now ? 
I 'm ready . '' 
`` Well , we ought to make haste . 
We must pass to examining the witnesses without delay . 
That must be done in your presence and therefore - '' `` Should n't we have some tea first ? '' 
interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch , `` I think we 've deserved it ! '' 
They decided that if tea were ready downstairs -LRB- Mihail Makarovitch had , no doubt , gone down to get some -RRB- they would have a glass and then `` go on and on , '' putting off their proper breakfast until a more favourable opportunity . 
Tea really was ready below , and was soon brought up . 
