You wrote for him . 
No , it was n't you , but Katya . 
It 's all Katya 's doing . 
Well , you see , a man may be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration . 
He may be conscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration . 
And there 's no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from aberration . 
They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts were reformed . 
It 's all the good effect of the reformed law courts . 
The doctor has been here and questioned me about that evening , about the gold mines . 
` How did he seem then ? ' 
he asked me . 
He must have been in a state of aberration . 
He came in shouting , ` Money , money , three thousand ! 
Give me three thousand ! ' 
and then went away and immediately did the murder . ' 
I do n't want to murder him , ' he said , and he suddenly went and murdered him . 
That 's why they 'll acquit him , because he struggled against it and yet he murdered him . '' 
`` But he did n't murder him , '' Alyosha interrupted rather sharply . 
He felt more and more sick with anxiety and impatience . 
`` Yes , I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him . '' 
`` Grigory ? '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Yes , yes ; it was Grigory . 
He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down , and then got up , saw the door open , went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
`` But why , why ? '' 
`` Suffering from aberration . 
When he recovered from the blow Dmitri Fyodorovitch gave him on the head , he was suffering from aberration : he went and committed the murder . 
As for his saying he did n't , he very likely does n't remember . 
Only , you know , it 'll be better , ever so much better , if Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him . 
And that 's how it must have been , though I say it was Grigory . 
It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch , and that 's better , ever so much better ! 
Oh ! 
not better that a son should have killed his father , I do n't defend that . 
Children ought to honour their parents , and yet it would be better if it were he , as you 'd have nothing to cry over then , for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he was conscious , but did not know what he was doing . 
Let them acquit him - that 's so humane , and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are . 
I knew nothing about it , but they say they have been so a long time . 
And when I heard it yesterday , I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you at once . 
And if he is acquitted , make him come straight from the law courts to dinner with me , and I 'll have a party of friends , and we 'll drink to the reformed law courts . 
I do n't believe he 'd be dangerous ; besides , I 'll invite a great many friends , so that he could always be led out if he did anything . 
And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something in another town , for those who have been in trouble themselves make the best judges . 
And , besides , who is n't suffering from aberration nowadays ? 
- you , I , all of us , are in a state of aberration , and there are ever so many examples of it : a man sits singing a song , suddenly something annoys him , he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across , and no one blames him for it . 
I read that lately , and all the doctors confirm it . 
The doctors are always confirming ; they confirm , - anything . 
Why , my Lise is in a state of aberration . 
She made me cry again yesterday , and the day before , too , and to-day I suddenly realised that it 's all due to aberration . 
Oh , Lise grieves me so ! 
I believe she 's quite mad . 
Why did she send for you ? 
Did she send for you or did you come of yourself ? '' 
