`` Once in olden times a holy saint saw in the Temple a mother like you weeping for her little one , her only one , whom God had taken . 
` Knowest thou not , ' said the saint to her , ` how bold these little ones are before the throne of God ? 
Verily there are none bolder than they in the Kingdom of Heaven . 
`` Thou didst give us life , O Lord , '' they say , `` and scarcely had we looked upon it when Thou didst take it back again . '' 
And so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives them at once the rank of angels . 
Therefore , ' said the saint , ` thou , too , O Mother , rejoice and weep not , for thy little son is with the Lord in the fellowship of the angels . ' 
That 's what the saint said to the weeping mother of old . 
He was a great saint and he could not have spoken falsely . 
Therefore you too , mother , know that your little one is surely before the throne of God , is rejoicing and happy , and praying to God for you , and therefore weep , but rejoice . '' 
The woman listened to him , looking down with her cheek in her hand . 
She sighed deeply . 
`` My Nikita tried to comfort me with the same words as you . 
` Foolish one , ' he said , ` why weep ? 
Our son is no doubt singing with the angels before God . ' 
He says that to me , but he weeps himself . 
I see that he cries like me . ' 
I know , Nikita , ' said I. ` Where could he be if not with the Lord God ? 
Only , here with us now he is not as he used to sit beside us before . ' 
And if only I could look upon him one little time , if only I could peep at him one little time , without going up to him , without speaking , if I could be hidden in a corner and only see him for one little minute , hear him playing in the yard , calling in his little voice , ` Mammy , where are you ? ' 
If only I could hear him pattering with his little feet about the room just once , only once ; for so often , so often I remember how he used to run to me and shout and laugh , if only I could hear his little feet I should know him ! 
But he 's gone , Father , he 's gone , and I shall never hear him again . 
Here 's his little sash , but him I shall never see or hear now . '' 
She drew out of her bosom her boy 's little embroidered sash , and as soon as she looked at it she began shaking with sobs , hiding her eyes with her fingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden stream . 
`` It is Rachel of old , '' said the elder , `` weeping for her children , and will not be comforted because they are not . 
Such is the lot set on earth for you mothers . 
Be not comforted . 
Consolation is not what you need . 
Weep and be not consoled , but weep . 
Only every time that you weep be sure to remember that your little son is one of the angels of God , that he looks down from there at you and sees you , and rejoices at your tears , and points at them to the Lord God ; and a long while yet will you keep that great mother 's grief . 
But it will turn in the end into quiet joy , and your bitter tears will be only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heart and delivers it from sin . 
And I shall pray for the peace of your child 's soul . 
What was his name ? '' 
`` Alexey , Father . '' 
`` A sweet name . 
After Alexey , the man of God ? '' 
`` Yes , Father . '' 
`` What a saint he was ! 
I will remember him , mother , and your grief in my prayers , and I will pray for your husband 's health . 
It is a sin for you to leave him . 
Your little one will see from heaven that you have forsaken his father , and will weep over you . 
Why do you trouble his happiness ? 
He is living , for the soul lives for ever , and though he is not in the house he is near you , unseen . 
How can he go into the house when you say that the house is hateful to you ? 
To whom is he to go if he find you not together , his father and mother ? 
He comes to you in dreams now , and you grieve . 
But then he will send you gentle dreams . 
Go to your husband , mother ; go this very day . '' 
`` I will go , Father , at your word . 
I will go . 
You 've gone straight to my heart . 
