The baby laughs with glee , holds out its little hands to the pistol , and he pulls the trigger in the baby 's face and blows out its brains . 
Artistic , was n't it ? 
By the way , Turks are particularly fond of sweet things , they say . '' 
`` Brother , what are you driving at ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I think if the devil does n't exist , but man has created him , he has created him in his own image and likeness . '' 
`` Just as he did God , then ? '' 
observed Alyosha . '' 
` It 's wonderful how you can turn words , ' as Polonius says in Hamlet , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` You turn my words against me . 
Well , I am glad . 
Yours must be a fine God , if man created Him in his image and likeness . 
You asked just now what I was driving at . 
You see , I am fond of collecting certain facts , and , would you believe , I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort from newspapers and books , and I 've already got a fine collection . 
The Turks , of course , have gone into it , but they are foreigners . 
I have specimens from home that are even better than the Turks . 
You know we prefer beating - rods and scourges - that 's our national institution . 
Nailing ears is unthinkable for us , for we are , after all , Europeans . 
But the rod and the scourge we have always with us and they can not be taken from us . 
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating . 
Manners are more humane , or laws have been passed , so that they do n't dare to flog men now . 
But they make up for it in another way just as national as ours . 
And so national that it would be practically impossible among us , though I believe we are being inoculated with it , since the religious movement began in our aristocracy . 
I have a charming pamphlet , translated from the French , describing how , quite recently , five years ago , a murderer , Richard , was executed - a young man , I believe , of three and twenty , who repented and was converted to the Christian faith at the very scaffold . 
This Richard was an illegitimate child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on the Swiss mountains . 
They brought him up to work for them . 
He grew up like a little wild beast among them . 
The shepherds taught him nothing , and scarcely fed or clothed him , but sent him out at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet , and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so . 
Quite the contrary , they thought they had every right , for Richard had been given to them as a chattel , and they did not even see the necessity of feeding him . 
Richard himself describes how in those years , like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel , he longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs , which were fattened for sale . 
But they would n't even give that , and beat him when he stole from the pigs . 
And that was how he spent all his childhood and his youth , till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief . 
The savage began to earn his living as a day labourer in Geneva . 
He drank what he earned , he lived like a brute , and finished by killing and robbing an old man . 
He was caught , tried , and condemned to death . 
They are not sentimentalists there . 
And in prison he was immediately surrounded by pastors , members of Christian brotherhoods , philanthropic ladies , and the like . 
They taught him to read and write in prison , and expounded the Gospel to him . 
They exhorted him , worked upon him , drummed at him incessantly , till at last he solemnly confessed his crime . 
He was converted . 
He wrote to the court himself that he was a monster , but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace . 
All Geneva was in excitement about him - all philanthropic and religious Geneva . 
All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the town rushed to the prison , kissed Richard and embraced him ; ` You are our brother , you have found grace . ' 
And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion , ` Yes , I 've found grace ! 
All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs ' food , but now even I have found grace . 
I am dying in the Lord . ' 
` Yes , Richard , die in the Lord ; you have shed blood and must die . 
Though it 's not your fault that you knew not the Lord , when you coveted the pigs ' food and were beaten for stealing it -LRB- which was very wrong of you , for stealing is forbidden -RRB- ; but you 've shed blood and you must die . 
` And on the last day , Richard , perfectly limp , did nothing but cry and repeat every minute : ` This is my happiest day . 
I am going to the Lord . ' 
