Ivan was thunderstruck when he recalled it . 
He had never once tried to persuade her that Mitya was the murderer ; on the contrary , he had suspected himself in her presence , that time when he came back from Smerdyakov . 
It was she , she , who had produced that `` document '' and proved his brother 's guilt . 
And now she suddenly exclaimed : `` I 've been at Smerdyakov 's myself ! '' 
When had she been there ? 
Ivan had known nothing of it . 
So she was not at all so sure of Mitya 's guilt ! 
And what could Smerdyakov have told her ? 
What , what , had he said to her ? 
His heart burned with violent anger . 
He could not understand how he could , half an hour before , have let those words pass and not have cried out at the moment . 
He let go of the bell and rushed off to Smerdyakov . 
`` I shall kill him , perhaps , this time , '' he thought on the way . 
The Third and Last Interview with Smerdyakov WHEN he was half-way there , the keen dry wind that had been blowing early that morning rose again , and a fine dry snow began falling thickly . 
It did not lie on the ground , but was whirled about by the wind , and soon there was a regular snowstorm . 
There were scarcely any lamp-posts in the part of the town where Smerdyakov lived . 
Ivan strode alone in the darkness , unconscious of the storm , instinctively picking out his way . 
His head ached and there was a painful throbbing in his temples . 
He felt that his hands were twitching convulsively . 
Not far from Marya Kondratyevna 's cottage , Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary drunken little peasant . 
He was wearing a coarse and patched coat , and was walking in zigzags , grumbling and swearing to himself . 
Then suddenly he would begin singing in a husky drunken voice : Ach , Vanka 's gone to Petersburg ; I wo n't wait till he comes back . 
But he broke off every time at the second line and began swearing again ; then he would begin the same song again . 
Ivan felt an intense hatred for him before he had thought about him at all . 
Suddenly he realised his presence and felt an irresistible impulse to knock him down . 
At that moment they met , and the peasant with a violent lurch fell full tilt against Ivan , who pushed him back furiously . 
The peasant went flying backwards and fell like a log on the frozen ground . 
He uttered one plaintive `` O - oh ! '' 
and then was silent . 
Ivan stepped up to him . 
He was lying on his back , without movement or consciousness . 
`` He will be frozen , '' thought Ivan , and he went on his way to Smerdyakov 's . 
In the passage , Marya Kondratyevna , who ran out to open the door with a candle in her hand , whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill ; `` It 's not that he 's laid up , but he seems not himself , and he even told us to take the tea away ; he would n't have any . '' 
`` Why , does he make a row ? '' 
asked Ivan coarsely . 
`` Oh dear no , quite the contrary , he 's very quiet . 
Only please do n't talk to him too long , '' Marya Kondratyevna begged him . 
Ivan opened the door and stepped into the room . 
It was over-heated as before , but there were changes in the room . 
One of the benches at the side had been removed , and in its place had been put a large old mahogany leather sofa , on which a bed had been made up , with fairly clean white pillows . 
Smerdyakov was sitting on the sofa , wearing the same dressing-gown . 
The table had been brought out in front of the sofa , so that there was hardly room to move . 
On the table lay a thick book in yellow cover , but Smerdyakov was not reading it . 
He seemed to be sitting doing nothing . 
He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze , and was apparently not at all surprised at his coming . 
There was a great change in his face ; he was much thinner and sallower . 
His eyes were sunken and there were blue marks under them . 
`` Why , you really are ill ? '' 
Ivan stopped short . 
`` I wo n't keep you long , I wont even take off my coat . 
