Mitya at first refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him , but afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily . 
He looked surprisingly exhausted . 
It might have been supposed from his Herculean strength that one night of carousing , even accompanied by the most violent emotions , could have had little effect on him . 
But he felt that he could hardly hold his head up , and from time to time all the objects about him seemed heaving and dancing before his eyes . 
`` A little more and I shall begin raving , '' he said to himself . 
The Evidences of the Witnesses . 
The Babe THE examination of the witnesses began . 
But we will not continue our story in such detail as before . 
And so we will not dwell on how Nikolay Parfenovitch impressed on every witness called that he must give his evidence in accordance with truth and conscience , and that he would afterwards have to repeat his evidence on oath , how every witness was called upon to sign the protocol of his evidence , and so on . 
We will only note that the point principally insisted upon in the examination was the question of the three thousand roubles ; that is , was the sum spent here , at Mokroe , by Mitya on the first occasion , a month before , three thousand or fifteen hundred ? 
And again had he spent three thousand or fifteen hundred yesterday ? 
Alas , all the evidence given by everyone turned out to be against Mitya . 
There was not one in his favour , and some witnesses introduced new , almost crushing facts , in contradiction of his , Mitya 's , story . 
The first witness examined was Trifon Borissovitch . 
He was not in the least abashed as he stood before the lawyers . 
He had , on the contrary , an air of stern and severe indignation with the accused , which gave him an appearance of truthfulness and personal dignity . 
He spoke little , and with reserve , waited to be questioned , answered precisely and deliberately . 
Firmly and unhesitatingly he bore witness that the sum spent a month before could not have been less than three thousand , that all the peasants about here would testify that they had heard the sum of three thousand mentioned by Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself . 
`` What a lot of money he flung away on the Gypsy girls alone ! 
He wasted a thousand , I daresay , on them alone . '' 
`` I do n't believe I gave them five hundred , '' was Mitya 's gloomy comment on this . 
`` It 's a pity I did n't count the money at the time , but I was drunk ... '' Mitya was sitting sideways with his back to the curtains . 
He listened gloomily , with a melancholy and exhausted air , as though he would say : `` Oh , say what you like . 
It makes no difference now . '' 
`` More than a thousand went on them , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' retorted Trifon Borissovitch firmly . 
`` You flung it about at random and they picked it up . 
They were a rascally , thievish lot , horse-stealers , they 've been driven away from here , or maybe they 'd bear witness themselves how much they got from you . 
I saw the sum in your hands , myself - count it I did n't , you did n't let me , that 's true enough - but by the look of it I should say it was far more than fifteen hundred ... fifteen hundred , indeed ! 
We 've seen money too . 
We can judge of amounts ... '' As for the sum spent yesterday he asserted that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had told him , as soon as he arrived , that he had brought three thousand with him . 
`` Come now , is that so , Trifon Borissovitch ? '' 
replied Mitya . 
`` Surely I did n't declare so positively that I 'd brought three thousand ? '' 
`` You did say so , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You said it before Andrey . 
Andrey himself is still here . 
Send for him . 
And in the hall , when you were treating the chorus , you shouted straight out that you would leave your sixth thousand here - that is , with what you spent before , we must understand . 
Stepan and Semyon heard it , and Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov , too , was standing beside you at the time . 
Maybe he 'd remember it ... '' The evidence as to the `` sixth '' thousand made an extraordinary impression on the two lawyers . 
They were delighted with this new mode of reckoning ; three and three made six , three thousand then and three now made six , that was clear . 
They questioned all the peasants suggested by Trifon Borissovitch , Stepan and Semyon , the driver Andrey , and Kalganov . 
The peasants and the driver unhesitatingly confirmed Trifon Borissovitch 's evidence . 
They noted down , with particular care , Andrey 's account of the conversation he had had with Mitya on the road : '' ` Where , ' says he , ` am I , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , going , to heaven or to hell , and shall I be forgiven in the next world or not ? ' '' 
The psychological Ippolit Kirillovitch heard this with a subtle smile , and ended by recommending that these remarks as to where Dmitri Fyodorovitch would go should be `` included in the case . '' 
Kalganov , when called , came in reluctantly , frowning and ill-humoured , and he spoke to the lawyers as though he had never met them before in his life , though they were acquaintances whom he had been meeting every day for a long time past . 
He began by saying that `` he knew nothing about it and did n't want to . '' 
But it appeared that he had heard of the '' sixth '' thousand , and he admitted that he had been standing close by at the moment . 
As far as he could see he `` did n't know '' how much money Mitya had in his hands . 
He affirmed that the Poles had cheated at cards . 
