`` That 's not true , Lise , Yulia ran to tell you that Alexey Fyodorovitch was coming . 
She was on the lookout for you . '' 
`` My darling mamma , it 's not at all clever of you . 
But if you want to make up for it and say something very clever , dear mamma , you 'd better tell our honoured visitor , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that he has shown his want of wit by venturing to us after what happened yesterday and although everyone is laughing at him . '' 
`` Lise , you go too far . 
I declare I shall have to be severe . 
Who laughs at him ? 
I am so glad he has come , I need him , I ca n't do without him . 
Oh , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am exceedingly unhappy ! '' 
`` But what 's the matter with you , mamma , darling ? '' 
`` Ah , your caprices , Lise , your fidgetiness , your illness , that awful night of fever , that awful everlasting Herzenstube , everlasting , everlasting , that 's the worst of it ! 
Everything , in fact , everything ... . 
Even that miracle , too ! 
Oh , how it has upset me , how it has shattered me , that miracle , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
And that tragedy in the drawing-room , it 's more than I can bear , I warn you . 
I ca n't bear it . 
A comedy , perhaps , not a tragedy . 
Tell me , will Father Zossima live till to-morrow , will he ? 
Oh , my God ! 
What is happening to me ? 
Every minute I close my eyes and see that it 's all nonsense , all nonsense . '' 
`` I should be very grateful , '' Alyosha interrupted suddenly , `` if you could give me a clean rag to bind up my finger with . 
I have hurt it , and it 's very painful . '' 
Alyosha unbound his bitten finger . 
The handkerchief was soaked with blood . 
Madame Hohlakov screamed and shut her eyes . 
`` Good heavens , what a wound , how awful ! 
But as soon as Lise saw Alyosha 's finger through the crack , she flung the door wide open . 
`` Come , come here , '' she cried , imperiously . 
`` No nonsense now ! 
Good heavens , why did you stand there saying nothing about it all this time ? 
He might have bled to death , mamma ! 
How did you do it ? 
Water , water ! 
You must wash it first of all , simply hold it in cold water to stop the pain , and keep it there , keep it there ... . 
Make haste , mamma , some water in a slop-basin . 
But do make haste , '' she finished nervously . 
She was quite frightened at the sight of Alyosha 's wound . 
`` Should n't we send for Herzenstube ? '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Mamma , you 'll be the death of me . 
Your Herzenstube will come and say that he can make nothing of it ! 
Water , water ! 
Mamma , for goodness ' sake go yourself and hurry Yulia , she is such a slowcoach and never can come quickly ! 
Make haste , mamma , or I shall die . '' 
`` Why , it 's nothing much , '' cried Alyosha , frightened at this alarm . 
Yulia ran in with water and Alyosha put his finger in it . 
`` Some lint , mamma , for mercy 's sake , bring some lint and that muddy caustic lotion for wounds , what 's it called ? 
We 've got some . 
You know where the bottle is , mamma ; it 's in your bedroom in the right-hand cupboard , there 's a big bottle of it there with the lint . '' 
