Answering certain questions about Grushenka and carried away by the loftiness of his own sentiments and his success , of which he was , of course , conscious , he went so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as `` the kept mistress of Samsonov . '' 
He would have given a good deal to take back his words afterwards , for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it at once . 
And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer having been able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so short a time . 
`` Allow me to ask , '' began the counsel for the defence , with the most affable and even respectful smile , `` you are , of course , the same Mr. Rakitin whose pamphlet , The Life of the Deceased Elder , Father Zossima , published by the diocesan authorities , full of profound and religious reflections and preceded by an excellent and devout dedication to the bishop , I have just read with such pleasure ? '' 
`` I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards , '' muttered Rakitin , for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almost ashamed . 
`` Oh , that 's excellent ! 
A thinker like you can , and indeed ought to , take the widest view of every social question . 
Your most instructive pamphlet has been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop , and has been of appreciable service ... . 
But this is the chief thing I should like to learn from you . 
You stated just now that you were very intimately acquainted with Madame Svyetlov . '' 
-LRB- It must be noted that Grushenka 's surname was Svyetlov . 
I heard it for the first time that day , during the case . -RRB- 
`` I can not answer for all my acquaintances ... . 
I am a young man ... and who can be responsible for everyone he meets ? '' 
cried Rakitin , flushing all over . 
`` I understand , I quite understand , '' cried Fetyukovitch ; as though he , too , were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself . 
`` You , like any other , might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautiful woman who would readily entertain the elite of the youth of the neighbourhood , but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to my knowledge , that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of months ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and promised you twenty-five roubles , if you would bring him to her in his monastic dress . 
And that actually took place on the evening of the day on which the terrible crime , which is the subject of the present investigation , was committed . 
You brought Alexey Karamazov to Madame Svyetlov , and did you receive the twenty-five roubles from Madame Svyetlov as a reward , that 's what I wanted to hear from you ? '' 
`` It was a joke ... . 
I do n't , see of what interest that can be to you ... . 
I took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later ... '' `` Then you did take - but you have not given it back yet ... or have you ? '' 
`` That 's of no consequence , '' muttered Rakitin , `` I refuse to answer such questions ... . 
Of course , I shall give it back . '' 
The President intervened , but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
Mr. Rakitin left the witness-box not absolutely without a stain upon his character . 
The effect left by the lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred , and Fetyukovitch 's expression , as he watched him walk away , seemed to suggest to the public `` this is a specimen of the lofty-minded persons who accuse him . '' 
I remember that this incident , too , did not pass off without an outbreak from Mitya . 
Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred to Grushenka , he suddenly shouted `` Bernard ! '' 
When , after Rakitin 's cross-examination , the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say , Mitya cried loudly : `` Since I 've been arrested , he has borrowed money from me ! 
He is a contemptible Bernard and opportunist , and he does n't believe in God ; he took the bishop in ! '' 
Mitya of course , was pulled up again for the intemperance of his language , but Rakitin was done for . 
Captain Snegiryov 's evidence was a failure , too , but from quite a different reason . 
He appeared in ragged and dirty clothes , muddy boots , and in spite of the vigilance and expert observation of the police officers , he turned out to be hopelessly drunk . 
On being asked about Mitya 's attack upon him , he refused to answer . 
`` God bless him . 
Ilusha told me not to . 
God will make it up to me yonder . '' 
`` Who told you not to tell ? 
Of whom are you talking ? '' 
`` Ilusha , my little son . 
` Father , father , how he insulted you ! ' 
He said that at the stone . 
Now he is dying ... '' The captain suddenly began sobbing , and plumped down on His knees before the President . 
He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of the public . 
The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all . 
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity , and amazed people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case . 
Thus , for example , Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression , of course , very prejudicial to Mitya . 
He calculated almost on his fingers that on his first visit to Mokroe , Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles , `` or very little less . 
Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girls alone ! 
