He was fond of the boy , though he would have felt it beneath him to try and win him over , and was severe and strict with him in class . 
Kolya , too , kept him at a respectful distance . 
He learned his lessons perfectly ; he was second in his class , was reserved with Dardanelov , and the whole class firmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could `` beat '' even Dardanelov . 
Kolya did indeed ask him the question , `` Who founded Troy ? '' 
to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply , referring to the movements and migrations of races , to the remoteness of the period , to the mythical legends . 
But the question , `` Who had founded Troy ? '' 
that is , what individuals , he could not answer , and even for some reason regarded the question as idle and frivolous . 
But the boys remained convinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy . 
Kolya had read of the founders of Troy in Smaragdov , whose history was among the After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya 's attitude to his mother . 
When Anna Fyodorovna -LRB- Madame Krassotkin -RRB- heard of her son 's exploit , she almost went out of her mind with horror . 
She had such terrible attacks of hysterics , lasting with intervals for several days , that Kolya , seriously alarmed at last , promised on his honour that such pranks should never be repeated . 
He swore on his knees before the holy image , and swore by the memory of his father , at Madame Krassotkin 's instance , and the `` manly '' Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six . 
And all that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other 's arms sobbing . 
Next day Kolya woke up as `` unfeeling '' as before , but he had become more silent , more modest , sterner , and more thoughtful . 
Six weeks later , it is true , he got into another scrape , which even brought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace , but it was a scrape of quite another kind , amusing , foolish , and he did not , as it turned out , take the leading part in it , but was only implicated in it . 
But of this later . 
His mother still fretted and trembled , but the more uneasy she became , the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov . 
It must be noted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov 's heart and , of course , despised him profoundly for his `` feelings '' ; he had in the past been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother , hinting vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after . 
But from the time of the railway incident his behaviour in this respect also was changed ; he did not allow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more respectfully of Dardanelov before his mother , which the sensitive woman at once appreciated with boundless gratitude . 
But at the slightest mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya 's presence , she would flush as pink as a rose . 
At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling , or would investigate the state of his boots , or would shout angrily for `` Perezvon , '' the big , shaggy , mangy dog , which he had picked up a month before , brought home , and kept for some reason secretly indoors , not showing him to any of his schoolfellows . 
He bullied him frightfully , teaching him all sorts of tricks , so that the poor dog howled for him whenever he was absent at school , and when he came in , whined with delight , rushed about as if he were crazy , begged , lay down on the ground pretending to be dead , and so on ; in fact , showed all the tricks he had taught him , not at the word of command , but simply from the zeal of his excited and grateful heart . 
I have forgotten , by the way , to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son of Captain Snegiryov . 
Ilusha had been defending his father when the schoolboys jeered at him , shouting the nickname `` wisp of tow . '' 
Children AND so on that frosty , snowy , and windy day in November , Kolya Krassotkin was sitting at home . 
It was Sunday and there was no school . 
It had just struck eleven , and he particularly wanted to go out `` on very urgent business , '' but he was left alone in charge of the house , for it so happened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden and singular event . 
Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms , separated from the rest of the house by a passage , to a doctor 's wife with her two small children . 
This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna , and a great friend of hers . 
Her husband , the doctor , had taken his departure twelve months before , going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend , and for the last six months she had not heard a word from him . 
Had it not been for her friendship with Madame Krassotkin , which was some consolation to the forsaken lady , she would certainly have completely dissolved away in tears . 
And now , to add to her misfortunes , Katerina , her only servant , was suddenly moved the evening before to announce , to her mistress 's amazement , that she proposed to bring a child into the world before morning . 
It seemed almost miraculous to everyone that no one had noticed the probability of it before . 
The astounded doctor 's wife decided to move Katerina while there was still time to an establishment in the town kept by a midwife for such emergencies . 
As she set great store by her servant , she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her . 
By the morning all Madame Krassotkin 's friendly sympathy and energy were called upon to render assistance and appeal to someone for help in the case . 
So both the ladies were absent from home , the Krassotkins ' servant , Agafya , had gone out to the market , and Kolya was thus left for a time to protect and look after `` the kids , '' that is , the son and daughter of the doctor 's wife , who were left alone . 
Kolya was not afraid of taking care of the house , besides he had Perezvon , who had been told to lie flat , without moving , under the bench in the hall . 
Every time Kolya , walking to and fro through the rooms , came into the hall , the dog shook his head and gave two loud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail , but alas ! 
the whistle did not sound to release him . 
Kolya looked sternly at the luckless dog , who relapsed again into obedient rigidity . 
The one thing that troubled Kolya was `` the kids . '' 
He looked , of course , with the utmost scorn on Katerina 's unexpected adventure , but he was very fond of the bereaved `` kiddies , '' and had already taken them a picture-book . 
Nastya , the elder , a girl of eight , could read , and Kostya , the boy , aged seven , was very fond of being read to by her . 
Krassotkin could , of course , have provided more diverting entertainment for them . 
He could have made them stand side by side and played soldiers with them , or sent them hiding all over the house . 
He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it , so much so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horses with the little lodgers at home , prancing with his head on one side like a trace-horse . 
But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust , pointing out that to play horses with boys of one 's own age , boys of thirteen , would certainly be disgraceful `` at this date , '' but that he did it for the sake of `` the kids '' because he liked them , and no one had a right to call him to account for his feelings . 
The two `` kids '' adored him . 
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games . 
