Fetyukovitch positively started , as though scenting something , and caught at it instantly . 
`` Oh , yes , I was a young man then ... . 
I was ... well , I was forty-five then , and had only just come here . 
And I was so sorry for the boy then ; I asked myself why should n't I buy him a pound of ... a pound of what ? 
I 've forgotten what it 's called . 
A pound of what children are very fond of , what is it , what is it ? '' 
The doctor began waving his hands again . 
`` It grows on a tree and is gathered and given to everyone ... '' `` Apples ? '' 
`` Oh , no , no . 
You have a dozen of apples , not a pound ... . 
No , there are a lot of them , and call little . 
You put them in the mouth and crack . '' 
`` Quite so , nuts , I say so . '' 
The doctor repeated in the calmest way as though he had been at no loss for a word . 
`` And I bought him a pound of nuts , for no one had ever bought the boy a pound of nuts before . 
And I lifted my finger and said to him , ` Boy , Gott der Vater . ' 
He laughed and said , ` Gott der Vater ' ... ` Gott der Sohn . ' 
He laughed again and lisped ` Gott der Sohn . ' 
` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
Then he laughed and said as best he could , ` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
I went away , and two days after I happened to be passing , and he shouted to me of himself , ` Uncle , Gott der Vater , Gott der Sohn , ' and he had only forgotten ` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
But I reminded him of it and I felt very sorry for him again . 
But he was taken away , and I did not see him again . 
Twenty-three years passed . 
I am sitting one morning in my study , a white-haired old man , when there walks into the room a blooming young man , whom I should never have recognised , but he held up his finger and said , laughing , ` Gott der Vater , Gott der Sohn , and Gott der heilige Geist . 
I have just arrived and have come to thank you for that pound of nuts , for no one else ever bought me a pound of nuts ; you are the only one that ever did . ' 
then I remembered my happy youth and the poor child in the yard , without boots on his feet , and my heart was touched and I said , ` You are a grateful young man , for you have remembered all your life the pound of nuts I bought you in your childhood . ' 
And I embraced him and blessed him . 
And I shed tears . 
He laughed , but he shed tears , too ... for the Russian often laughs when he ought to be weeping . 
But he did weep ; I saw it . 
And now , alas ! 
... '' `` And I am weeping now , German , I am weeping now , too , you saintly man , '' Mitya cried suddenly . 
In any case the anecdote made a certain favourable impression on the public . 
But the chief sensation in Mitya 's favour was created by the evidence of Katerina Ivanovna , which I will describe directly . 
Indeed , when the witnesses a decharge , that is , called the defence , began giving evidence , fortune seemed all at once markedly more favourable to Mitya , and what was particularly striking , this was a surprise even to the counsel for the defence . 
But before Katerina Ivanovna was called , Alyosha was examined , and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish positive evidence against one important point made by the prosecution . 
Fortune Smiles on Mitya IT came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself . 
He was not required to take the oath , and I remember that both sides addressed him very gently and sympathetically . 
It was evident that his reputation for goodness had preceded him . 
Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with restraint , but his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was unmistakable . 
In answer to one question , he sketched his brother 's character as that of a man , violent-tempered perhaps and carried away by his passions , but at the same time honourable , proud and generous , capable of self-sacrifice , if necessary . 
He admitted , however , that , through his passion for Grushenka and his rivalry with his father , his brother had been of late in an intolerable position . 
But he repelled with indignation the suggestion that his brother might have committed a murder for the sake of gain , though he recognised that the three thousand roubles had become almost an obsession with Mitya ; that upon them as part of the inheritance he had been cheated of by his father , and that , indifferent as he was to money as a rule , he could not even speak of that three thousand without fury . 
As for the rivalry of the two `` ladies , '' as the prosecutor expressed it - that is , of Grushenka and Katya - he answered evasively and was even unwilling to answer one or two questions altogether . 
`` Did your brother tell you , anyway , that he intended to kill your father ? '' 
asked the prosecutor . 
`` You can refuse to answer if you think necessary , '' he added . 
`` He did not tell me so directly , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` How so ? 
