And while he was talking to her husband , her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with the same haughty and questioning expression . 
Beside her at the window stood a young girl , rather plain , with scanty reddish hair , poorly but very neatly dressed . 
She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in . 
Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure . 
She was a very sad sight , a young girl of about twenty , but hunchback and crippled `` with withered legs , '' as Alyosha was told afterwards . 
Her crutches stood in the corner close by . 
The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha . 
A man of forty-five was sitting at the table , finishing the fried eggs . 
He was spare , small , and weakly built . 
He had reddish hair and a scanty light-coloured beard , very much like a wisp of tow -LRB- this comparison and the phrase `` a wisp of tow '' flashed at once into Alyosha 's mind for some reason , he remembered it afterwards -RRB- . 
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him , as there was no other man in the room . 
But when Alyosha went in , he leapt up from the bench on which he was sitting , and , hastily wiping his mouth with a ragged napkin , darted up to Alyosha . 
`` It 's a monk come to beg for the monastery . 
A nice place to come to ! '' 
the girl standing in the left corner said aloud . 
The man spun round instantly towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice : `` No , Varvara , you are wrong . 
Allow me to ask , '' he turned again to Alyosha , `` what has brought you to our retreat ? '' 
Alyosha looked attentively at him . 
It was the first time he had seen him . 
There was something angular , flurried and irritable about him . 
Though he had obviously just been drinking , he was not drunk . 
There was extraordinary impudence in his expression , and yet , strange to say , at the same time there was fear . 
He looked like a man who had long been kept in subjection and had submitted to it , and now had suddenly turned and was trying to assert himself . 
Or , better still , like a man who wants dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him . 
In his words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy humour , at times spiteful and at times cringing , and continually shifting from one tone to another . 
The question about `` our retreat '' he had asked , as it were , quivering all over , rolling his eyes , and skipping up so close to Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step . 
He was dressed in a very shabby dark cotton coat , patched and spotted . 
He wore checked trousers of an extremely light colour , long out of fashion , and of very thin material . 
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown out of them like a boy . 
`` I am Alexey Karamazov , '' Alyosha began in reply . 
`` I quite understand that , sir , '' the gentleman snapped out at once to assure him that he knew who he was already . 
`` I am Captain Snegiryov , sir , but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you - '' `` Oh , I 've come for nothing special . 
I wanted to have a word with you - if only you allow me . '' 
`` In that case , here is a chair , sir ; kindly be seated . 
That 's what they used to say in the old comedies , ` kindly be seated , ' '' and with a rapid gesture he seized an empty chair -LRB- it was a rough wooden chair , not upholstered -RRB- and set it for him almost in the middle of the room ; then , taking another similar chair for himself , he sat down facing Alyosha , so close to him that their knees almost touched . 
`` Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov , sir , formerly a captain in the Russian infantry , put to shame for his vices , but still a captain . 
Though I might not be one now for the way I talk ; for the last half of my life I 've learnt to say ` sir . ' 
It 's a word you use when you 've come down in the world . '' 
`` That 's very true , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But is it used involuntarily or on purpose ? '' 
`` As God 's above , it 's involuntary , and I use n't to use it ! 
I did n't use the word ` sir ' all my life , but as soon as I sank into low water I began to say ` sir . ' 
It 's the work of a higher power . 
I see you are interested in contemporary questions , but how can I have excited your curiosity , living as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality ? '' 
`` I 've come - about that business . '' 
`` About what business ? '' 
the captain interrupted impatiently . 
`` About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Alyosha blurted out awkwardly . 
`` What meeting , sir ? 
You do n't mean that meeting ? 
