... Gentlemen , you 've sullied my heart ! 
Can you suppose that I would conceal it from you , if I had really killed my father , that I would shuffle , lie , and hide myself ? 
No , that 's not like Dmitri Karamazov , that he could n't do , and if I were guilty , I swear I should n't have waited for your coming , or for the sunrise as I meant at first , but should have killed myself before this , without waiting for the dawn ! 
I know that about myself now . 
I could n't have learnt so much in twenty years as I 've found out in this accursed night ! 
... And should I have been like this on this night , and at this moment , sitting with you , could I have talked like this , could I have moved like this , could I have looked at you and at the world like this , if I had really been the murderer of my father , when the very thought of having accidentally killed Grigory gave me no peace all night - not from fear - oh , not simply from fear of your punishment ! 
The disgrace of it ! 
And you expect me to be open with such scoffers as you , who see nothing and believe in nothing , blind moles and scoffers , and to tell you another nasty thing I 've done , another disgrace , even if that would save me from your accusation ! 
No , better Siberia ! 
The man who opened the door to my father and went in at that door , he killed him , he robbed him . 
Who was he ? 
I 'm racking my brains and ca n't think who . 
But I can tell you it was not Dmitri Karamazov , and that 's all I can tell you , and that 's enough , enough , leave me alone ... . 
Exile me , punish me , but do n't bother me any more . 
I 'll say no more . 
Call your witnesses ! '' 
Mitya uttered his sudden monologue as though he were determined to be absolutely silent for the future . 
The prosecutor watched him the whole time and only when he had ceased speaking , observed , as though it were the most ordinary thing , with the most frigid and composed air : `` Oh , about the open door of which you spoke just now , we may as well inform you , by the way , now , of a very interesting piece of evidence of the greatest importance both to you and to us , that has been given us by Grigory , the old man you wounded . 
On his recovery , he clearly and emphatically stated , in reply to our questions , that when , on coming out to the steps , and hearing a noise in the garden , he made up his mind to go into it through the little gate which stood open , before he noticed you running , as you have told us already , in the dark from the open window where you saw your father , he , Grigory , glanced to the left , and , while noticing the open window , observed at the same time , much nearer to him , the door , standing wide open - that door which you have stated to have been shut the whole time you were in the garden . 
I will not conceal from you that Grigory himself confidently affirms and bears witness that you must have run from that door , though , of course , he did not see you do so with his own eyes , since he only noticed you first some distance away in the garden , running towards the fence . '' 
Mitya had leapt up from his chair half-way through this speech . 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
he yelled , in a sudden frenzy , `` it 's a barefaced lie . 
He could n't have seen the door open because it was shut . 
He 's lying ! '' 
`` I consider it my duty to repeat that he is firm in his statement . 
He does not waver . 
He adheres to it . 
We 've cross-examined him several times . '' 
`` Precisely . 
I have cross-examined him several times , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch confirmed warmly . 
`` It 's false , false ! 
It 's either an attempt to slander me , or the hallucination of a madman , '' Mitya still shouted . 
`` He 's simply raving , from loss of blood , from the wound . 
He must have fancied it when he came to ... . 
He 's raving . '' 
`` Yes , but he noticed the open door , not when he came to after his injuries , but before that , as soon as he went into the garden from the lodge . '' 
`` But it 's false , it 's false ! 
It ca n't be so ! 
He 's slandering me from spite ... . 
He could n't have seen it ... I did n't come from the door , '' gasped Mitya . 
The prosecutor turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and said to him impressively : `` Confront him with it . '' 
`` Do you recognise this object ? '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch laid upon the table a large and thick official envelope , on which three seals still remained intact . 
The envelope was empty , and slit open at one end . 
Mitya stared at it with open eyes . 
`` It ... it must be that envelope of my father 's , the envelope that contained the three thousand roubles ... and if there 's inscribed on it , allow me , ` For my little chicken ' ... yes - three thousand ! '' 
he shouted , `` do you see , three thousand , do you see ? '' 
`` Of course , we see . 
But we did n't find the money in it . 
