But Ivan 's a tomb . '' 
`` Ivan 's a tomb ? '' 
Alyosha listened with great attention . 
`` I was lieutenant in a line regiment , but still I was under supervision , like a kind of convict . 
Yet I was awfully well received in the little town . 
I spent money right and left . 
I was thought to be rich ; I thought so myself . 
But I must have pleased them in other ways as well . 
Although they shook their heads over me , they liked me . 
My colonel , who was an old man , took a sudden dislike to me . 
He was always down upon me , but I had powerful friends , and , moreover , all the town was on my side , so he could n't do me much harm . 
I was in fault myself for refusing to treat him with proper respect . 
I was proud . 
This obstinate old fellow , who was really a very good sort , kind-hearted and hospitable , had had two wives , both dead . 
His first wife , who was of a humble family , left a daughter as unpretentious as herself . 
She was a young woman of four and twenty when I was there , and was living with her father and an aunt , her mother 's sister . 
The aunt was simple and illiterate ; the niece was simple but lively . 
I like to say nice things about people . 
I never knew a woman of more charming character than Agafya - fancy , her name was Agafya Ivanovna ! 
And she was n't bad-looking either , in the Russian style : tall , stout , with a full figure , and beautiful eyes , though a rather coarse face . 
She had not married , although she had had two suitors . 
She refused them , but was as cheerful as ever . 
I was intimate with her , not in ` that ' way , it was pure friendship . 
I have often been friendly with women quite innocently . 
I used to talk to her with shocking frankness , and she only laughed . 
Many woman like such freedom , and she was a girl too , which made it very amusing . 
Another thing , one could never think of her as a young lady . 
She and her aunt lived in her father 's house with a sort of voluntary humility , not putting themselves on an equality with other people . 
She was a general favourite , and of use of everyone , for she was a clever dressmaker . 
She had a talent for it . 
She gave her services freely without asking for payment , but if anyone offered her payment , she did n't refuse . 
The colonel , of course , was a very different matter . 
He was one of the chief personages in the district . 
He kept open house , entertained the whole town , gave suppers and dances . 
At the time I arrived and joined the battalion , all the town was talking of the expected return of the colonel 's second daughter , a great beauty , who had just left a fashionable school in the capital . 
This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna , and she was the child of the second wife , who belonged to a distinguished general 's family ; although , as I learnt on good authority , she too brought the colonel no money . 
She had connections , and that was all . 
There may have been expectations , but they had come to nothing . 
`` Yet , when the young lady came from boarding-school on a visit , the whole town revived . 
Our most distinguished ladies - two ` Excellencies ' and a colonel 's wife - and all the rest following their lead , at once took her up and gave entertainments in her honour . 
She was the belle of the balls and picnics , and they got up tableaux vivants in aid of distressed governesses . 
I took no notice , I went on as wildly as before , and one of my exploits at the time set all the town talking . 
I saw her eyes taking my measure one evening at the battery commander 's , but I did n't go up to her , as though I disdained her acquaintance . 
I did go up and speak to her at an evening party not long after . 
She scarcely looked at me , and compressed her lips scornfully . 
` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have my revenge , ' thought I. I behaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time , and I was conscious of it myself . 
What made it worse was that I felt that ` Katenka ' was not an innocent boarding-school miss , but a person of character , proud and really high-principled ; above all , she had education and intellect , and I had neither . 
You think I meant to make her an offer ? 
No , I simply wanted to revenge myself , because I was such a hero and she did n't seem to feel it . 
