And while I am on earth , I make haste to take my own measures . 
You see , Alyosha , perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that moment , or rise again to see it , I , too , perhaps , may cry aloud with the rest , looking at the mother embracing the child 's torturer , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
but I do n't want to cry aloud then . 
While there is still time , I hasten to protect myself , and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether . 
It 's not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse , with its unexpiated tears to ` dear , kind God ' ! 
It 's not worth it , because those tears are unatoned for . 
They must be atoned for , or there can be no harmony . 
But how ? 
How are you going to atone for them ? 
Is it possible ? 
By their being avenged ? 
But what do I care for avenging them ? 
What do I care for a hell for oppressors ? 
What good can hell do , since those children have already been tortured ? 
And what becomes of harmony , if there is hell ? 
I want to forgive . 
I want to embrace . 
I do n't want more suffering . 
And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth , then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price . 
I do n't want the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs ! 
She dare not forgive him ! 
Let her forgive him for herself , if she will , let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother 's heart . 
But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive ; she dare not forgive the torturer , even if the child were to forgive him ! 
And if that is so , if they dare not forgive , what becomes of harmony ? 
Is there in the whole world a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
I do n't want harmony . 
From love for humanity I do n't want it . 
I would rather be left with the unavenged suffering . 
I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation , even if I were wrong . 
Besides , too high a price is asked for harmony ; it 's beyond our means to pay so much to enter on it . 
And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket , and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible . 
And that I am doing . 
It 's not God that I do n't accept , Alyosha , only I most respectfully return him the ticket . '' 
`` That 's rebellion , '' murmered Alyosha , looking down . 
`` Rebellion ? 
I am sorry you call it that , '' said Ivan earnestly . 
`` One can hardly live in rebellion , and I want to live . 
Tell me yourself , I challenge your answer . 
Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end , giving them peace and rest at last , but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature - that baby beating its breast with its fist , for instance - and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears , would you consent to be the architect on those conditions ? 
Tell me , and tell the truth . '' 
`` No , I would n't consent , '' said Alyosha softly . 
`` And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood of a little victim ? 
And accepting it would remain happy for ever ? '' 
`` No , I ca n't admit it . 
Brother , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with flashing eyes , `` you said just now , is there a being in the whole world who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
But there is a Being and He can forgive everything , all and for all , because He gave His innocent blood for all and everything . 
You have forgotten Him , and on Him is built the edifice , and it is to Him they cry aloud , ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed ! ' 
`` Ah ! 
the One without sin and His blood ! 
No , I have not forgotten Him ; on the contrary I 've been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring Him in before , for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the foreground . 
