Twice I have confessed it . '' 
`` Have you been admitted to Communion ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I am afraid . 
I am afraid to die . '' 
`` Fear nothing and never be afraid ; and do n't fret . 
If only your penitence fail not , God will forgive all . 
There is no sin , and there can be no sin on all the earth , which the Lord will not forgive to the truly repentant ! 
Man can not commit a sin so great as to exhaust the infinite love of God . 
Can there be a sin which could exceed the love of God ? 
Think only of repentance , continual repentance , but dismiss fear altogether . 
Believe that God loves you as you can not conceive ; that He loves you with your sin , in your sin . 
It has been said of old that over one repentant sinner there is more joy in heaven than over ten righteous men . 
Go , and fear not . 
Be not bitter against men . 
Be not angry if you are wronged . 
Forgive the dead man in your heart what wrong he did you . 
Be reconciled with him in truth . 
If you are penitent , you love . 
And if you love you are of God . 
All things are atoned for , all things are saved by love . 
If I , a sinner , even as you are , am tender with you and have pity on you , how much more will God . 
Love is such a priceless treasure that you can redeem the whole world by it , and expiate not only your own sins but the sins of others . '' 
He signed her three times with the cross , took from his own neck a little ikon and put it upon her . 
She bowed down to the earth without speaking . 
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tiny baby in her arms . 
`` From Vyshegorye , dear Father . '' 
`` Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby . 
What do you want ? '' 
`` I 've come to look at you . 
I have been to you before - or have you forgotten ? 
You 've no great memory if you 've forgotten me . 
They told us you were ill . 
Thinks I , I 'll go and see him for myself . 
Now I see you , and you 're not ill ! 
You 'll live another twenty years . 
God bless you ! 
There are plenty to pray for you ; how should you be ill ? '' 
`` I thank you for all , daughter . '' 
`` By the way , I have a thing to ask , not a great one . 
Here are sixty copecks . 
Give them , dear Father , to someone poorer than me . 
I thought as I came along , better give through him . 
He 'll know whom to give to . '' 
`` Thanks , my dear , thanks ! 
You are a good woman . 
I love you . 
I will do so certainly . 
Is that your little girl ? '' 
`` My little girl , Father , Lizaveta . '' 
