And I must go , my dear fellow , I must go and tell her that you are calm and comforted about her . 
And so you must be calm , do you understand ? 
I was unfair to her ; she is a Christian soul , gentlemen , yes , I tell you , she 's a gentle soul , and not to blame for anything . 
So what am I to tell her , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
Will you sit quiet or not ? '' 
The good-natured police captain said a great deal that was irregular , but Grushenka 's suffering , a fellow creature 's suffering , touched his good-natured heart , and tears stood in his eyes . 
Mitya jumped up and rushed towards him . 
`` Forgive me , gentlemen , oh , allow me , allow me ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You 've the heart of an angel , an angel , Mihail Makarovitch , I thank you for her . 
I will , I will be calm , cheerful , in fact . 
Tell her , in the kindness of your heart , that I am cheerful , quite cheerful , that I shall be laughing in a minute , knowing that she has a guardian angel like you . 
I shall have done with all this directly , and as soon as I 'm free , I 'll be with her , she 'll see , let her wait . 
Gentlemen , '' he said , turning to the two lawyers , now I 'll open my whole soul to you ; I 'll pour out everything . 
We 'll finish this off directly , finish it off gaily . 
We shall laugh at it in the end , sha n't we ? 
But gentlemen , that woman is the queen of my heart . 
Oh , let me tell you that . 
That one thing I 'll tell you now ... . 
I see I 'm with honourable men . 
She is my light , she is my holy one , and if only you knew ! 
Did you hear her cry , ` I 'll go to death with you ' ? 
And what have I , a penniless beggar , done for her ? 
Why such love for me ? 
How can a clumsy , ugly brute like me , with my ugly face , deserve such love , that she is ready to go to exile with me ? 
And how she fell down at your feet for my sake , just now ! 
... and yet she 's proud and has done nothing ! 
How can I help adoring her , how can I help crying out and rushing to her as I did just now ? 
Gentlemen , forgive me ! 
But now , now I am comforted . '' 
And he sank back in his chair and , covering his face with his hands , burst into tears . 
But they were happy tears . 
He recovered himself instantly . 
The old police captain seemed much pleased , and the lawyers also . 
They felt that the examination was passing into a new phase . 
When the police captain went out , Mitya was positively gay . 
`` Now , gentlemen , I am at your disposal , entirely at your disposal . 
And if it were not for all these trivial details , we should understand one another in a minute . 
I 'm at those details again . 
I 'm at your disposal , gentlemen , but I declare that we must have mutual confidence , you in me and I in you , or there 'll be no end to it . 
I speak in your interests . 
To business , gentlemen , to business , and do n't rummage in my soul ; do n't tease me with trifles , but only ask me about facts and what matters , and I will satisfy you at once . 
And damn the details ! '' 
So spoke Mitya . 
The interrogation began again . 
The Second Ordeal `` YOU do n't know how you encourage us , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , by your readiness to answer , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , with an animated air , and obvious satisfaction beaming in his very prominent , short-sighted , light grey eyes , from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before . 
`` And you have made a very just remark about the mutual confidence , without which it is sometimes positively impossible to get on in cases of such importance , if the suspected party really hopes and desires to defend himself and is in a position to do so . 
We on our side , will do everything in our power , and you can see for yourself how we are conducting the case . 
You approve , Ippolit Kirillovitch ? '' 
He turned to the prosecutor . 
