I know myself that Samsonov , her merchant , was laughing with her about it , telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do . 
And she 's got plenty of sense . 
She would n't marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
So , taking that into consideration , Ivan Fyodorovitch , reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch , would have anything after the master 's death , not a rouble , for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get hold of the whole , all the money there is . 
But if your father were to die now , there 'd be some forty thousand for sure , even for Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so , for he 's made no will ... . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knows all that very well . '' 
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan 's face . 
He suddenly flushed . 
`` Then why on earth , '' he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov , `` do you advise me to go to Tchermashnya ? 
What did you mean by that ? 
If I go away , you see what will happen here . '' 
Ivan drew his breath with difficulty . 
`` Precisely so , '' said Smerdyakov , softly and reasonably , watching Ivan intently , however . 
`` What do you mean by ` precisely so ' ? '' 
Ivan questioned him , with a menacing light in his eyes , restraining himself with difficulty . 
`` I spoke because I felt sorry for you . 
If I were in your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position , '' answered Smerdyakov , with the most candid air looking at Ivan 's flashing eyes . 
They were both silent . 
`` You seem to be a perfect idiot , and what 's more ... an awful scoundrel , too . '' 
Ivan rose suddenly from the bench . 
He was about to pass straight through the gate , but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov . 
Something strange followed . 
Ivan , in a sudden paroxysm , bit his lip , clenched his fists , and , in another minute , would have flung himself on Smerdyakov . 
The latter , anyway , noticed it at the same moment , started , and shrank back . 
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov , and Ivan turned in silence , as it seemed in perplexity , to the gate . 
`` I am going away to Moscow to-morrow , if you care to know - early to-morrow morning . 
That 's all ! '' 
he suddenly said aloud angrily , and wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov . 
`` That 's the best thing you can do , '' he responded , as though he had expected to hear it ; `` except that you can always be telegraphed for from Moscow , if anything should happen here . '' 
Ivan stopped again , and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov . 
But a change had passed over him , too . 
All his familiarity and carelessnes had completely disappeared . 
His face expressed attention and expectation , intent but timid and cringing . 
`` Have n't you something more to say - something to add ? '' 
could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan . 
`` And could n't I be sent for from Tchermashnya , too - in case anything happened ? '' 
Ivan shouted suddenly , for some unknown reason raising his voice . 
`` From Tchermashnya , too ... you could be sent for , '' Smerdyakov muttered , almost in a whisper , looking disconcerted , but gazing intently into Ivan 's eyes . 
`` Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer . 
Is it to save my spending money on the fare , or to save my going so far out of my way , that you insist on Tchermashnya ? '' 
`` Precisely so ... '' muttered Smerdyakov , with a breaking voice . 
He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile , and again made ready to draw back . 
But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh , and went through the gate still laughing . 
Anyone who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart , and he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that instant . 
He moved and walked as though in a nervous frenzy . 
`` It 's Always Worth While Speaking to a Clever Man '' AND in the same nervous frenzy , too , he spoke . 
Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in , he shouted to him , waving his hands , `` I am going upstairs to my room , not in to you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
and passed by , trying not even to look at his father . 
Very possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment ; but such an unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
