I 'm not ` old fellow ' to you , and you can keep your advice for another time ! '' 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely , as though glad to vent his wrath . 
Mitya was reduced to silence . 
He flushed all over . 
A moment later he felt suddenly very cold . 
The rain had ceased , but the dull sky was still overcast with clouds , and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face . 
`` I 've taken a chill , '' thought Mitya , twitching his shoulders . 
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , too , got into the cart , sat down heavily , and , as though without noticing it , squeezed Mitya into the corner . 
It is true that he was out of humour and greatly disliked the task that had been laid upon him . 
`` Good-bye , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
Mitya shouted again , and felt himself , that he had not called out this time from good-nature , but involuntarily , from resentment . 
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly , with both hands behind his back , and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face , he made no reply . 
`` Good-bye , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , good-bye ! '' 
he heard all at once the voice of Kalganov , who had suddenly darted out . 
Running up to the cart he held out his hand to Mitya . 
He had no cap on . 
Mitya had time to seize and press his hand . 
`` Good-bye , dear fellow ! 
I sha n't forget your generosity , '' he cried warmly . 
But the cart moved and their hands parted . 
The bell began ringing and Mitya was driven off . 
Kalganov ran back , sat down in a corner , bent his head , hid his face in his hands , and burst out crying . 
For a long while he sat like that , crying as though he were a little boy instead of a young man of twenty . 
Oh , he believed almost without doubt in Mitya 's guilt . 
`` What are these people ? 
What can men be after this ? '' 
he exclaimed incoherently , in bitter despondency , almost despair . 
At that moment he had no desire to live . 
`` Is it worth it ? 
Is it worth it ? '' 
exclaimed the boy in his grief . 
Kolya Krassotkin IT was the beginning of November . 
There had been a hard frost , eleven degrees Reaumur , without snow , but a little dry snow had fallen on the frozen ground during the night , and a keen dry wind was lifting and blowing it along the dreary streets of our town , especially about the market-place . 
It was a dull morning , but the snow had ceased . 
Not far from the market-place , close to Plotnikov 's shop , there stood a small house , very clean both without and within . 
It belonged to Madame Krassotkin , the widow of a former provincial secretary , who had been dead for fourteen years . 
His widow , still a nice-looking woman of thirty-two , was living in her neat little house on her private means . 
She lived in respectable seclusion ; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition . 
She was about eighteen at the time of her husband 's death ; she had been married only a year and had just borne him a son . 
From the day of his death she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her precious treasure , her boy Kolya . 
Though she had loved him passionately those fourteen years , he had caused her far more suffering than happiness . 
She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day , afraid he would fall ill , would catch cold , do something naughty , climb on a chair and fall off it , and so on and so on . 
When Kolya began going to school , the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with him so as to help him , and go through his lessons with him . 
She hastened to make the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives , even made up to Kolya 's schoolfellows , and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving Kolya from being teased , laughed at , or beaten by them . 
She went so far that the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him with being a `` mother 's darling . '' 
But the boy could take his own part . 
He was a resolute boy , `` tremendously strong , '' as was rumoured in his class , and soon proved to be the fact ; he was agile , strong-willed , and of an audacious and enterprising temper . 
He was good at lessons , and there was a rumour in the school that he could beat the teacher , Dardanelov , at arithmetic and universal history . 
Though he looked down upon everyone , he was a good comrade and not supercilious . 
He accepted his schoolfellows ' respect as his due , but was friendly with them . 
