` Give me back my nose ! ' 
he said , and he beat his breast . 
` My son , ' said the priest evasively , ` all things are accomplished in accordance with the inscrutable decrees of Providence , and what seems a misfortune sometimes leads to extraordinary , though unapparent , benefits . 
If stern destiny has deprived you of your nose , it 's to your advantage that no one can ever pull you by your nose . ' 
` Holy father , that 's no comfort , ' cried the despairing marquis . 
` I 'd be delighted to have my nose pulled every day of my life , if it were only in its proper place . ' 
` My son , ' sighs the priest , ` you ca n't expect every blessing at once . 
This is murmuring against Providence , who even in this has not forgotten you , for if you repine as you repined just now , declaring you 'd be glad to have your nose pulled for the rest of your life , your desire has already been fulfilled indirectly , for when you lost your nose , you were led by the nose . ' 
`` Fool , how stupid ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` My dear friend , I only wanted to amuse you . 
But I swear that 's the genuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word as I 've told you . 
It happened lately and gave me a great deal of trouble . 
The unhappy young man shot himself that very night when he got home . 
I was by his side till the very last moment . 
Those Jesuit confessionals are really my most delightful diversion at melancholy moments . 
Here 's another incident that happened only the other day . 
A little blonde Norman girl of twenty - a buxom , unsophisticated beauty that would make your mouth water - comes to an old priest . 
She bends down and whispers her sin into the grating . 
` Why , my daughter , have you fallen again already ? ' 
cries the priest : ' O Sancta Maria , what do I hear ! 
Not the same man this time , how long is this going on ? 
Are n't you ashamed ! ' 
` Ah , mon pere , ' answers the sinner with tears of penitence , ` Ca lui fait tant de plaisir , et a moi si peu de peine ! ' 
* Fancy , such an answer ! 
I drew back . 
It was the cry of nature , better than innocence itself , if you like . 
I absolved her sin on the spot and was turning to go , but I was forced to turn back . 
I heard the priest at the grating making an appointment with her for the evening - though he was an old man hard as flint , he fell in an instant ! 
It was nature , the truth of nature asserted its rights ! 
What , you are turning up your nose again ? 
Angry again ? 
I do n't know how to please you - '' * Ah , my father , this gives him so much pleasure , and me so little pain ! 
`` Leave me alone , you are beating on my brain like a haunting nightmare , '' Ivan moaned miserably , helpless before his apparition . 
`` I am bored with you , agonisingly and insufferably . 
I would give anything to be able to shake you off ! '' 
`` I repeat , moderate your expectations , do n't demand of me ` everything great and noble , ' and you 'll see how well we shall get on , '' said the gentleman impressively . 
`` You are really angry with me for not having appeared to you in a red glow , with thunder and lightning , with scorched wings , but have shown myself in such a modest form . 
You are wounded , in the first place , in your asthetic feelings , and , secondly , in your pride . 
How could such a vulgar devil visit such a great man as you ! 
Yes , there is that romantic strain in you , that was so derided by Byelinsky . 
I ca n't help it , young man , as I got ready to come to you I did think as a joke of appearing in the figure of a retired general who had served in the Caucasus , with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my coat . 
But I was positively afraid of doing it , for you 'd have thrashed me for daring to pin the Lion and the Sun on my coat , instead of , at least , the Polar Star or the Sirius . 
And you keep on saying I am stupid , but , mercy on us ! 
I make no claim to be equal to you in intelligence . 
Mephistopheles declared to Faust that he desired evil , but did only good . 
Well , he can say what he likes , it 's quite the opposite with me . 
I am perhaps the one man in all creation who loves the truth and genuinely desires good . 
I was there when the Word , Who died on the Cross , rose up into heaven bearing on His bosom the soul of the penitent thief . 
I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubim singing and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphim which shook heaven and all creation , and I swear to you by all that 's sacred , I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all . 
