But neither Yefim Petrovitch nor this teacher was living when the young man finished at the gymnasium and entered the university . 
As Yefim Petrovitch had made no provision for the payment of the tyrannical old lady 's legacy , which had grown from one thousand to two , it was delayed , owing to formalities inevitable in Russia , and the young man was in great straits for the first two years at the university , as he was forced to keep himself all the time he was studying . 
It must be noted that he did not even attempt to communicate with his father , perhaps from pride , from contempt for him , or perhaps from his cool common sense , which told him that from such a father he would get no real assistance . 
However that may have been , the young man was by no means despondent and succeeded in getting work , at first giving sixpenny lessons and afterwards getting paragraphs on street incidents into the newspapers under the signature of `` Eye-Witness . '' 
These paragraphs , it was said , were so interesting and piquant that they were soon taken . 
This alone showed the young man 's practical and intellectual superiority over the masses of needy and unfortunate students of both sexes who hang about the offices of the newspapers and journals , unable to think of anything better than everlasting entreaties for copying and translations from the French . 
Having once got into touch with the editors Ivan Fyodorovitch always kept up his connection with them , and in his latter years at the university he published brilliant reviews of books upon various special subjects , so that he became well known in literary circles . 
But only in his last year he suddenly succeeded in attracting the attention of a far wider circle of readers , so that a great many people noticed and remembered him . 
It was rather a curious incident . 
When he had just left the university and was preparing to go abroad upon his two thousand roubles , Ivan Fyodorovitch published in one of the more important journals a strange article , which attracted general notice , on a subject of which he might have been supposed to know nothing , as he was a student of natural science . 
The article dealt with a subject which was being debated everywhere at the time - the position of the ecclesiastical courts . 
After discussing several opinions on the subject he went on to explain his own view . 
What was most striking about the article was its tone , and its unexpected conclusion . 
Many of the Church party regarded him unquestioningly as on their side . 
And yet not only the secularists but even atheists joined them in their applause . 
Finally some sagacious persons opined that the article was nothing but an impudent satirical burlesque . 
I mention this incident particularly because this article penetrated into the famous monastery in our neighbourhood , where the inmates , being particularly interested in question of the ecclesiastical courts , were completely bewildered by it . 
Learning the author 's name , they were interested in his being a native of the town and the son of `` that Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
And just then it was that the author himself made his appearance among us . 
Why Ivan Fyodorovitch had come amongst us I remember asking myself at the time with a certain uneasiness . 
This fateful visit , which was the first step leading to so many consequences , I never fully explained to myself . 
It seemed strange on the face of it that a young man so learned , so proud , and apparently so cautious , should suddenly visit such an infamous house and a father who had ignored him all his life , hardly knew him , never thought of him , and would not under any circumstances have given him money , though he was always afraid that his sons Ivan and Alexey would also come to ask him for it . 
And here the young man was staying in the house of such a father , had been living with him for two months , and they were on the best possible terms . 
This last fact was a special cause of wonder to many others as well as to me . 
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov , of whom we have spoken already , the cousin of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's first wife , happened to be in the neighbourhood again on a visit to his estate . 
He had come from Paris , which was his permanent home . 
I remember that he was more surprised than anyone when he made the acquaintance of the young man , who interested him extremely , and with whom he sometimes argued and not without inner pang compared himself in acquirements . 
`` He is proud , '' he used to say , `` he will never be in want of pence ; he has got money enough to go abroad now . 
What does he want here ? 
Everyone can see that he has n't come for money , for his father would never give him any . 
He has no taste for drink and dissipation , and yet his father ca n't do without him . 
They get on so well together ! '' 
That was the truth ; the young man had an unmistakable influence over his father , who positively appeared to be behaving more decently and even seemed at times ready to obey his son , though often extremely and even spitefully perverse . 
It was only later that we learned that Ivan had come partly at the request of , and in the interests of , his elder brother , Dmitri , whom he saw for the first time on this very visit , though he had before leaving Moscow been in correspondence with him about an important matter of more concern to Dmitri than himself . 
What that business was the reader will learn fully in due time . 
Yet even when I did know of this special circumstance I still felt Ivan Fyodorovitch to be an enigmatic figure , and thought his visit rather mysterious . 
I may add that Ivan appeared at the time in the light of a mediator between his father and his elder brother Dmitri , who was in open quarrel with his father and even planning to bring an action against him . 
The family , I repeat , was now united for the first time , and some of its members met for the first time in their lives . 
The younger brother , Alexey , had been a year already among us , having been the first of the three to arrive . 
It is of that brother Alexey I find it most difficult to speak in this introduction . 
Yet I must give some preliminary account of him , if only to explain one queer fact , which is that I have to introduce my hero to the reader wearing the cassock of a novice . 
Yes , he had been for the last year in our monastery , and seemed willing to be cloistered there for the rest of his life . 
The Third Son , Alyosha HE was only twenty , his brother Ivan was in his twenty-fourth year at the time , while their elder brother Dmitri was twenty-seven . 
First of all , I must explain that this young man , Alyosha , was not a fanatic , and , in my opinion at least , was not even a mystic . 
I may as well give my full opinion from the beginning . 
He was simply an early lover of humanity , and that he adopted the monastic life was simply because at that time it struck him , so to say , as the ideal escape for his soul struggling from the darkness of worldly wickedness to the light of love . 
And the reason this life struck him in this way was that he found in it at that time , as he thought an extrordinary being , our celebrated elder , Zossima , to whom he became attached with all the warm first love of his ardent heart . 
But I do not dispute that he was very strange even at that time , and had been so indeed from his cradle . 
I have mentioned already , by the way , that though he lost his mother in his fourth year he remembered her all his life her face , her caresses , `` as though she stood living before me . '' 
Such memories may persist , as everyone knows , from an even earlier age , even from two years old , but scarcely standing out through a whole lifetime like spots of light out of darkness , like a corner torn out of a huge picture , which has all faded and disappeared except that fragment . 
