Choose one , my dear soul ! '' 
`` I like one with vanilla ... for old people . 
He he ! 
`` No , brother , we 've none of that special sort . '' 
`` I say , '' the old man bent down to whisper in Mitya 's ear . 
`` That girl there , little Marya , he he ! 
How would it be if you were to help me make friends with her ? '' 
`` So that 's what you 're after ! 
No , brother , that wo n't do ! '' 
`` I 'd do no harm to anyone , '' Maximov muttered disconsolately . 
`` Oh , all right , all right . 
They only come here to dance and sing , you know , brother . 
But damn it all , wait a bit ! 
... Eat and drink and be merry , meanwhile . 
Do n't you want money ? '' 
`` Later on , perhaps , '' smiled Maximov . 
`` All right , all right ... '' Mitya 's head was burning . 
He went outside to the wooden balcony which ran round the whole building on the inner side , overlooking the courtyard . 
The fresh air revived him . 
He stood alone in a dark corner , and suddenly clutched his head in both hands . 
His scattered thoughts came together ; his sensations blended into a whole and threw a sudden light into his mind . 
A fearful and terrible light ! 
`` If I 'm to shoot myself , why not now ? '' 
passed through his mind . 
`` Why not go for the pistols , bring them here , and here , in this dark dirty corner , make an end ? '' 
Almost a minute he undecided . 
A few hours earlier , when he had been dashing here , he was pursued by disgrace , by the theft he had committed , and that blood , that blood ! 
... But yet it was easier for him then . 
Then everything was over : he had lost her , given her up . 
She was gone , for him - oh , then his death sentence had been easier for him ; at least it had seemed necessary , inevitable , for what had he to stay on earth for ? 
But now ? 
Was it the same as then ? 
Now one phantom , one terror at least was at an end : that first , rightful lover , that fateful figure had vanished , leaving no trace . 
The terrible phantom had turned into something so small , so comic ; it had been carried into the bedroom and locked in . 
It would never return . 
She was ashamed , and from her eyes he could see now whom she loved . 
Now he had everything to make life happy ... but he could not go on living , he could not ; oh , damnation ! 
`` O God ! 
restore to life the man I knocked down at the fence ! 
Let this fearful cup pass from me ! 
Lord , thou hast wrought miracles for such sinners as me ! 
But what , what if the old man 's alive ? 
Oh , then the shame of the other disgrace I would wipe away . 
I would restore the stolen money . 
I 'd give it back ; I 'd get it somehow ... . 
No trace of that shame will remain except in my heart for ever ! 
But no , no ; oh , impossible cowardly dreams ! 
Oh , damnation ! '' 
Yet there was a ray of light and hope in his darkness . 
He jumped up and ran back to the room - to her , to her , his queen for ever ! 
