I should n't have said it , if I had known . 
I should have praised it . 
Poets are all so irritable , ' he said . 
In short , he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone . 
He explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic . 
I thought he was in earnest . 
Only as I lay there , just as before you now , I thought , ` Would it , or would it not , be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out for shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house ? ' 
And , would you believe it , I lay here , shut my eyes , and wondered , would it be the proper thing or not . 
I kept worrying and worrying , and my heart began to beat , and I could n't make up my mind whether to make an outcry or not . 
One voice seemed to be telling me , ` Speak , ' and the other ` No , do n't speak . ' 
And no sooner had the second voice said that than I cried out , and fainted . 
Of course , there was a fuss . 
I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin , ` It 's painful for me to say it , but I do n't wish to see you in my house again . ' 
So I turned him out . 
Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I know myself I did wrong . 
I was putting it on . 
I was n't angry with him at all , really ; but I suddenly fancied - that was what did it - that it would be such a fine scene ... . 
And yet , believe me , it was quite natural , for I really shed tears and cried for several days afterwards , and then suddenly , one afternoon , I forgot all about it . 
So it 's a fortnight since he 's been here , and I kept wondering whether he would come again . 
I wondered even yesterday , then suddenly last night came this Gossip . 
I read it and gasped . 
Who could have written it ? 
He must have written it . 
He went home , sat down , wrote it on the spot , sent it , and they put it in . 
It was a fortnight ago , you see . 
But , Alyosha , it 's awful how I keep talking and do n't say what I want to say . 
the words come of themselves ! '' 
`` It 's very important for me to be in time to see my brother to-day , '' Alyosha faltered . 
`` To be sure , to be sure ! 
You bring it all back to me . 
Listen , what is an aberration ? '' 
`` What aberration ? '' 
asked Alyosha , wondering . 
`` In the legal sense . 
An aberration in which everything is pardonable . 
Whatever you do , you will be acquitted at once . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
This Katya ... Ah ! 
she is a charming , charming creature , only I never can make out who it is she is in love with . 
She was with me some time ago and I could n't get anything out of her . 
Especially as she wo n't talk to me except on the surface now . 
She is always talking about my health and nothing else , and she takes up such a tone with me , too . 
I simply said to myself , ` Well so be it . 
I do n't care ' ... Oh , yes . 
I was talking of aberration . 
This doctor has come . 
You know a doctor has come ? 
Of course , you know it - the one who discovers madmen . 
