`` Quite so , brother . 
Such people remain always the same . 
They do n't yield to fate . 
So you think I sha n't love her for ever . '' 
`` No ; perhaps you will love her for ever . 
But perhaps you wo n't always be happy with her . '' 
Alyosha had given his opinion at the time , blushing , and angry with himself for having yielded to his brother 's entreaties and put such `` foolish '' ideas into words . 
For his opinion had struck him as awfully foolish immediately after he had uttered it . 
He felt ashamed too of having given so confident an opinion about a woman . 
It was with the more amazement that he felt now , at the first glance at Katerina Ivanovna as she ran in to him , that he had perhaps been utterly mistaken . 
This time her face was beaming with spontaneous good-natured kindliness , and direct warm-hearted sincerity . 
The `` pride and haughtiness , '' which had struck Alyosha so much before , was only betrayed now in a frank , generous energy and a sort of bright , strong faith in herself . 
Alyosha realised at the first glance , at the first word , that all the tragedy of her position in relation to the man she loved so dearly was no secret to her ; that she perhaps already knew everything , positively everything . 
And yet , in spite of that , there was such brightness in her face , such faith in the future . 
Alyosha felt at once that he had gravely wronged her in his thoughts . 
He was conquered and captivated immediately . 
Besides all this , he noticed at her first words that she was in great excitement , an excitement perhaps quite exceptional and almost approaching ecstasy . 
`` I was so eager to see you , because I can learn from you the whole truth - from you and no one else . '' 
`` I have come , '' muttered Alyosha confusedly , `` I - he sent me . '' 
`` Ah , he sent you I foresaw that . 
Now I know everything - everything ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , her eyes flashing . 
`` Wait a moment , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I 'll tell you why I 've been so longing to see you . 
You see , I know perhaps far more than you do yourself , and there 's no need for you to tell me anything . 
I 'll tell you what I want from you . 
I want to know your own last impression of him . 
I want you to tell me most directly , plainly , coarsely even -LRB- oh , as coarsely as you like ! -RRB- 
, what you thought of him just now and of his position after your meeting with him to-day . 
That will perhaps be better than if I had a personal explanation with him , as he does not want to come to me . 
Do you understand what I want from you ? 
Now , tell me simply , tell me every word of the message he sent you with -LRB- I knew he would send you -RRB- . '' 
`` He told me to give you his compliments and to say that he would never come again but to give you his compliments . '' 
`` His compliments ? 
Was that what he said his own expression ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Accidentally perhaps he made a mistake in the word , perhaps he did not use the right word ? '' 
`` No ; he told me precisely to repeat that word . 
He begged me two or three times not to forget to say so . '' 
Katerina Ivanovna flushed hotly . 
`` Help me now , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
Now I really need your help . 
I 'll tell you what I think , and you must simply say whether it 's right or not . 
Listen ! 
If he had sent me his compliments in passing , without insisting on your repeating the words , without emphasising them , that would be the end of everything ! 
But if he particularly insisted on those words , if he particularly told you not to forget to repeat them to me , then perhaps he was in excitement , beside himself . 
He had made his decision and was frightened at it . 
He was n't walking away from me with a resolute step , but leaping headlong . 
The emphasis on that phrase may have been simply bravado . '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
cried Alyosha warmly . 
