I understand that . 
Why do you look at me ? 
You see , I went in the first place to beat her . 
I had heard , and I know for a fact now , that that captain , father 's agent , had given Grushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment , so as to put an end to me . 
They wanted to scare me . 
I went to beat her . 
I had had a glimpse of her before . 
She does n't strike one at first sight . 
I knew about her old merchant , who 's lying ill now , paralysed ; but he 's leaving her a decent little sum . 
I knew , too , that she was fond of money , that she hoarded it , and lent it at a wicked rate of interest , that she 's a merciless cheat and swindler . 
I went to beat her , and I stayed . 
The storm broke - it struck me down like the plague . 
I 'm plague-stricken still , and I know that everything is over , that there will never be anything more for me . 
The cycle of the ages is accomplished . 
That 's my position . 
And though I 'm a beggar , as fate would have it , I had three thousand just then in my pocket . 
I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe , a place twenty-five versts from here . 
I got Gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants there drunk on it , and all the women and girls . 
I sent the thousands flying . 
In three days ' time I was stripped bare , but a hero . 
Do you suppose the hero had gained his end ? 
Not a sign of it from her . 
I tell you that rogue , Grushenka , has a supple curve all over her body . 
You can see it in her little foot , even in her little toe . 
I saw it , and kissed it , but that was all , I swear ! 
` I 'll marry you if you like , ' she said , ` you 're a beggar , you know . 
Say that you wo n't beat me , and will let me do anything I choose , and perhaps I will marry you . ' 
She laughed , and she 's laughing still ! '' 
Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury . 
He seemed all at once as though he were drunk . 
His eyes became suddenly bloodshot . 
`` And do you really mean to marry her ? '' 
`` At once , if she will . 
And if she wo n't , I shall stay all the same . 
I 'll be the porter at her gate . 
Alyosha ! '' 
he cried . 
He stopped short before him , and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently . 
`` Do you know , you innocent boy , that this is all delirium , senseless delirium , for there 's a tragedy here . 
Let me tell you , Alexey , that I may be a low man , with low and degraded passions , but a thief and a pickpocket Dmitri Karamazov never can be . 
Well , then ; let me tell you that I am a thief and a pickpocket . 
That very morning , just before I went to beat Grushenka , Katerina Ivanovna sent for me , and in strict secrecy -LRB- why I do n't know , I suppose she had some reason -RRB- asked me to go to the chief town of the province and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow , so that nothing should be known of it in the town here . 
So I had that three thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka , and it was that money we spent at Mokroe . 
Afterwards I pretended I had been to the town , but did not show her the post office receipt . 
I said I had sent the money and would bring the receipt , and so far I have n't brought it . 
I 've forgotten it . 
Now what do you think you 're going to her to-day to say ? 
` He sends his compliments , ' and she 'll ask you , ` What about the money ? ' 
You might still have said to her , ` He 's a degraded sensualist , and a low creature , with uncontrolled passions . 
He did n't send your money then , but wasted it , because , like a low brute , he could n't control himself . ' 
