After describing the result of this conversation and the moment when the prisoner learnt that Grushenka had not remained at Samsonov 's , the sudden frenzy of the luckless man worn out with jealousy and nervous exhaustion , at the thought that she had deceived him and was now with his father , Ippolit Kirillovitch concluded by dwelling upon the fatal influence of chance . 
`` Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with her former lover , nothing would have happened . 
But she lost her head , she could only swear and protest her ignorance , and if the prisoner did not kill her on the spot , it was only because he flew in pursuit of his false mistress . 
`` But note , frantic as he was , he took with him a brass pestle . 
Why that ? 
Why not some other weapon ? 
But since he had been contemplating his plan and preparing himself for it for a whole month , he would snatch up anything like a weapon that caught his eye . 
He had realised for a month past that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon , so he instantly , without hesitation , recognised that it would serve his purpose . 
So it was by no means unconsciously , by no means involuntarily , that he snatched up that fatal pestle . 
And then we find him in his father 's garden - the coast is clear , there are no witnesses , darkness and jealousy . 
The suspicion that she was there , with him , with his rival , in his arms , and perhaps laughing at him at that moment - took his breath away . 
And it was not mere suspicion , the deception was open , obvious . 
She must be there , in that lighted room , she must be behind the screen ; and the unhappy man would have us believe that he stole up to the window , peeped respectfully in , and discreetly withdrew , for fear something terrible and immoral should happen . 
And he tries to persuade us of that , us , who understand his character , who know his state of mind at the moment , and that he knew the signals by which he could at once enter the house . '' 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection of Smerdyakov with the murder . 
He did this very circumstantially , and everyone realised that , although he professed to despise that suspicion , he thought the subject of great importance . 
A Treatise on Smerdyakov `` TO begin with , what was the source of this suspicion ? '' 
-LRB- Ippolit Kirillovitch began -RRB- . 
`` The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov had committed the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest , yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact to confirm the charge , nor the faintest suggestion of a fact . 
The charge is confirmed by three persons only - the two brothers of the prisoner and Madame Svyetlov . 
The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions only to-day , when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever . 
But we know that for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction of his brother 's guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea . 
But of that later . 
The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest fact to support his notion of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and has only been led to that conclusion from the prisoner 's own words and the expression of his face . 
Yes , that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to-day by him . 
Madame Svyetslov was even more astounding . 
` What the prisoner tells you , you must believe ; he is not a man to tell a lie . ' 
That is all the evidence against Smerdyakov produced by these three persons . 
who are all deeply concerned in the prisoner 's fate . 
And yet the theory of Smerdyakov 's guilt has been noised about , has been and is still maintained . 
Is it credible ? 
Is it conceivable ? '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch thought it necessary to describe the personality of Smerdyakov , `` who had cut short his life in a fit of insanity . '' 
He depicted him as a man of weak intellect , with a smattering of education , who had been thrown off his balance by philosophical ideas above his level and certain modern theories of duty , which he learnt in practice from the reckless life of his master , who was also perhaps his father - Fyodor Pavlovitch ; and , theoretically , from various strange philosophical conversations with his master 's elder son , Ivan Fyodorovitch , who readily indulged in this diversion , probably feeling dull or wishing to amuse himself at the valet 's expense . 
`` He spoke to me himself of his spiritual condition during the last few days at his father 's house , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch explained ; `` but others too have borne witness to it - the prisoner himself , his brother , and the servant Grigory - that is , all who knew him well . 
`` Moreover , Smerdyakov , whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy , had not the courage of a chicken . 
` He fell at my feet and kissed them , ' the prisoner himself has told us , before he realised how damaging such a statement was to himself . 
` He is an epileptic chicken , ' he declared about him in his characteristic language . 
And the prisoner chose him for his confidant -LRB- we have his own word for it -RRB- and he frightened him into consenting at last to act as a spy for him . 
In that capacity he deceived his master , revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope with the notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into the house . 
How could he help telling him , indeed ? 
` He would have killed me , I could see that he would have killed me , ' he said at the inquiry , trembling and shaking even before us , though his tormentor was by that time arrested and could do him no harm . 
` He suspected me at every instant . 
In fear and trembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him , that he might see that I had not deceived him and let me off alive . ' 
Those are his own words . 
I wrote them down and I remember them . 
` When he began shouting at me , I would fall on my knees . ' 
`` He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of his master , ever since he had restored him some money he had lost . 
So it may be supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at having deceived his master , whom he loved as his benefactor . 
Persons severely afflicted with epilepsy are , so the most skilful doctors tell us , always prone to continual and morbid self-reproach . 
