And they will have no secrets from us . 
We shall allow or forbid them to live with their wives and mistresses , to have or not to have children according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient - and they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully . 
The most painful secrets of their conscience , all , all they will bring to us , and we shall have an answer for all . 
And they will be glad to believe our answer , for it will save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present in making a free decision for themselves . 
And all will be happy , all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them . 
For only we , we who guard the mystery , shall be unhappy . 
There will be thousands of millions of happy babes , and a hundred thousand sufferers who have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil . 
Peacefully they will die , peacefully they will expire in Thy name , and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death . 
But we shall keep the secret , and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity . 
Though if there were anything in the other world , it certainly would not be for such as they . 
It is prophesied that Thou wilt come again in victory , Thou wilt come with Thy chosen , the proud and strong , but we will say that they have only saved themselves , but we have saved all . 
We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast , and holds in her hands the mystery , shall be put to shame , that the weak will rise up again , and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her loathsome body . 
But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin . 
And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say : `` Judge us if Thou canst and darest . '' 
Know that I fear Thee not . 
Know that I too have been in the wilderness , I too have lived on roots and locusts , I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men , and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect , among the strong and powerful , thirsting `` to make up the number . '' 
But I awakened and would not serve madness . 
I turned back and joined the ranks of those who have corrected Thy work . 
I left the proud and went back to the humble , for the happiness of the humble . 
What I say to Thee will come to pass , and our dominion will be built up . 
I repeat , to-morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us . 
For if anyone has ever deserved our fires , it is Thou . 
To-morrow I shall burn Thee . 
Dixi . ' '' 
* * I have spoken . 
Ivan stopped . 
He was carried away as he talked , and spoke with excitement ; when he had finished , he suddenly smiled . 
Alyosha had listened in silence ; towards the end he was greatly moved and seemed several times on the point of interrupting , but restrained himself . 
Now his words came with a rush . 
`` But ... that 's absurd ! '' 
he cried , flushing . 
`` Your poem is in praise of Jesus , not in blame of Him - as you meant it to be . 
And who will believe you about freedom ? 
Is that the way to understand it ? 
That 's not the idea of it in the Orthodox Church ... . 
That 's Rome , and not even the whole of Rome , it 's false-those are the worst of the Catholics the Inquisitors , the Jesuits ! 
... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your Inquisitor . 
What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves ? 
Who are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves for the happiness of mankind ? 
When have they been seen ? 
We know the Jesuits , they are spoken ill of , but surely they are not what you describe ? 
They are not that at all , not at all ... . 
They are simply the Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future , with the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that 's their ideal , but there 's no sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it ... . 
It 's simple lust of power , of filthy earthly gain , of domination-something like a universal serfdom with them as masters-that 's all they stand for . 
They do n't even believe in God perhaps . 
Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy . '' 
`` Stay , stay , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` how hot you are ! 
A fantasy you say , let it be so ! 
Of course it 's a fantasy . 
