And the third time I knew I 'd broken his skull . 
He suddenly rolled on his back , face upwards , covered with blood . 
I looked round . 
There was no blood on me , not a spot . 
I wiped the paper-weight , put it back , went up to the ikons , took the money out of the envelope , and flung the envelope on the floor and the pink ribbon beside it . 
I went out into the garden all of a tremble , straight to the apple-tree with a hollow in it - you know that hollow . 
I 'd marked it long before and put a rag and a piece of paper ready in it . 
I wrapped all the notes in the rag and stuffed it deep down in the hole . 
And there it stayed for over a fortnight . 
I took it out later , when I came out of the hospital . 
I went back to my bed , lay down and thought , ` If Grigory Vassilyevitch has been killed outright it may be a bad job for me , but if he is not killed and recovers , it will be first-rate , for then he 'll bear witness that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here , and so he must have killed him and taken the money . ' 
Then I began groaning with suspense and impatience , so as to wake Marfa Ignatyevna as soon as possible . 
At last she got up and she rushed to me , but when she saw Grigory Vassilyevitch was not there , she ran out , and I heard her scream in the garden . 
And that set it all going and set my mind at rest . '' 
He stopped . 
Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence without stirring or taking his eyes off him . 
As he told his story Smerdyakov glanced at him from time to time , but for the most part kept his eyes averted . 
When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathing hard . 
The perspiration stood out on his face . 
But it was impossible to tell whether it was remorse he was feeling , or what . 
`` Stay , '' cried Ivan pondering . 
`` What about the door ? 
If he only opened the door to you , how could Grigory have seen it open before ? 
For Grigory saw it before you went . '' 
It was remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably , in a different tone , not angry as before , so if anyone had opened the door at that moment and peeped in at them , he would certainly have concluded that they were talking peaceably about some ordinary , though interesting , subject . 
`` As for that door and having seen it open , that 's only his fancy , '' said Smerdyakov , with a wry smile . 
`` He is not a man , I assure you , but an obstinate mule . 
He did n't see it , but fancied he had seen it , and there 's no shaking him . 
It 's just our luck he took that notion into his head , for they ca n't fail to convict Dmitri Fyodorovitch after that . '' 
`` Listen ... '' said Ivan , beginning to seem bewildered again and making an effort to grasp something . 
`` Listen . 
There are a lot of questions I want to ask you , but I forget them ... I keep forgetting and getting mixed up . 
Yes . 
Tell me this at least , why did you open the envelope and leave it there on the floor ? 
Why did n't you simply carry off the envelope ? 
... When you were telling me , I thought you spoke about it as though it were the right thing to do ... but why , I ca n't understand ... '' `` I did that for a good reason . 
For if a man had known all about it , as I did for instance , if he 'd seen those notes before , and perhaps had put them in that envelope himself , and had seen the envelope sealed up and addressed , with his own eyes , if such a man had done the murder , what should have made him tear open the envelope afterwards , especially in such desperate haste , since he 'd know for certain the notes must be in the envelope ? 
No , if the robber had been someone like me , he 'd simply have put the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast as he could . 
But it 'd be quite different with Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
He only knew about the envelope by hearsay ; he had never seen it , and if he 'd found it , for instance , under the mattress , he 'd have torn it open as quickly as possible to make sure the notes were in it . 
And he 'd have thrown the envelope down , without having time to think that it would be evidence against him . 
Because he was not an habitual thief and had never directly stolen anything before , for he is a gentleman born , and if he did bring himself to steal , it would not be regular stealing , but simply taking what was his own , for he 'd told the whole town he meant to before , and had even bragged aloud before everyone that he 'd go and take his property from Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I did n't say that openly to the prosecutor when I was being examined , but quite the contrary , I brought him to it by a hint , as though I did n't see it myself , and as though he 'd thought of it himself and I had n't prompted him ; so that Mr. Prosecutor 's mouth positively watered at my suggestion . '' 
`` But can you possibly have thought of all that on the spot ? '' 
cried Ivan , overcome with astonishment . 
He looked at Smerdyakov again with alarm . 
`` Mercy on us ! 
Could anyone think of it all in such a desperate hurry ? 
It was all thought out beforehand . '' 
`` Well ... well , it was the devil helped you ! '' 
