` Yes , ' cry the pastors and the judges and philanthropic ladies . 
` This is the happiest day of your life , for you are going to the Lord ! ' 
They all walk or drive to the scaffold in procession behind the prison van . 
At the scaffold they call to Richard : ` Die , brother , die in the Lord , for even thou hast found grace ! ' 
And so , covered with his brothers ' kisses , Richard is dragged on to the scaffold , and led to the guillotine . 
And they chopped off his head in brotherly fashion , because he had found grace . 
Yes , that 's characteristic . 
That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists of aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations , and has been distributed gratis for the enlightenment of the people . 
The case of Richard is interesting because it 's national . 
Though to us it 's absurd to cut off a man 's head , because he has become our brother and has found grace , yet we have our own speciality , which is all but worse . 
Our historical pastime is the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain . 
There are lines in Nekrassov describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes , ` on its meek eyes , ' everyone must have seen it . 
It 's peculiarly Russian . 
He describes how a feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and can not move . 
The peasant beats it , beats it savagely , beats it at last not knowing what he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty , thrashes it mercilessly over and over again . 
` However weak you are , you must pull , if you die for it . ' 
The nag strains , and then he begins lashing the poor defenceless creature on its weeping , on its ` meek eyes . ' 
The frantic beast tugs and draws the load , trembling all over , gasping for breath , moving sideways , with a sort of unnatural spasmodic action - it 's awful in Nekrassov . 
But that only a horse , and God has horses to be beaten . 
So the Tatars have taught us , and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it . 
But men , too , can be beaten . 
A well-educated , cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own child with a birch-rod , a girl of seven . 
I have an exact account of it . 
The papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs . 
` It stings more , ' said he , and so be began stinging his daughter . 
I know for a fact there are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality , to literal sensuality , which increases progressively at every blow they inflict . 
They beat for a minute , for five minutes , for ten minutes , more often and more savagely . 
The child screams . 
At last the child can not scream , it gasps , ` Daddy daddy ! ' 
By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was brought into court . 
A counsel is engaged . 
The Russian people have long called a barrister ' a conscience for hire . ' 
The counsel protests in his client 's defence . 
` It 's such a simple thing , ' he says , ` an everyday domestic event . 
A father corrects his child . 
To our shame be it said , it is brought into court . ' 
The jury , convinced by him , give a favourable verdict . 
The public roars with delight that the torturer is acquitted . 
Ah , pity I was n't there ! 
I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honour ! 
Charming pictures . 
`` But I 've still better things about children . 
I 've collected a great , great deal about Russian children , Alyosha . 
There was a little girl of five who was hated by her father and mother , ` most worthy and respectable people , of good education and breeding . ' 
You see , I must repeat again , it is a peculiar characteristic of many people , this love of torturing children , and children only . 
To all other types of humanity these torturers behave mildly and benevolently , like cultivated and humane Europeans ; but they are very fond of tormenting children , even fond of children themselves in that sense . 
it 's just their defencelessness that tempts the tormentor , just the angelic confidence of the child who has no refuge and no appeal , that sets his vile blood on fire . 
In every man , of course , a demon lies hidden - the demon of rage , the demon of lustful heat at the screams of the tortured victim , the demon of lawlessness let off the chain , the demon of diseases that follow on vice , gout , kidney disease , and so on . 
`` This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by those cultivated parents . 
They beat her , thrashed her , kicked her for no reason till her body was one bruise . 
