`` I swear , Alyosha , '' he cried , with intense and genuine anger at himself ; `` You may not believe me , but as God is Holy , and as Christ is God , I swear that though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now , I know that I am a million times baser in soul than she , and that these lofty sentiments of hers are as sincere as a heavenly angel 's . 
That 's the tragedy of it - that I know that for certain . 
What if anyone does show off a bit ? 
Do n't I do it myself ? 
And yet I 'm sincere , I 'm sincere . 
As for Ivan , I can understand how he must be cursing nature now with his intellect , too ! 
To see the preference given - to whom , to what ? 
To a monster who , though he is betrothed and all eyes are fixed on him , ca n't restrain his debaucheries - and before the very eyes of his betrothed ! 
And a man like me is preferred , while he is rejected . 
And why ? 
Because a girl wants to sacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude . 
It 's ridiculous ! 
I 've never said a word of this to Ivan , and Ivan of course has never dropped a hint of the sort to me . 
But destiny will be accomplished , and the best man will hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back-alley for ever - his filthy back-alley , his beloved back-alley , where he is at home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free will and with enjoyment . 
I 've been talking foolishly . 
I 've no words left . 
I used them at random , but it will be as I have said . 
I shall drown in the back-alley , and she will marry Ivan . '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri , '' Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety . 
`` There 's one thing you have n't made clear yet : you are still betrothed all the same , are n't you ? 
How can you break off the engagement if she , your betrothed , does n't want to ? '' 
`` Yes , formally and solemnly betrothed . 
It was all done on my arrival in Moscow , with great ceremony , with ikons , all in fine style . 
The general 's wife blessed us , and - would you believe it ? 
- congratulated Katya . 
You 've made a good choice , ' she said , ' I see right through him . ' 
And - would you believe it ? 
- she did n't like Ivan , and hardly greeted him . 
I had a lot of talk with Katya in Moscow . 
I told her about myself - sincerely , honourably . 
She listened to everything . 
There was sweet confusion , There were tender words . 
Though there were proud words , too . 
She wrung out of me a mighty promise to reform . 
I gave my promise , and here - '' `` What ? '' 
`` Why , I called to you and brought you out here to-day , this very day - remember it - to send you - this very day again - to Katerina Ivanovna , and - '' `` To tell her that I shall never come to see her again . 
Say , ` He sends you his compliments . ' '' 
`` But is that possible ? '' 
`` That 's just the reason I 'm sending you , in my place , because it 's impossible . 
And , how could I tell her myself ? '' 
`` And where are you going ? '' 
`` To the back-alley . '' 
`` To Grushenka , then ! '' 
Alyosha exclaimed mournfully , clasping his hands . 
`` Can Rakitin really have told the truth ? 
I thought that you had just visited her , and that was all . '' 
`` Can a betrothed man pay such visits ? 
Is such a thing possible and with such a betrothed , and before the eyes of all the world ? 
Confound it , I have some honour ! 
As soon as I began visiting Grushenka , I ceased to be betrothed , and to be an honest man . 
