`` Yes , that was a moment of weakness ... but I could n't believe in you . 
I do n't know whether I was asleep or awake last time . 
Perhaps I was only dreaming then and did n't see you really at all - '' `` And why were you so surly with Alyosha just now ? 
He is a dear ; I 've treated him badly over Father Zossima . '' 
`` Do n't talk of Alyosha ! 
How dare you , you flunkey ! '' 
Ivan laughed again . 
`` You scold me , but you laugh - that 's a good sign . 
But you are ever so much more polite than you were last time and I know why : that great resolution of yours - '' `` Do n't speak of my resolution , '' cried Ivan , savagely . 
`` I understand , I understand , c'est noble , c'est charmant , you are going to defend your brother and to sacrifice yourself ... C'est chevaleresque . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , I 'll kick you ! '' 
`` I sha n't be altogether sorry , for then my object will be attained . 
If you kick me , you must believe in my reality , for people do n't kick ghosts . 
Joking apart , it does n't matter to me , scold if you like , though it 's better to be a trifle more polite even to me . 
` Fool , flunkey ! ' 
what words ! '' 
`` Scolding you , I scold myself , '' Ivan laughed again , `` you are myself , myself , only with a different face . 
You just say what I am thinking ... and are incapable of saying anything new ! '' 
`` If I am like you in my way of thinking , it 's all to my credit , '' the gentleman declared , with delicacy and dignity . 
`` You choose out only my worst thoughts , and what 's more , the stupid ones . 
You are stupid and vulgar . 
You are awfully stupid . 
No , I ca n't put up with you ! 
What am I to do , what am I to do ? '' 
Ivan said through his clenched teeth . 
`` My dear friend , above all things I want to behave like a gentleman and to be recognised as such , '' the visitor began in an access of deprecating and simple-hearted pride , typical of a poor relation . 
`` I am poor , but ... I wo n't say very honest , but ... it 's an axiom generally accepted in society that I am a fallen angel . 
I certainly ca n't conceive how I can ever have been an angel . 
If I ever was , it must have been so long ago that there 's no harm in forgetting it . 
Now I only prize the reputation of being a gentlemanly person and live as I can , trying to make myself agreeable . 
I love men genuinely , I 've been greatly calumniated ! 
Here when I stay with you from time to time , my life gains a kind of reality and that 's what I like most of all . 
You see , like you , I suffer from the fantastic and so I love the realism of earth . 
Here , with you , everything is circumscribed , here all is formulated and geometrical , while we have nothing but indeterminate equations ! 
I wander about here dreaming . 
I like dreaming . 
Besides , on earth I become superstitious . 
Please do n't laugh , that 's just what I like , to become superstitious . 
I adopt all your habits here : I 've grown fond of going to the public baths , would you believe it ? 
and I go and steam myself with merchants and priests . 
What I dream of is becoming incarnate once for all and irrevocably in the form of some merchant 's wife weighing eighteen stone , and of believing all she believes . 
My ideal is to go to church and offer a candle in simple-hearted faith , upon my word it is . 
Then there would be an end to my sufferings . 
I like being doctored too ; in the spring there was an outbreak of smallpox and I went and was vaccinated in a foundling hospital - if only you knew how I enjoyed myself that day . 
I subscribed ten roubles in the cause of the Slavs ! 
... But you are not listening . 
Do you know , you are not at all well this evening ? 
I know you went yesterday to that doctor ... well , what about your health ? 
What did the doctor say ? '' 
`` Fool ! '' 
