Yet he kept cursing himself , of course , all the way for going to this lady , but `` I will get to the bottom of it , I will ! '' 
he repeated for the tenth time , grinding his teeth , and he carried out his intention . 
It was exactly eleven o'clock when he entered Madame Hohlakov 's house . 
He was admitted into the yard pretty quickly , but , in response to his inquiry whether the lady was still up , the porter could give no answer , except that she was usually in bed by that time . 
`` Ask at the top of the stairs . 
If the lady wants to receive you , she 'll receive you . 
If she wo n't , she wo n't . '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch went up , but did not find things so easy here . 
The footman was unwilling to take in his name , but finally called a maid . 
Pyotr Ilyitch politely but insistently begged her to inform her lady that an official , living in the town , called Perhotin , had called on particular business , and that if it were not of the greatest importance he would not have ventured to come . 
`` Tell her in those words , in those words exactly , '' he asked the girl . 
She went away . 
He remained waiting in the entry . 
Madame Hohlakov herself was already in her bedroom , though not yet asleep . 
She had felt upset ever since Mitya 's visit , and had a presentiment that she would not get through the night without the sick headache which always , with her , followed such excitement . 
She was surprised on hearing the announcement from the maid . 
She irritably declined to see him , however , though the unexpected visit at such an hour , of an `` official living in the town , '' who was a total stranger , roused her feminine curiosity intensely . 
But this time Pyotr Ilyitch was as obstinate as a mule . 
He begged the maid most earnestly to take another message in these very words : `` That he had come on business of the greatest importance , and that Madame Hohlakov might have cause to regret it later , if she refused to see him now . '' 
`` I plunged headlong , '' he described it afterwards . 
The maid , gazing at him in amazement , went to take his message again . 
Madame Hohlakov was impressed . 
She thought a little , asked what he looked like , and learned that he was very well dressed , young , and so polite . '' 
We may note , parenthetically , that Pyotr Ilyitch was a rather good-looking young man , and well aware of the fact . 
Madame Hohlakov made up her mind to see him . 
She was in her dressing-gown and slippers , but she flung a black shawl over her shoulders . 
`` The official '' was asked to walk into the drawing-room , the very room in which Mitya had been received shortly before . 
The lady came to meet her visitor , with a sternly inquiring countenance , and , without asking him to sit down , began at once with the question : `` What do you want ? '' 
`` I have ventured to disturb you , madam , on a matter concerning our common acquaintance , Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov , '' Perhotin began . 
But he had hardly uttered the name , when the lady 's face showed signs of acute irritation . 
She almost shrieked , and interrupted him in a fury : `` How much longer am I to be worried by that awful man ? '' 
she cried hysterically . 
`` How dare you , sir , how could you venture to disturb a lady who is a stranger to you , in her own house at such an hour ! 
... And to force yourself upon her to talk of a man who came here , to this very drawing-room , only three hours ago , to murder me , and went stamping out of the room , as no one would go out of a decent house . 
Let me tell you , sir , that I shall lodge a complaint against you , that I will not let it pass . 
Kindly leave me at once ... I am a mother ... . 
I. . . 
I - '' `` Murder ! 
then he tried to murder you , too ? '' 
`` Why , has he killed somebody else ? '' 
Madame Hohlakov asked impulsively . 
`` If you would kindly listen , madam , for half a moment , I 'll explain it all in a couple of words , '' answered Perhotin , firmly . 
`` At five o'clock this afternoon Dmitri Fyodorovitch borrowed ten roubles from me , and I know for a fact he had no money . 
Yet at nine o'clock , he came to see me with a bundle of hundred-rouble notes in his hand , about two or three thousand roubles . 
His hands and face were all covered with blood , and he looked like a madman . 
When I asked him where he had got so much money , he answered that he had just received it from you , that you had given him a sum of three thousand to go to the gold mines ... '' Madame Hohlakov 's face assumed an expression of intense and painful excitement . 
`` Good God ! 
He must have killed his old father ! '' 
she cried , clasping her hands . 
`` I have never given him money , never ! 
