In the spaces between the windows there were mirrors in elaborate white and gilt frames , of old-fashioned carving . 
On the walls , covered with white paper , which was torn in many places , there hung two large portraits - one of some prince who had been governor of the district thirty years before , and the other of some bishop , also long since dead . 
In the corner opposite the door there were several ikons , before which a lamp was lighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes as to light the room . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to bed very late , at three or four o'clock in the morning , and would wander about the room at night or sit in an armchair , thinking . 
This had become a habit with him . 
He often slept quite alone in the house , sending his servants to the lodge ; but usually Smerdyakov remained , sleeping on a bench in the hall . 
When Alyosha came in , dinner was over , but coffee and preserves had been served . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after dinner . 
Ivan was also at table , sipping coffee . 
The servants , Grigory and Smerdyakov , were standing by . 
Both the gentlemen and the servants seemed in singularly good spirits . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was roaring with laughter . 
Before he entered the room , Alyosha heard the shrill laugh he knew so well , and could tell from the sound of it that his father had only reached the good-humoured stage , and was far from being completely drunk . 
`` Here he is ! 
Here he is ! '' 
yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch , highly delighted at seeing Alyosha . 
`` Join us . 
Sit down . 
Coffee is a lenten dish , but it 's hot and good . 
I do n't offer you brandy , you 're keeping the fast . 
But would you like some ? 
No ; I 'd better give you some of our famous liqueur . 
Smerdyakov , go to the cupboard , the second shelf on the right . 
Here are the keys . 
Look sharp ! '' 
Alyosha began refusing the liqueur . 
`` Never mind . 
If you wo n't have it , we will , '' said Fyodor Pavlovitch , beaming . 
`` But stay - have you dined ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Alyosha , who had in truth only eaten a piece of bread and drunk a glass of kvass in the Father Superior 's kitchen . 
`` Though I should be pleased to have some hot coffee . '' 
`` Bravo , my darling ! 
He 'll have some coffee . 
Does it want warming ? 
No , it 's boiling . 
It 's capital coffee : Smerdyakov 's making . 
My Smerdyakov 's an artist at coffee and at fish patties , and at fish soup , too . 
You must come one day and have some fish soup . 
Let me know beforehand ... . 
But , stay ; did n't I tell you this morning to come home with your mattress and pillow and all ? 
Have you brought your mattress ? 
He he he ! '' 
`` No , I have n't , '' said Alyosha , smiling , too . 
`` Ah , but you were frightened , you were frightened this morning , were n't you ? 
There , my darling , I could n't do anything to vex you . 
Do you know , Ivan , I ca n't resist the way he looks one straight in the face and laughs ? 
It makes me laugh all over . 
I 'm so fond of him . 
Alyosha , let me give you my blessing - a father 's blessing . '' 
Alyosha rose , but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind . 
