And bending down to Alyosha , he went on in a confidential half-whisper . 
`` If I send the ruffian to prison , she 'll hear of it and run to see him at once . 
But if she hears that he has beaten me , a weak old man , within an inch of my life , she may give him up and come to me ... For that 's her way , everything by contraries . 
I know her through and through ! 
Wo n't you have a drop of brandy ? 
Take some cold coffee and I 'll pour a quarter of a glass of brandy into it , it 's delicious , my boy . '' 
`` No , thank you . 
I 'll take that roll with me if I may , '' said Alyosha , and taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock . 
`` And you 'd better not have brandy , either , '' he suggested apprehensively , looking into the old man 's face . 
`` You are quite right , it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them . 
Only one little glass . 
I 'll get it out of the cupboard . '' 
He unlocked the cupboard , poured out a glass , drank it , then locked the cupboard and put the key back in his pocket . 
`` That 's enough . 
One glass wo n't kill me . '' 
`` You see you are in a better humour now , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Um ! 
I love you even without the brandy , but with scoundrels I am a scoundrel . 
Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya - why is that ? 
He wants to spy how much I give Grushenka if she comes . 
They are all scoundrels ! 
But I do n't recognise Ivan , I do n't know him at all . 
Where does he come from ? 
He is not one of us in soul . 
As though I 'd leave him anything ! 
I sha n't leave a will at all , you may as well know . 
And I 'll crush Mitya like a beetle . 
I squash black-beetles at night with my slipper ; they squelch when you tread on them . 
And your Mitya will squelch too . 
Your Mitya , for you love him . 
Yes you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him . 
But if Ivan loved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him . 
But Ivan loves nobody . 
Ivan is not one of us . 
People like Ivan are not our sort , my boy . 
They are like a cloud of dust . 
When the wind blows , the dust will be gone ... . 
I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to-day ; I wanted to find out from you about Mitya . 
If I were to hand him over a thousand or maybe two now , would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself off altogether for five years or , better still , thirty-five , and without Grushenka , and give her up once for all , eh ? '' 
`` I - I 'll ask him , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` If you would give him three thousand , perhaps he - '' `` That 's nonsense ! 
You need n't ask him now , no need ! 
I 've changed my mind . 
It was a nonsensical idea of mine . 
I wo n't give him anything , not a penny , I want my money myself , '' cried the old man , waving his hand . 
`` I 'll crush him like a beetle without it . 
Do n't say anything to him or else he will begin hoping . 
There 's nothing for you to do here , you need n't stay . 
Is that betrothed of his , Katerina Ivanovna , whom he has kept so carefully hidden from me all this time , going to marry him or not ? 
You went to see her yesterday , I believe ? '' 
