`` Terrible are your words , most holy and blessed Father , '' the monk shook his head . 
But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes . 
`` Do you see this tree ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , after a pause . 
`` I do , blessed Father . '' 
`` You think it 's an elm , but for me it has another shape . '' 
`` What sort of shape ? '' 
inquired the monk , after a pause of vain expectation . 
`` It happens at night . 
You see those two branches ? 
In the night it is Christ holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms , I see it clearly and tremble . 
It 's terrible , terrible ! '' 
`` What is there terrible if it 's Christ Himself ? '' 
`` Why , He 'll snatch me up and carry me away . '' 
`` Alive ? '' 
`` In the spirit and glory of Elijah , have n't you heard ? 
He will take me in His arms and bear me away . '' 
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the brothers , in considerable perplexity of mind , he still cherished at heart a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima . 
He was strongly in favour of fasting , and it was not strange that one who kept so rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should `` see marvels . '' 
His words seemed certainly queer , but God only could tell what was hidden in those words , and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God ? 
The pinching of the devil 's tail he was ready and eager to believe , and not only in the figurative sense . 
Besides he had , before visiting the monastery , a strong prejudice against the institution of `` elders , '' which he only knew of by hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation . 
Before he had been long at the monastery , he had detected the secret murmurings of some shallow brothers who disliked the institution . 
He was , besides , a meddlesome , inquisitive man , who poked his nose into everything . 
This was why the news of the fresh `` miracle '' performed by Father Zossima reduced him to extreme perplexity . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards how their inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro from one group to another , listening and asking questions among the monks that were crowding within and without the elder 's cell . 
But he did not pay much attention to him at the time , and only recollected it afterwards . 
He had no thought to spare for it indeed , for when Father Zossima , feeling tired again , had gone back to bed , he thought of Alyosha as he was closing his eyes , and sent for him . 
Alyosha ran at once . 
There was no one else in the cell but Father Paissy , Father Iosif , and the novice Porfiry . 
The elder , opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha , asked him suddenly : `` Are your people expecting you , my son ? '' 
Alyosha hesitated . 
`` Have n't they need of you ? 
Did n't you promise someone yesterday to see them to-day ? '' 
`` I did promise - to my father - my brothers - others too . '' 
`` You see , you must go . 
Do n't grieve . 
Be sure I shall not die without your being by to hear my last word . 
To you I will say that word , my son , it will be my last gift to you . 
To you , dear son , because you love me . 
But now go to keep your promise . '' 
Alyosha immediately obeyed , though it was hard to go . 
But the promise that he should hear his last word on earth , that it should be the last gift to him , Alyosha , sent a thrill of rapture through his soul . 
He made haste that he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly . 
Father Paissy , too , uttered some words of exhortation which moved and surprised him greatly . 
He spoke as they left the cell together . 
`` Remember , young man , unceasingly , '' Father Paissy began , without preface , `` that the science of this world , which has become a great power , has , especially in the last century , analysed everything divine handed down to us in the holy books . 
After this cruel analysis the learned of this world have nothing left of all that was sacred of old . 
But they have only analysed the parts and overlooked the whole , and indeed their blindness is marvellous . 
Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . 
