If you wo n't , I am glad to see you ... '' `` Me , me frighten you ? '' 
cried Mitya , flinging up his hands . 
`` Oh , pass me by , go your way , I wo n't hinder you ! 
... '' And suddenly he surprised them all , and no doubt himself as well , by flinging himself on a chair , and bursting into tears , turning his head away to the opposite wall , while his arms clasped the back of the chair tight , as though embracing it . 
`` Come , come , what a fellow you are ! '' 
cried Grushenka reproachfully . 
`` That 's just how he comes to see me - he begins talking , and I ca n't make out what he means . 
He cried like that once before , and now he 's crying again ! 
It 's shamefull Why are you crying ? 
As though you had anything to cry for ! '' 
she added enigmatically , emphasising each word with some irritability . 
`` I. . . 
I 'm not crying ... . 
Well , good evening ! '' 
He instantly turned round in his chair , and suddenly laughed , not his abrupt wooden laugh , but a long , quivering , inaudible nervous laugh . 
`` Well , there you are again ... . 
Come , cheer up , cheer up ! '' 
Grushenka said to him persuasively . 
`` I 'm very glad you 've come , very glad , Mitya , do you hear , I 'm very glad ! 
I want him to stay here with us , '' she said peremptorily , addressing the whole company , though her words were obviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa . 
`` I wish it , I wish it ! 
And if he goes away I shall go , too ! '' 
she added with flashing eyes . 
`` What my queen commands is law ! '' 
pronounced the Pole , gallantly kissing Grushenka 's hand . 
`` I beg you , panie , to join our company , '' he added politely , addressing Mitya . 
Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering another tirade , but the words did not come . 
`` Let 's drink , Panie , '' he blurted out instead of making a speech . 
Everyone laughed . 
`` Good heavens ! 
I thought he was going to begin again ! '' 
Grushenka exclaimed nervously . 
`` Do you hear , Mitya , '' she went on insistently , `` do n't prance about , but it 's nice you 've brought the champagne . 
I want some myself , and I ca n't bear liqueurs . 
And best of all , you 've come yourself . 
We were fearfully dull here ... . 
You 've come for a spree again , I suppose ? 
But put your money in your pocket . 
Where did you get such a lot ? '' 
Mitya had been , all this time , holding in his hand the crumpled bundle of notes on which the eyes of all , especially of the Poles , were fixed . 
In confusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket . 
He flushed . 
At that moment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne , and glasses on a tray . 
Mitya snatched up the bottle , but he was so bewildered that he did not know what to do with it . 
Kalgonov took it from him and poured out the champagne . 
`` Another ! 
Another bottle ! '' 
Mitya cried to the inn-keeper , and , forgetting to clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly invited to drink to their good understanding , he drank off his glass without waiting for anyone else . 
His whole countenance suddenly changed . 
The solemn and tragic expression with which he had entered vanished completely , and a look of something childlike came into his face . 
