Say , the son of lies , and that will be enough . 
Only ... my angel ... may sometimes talk about Diderot ! 
Diderot will do no harm , though sometimes a word will do harm . 
Great elder , by the way , I was forgetting , though I had been meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose to ask and to find out something . 
Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch not to interrupt me . 
Here is my question : Is it true , great Father , that the story is told somewhere in the Lives of the Saints of a holy saint martyred for his faith who , when his head was cut off at last , stood up , picked up his head , and , ` courteously kissing it , ' walked a long way , carrying it in his hands . 
Is that true or not , honoured Father ? '' 
`` No , it is untrue , '' said the elder . 
`` There is nothing of the kind in all the lives of the saints . 
What saint do you say the story is told of ? '' 
asked the Father Librarian . 
`` I do not know what saint . 
I do not know , and ca n't tell . 
I was deceived . 
I was told the story . 
I had heard it , and do you know who told it ? 
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov here , was so angry just now about Diderot . 
He it was who told the story . '' 
`` I have never told it you , I never speak to you at all . '' 
`` It is true you did not tell me , but you told it when I was present . 
It was three years ago . 
I mentioned it because by that ridiculous story you shook my faith , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
You knew nothing of it , but I went home with my faith shaken , and I have been getting more and more shaken ever since . 
Yes , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , you were the cause of a great fall . 
That was not a Diderot ! 
Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic , though it was perfectly clear to everyone by now that he was playing a part again . 
Yet Miusov was stung by his words . 
`` What nonsense , and it is all nonsense , '' he muttered . 
`` I may really have told it , some time or other ... but not to you . 
I was told it myself . 
I heard it in Paris from a Frenchman . 
He told me it was read at our mass from the Lives of the Saints ... he was a very learned man who had made a special study of Russian statistics and had lived a long time in Russia ... . 
I have not read the Lives of the Saints myself , and I am not going to read them ... all sorts of things are said at dinner - we were dining then . '' 
`` Yes , you were dining then , and so I lost my faith ! '' 
said Fyodor Pavlovitch , mimicking him . 
`` What do I care for your faith ? '' 
Miusov was on the point of shouting , but he suddenly checked himself , and said with contempt , `` You defile everything you touch . '' 
The elder suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` Excuse me , gentlemen , for leaving you a few minutes , '' he said , addressing all his guests . 
`` I have visitors awaiting me who arrived before you . 
But do n't you tell lies all the same , '' he added , turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good-humoured face . 
He went out of the cell . 
Alyosha and the novice flew to escort him down the steps . 
Alyosha was breathless : he was glad to get away , but he was glad , too , that the elder was good-humoured and not offended . 
Father Zossima was going towards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch persisted , in stopping him at the door of the cell . 
`` Blessed man ! '' 
he cried , with feeling . 
`` Allow me to kiss your hand once more . 
Yes , with you I could still talk , I could still get on . 
