Lost his job , they say . 
He 's heard now that Grushenka 's saved a little money , so he 's turned up again - that 's the explanation of the mystery . '' 
Again Alyosha seemed not to hear . 
Rakitin could not control himself . 
`` Well , so you 've saved the sinner ? '' 
he laughed spitefully . 
`` Have you turned the Magdalene into the true path ? 
Driven out the seven devils , eh ? 
So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come to pass ! '' 
`` Hush , Rakitin , '' Alyosha , answered with an aching heart . 
`` So you despise me now for those twenty-five roubles ? 
I 've sold my friend , you think . 
But you are not Christ , you know , and I am not Judas . '' 
`` Oh , Rakitin , I assure you I 'd forgotten about it , '' cried Alyosha , `` you remind me of it yourself ... '' But this was the last straw for Rakitin . 
`` Damnation take you all and each of you '' he cried suddenly , `` why the devil did I take you up ? 
I do n't want to know you from this time forward . 
Go alone , there 's your road ! '' 
And he turned abruptly into another street , leaving Alyosha alone in the dark . 
Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the monastery . 
Cana of Galilee IT was very late , according to the monastery ideas , when Alyosha returned to the hermitage ; the door-keeper let him in by a special entrance . 
It had struck nine o'clock - the hour of rest and repose after a day of such agitation for all . 
Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into the elder 's cell where his coffin was now standing . 
There was no one in the cell but Father Paissy , reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin , and the young novice Porfiry , who , exhausted by the previous night 's conversation and the disturbing incidents of the day , was sleeping the deep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room . 
Though Father Paissy heard Alyosha come in , he did not even look in his direction . 
Alyosha turned to the right from the door to the corner , fell on his knees and began to pray . 
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings ; no single sensation stood out distinctly ; on the contrary , one drove out another in a slow , continual rotation . 
But there was a sweetness in his heart and , strange to say , Alyosha was not surprised at it . 
Again he saw that coffin before him , the hidden dead figure so precious to him , but the weeping and poignant grief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul . 
As soon as he came in , he fell down before the coffin as before a holy shrine , but joy , joy was glowing in his mind and in his heart . 
The one window of the cell was open , the air was fresh and cool . 
`` So the smell must have become stronger , if they opened the window , '' thought Alyosha . 
But even this thought of the smell of corruption , which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating a few hours before , no longer made him feel miserable or indignant . 
He began quietly praying , but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically . 
Fragments of thought floated through his soul , flashed like stars and went out again at once , to be succeeded by others . 
But yet there was reigning in his soul a sense of the wholeness of things - something steadfast and comforting - and he was aware of it himself . 
Sometimes he began praying ardently , he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love ... But when he had begun to pray , he passed suddenly to something else , and sank into thought , forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it . 
He began listening to what Father Paissy was reading , but worn out with exhaustion he gradually began to doze . 
`` And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee , '' read Father Paissy . 
`` And the mother of Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was called , and his disciples , to the marriage . '' 
`` Marriage ? 
What 's that ? 
... A marriage ! '' 
floated whirling through Alyosha 's mind . 
`` There is happiness for her , too ... She has gone to the feast ... . 
No , she has not taken the knife ... . 
That was only a tragic phrase ... . 
Well ... tragic phrases should be forgiven , they must be . 
Tragic phrases comfort the heart ... Without them , sorrow would be too heavy for men to bear . 
Rakitin has gone off to the back alley . 
As long as Rakitin broods over his wrongs , he will always go off to the back alley ... . 
