cried Miusov , suddenly breaking out ; `` the State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State . 
It 's not simply Ultramontanism , it 's arch-Ultramontanism ! 
It 's beyond the dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh ! '' 
`` You are completely misunderstanding it , '' said Father Paissy sternly . 
`` Understand , the Church is not to be transformed into the State . 
That is Rome and its dream . 
That is the third temptation of the devil . 
On the contrary , the State is transformed into the Church , will ascend and become a Church over the whole world - which is the complete opposite of Ultramontanism and Rome , and your interpretation , and is only the glorious destiny ordained for the Orthodox Church . 
This star will arise in the east ! '' 
Miusov was significantly silent . 
His whole figure expressed extraordinary personal dignity . 
A supercilious and condescending smile played on his lips . 
Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart . 
The whole conversation stirred him profoundly . 
He glanced casually at Rakitin , who was standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watching intently though with downcast eyes . 
But from the colour in his cheeks Alyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited , and he knew what caused his excitement . 
`` Allow me to tell you one little anecdote , gentlemen , '' Miusov said impressively , with a peculiarly majestic air . 
`` Some years ago , soon after the coup d'etat of December , I happened to be calling in Paris on an extremely influential personage in the Government , and I met a very interesting man in his house . 
This individual was not precisely a detective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment of political detectives - a rather powerful position in its own way . 
I was prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him . 
And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringing a special report , and as he saw the reception given me by his chief , he deigned to speak with some openness , to a certain extent only , of course . 
He was rather courteous than open , as Frenchmen know how to be courteous , especially to a foreigner . 
But I thoroughly understood him . 
The subject was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted . 
I will quote only one most curious remark dropped by this person . 
` We are not particularly afraid , ' said he , ` of all these socialists , anarchists , infidels , and revolutionists ; we keep watch on them and know all their goings on . 
But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in God and are Christians , but at the same time are socialists . 
These are the people we are most afraid of . 
They are dreadful people The socialist who is a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist . ' 
The words struck me at the time , and now they have suddenly come back to me here , gentlemen . '' 
`` You apply them to us , and look upon us as socialists ? '' 
Father Paissy asked directly , without beating about the bush . 
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer , the door opened , and the guest so long expected , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , came in . 
They had , in fact , given up expecting him , and his sudden appearance caused some surprise for a moment . 
Why Is Such a Man Alive ? 
DMITRI FYODOROVITCH , a young man of eight and twenty , of medium height and agreeable countenance , looked older than his years . 
He was muscular , and showed signs of considerable physical strength . 
Yet there was something not healthy in his face . 
It was rather thin , his cheeks were hollow , and there was an unhealthy sallowness in their colour . 
His rather large , prominent , dark eyes had an expression of firm determination , and yet there was a vague look in them , too . 
Even when he was excited and talking irritably , his eyes somehow did not follow his mood , but betrayed something else , sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing . 
`` It 's hard to tell what he 's thinking , '' those who talked to him sometimes declared . 
People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes were startled by his sudden laugh , which bore witness to mirthful and light-hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy . 
A certain strained look in his face was easy to understand at this moment . 
Everyone knew , or had heard of , the extremely restless and dissipated life which he had been leading of late , as well as of the violent anger to which he had been roused in his quarrels with his father . 
There were several stories current in the town about it . 
It is true that he was irascible by nature , `` of an unstable and unbalanced mind , '' as our justice of the peace , Katchalnikov , happily described him . 
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned frock-coat . 
He wore black gloves and carried a top hat . 
Having only lately left the army , he still had moustaches and no beard . 
