He seemed to have become suddenly gentle and subdued . 
He looked shyly and happily at everyone , with a continual nervous little laugh , and the blissful expression of a dog who has done wrong , been punished , and forgiven . 
He seemed to have forgotten everything , and was looking round at everyone with a childlike smile of delight . 
He looked at Grushenka , laughing continually , and bringing his chair close up to her . 
By degrees he had gained some idea of the two Poles , though he had formed no definite conception of them yet . 
The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanour and his Polish accent ; and , above all , by his pipe . 
`` Well , what of it ? 
It 's a good thing he 's smoking a pipe , '' he reflected . 
The Pole 's puffy , middle-aged face , with its tiny nose and two very thin , pointed , dyed and impudent-looking moustaches , had not so far roused the faintest doubts in Mitya . 
He was not even particularly struck by the Pole 's absurd wig made in Siberia , with love-locks foolishly combed forward over the temples . 
`` I suppose it 's all right since he wears a wig , '' he went on , musing blissfully . 
The other , younger Pole , who was staring insolently and defiantly at the company and listening to the conversation with silent contempt , still only impressed Mitya by his great height , which was in striking contrast to the Pole on the sofa . 
`` If he stood up he 'd be six foot three . '' 
The thought flitted through Mitya 's mind . 
It occurred to him , too , that this Pole must be the friend of the other , as it were , a `` bodyguard , '' and no doubt the big Pole was at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe . 
But this all seemed to Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned . 
In his mood of doglike submissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away . 
Grushenka 's mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he completely failed to grasp . 
All he understood , with thrilling heart , was that she was kind to him , that she had forgiven him , and made him sit by her . 
He was beside himself with delight , watching her sip her glass of champagne . 
The silence of the company seemed somehow to strike him , however , and he looked round at everyone with expectant eyes . 
`` Why are we sitting here though , gentlemen ? 
Why do n't you begin doing something ? '' 
his smiling eyes seemed to ask . 
`` He keeps talking nonsense , and we were all laughing , '' Kalgonov began suddenly , as though divining his thought , and pointing to Maximov . 
Mitya immediately stared at Kalgonov and then at Maximov `` He 's talking nonsense ? '' 
he laughed , his short , wooden laugh , seeming suddenly delighted at something - `` ha ha ! '' 
`` Yes . 
Would you believe it , he will have it that all our cavalry officers in the twenties married Polish women . 
That 's awful rot , is n't it ? '' 
`` Polish women ? '' 
repeated Mitya , perfectly ecstatic . 
Kalgonov was well aware of Mitya 's attitude to Grushenka , and he guessed about the Pole , too , but that did not so much interest him , perhaps did not interest him at all ; what he was interested in was Maximov . 
He had come here with Maximov by chance , and he met the Poles here at the inn for the first time in his life . 
Grushenka he knew before , and had once been with someone to see her ; but she had not taken to him . 
But here she looked at him very affectionately : before Mitya 's arrival , she had been making much of him , but he seemed somehow to be unmoved by it . 
He was a boy , not over twenty , dressed like a dandy , with a very charming fair-skinned face , and splendid thick , fair hair . 
From his fair face looked out beautiful pale blue eyes , with an intelligent and sometimes even deep expression , beyond his age indeed , although the young man sometimes looked and talked quite like a child , and was not at all ashamed of it , even when he was aware of it himself . 
As a rule he was very wilful , even capricious , though always friendly . 
Sometimes there was something fixed and obstinate in his expression . 
He would look at you and listen , seeming all the while to be persistently dreaming over something else . 
Often he was listless and lazy ; at other times he would grow excited , sometimes , apparently , over the most trivial matters . 
`` Only imagine , I 've been taking him about with me for the last four days , '' he went on , indolently drawling his words , quite naturally though , without the slightest affectation . 
`` Ever since your brother , do you remember , shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying . 
That made me take an interest in him at the time , and I took him into the country , but he keeps talking such rot I 'm ashamed to be with him . 
I 'm taking him back . '' 
`` The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies , and says what is impossible , '' the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov . 
He spoke Russian fairly well , much better , anyway , than he pretended . 
If he used Russian words , he always distorted them into a Polish form . 
`` But I was married to a Polish lady myself , '' tittered Maximov . 
