Why are people poor ? 
Why is the babe poor ? 
Why is the steppe barren ? 
Why do n't they hug each other and kiss ? 
Why do n't they sing songs of joy ? 
Why are they so dark from black misery ? 
Why do n't they feed the babe ? '' 
And he felt that , though his questions were unreasonable and senseless , yet he wanted to ask just that , and he had to ask it just in that way . 
And he felt that a passion of pity , such as he had never known before , was rising in his heart , that he wanted to cry , that he wanted to do something for them all , so that the babe should weep no more , so that the dark-faced , dried-up mother should not weep , that no one should shed tears again from that moment , and he wanted to do it at once , at once , regardless of all obstacles , with all the recklessness of the Karamazovs . 
`` And I 'm coming with you . 
I wo n't leave you now for the rest of my life , I 'm coming with you '' , he heard close beside him Grushenka 's tender voice , thrilling with emotion . 
And his heart glowed , and he struggled forward towards the light , and he longed to live , to live , to go on and on , towards the new , beckoning light , and to hasten , hasten , now , at once ! 
`` What ! 
Where ? '' 
he exclaimed opening his eyes , and sitting up on the chest , as though he had revived from a swoon , smiling brightly . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was standing over him , suggesting that he should hear the protocol read aloud and sign it . 
Mitya guessed that he had been asleep an hour or more , but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
He was suddenly struck by the fact that there was a pillow under his head , which had n't been there when he had leant back , exhausted , on the chest . 
`` Who put that pillow under my head ? 
Who was so kind ? '' 
he cried , with a sort of ecstatic gratitude , and tears in his voice , as though some great kindness had been shown him . 
He never found out who this kind man was ; perhaps one of the peasant witnesses , or Nikolay Parfenovitch 's little secretary , had compassionately thought to put a pillow under his head ; but his whole soul was quivering with tears . 
He went to the table and said that he would sign whatever they liked . 
`` I 've had a good dream , gentlemen , '' he said in a strange voice , with a new light , as of joy , in his face . 
They Carry Mitya Away WHEN the protocol had been signed , Nikolay Parfenovitch turned solemnly to the prisoner and read him the `` Committal , '' setting forth , that in such a year , on such a day , in such a place , the investigating lawyer of such-and-such a district court , having examined so-and-so -LRB- to wit , Mitya -RRB- accused of this and of that -LRB- all the charges were carefully written out -RRB- and having considered that the accused , not pleading guilty to the charges made against him , had brought forward nothing in his defence , while the witnesses , so-and-so , and so-and-so , and the circumstances such-and-such testify against him , acting in accordance with such-and-such articles of the Statute Book , and so on , has ruled , that , in order to preclude so-and-so -LRB- Mitya -RRB- from all means of evading pursuit and judgment , he be detained in such-and-such a prison , which he hereby notifies to the accused and communicates a copy of this same `` Committal '' to the deputy prosecutor , and so on , and so on . 
In brief , Mitya was informed that he was , from that moment , a prisoner , and that he would be driven at once to the town , and there shut up in a very unpleasant place . 
Mitya listened attentively , and only shrugged his shoulders . 
`` Well , gentlemen , I do n't blame you . 
I 'm ready ... . 
I understand that there 's nothing else for you to do . '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch informed him gently that he would be escorted at once by the rural police officer , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , who happened to be on the spot ... `` Stay , '' Mitya interrupted , suddenly , and impelled by uncontrollable feeling he pronounced , addressing all in the room : `` Gentlemen , we 're all cruel , we 're all monsters , we all make men weep , and mothers , and babes at the breast , but of all , let it be settled here , now , of all I am the lowest reptile ! 
I 've sworn to amend , and every day I 've done the same filthy things . 
I understand now that such men as I need a blow , a blow of destiny to catch them as with a noose , and bind them by a force from without . 
Never , never should I have risen of myself ! 
But the thunderbolt has fallen . 
I accept the torture of accusation , and my public shame ; I want to suffer and by suffering I shall be purified . 
Perhaps I shall be purified , gentlemen ? 
But listen , for the last time , I am not guilty of my father 's blood . 
I accept my punishment , not because I killed him , but because I meant to kill him , and perhaps I really might have killed him . 
Still I mean to fight it out with you . 
I warn you of that . 
I 'll fight it out with you to the end , and then God will decide . 
Good-bye , gentlemen , do n't be vexed with me for having shouted at you during the examination . 
Oh , I was still such a fool then ... . 
In another minute I shall be a prisoner , but now , for the last time , as a free man , Dmitri Karamazov offers you his hand . 
Saying good-bye to you , I say it to all men . '' 
His voice quivered and he stretched out his hand , but Nikolay Parfenovitch , who happened to stand nearest to him , with a sudden , almost nervous movement , hid his hands behind his back . 
Mitya instantly noticed this , and started . 
He let his outstretched hand fall at once . 
`` The preliminary inquiry is not yet over , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch faltered , somewhat embarrassed . 
