A year before the end of the course he suddenly announced to the ladies that he was going to see his father about a plan which had occurred to him . 
They were sorry and unwilling to let him go . 
The journey was not an expensive one , and the ladies would not let him pawn his watch , a parting present from his benefactor 's family . 
They provided him liberally with money and even fitted him out with new clothes and linen . 
But he returned half the money they gave him , saying that he intended to go third class . 
On his arrival in the town he made no answer to his father 's first inquiry why he had come before completing his studies , and seemed , so they say , unusually thoughtful . 
It soon became apparent that he was looking for his mother 's tomb . 
He practically acknowledged at the time that that was the only object of his visit . 
But it can hardly have been the whole reason of it . 
It is more probable that he himself did not understand and could not explain what had suddenly arisen in his soul , and drawn him irresistibly into a new , unknown , but inevitable path . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch could not show him where his second wife was buried , for he had never visited her grave since he had thrown earth upon her coffin , and in the course of years had entirely forgotten where she was buried . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , by the way , had for some time previously not been living in our town . 
Three or four years after his wife 's death he had gone to the south of Russia and finally turned up in Odessa , where he spent several years . 
He made the acquaintance at first , in his own words , `` of a lot of low Jews , Jewesses , and Jewkins , '' and ended by being received by `` Jews high and low alike . '' 
It may be presumed that at this period he developed a peculiar faculty for making and hoarding money . 
He finally returned to our town only three years before Alyosha 's arrival . 
His former acquaintances found him looking terribly aged , although he was by no means an old man . 
He behaved not exactly with more dignity but with more effrontery . 
The former buffoon showed an insolent propensity for making buffoons of others . 
His depravity with women was not as it used to be , but even more revolting . 
In a short time he opened a great number of new taverns in the district . 
It was evident that he had perhaps a hundred thousand roubles or not much less . 
Many of the inhabitants of the town and district were soon in his debt , and , of course , had given good security . 
Of late , too , he looked somehow bloated and seemed more irresponsible , more uneven , had sunk into a sort of incoherence , used to begin one thing and go on with another , as though he were letting himself go altogether . 
He was more and more frequently drunk . 
And , if it had not been for the same servant Grigory , who by that time had aged considerably too , and used to look after him sometimes almost like a tutor , Fyodor Pavlovitch might have got into terrible scrapes . 
Alyosha 's arrival seemed to affect even his moral side , as though something had awakened in this prematurely old man which had long been dead in his soul . 
`` Do you know , '' he used often to say , looking at Alyosha , `` that you are like her , ` the crazy woman ' '' - that was what he used to call his dead wife , Alyosha 's mother . 
Grigory it was who pointed out the `` crazy woman 's '' grave to Alyosha . 
He took him to our town cemetery and showed him in a remote corner a cast-iron tombstone , cheap but decently kept , on which were inscribed the name and age of the deceased and the date of her death , and below a four-lined verse , such as are commonly used on old-fashioned middle-class tombs . 
To Alyosha 's amazement this tomb turned out to be Grigory 's doing . 
He had put it up on the poor `` crazy woman 's '' grave at his own expense , after Fyodor Pavlovitch , whom he had often pestered about the grave , had gone to Odessa , abandoning the grave and all his memories . 
Alyosha showed no particular emotion at the sight of his mother 's grave . 
He only listened to Grigory 's minute and solemn account of the erection of the tomb ; he stood with bowed head and walked away without uttering a word . 
It was perhaps a year before he visited the cemetery again . 
But this little episode was not without an influence upon Fyodor Pavlovitch - and a very original one . 
He suddenly took a thousand roubles to our monastery to pay for requiems for the soul of his wife ; but not for the second , Alyosha 's mother , the `` crazy woman , '' but for the first , Adelaida Ivanovna , who used to thrash him . 
In the evening of the same day he got drunk and abused the monks to Alyosha . 
He himself was far from being religious ; he had probably never put a penny candle before the image of a saint . 
Strange impulses of sudden feeling and sudden thought are common in such types . 
I have mentioned already that he looked bloated . 
His countenance at this time bore traces of something that testified unmistakably to the life he had led . 
Besides the long fleshy bags under his little , always insolent , suspicious , and ironical eyes ; besides the multitude of deep wrinkles in his little fat face , the Adam 's apple hung below his sharp chin like a great , fleshy goitre , which gave him a peculiar , repulsive , sensual appearance ; add to that a long rapacious mouth with full lips , between which could be seen little stumps of black decayed teeth . 
He slobbered every time he began to speak . 
He was fond indeed of making fun of his own face , though , I believe , he was well satisfied with it . 
He used particularly to point to his nose , which was not very large , but very delicate and conspicuously aquiline . 
`` A regular Roman nose , '' he used to say , `` with my goitre I 've quite the countenance of an ancient Roman patrician of the decadent period . '' 
He seemed proud of it . 
Not long after visiting his mother 's grave Alyosha suddenly announced that he wanted to enter the monastery , and that the monks were willing to receive him as a novice . 
He explained that this was his strong desire , and that he was solemnly asking his consent as his father . 
