The cool evening air refreshed him . 
There was a bright moon in the sky . 
A nightmare of ideas and sensations filled his soul . 
`` Shall I go at once and give information against Smerdyakov ? 
But what information can I give ? 
He is not guilty , anyway . 
On the contrary , he 'll accuse me . 
And in fact , why did I set off for Tchermashnya then ? 
What for ? 
What for ? '' 
Ivan asked himself . 
`` Yes , of course , I was expecting something and he is right ... '' And he remembered for the hundredth time how , on the last night in his father 's house , he had listened on the stairs . 
But he remembered it now with such anguish that he stood still on the spot as though he had been stabbed . 
`` Yes , I expected it then , that 's true ! 
I wanted the murder , I did want the murder ! 
Did I want the murder ? 
Did I want it ? 
I must kill Smerdyakov ! 
If I do n't dare kill Smerdyakov now , life is not worth living ! '' 
Ivan did not go home , but went straight to Katerina Ivanovna and alarmed her by his appearance . 
He was like a madman . 
He repeated all his conversation with Smerdyakov , every syllable of it . 
He could n't be calmed , however much she tried to soothe him : he kept walking about the room , speaking strangely , disconnectedly . 
At last he sat down , put his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hands and pronounced this strange sentence : `` If it 's not Dmitri , but Smerdyakov who 's the murderer , I share his guilt , for I put him up to it . 
Whether I did , I do n't know yet . 
But if he is the murderer , and not Dmitri , then , of course , I am the murderer , too . '' 
When Katerina Ivanovna heard that , she got up from her seat without a word , went to her writing-table , opened a box standing on it , took out a sheet of paper and laid it before Ivan . 
This was the document of which Ivan spoke to Alyosha later on as a `` conclusive proof '' that Dmitri had killed his father . 
It was the letter written by Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna when he was drunk , on the very evening he met Alyosha at the crossroads on the way to the monastery , after the scene at Katerina Ivanovna 's , when Grushenka had insulted her . 
Then , parting from Alyosha , Mitya had rushed to Grushenka . 
I do n't know whether he saw her , but in the evening he was at the Metropolis , where he got thoroughly drunk . 
Then he asked for pen and paper and wrote a document of weighty consequences to himself . 
It was a wordy , disconnected , frantic letter , a drunken letter , in fact . 
It was like the talk of a drunken man , who , on his return home , begins with extraordinary heat telling his wife or one of his household how he has just been insulted , what a rascal had just insulted him , what a fine fellow he is on the other hand , and how he will pay that scoundrel out ; and all that at great length , with great excitement and incoherence , with drunken tears and blows on the table . 
The letter was written on a dirty piece of ordinary paper of the cheapest kind . 
It had been provided by the tavern and there were figures scrawled on the back of it . 
There was evidently not space enough for his drunken verbosity and Mitya not only filled the margins but had written the last line right across the rest . 
The letter ran as follows : FATAL KATYA : To-morrow I will get the money and repay your three thousand and farewell , woman of great wrath , but farewell , too , my love ! 
Let us make an end ! 
To-morrow I shall try and get it from everyone , and if I ca n't borrow it , I give you my word of honour I shall go to my father and break his skull and take the money from under the pillow , if only Ivan has gone . 
It I have to go to Siberia for it , I 'll give you back your three thousand . 
And farewell . 
I bow down to the ground before you , for I 've been a scoundrel to you . 
Forgive me ! 
No , better not forgive me , you 'll be happier and so shall I ! 
Better Siberia than your love , for I love another woman and you got to know her too well to-day , so how can you forgive ? 
I will murder the man who 's robbed me ! 
I 'll leave you all and go to the East so as to see no one again . 
Not her either , for you are not my only tormentress ; she is too . 
Farewel ! 
