but receiving no answer , he adds at once . 
` Do n't answer , be silent . 
What canst Thou say , indeed ? 
I know too well what Thou wouldst say . 
And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadst said of old . 
Why , then , art Thou come to hinder us ? 
For Thou hast come to hinder us , and Thou knowest that . 
But dost thou know what will be to-morrow ? 
I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou or only a semblance of Him , but to-morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee at the stake as the worst of heretics . 
And the very people who have to-day kissed Thy feet , to-morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap up the embers of Thy fire . 
Knowest Thou that ? 
Yes , maybe Thou knowest it , ' he added with thoughtful penetration , never for a moment taking his eyes off the Prisoner . '' 
`` I do n't quite understand , Ivan . 
What does it mean ? '' 
Alyosha , who had been listening in silence , said with a smile . 
`` Is it simply a wild fantasy , or a mistake on the part of the old man - some impossible quid pro quo ? '' 
`` Take it as the last , '' said Ivan , laughing , `` if you are so corrupted by modern realism and ca n't stand anything fantastic . 
If you like it to be a case of mistaken identity , let it be so . 
It is true , '' he went on , laughing , `` the old man was ninety , and he might well be crazy over his set idea . 
He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner . 
It might , in fact , be simply his ravings , the delusion of an old man of ninety , over-excited by the auto da fe of a hundred heretics the day before . 
But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake of identity or a wild fantasy ? 
All that matters is that the old man should speak out , that he should speak openly of what he has thought in silence for ninety years . '' 
`` And the Prisoner too is silent ? 
Does He look at him and not say a word ? '' 
`` That 's inevitable in any case , '' Ivan laughed again . 
`` The old man has told Him He has n't the right to add anything to what He has said of old . 
One may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism , in my opinion at least . 
` All has been given by Thee to the Pope , ' they say , ` and all , therefore , is still in the Pope 's hands , and there is no need for Thee to come now at all . 
Thou must not meddle for the time , at least . ' 
That 's how they speak and write too - the Jesuits , at any rate . 
I have read it myself in the works of their theologians . 
` Hast Thou the right to reveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hast come ? ' 
my old man asks Him , and answers the question for Him . 
` No , Thou hast not ; that Thou mayest not add to what has been said of old , and mayest not take from men the freedom which Thou didst exalt when Thou wast on earth . 
Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men 's freedom of faith ; for it will be manifest as a miracle , and the freedom of their faith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred years ago . 
Didst Thou not often say then , `` I will make you free '' ? 
But now Thou hast seen these `` free '' men , ' the old man adds suddenly , with a pensive smile . 
` Yes , we 've paid dearly for it , ' he goes on , looking sternly at Him , ` but at last we have completed that work in Thy name . 
For fifteen centuries we have been wrestling with Thy freedom , but now it is ended and over for good . 
Dost Thou not believe that it 's over for good ? 
Thou lookest meekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me . 
But let me tell Thee that now , to-day , people are more persuaded than ever that they have perfect freedom , yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid it humbly at our feet . 
But that has been our doing . 
Was this what Thou didst ? 
Was this Thy freedom ? ' '' 
`` I do n't understand again . '' 
Alyosha broke in . 
`` Is he ironical , is he jesting ? '' 
`` Not a bit of it ! 
