Your question has no bearing on the case , and whatever has nothing to do with the case is my private affair . 
I wanted to pay a debt . 
I wanted to pay a debt of honour but to whom I wo n't say . '' 
`` Allow me to make a note of that , '' said the prosecutor . 
`` By all means . 
Write down that I wo n't say , that I wo n't . 
Write that I should think it dishonourable to say . 
Ech ! 
you can write it ; you 've nothing else to do with your time . '' 
`` Allow me to caution you , sir , and to remind you once more , if you are unaware of it , '' the prosecutor began , with a peculiar and stern impressiveness , `` that you have a perfect right not to answer the questions put to you now , and we on our side have no right to extort an answer from you , if you decline to give it for one reason or another . 
That is entirely a matter for your personal decision . 
But it is our duty , on the other hand , in such cases as the present , to explain and set before you the degree of injury you will be doing yourself by refusing to give this or that piece of evidence . 
After which I will beg you to continue . '' 
`` Gentlemen , I 'm not angry ... I. . . 
`` Mitya muttered in a rather disconcerted tone . 
`` Well , gentlemen , you see , that Samsonov to whom I went then ... '' We will , of course , not reproduce his account of what is known to the reader already . 
Mitya was impatiently anxious not to omit the slightest detail . 
At the same time he was in a hurry to get it over . 
But as he gave his evidence it was written down , and therefore they had continually to pull him up . 
Mitya disliked this , but submitted ; got angry , though still good-humouredly . 
He did , it is true , exclaim , from time to time , `` Gentlemen , that 's enough to make an angel out of patience ! '' 
Or , `` Gentlemen , it 's no good your irritating me . '' 
But even though he exclaimed he still preserved for a time his genially expansive mood . 
So he told them how Samsonov had made a fool of him two days before . 
-LRB- He had completely realised by now that he had been fooled . -RRB- 
The sale of his watch for six roubles to obtain money for the journey was something new to the lawyers . 
They were at once greatly interested , and even , to Mitya 's intense indignation , thought it necessary to write the fact down as a secondary confirmation of the circumstance that he had hardly a farthing in his pocket at the time . 
Little by little Mitya began to grow surly . 
Then , after describing his journey to see Lyagavy , the night spent in the stifling hut , and so on , he came to his return to the town . 
Here he began , without being particularly urged , to give a minute account of the agonies of jealousy he endured on Grushenka 's account . 
He was heard with silent attention . 
They inquired particularly into the circumstance of his having a place of ambush in Marya Kondratyevna 's house at the back of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden to keep watch on Grushenka , and of Smerdyakov 's bringing him information . 
They laid particular stress on this , and noted it down . 
Of his jealousy he spoke warmly and at length , and though inwardly ashamed at exposing his most intimate feelings to `` public ignominy , '' so to speak , he evidently overcame his shame in order to tell the truth . 
The frigid severity with which the investigating lawyer , and still more the prosecutor , stared intently at him as he told his story , disconcerted him at last considerably . 
`` That boy , Nikolay Parfenovitch , to whom I was talking nonsense about women only a few days ago , and that sickly prosecutor are not worth my telling this to , '' he reflected mournfully . 
`` It 's ignominious . 
` Be patient , humble , hold thy peace . ' '' 
He wound up his reflections with that line . 
But he pulled himself together to go on again . 
When he came to telling of his visit to Madame Hohlakov , he regained his spirits and even wished to tell a little anecdote of that lady which had nothing to do with the case . 
But the investigating lawyer stopped him , and civilly suggested that he should pass on to `` more essential matters . '' 
At last , when he described his despair and told them how , when he left Madame Hohlakov 's , he thought that he 'd `` get three thousand if he had to murder someone to do it , '' they stopped him again and noted down that he had `` meant to murder someone . '' 
Mitya let them write it without protest . 
At last he reached the point in his story when he learned that Grushenka had deceived him and had returned from Samsonov 's as soon as he left her there , though she had said that she would stay there till midnight . 
`` If I did n't kill Fenya then , gentlemen , it was only because I had n't time , '' broke from him suddenly at that point in his story . 
That , too , was carefully written down . 
Mitya waited gloomily , and was beginning to tell how he ran into his father 's garden when the investigating lawyer suddenly stopped him , and opening the big portfolio that lay on the sofa beside him he brought out the brass pestle . 
`` Do you recognise this object ? '' 
he asked , showing it to Mitya . 
