But little attention was paid him and Father Paissy noticed it uneasily . 
Yet he himself -LRB- if the whole truth must be told -RRB- , secretly at the bottom of his heart , cherished almost the same hopes and could not but be aware of it , though he was indignant at the too impatient expectation around him , and saw in it light-mindedness and vanity . 
Nevertheless , it was particularly unpleasant to him to meet certain persons , whose presence aroused in him great misgivings . 
In the crowd in the dead man 's cell he noticed with inward aversion -LRB- for which he immediately reproached himself -RRB- the presence of Rakitin and of the monk from Obdorsk , who was still staying in the monastery . 
Of both of them Father Paissy felt for some reason suddenly suspicious - though , indeed , he might well have felt the same about others . 
The monk from Obdorsk was conspicuous as the most fussy in the excited crowd . 
He was to be seen everywhere ; everywhere he was asking questions , everywhere he was listening , on all sides he was whispering with a peculiar , mysterious air . 
His expression showed the greatest impatience and even a sort of irritation . 
As for Rakitin , he , as appeared later , had come so early to the hermitage at the special request of Madame Hohlakov . 
As soon as that good-hearted but weak-minded woman , who could not herself have been admitted to the hermitage , waked and heard of the death of Father Zossima , she was overtaken with such intense curiosity that she promptly despatched Rakitin to the hermitage , to keep a careful look out and report to her by letter ever half hour or so `` everything that takes place . '' 
She regarded Rakitin as a most religious and devout young man . 
He was particularly clever in getting round people and assuming whatever part he thought most to their taste , if he detected the slightest advantage to himself from doing so . 
It was a bright , clear day , and many of the visitors were thronging about the tombs , which were particularly numerous round the church and scattered here and there about the hermitage . 
As he walked round the hermitage , Father Paissy remembered Alyosha and that he had not seen him for some time , not since the night . 
And he had no sooner thought of him than he at once noticed him in the farthest corner of the hermitage garden , sitting on the tombstone of a monk who had been famous long ago for his saintliness . 
He sat with his back to the hermitage and his face to the wall , and seemed to be hiding behind the tombstone . 
Going up to him , Father Paissy saw that he was weeping quietly but bitterly , with his face hidden in his hands , and that his whole frame was shaking with sobs . 
Father Paissy stood over him for a little . 
`` Enough , dear son , enough , dear , '' he pronounced with feeling at last . 
`` Why do you weep ? 
Rejoice and weep not . 
Do n't you know that this is the greatest of his days ? 
Think only where he is now , at this moment ! '' 
Alyosha glanced at him , uncovering his face , which was swollen with crying like a child 's , but turned away at once without uttering a word and hid his face in his hands again . 
`` Maybe it is well , '' said Father Paissy thoughtfully ; `` weep if you must ; Christ has sent you those tears . '' 
`` Your touching tears are but a relief to your spirit and will serve to gladden your dear heart , '' he added to himself , walking away from Alyosha , and thinking lovingly of him . 
He moved away quickly , however , for he felt that he too might weep looking at him . 
Meanwhile the time was passing ; the monastery services and the requiems for the dead followed in their due course . 
Father Paissy again took Father Iosif 's place by the coffin and began reading the Gospel . 
But before three o'clock in the afternoon that something took place to which I alluded at the end of the last book , something so unexpected by all of us and so contrary to the general hope , that , I repeat , this trivial incident has been minutely remembered to this day in our town and all the surrounding neighbourhood . 
I may add here , for myself personally , that I feel it almost repulsive that event which caused such frivolous agitation and was such a stumbling-block to many , though in reality it was the most natural and trivial matter . 
I should , of course , have omitted all mention of it in my story , if it had not exerted a very strong influence on the heart and soul of the chief , though future , hero of my story , Alyosha , forming a crisis and turning-point in his spiritual development , giving a shock to his intellect , which finally strengthened it for the rest of his life and gave it a definite aim . 
And so , to return to our story . 
When before dawn they laid Father Zossima 's body in the coffin and brought it into the front room , the question of opening the windows was raised among those who were around the coffin . 
But this suggestion made casually by someone was unanswered and almost unnoticed . 
Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticed it , only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from the body of such a saint was an actual absurdity , calling for compassion -LRB- if not a smile -RRB- for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied . 
For they expected something quite different . 
And , behold , soon after midday there were signs of something , at first only observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidently each afraid to communicate the thought in his mind . 
But by three o'clock those signs had become so clear and unmistakable , that the news swiftly reached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage , promptly penetrated to the monastery , throwing all the monks into amazement , and finally , in the shortest possible time , spread to the town , exciting everyone in it , believers and unbelievers alike . 
The unbelievers rejoiced , and as for the believers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers , for `` men love the downfall and disgrace of the righteous , '' as the deceased elder had said in one of his exhortations . 
The fact is that a smell of decomposition began to come from the coffin , growing gradually more marked , and by three o'clock it was quite unmistakable . 
In all the past history of our monastery , no such scandal could be recalled , and in no other circumstances could such a scandal have been possible , as showed itself in unseemly disorder immediately after this discovery among the very monks themselves . 
Afterwards , even many years afterwards , some sensible monks were amazed and horrified , when they recalled that day , that the scandal could have reached such proportions . 
For in the past , monks of very holy life had died , God-fearing old men , whose saintliness was acknowledged by all , yet from their humble coffins , too , the breath of corruption had come , naturally , as from all dead bodies , but that had caused no scandal nor even the slightest excitement . 
Of course , there had been , in former times , saints in the monastery whose memory was carefully preserved and whose relics , according to tradition , showed no signs of corruption . 
This fact was regarded by the monks as touching and mysterious , and the tradition of it was cherished as something blessed and miraculous , and as a promise , by God 's grace , of still greater glory from their tombs in the future . 
One such , whose memory was particularly cherished , was an old monk , Job , who had died seventy years before at the age of a hundred and five . 
He had been a celebrated ascetic , rigid in fasting and silence , and his tomb was pointed out to all visitors on their arrival with peculiar respect and mysterious hints of great hopes connected with it . 
-LRB- That was the very tomb on which Father Paissy had found Alyosha sitting in the morning . -RRB- 
Another memory cherished in the monastery was that of the famous Father Varsonofy , who was only recently dead and had preceded Father Zossima in the eldership . 
