Now about that door , gentlemen of the jury ... . 
Observe that we have only the statement of one witness as to that door , and he was at the time in such a condition , that - but supposing the door was open ; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying it , from an instinct of self-defence , natural in his position ; supposing he did go into the house - well , what then ? 
How does it follow that because he was there he committed the murder ? 
He might have dashed in , run through the rooms ; might have pushed his father away ; might have struck him ; but as soon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was not there , he may have run away rejoicing that she was not there and that he had not killed his father . 
And it was perhaps just because he had escaped from the temptation to kill his father , because he had a clear conscience and was rejoicing at not having killed him , that he was capable of a pure feeling , the feeling of pity and compassion , and leapt off the fence a minute later to the assistance of Grigory after he had , in his excitement , knocked him down . 
`` With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the dreadful state of the prisoner 's mind at Mokroe when love again lay before him calling him to new life , while love was impossible for him because he had his father 's bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond that corpse - retribution . 
And yet the prosecutor allowed him love , which he explained , according to his method , talking about this drunken condition , about a criminal being taken to execution , about it being still far off , and so on and so on . 
But again I ask , Mr. Prosecutor , have you not invented a new personality ? 
Is the prisoner so coarse and heartless as to be able to think at that moment of love and of dodges to escape punishment , if his hands were really stained with his father 's blood ? 
No , no , no ! 
As soon as it was made plain to him that she loved him and called him to her side , promising him new happiness , oh ! 
then , I protest he must have felt the impulse to suicide doubled , trebled , and must have killed himself , if he had his father 's murder on his conscience . 
Oh , no ! 
he would not have forgotten where his pistols lay ! 
I know the prisoner : the savage , stony heartlessness ascribed to him by the prosecutor is inconsistent with his character . 
He would have killed himself , that 's certain . 
He did not kill himself just because ` his mother 's prayers had saved him , ' and he was innocent of his father 's blood . 
He was troubled , he was grieving that night at Mokroe only about old Grigory and praying to God that the old man would recover , that his blow had not been fatal , and that he would not have to suffer for it . 
Why not accept such an interpretation of the facts ? 
What trustworthy proof have we that the prisoner is lying ? 
`` But we shall be told at once again , ` There is his father 's corpse ! 
If he ran away without murdering him , who did murder him ? ' 
Here , I repeat , you have the whole logic of the prosecution . 
Who murdered him , if not he ? 
There 's no one to put in his place . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , is that really so ? 
Is it positively , actually true that there is no one else at all ? 
We 've heard the prosecutor count on his fingers all the persons who were in that house that night . 
They were five in number ; three of them , I agree , could not have been responsible - the murdered man himself , old Grigory , and his wife . 
There are left then the prisoner and Smerdyakov , and the prosecutor dramatically exclaims that the prisoner pointed to Smerdyakov because he had no one else to fix on , that had there been a sixth person , even a phantom of a sixth person , he would have abandoned the charge against Smerdyakov at once in shame and have accused that other . 
But , gentlemen of the jury , why may I not draw the very opposite conclusion ? 
There are two persons - the prisoner and Smerdyakov . 
Why can I not say that you accuse my client , simply because you have no one else to accuse ? 
And you have no one else only because you have determined to exclude Smerdyakov from all suspicion . 
`` It 's true , indeed , Smerdyakov is accused only by the prisoner , his two brothers , and Madame Svyetlov . 
But there are others who accuse him : there are vague rumours of a question , of a suspicion , an obscure report , a feeling of expectation . 
Finally , we have the evidence of a combination of facts very suggestive , though , I admit , inconclusive . 
In the first place we have precisely on the day of the catastrophe that fit , for the genuineness of which the prosecutor , for some reason , has felt obliged to make a careful defence . 
Then Smerdyakov 's sudden suicide on the eve of the trial . 
Then the equally startling evidence given in court to-day by the elder of the prisoner 's brothers , who had believed in his guilt , but has to-day produced a bundle of notes and proclaimed Smerdyakov as the murderer . 
Oh , I fully share the court 's and the prosecutor 's conviction that Ivan Karamazov is suffering from brain fever , that his statement may really be a desperate effort , planned in delirium , to save his brother by throwing the guilt on the dead man . 
But again Smerdyakov 's name is pronounced , again there is a suggestion of mystery . 
There is something unexplained , incomplete . 
And perhaps it may one day be explained . 
But we wo n't go into that now . 
Of that later . 
`` The court has resolved to go on with the trial , but , meantime , I might make a few remarks about the character-sketch of Smerdyakov drawn with subtlety and talent by the prosecutor . 
But while I admire his talent I can not agree with him . 
I have visited Smerdyakov , I have seen him and talked to him , and he made a very different impression on me . 
He was weak in health , it is true ; but in character , in spirit , he was by no means the weak man the prosecutor has made him out to be . 
