Can you inform us , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch began , with extreme gentleness , `` where did you get so much money all of a sudden , when it appears from the facts , from the reckoning of time , that you had not been home ? '' 
The prosecutor 's brows contracted at the question being asked so plainly , but he did not interrupt Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` No , I did n't go home , '' answered Mitya , apparently perfectly composed , but looking at the floor . 
`` Allow me then to repeat my question , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch went on as though creeping up to the subject . 
`` Where were you able to procure such a sum all at once , when by your own confession , at five o'clock the same day you - '' `` I was in want of ten roubles and pledged my pistols with Perhotin , and then went to Madame Hohlakov to borrow three thousand which she would n't give me , and so on , and all the rest of it , '' Mitya interrupted sharply . 
`` Yes , gentlemen , I was in want of it , and suddenly thousands turned up , eh ? 
Do you know , gentlemen , you 're both afraid now ` what if he wo n't tell us where he got it ? ' 
That 's just how it is . 
I 'm not going to tell you , gentlemen . 
You 've guessed right . 
You 'll never know , '' said Mitya , chipping out each word with extraordinary determination . 
The lawyers were silent for a moment . 
`` You must understand , Mr. Karamazov , that it is of vital importance for us to know , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , softly and suavely . 
`` I understand ; but still I wo n't tell you . '' 
The prosecutor , too , intervened , and again reminded the prisoner that he was at liberty to refuse to answer questions , if he thought it to his interest , and so on . 
But in view of the damage he might do himself by his silence , especially in a case of such importance as - `` And so on , gentlemen , and so on . 
Enough ! 
I 've heard that rigmarole before , '' Mitya interrupted again . 
`` I can see for myself how important it is , and that this is the vital point , and still I wo n't say . '' 
`` What is it to us ? 
It 's not our business , but yours . . 
You are doing yourself harm , '' observed Nikolay Parfenovitch nervously . 
`` You see , gentlemen , joking apart '' - Mitya lifted his eyes and looked firmly at them both - `` I had an inkling from the first that we should come to loggerheads at this point . 
But at first when I began to give my evidence , it was all still far away and misty ; it was all floating , and I was so simple that I began with the supposition of mutual confidence existing between us . 
Now I can see for myself that such confidence is out of the question , for in any case we were bound to come to this cursed stumbling-block . 
And now we 've come to it ! 
It 's impossible and there 's an end of it ! 
But I do n't blame you . 
You ca n't believe it all simply on my word . 
I understand that , of course . '' 
He relapsed into gloomy silence . 
`` Could n't you , without abandoning your resolution to be silent about the chief point , could you not , at the same time , give us some slight hint as to the nature of the motives which are strong enough to induce you to refuse to answer , at a crisis so full of danger to you ? '' 
Mitya smiled mournfully , almost dreamily . 
`` I 'm much more good-natured than you think , gentlemen . 
I 'll tell you the reason why and give you that hint , though you do n't deserve it . 
I wo n't speak of that , gentlemen , because it would be a stain on my honour . 
The answer to the question where I got the money would expose me to far greater disgrace than the murder and robbing of my father , if I had murdered and robbed him . 
That 's why I ca n't tell you . 
I ca n't for fear of disgrace . 
What , gentlemen , are you going to write that down ? '' 
`` Yes , we 'll write it down , '' lisped Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` You ought not to write that down about ` disgrace . ' 
I only told you that in the goodness of my heart . 
I need n't have told you . 
I made you a present of it , so to speak , and you pounce upon it at once . 
Oh , well , write - write what you like , '' he concluded , with scornful disgust . 
`` I 'm not afraid of you and I can still hold up my head before you . '' 
`` And ca n't you tell us the nature of that disgrace ? '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch hazarded . 
The prosecutor frowned darkly . 
