Secondly , that ` criminal and civil jurisdiction ought not to belong to the Church , and is inconsistent with its nature , both as a divine institution and as an organisation of men for religious objects , ' and , finally , in the third place , ` the Church is a kingdom not of this world . ' 
`` A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic ! '' 
Father Paissy could not refrain from breaking in again . 
`` I have read the book which you have answered , '' he added , addressing Ivan , `` and was astounded at the words ` The Church is a kingdom not of this world . 
` If it is not of this world , then it can not exist on earth at all . 
In the Gospel , the words ` not of this world ' are not used in that sense . 
To play with such words is indefensible . 
Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church upon earth . 
The Kingdom of Heaven , of course , is not of this world , but in Heaven ; but it is only entered through the Church which has been founded and established upon earth . 
And so a frivolous play upon words in such a connection is unpardonable and improper . 
The Church is , in truth , a kingdom and ordained to rule , and in the end must undoubtedly become the kingdom ruling over all the earth . 
For that we have the divine promise . '' 
He ceased speaking suddenly , as though checking himself . 
After listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on , addressing the elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality : `` The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was nothing but the Church . 
When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become Christian , it inevitably happened that , by becoming Christian , it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments . 
In reality this was bound to happen . 
But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan civilisation and culture , as , for example , in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State . 
The Christian Church entering into the State could , of course , surrender no part of its fundamental principles - the rock on which it stands - and could pursue no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself , and among them that of drawing the whole world , and therefore the ancient pagan State itself , into the Church . 
In that way -LRB- that is , with a view to the future -RRB- it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State , like ` every social organisation , ' or as ` an organisation of men for religious purposes ' -LRB- as my opponent calls the Church -RRB- , but , on the contrary , every earthly State should be , in the end , completely transformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church , rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church . 
All this will not degrade it in any way or take from its honour and glory as a great State , nor from the glory of its rulers , but only turns it from a false , still pagan , and mistaken path to the true and rightful path , which alone leads to the eternal goal . 
This is why the author of the book On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction would have judged correctly if , in seeking and laying down those foundations , he bad looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days . 
But as soon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which he predicates now , part of which Father Iosif just enumerated , are the permanent , essential , and eternal foundations , he is going directly against the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation . 
That is the gist of my article . '' 
`` That is , in brief , '' Father Paissy began again , laying stress on each word , `` according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in the nineteenth century , the Church ought to be transformed into the State , as though this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form , so as to disappear into it , making way for science , for the spirit of the age , and civilisation . 
And if the Church resists and is unwilling , some corner will be set apart for her in the State , and even that under control and this will be so everywhere in all modern European countries . 
But Russian hopes and conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower into a higher type into the State , but , on the contrary , that the State should end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else . 
So be it ! 
So be it ! '' 
`` Well , I confess you 've reassured me somewhat , '' Miusov said smiling , again crossing his legs . 
`` So far as I understand , then , the realisation of such an ideal is infinitely remote , at the second coming of Christ . 
That 's as you please . 
It 's a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war , diplomacy , banks , and so on - something after the fashion of socialism , indeed . 
But I imagined that it was all meant seriously , and that the Church might be now going to try criminals , and sentence them to beating , prison , and even death . '' 
`` But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court , the Church would not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death . 
Crime and the way of regarding it would inevitably change , not all at once of course , but fairly soon , '' Ivan replied calmly , without flinching . 
`` Are you serious ? '' 
Miusov glanced keenly at him . 
`` If everything became the Church , the Church would exclude all the criminal and disobedient , and would not cut off their heads , '' Ivan went on . 
`` I ask you , what would become of the excluded ? 
He would be cut off then not only from men , as now , but from Christ . 
By his crime he would have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ . 
This is so even now , of course , strictly speaking , but it is not clearly enunciated , and very , very often the criminal of to-day compromises with his conscience : ' I steal , ' he says , ` but I do n't go against the Church . 
I 'm not an enemy of Christ . ' 
That 's what the criminal of to-day is continually saying to himself , but when the Church takes the place of the State it will be difficult for him , in opposition to the Church all over the world , to say : ` All men are mistaken , all in error , all mankind are the false Church . 
I , a thief and murderer , am the only true Christian Church . ' 
It will be very difficult to say this to himself ; it requires a rare combination of unusual circumstances . 
Now , on the other side , take the Church 's own view of crime : is it not bound to renounce the present almost pagan attitude , and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its tainted member for the preservation of society , as at present , into completely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man , of his reformation and salvation ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
I fail to understand again , '' Miusov interrupted . 
`` Some sort of dream again . 
