It was empty , and lying on the floor by the bed , behind the screen . '' 
For some seconds Mitya stood as though thunderstruck . 
`` Gentlemen , it 's Smerdyakov ! '' 
he shouted suddenly , at the top of his voice . 
`` It 's he who 's murdered him ! 
He 's robbed him ! 
No one else knew where the old man hid the envelope . 
It 's Smerdyakov , that 's clear , now ! '' 
`` But you , too , knew of the envelope and that it was under the pillow . '' 
`` I never knew it . 
I 've never seen it . 
This is the first time I 've looked at it . 
I 'd only heard of it from Smerdyakov ... . 
He was the only one who knew where the old man kept it hidden , I did n't know ... '' Mitya was completely breathless . 
`` But you told us yourself that the envelope was under your deceased father 's pillow . 
You especially stated that it was under the pillow , so you must have known it . '' 
`` We 've got it written down , '' confirmed Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` Nonsense ! 
It 's absurd ! 
I 'd no idea it was under the pillow . 
And perhaps it was n't under the pillow at all ... . 
It was just a chance guess that it was under the pillow . 
What does Smerdyakov say ? 
Have you asked him where it was ? 
What does Smerdyakov say ? 
That 's the chief point ... . 
And I went out of my way to tell lies against myself ... . 
I told you without thinking that it was under the pillow , and now you - Oh , you know how one says the wrong thing , without meaning it . 
No one knew but Smerdyakov , only Smerdyakov , and no one else ... . 
He did n't even tell me where it was ! 
But it 's his doing , his doing ; there 's no doubt about it , he murdered him , that 's as clear as daylight now , '' Mitya exclaimed more and more frantically , repeating himself incoherently , and growing more and more exasperated and excited . 
`` You must understand that , and arrest him at once ... . 
He must have killed him while I was running away and while Grigory was unconscious , that 's clear now ... . 
He gave the signal and father opened to him ... for no one but he knew the signal , and without the signal father would never have opened the door ... '' `` But you 're again forgetting the circumstance , '' the prosecutor observed , still speaking with the same restraint , though with a note of triumph , `` that there was no need to give the signal if the door already stood open when you were there , while you were in the garden ... '' `` The door , the door , '' muttered Mitya , and he stared speechless at the prosecutor . 
He sank back helpless in his chair . 
All were silent . 
`` Yes , the door ! 
... It 's a nightmare ! 
God is against me ! '' 
he exclaimed , staring before him in complete stupefaction . 
`` Come , you see , '' the prosecutor went on with dignity , `` and you can judge for yourself , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
On the one hand , we have the evidence of the open door from which you ran out , a fact which overwhelms you and us . 
On the other side , your incomprehensible , persistent , and , so to speak , obdurate silence with regard to the source from which you obtained the money which was so suddenly seen in your hands , when only three hours earlier , on your own showing , you pledged your pistols for the sake of ten roubles ! 
In view of all these facts , judge for yourself . 
What are we to believe , and what can we depend upon ? 
And do n't accuse us of being ` frigid , cynical , scoffing people , ' who are incapable of believing in the generous impulses of your heart ... . 
Try to enter into our position ... '' Mitya was indescribably agitated . 
He turned pale . 
`` Very well ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly , `` I will tell you my secret . 
