Well , that poor young man , your friend , Rakitin -LRB- Mercy on us ! 
I ca n't be angry with him . 
I feel cross , but not very -RRB- , that frivolous young man , would you believe it , seems to have taken it into his head to fall in love with me . 
I only noticed it later . 
At first - a month ago - he only began to come oftener to see me , almost every day ; though , of course , we were acquainted before . 
I knew nothing about it ... and suddenly it dawned upon me , and I began to notice things with surprise . 
You know , two months ago , that modest , charming , excellent young man , Ilyitch Perhotin , who 's in the service here , began to be a regular visitor at the house . 
You met him here ever so many times yourself . 
And he is an excellent , earnest young man , is n't he ? 
He comes once every three days , not every day -LRB- though I should be glad to see him every day -RRB- , and always so well dressed . 
Altogether , I love young people , Alyosha , talented , modest , like you , and he has almost the mind of a statesman , he talks so charmingly , and I shall certainly , certainly try and get promotion for him . 
He is a future diplomat . 
On that awful day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night . 
And your friend Rakitin comes in such boots , and always stretches them out on the carpet ... . 
He began hinting at his feelings , in fact , and one day , as he was going , he squeezed my hand terribly hard . 
My foot began to swell directly after he pressed my hand like that . 
He had met Pyotr Ilyitch here before , and would you believe it , he is always gibing at him , growling at him , for some reason . 
I simply looked at the way they went on together and laughed inwardly . 
So I was sitting here alone - no , I was laid up then . 
Well , I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in , and only fancy ! 
brought me some verses of his own composition - a short poem , on my bad foot : that is , he described my foot in a poem . 
Wait a minute - how did it go ? 
A captivating little foot . 
It began somehow like that . 
I can never remember poetry . 
I 've got it here . 
I 'll show it to you later . 
But it 's a charming thing - charming ; and , you know , it 's not only about the foot , it had a good moral , too , a charming idea , only I 've forgotten it ; in fact , it was just the thing for an album . 
So , of course , I thanked him , and he was evidently flattered . 
I 'd hardly had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch , and Rakitin suddenly looked as black as night . 
I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way , for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses . 
I had a presentiment of it ; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in . 
I showed Pyotr Ilyitch the verses and did n't say who was the author . 
But I am convinced that he guessed , though he wo n't own it to this day , and declares he had no idea . 
But he says that on purpose . 
Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at once , and fell to criticising it . 
` Wretched doggerel , ' he said they were , ` some divinity student must have written them , ' and with such vehemence , such vehemence ! 
Then , instead of laughing , your friend flew into a rage . 
` Good gracious ! ' 
I thought , ` they 'll fly at each other . ' 
` It was I who wrote them , ' said he . ' 
I wrote them as a joke , ' he said , ` for I think it degrading to write verses ... . 
But they are good poetry . 
They want to put a monument to your Pushkin for writing about women 's feet , while I wrote with a moral purpose , and you , ' said he , ` are an advocate of serfdom . 
You 've no humane ideas , ' said he . 
` You have no modern enlightened feelings , you are uninfluenced by progress , you are a mere official , ' he said , ` and you take bribes . ' 
Then I began screaming and imploring them . 
And , you know , Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward . 
He at once took up the most gentlemanly tone , looked at him sarcastically , listened , and apologised . 
` I 'd no idea , ' said he . ' 
