In the following days he became convinced of Mitya 's guilt , as he got to know all the weight of evidence against him . 
There was evidence of people of no importance , Fenya and her mother , for instance , but the effect of it was almost overpowering . 
As to Perhotin , the people at the tavern , and at Plotnikov 's shop , as well as the witnesses at Mokroe , their evidence seemed conclusive . 
It was the details that were so damning . 
The secret of the knocks impressed the lawyers almost as much as Grigory 's evidence as to the open door . 
Grigory 's wife , Marfa , in answer to Ivan 's questions , declared that Smerdyakov had been lying all night the other side of the partition wall , `` He was not three paces from our bed , '' and that although she was a sound sleeper she waked several times and heard him moaning , `` He was moaning the whole time , moaning continually . '' 
Talking to Herzenstube , and giving it as his opinion that Smerdyakov was not mad , but only rather weak , Ivan only evoked from the old man a subtle smile . 
`` Do you know how he spends his time now ? '' 
he asked ; `` learning lists of French words by heart . 
He has an exercise-book under his pillow with the French words written out in Russian letters for him by someone , he he he ! '' 
Ivan ended by dismissing all doubts . 
He could not think of Dmitri without repulsion . 
Only one thing was strange , however . 
Alyosha persisted that Dmitri was not the murderer , and that `` in all probability '' Smerdyakov was . 
Ivan always felt that Alyosha 's opinion meant a great deal to him , and so he was astonished at it now . 
Another thing that was strange was that Alyosha did not make any attempt to talk about Mitya with Ivan , that he never began on the subject and only answered his questions . 
This , too , struck Ivan particularly . 
But he was very much preoccupied at that time with something quite apart from that . 
On his return from Moscow , he abandoned himself hopelessly to his mad and consuming passion for Katerina Ivanovna . 
This is not the time to begin to speak of this new passion of Ivan 's , which left its mark on all the rest of his life : this would furnish the subject for another novel , which I may perhaps never write . 
But I can not omit to mention here that when Ivan , on leaving Katerina Ivanovna with Alyosha , as I 've related already , told him , `` I am not keen on her , '' it was an absolute lie : he loved her madly , though at times he hated her so that he might have murdered her . 
Many causes helped to bring about this feeling . 
Shattered by what had happened with Mitya , she rushed on Ivan 's return to meet him as her one salvation . 
She was hurt , insulted and humiliated in her feelings . 
And here the man had come back to her , who had loved her so ardently before -LRB- oh ! 
she knew that very well -RRB- , and whose heart and intellect she considered so superior to her own . 
But the sternly virtuous girl did not abandon herself altogether to the man she loved , in spite of the Karamazov violence of his passions and the great fascination he had for her . 
She was continually tormented at the same time by remorse for having deserted Mitya , and in moments of discord and violent anger -LRB- and they were numerous -RRB- she told Ivan so plainly . 
This was what he had called to Alyosha `` lies upon lies . '' 
There was , of course , much that was false in it , and that angered Ivan more than anything ... . 
But of all this later . 
He did , in fact , for a time almost forget Smerdyakov 's existence , and yet , a fortnight after his first visit to him , he began to be haunted by the same strange thoughts as before . 
It 's enough to say that he was continually asking himself , why was it that on that last night in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house he had crept out on to the stairs like a thief and listened to hear what his father was doing below ? 
Why had he recalled that afterwards with repulsion ? 
Why next morning , had he been suddenly so depressed on the journey ? 
Why , as he reached Moscow , had he said to himself , `` I am a scoundrel '' ? 
And now he almost fancied that these tormenting thoughts would make him even forget Katerina Ivanovna , so completely did they take possession of him again . 
It was just after fancying this , that he met Alyosha in the street . 
He stopped him at once , and put a question to him : `` Do you remember when Dmitri burst in after dinner and beat father , and afterwards I told you in the yard that I reserved ` the right to desire ' ? 
... Tell me , did you think then that I desired father 's death or not ? '' 
`` I did think so , '' answered Alyosha , softly . 
`` It was so , too ; it was not a matter of guessing . 
But did n't you fancy then that what I wished was just that one reptile should devour another ' ; that is , just that Dmitri should kill father , and as soon as possible ... and that I myself was even prepared to help to bring that about ? '' 
Alyosha turned rather pale , and looked silently into his brother 's face . 
`` Speak ! '' 
cried Ivan , `` I want above everything to know what you thought then . 
I want the truth , the truth ! '' 
He drew a deep breath , looking angrily at Alyosha before his answer came . 
`` Forgive me , I did think that , too , at the time , '' whispered Alyosha , and he did not add one softening phrase . 
`` Thanks , '' snapped Ivan , and , leaving Alyosha , he went quickly on his way . 
