It 's not enjoyment though , but ecstasy . 
Damn it all , whatever it is ! 
A strong spirit , a weak spirit , a womanish spirit - what , ever it is ! 
Let us praise nature : you see what sunshine , how clear the sky is , the leaves are all green , it 's still summer ; four o'clock in the afternoon and the stillness ! 
Where were you going ? '' 
`` I was going to father 's , but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna 's first . '' 
`` To her , and to father ! 
Oo ! 
what a coincidence ! 
Why was I waiting for you ? 
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my ribs ? 
Why , to send you to father and to her , Katerina Ivanovna , so as to have done with her and with father . 
To send an angel . 
I might have sent anyone , but I wanted to send an angel . 
And here you are on your way to see father and her . '' 
`` Did you really mean to send me ? '' 
cried Alyosha with a distressed expression . 
`` Stay ! 
You knew it And I see you understand it all at once . 
But be quiet , be quiet for a time . 
Do n't be sorry , and do n't cry . '' 
Dmitri stood up , thought a moment , and put his finger to his forehead . 
`` She 's asked you , written to you a letter or something , that 's why you 're going to her ? 
You would n't be going except for that ? '' 
`` Here is her note . '' 
Alyosha took it out of his pocket . 
Mitya looked through it quickly . 
`` And you were going the backway ! 
Oh , gods , I thank you for sending him by the backway , and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old fishermen in the fable ! 
Listen , Alyosha , listen , brother ! 
Now I mean to tell you everything , for I must tell someone . 
An angel in heaven I 've told already ; but I want to tell an angel on earth . 
You are an angel on earth . 
You will hear and judge and forgive . 
And that 's what I need , that someone above me should forgive . 
Listen ! 
If two people break away from everything on earth and fly off into the unknown , or at least one of them , and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to someone else and says , ` Do this for me ' - some favour never asked before that could only be asked on one 's deathbed - would that other refuse , if he were a friend or a brother ? '' 
`` I will do it , but tell me what it is , and make haste , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste ! 
H 'm ! 
... Do n't be in a hurry , Alyosha , you hurry and worry yourself . 
There 's no need to hurry now . 
Now the world has taken a new turning . 
Ah , Alyosha , what a pity you ca n't understand ecstasy . 
But what am I saying to him ? 
As though you did n't understand it . 
What an ass I am ! 
What am I saying ? 
` Be noble , O man ! ' 
- who says that ? '' 
