A thick coil of her dark brown hair escaped from its lace covering and fell on her right shoulder , but she did not notice it and did not put it back till she had gazed at her visitors and recognised them . 
`` Ah , it 's you , Rakitin ? 
You quite frightened me . 
Whom have you brought ? 
Who is this with you ? 
Good heavens , you have brought him ! '' 
she exclaimed , recognising Alyosha . 
`` Do send for candles ! '' 
said Rakitin , with the free-and-easy air of a most intimate friend , who is privileged to give orders in the house . 
`` Candles ... of course , candles ... . 
Fenya , fetch him a candle ... . 
Well , you have chosen a moment to bring him ! 
she exclaimed again , nodding towards Alyosha , and turning to the looking-glass she began quickly fastening up her hair with both hands . 
She seemed displeased . 
`` Have n't I managed to please you ? '' 
asked Rakitin , instantly almost offended . 
You frightened me , Rakitin , that 's what it is . '' 
Grushenka turned with a smile to Alyosha . 
`` Do n't be afraid of me , my dear Alyosha , you can not think how glad I am to see you , my unexpected visitor . 
But you frightened me , Rakitin , I thought it was Mitya breaking in . 
You see , I deceived him just now , I made him promise to believe me and I told him a lie . 
I told him that I was going to spend the evening with my old man , Kuzma Kuzmitch , and should be there till late counting up his money . 
I always spend one whole evening a week with him making up his accounts . 
We lock ourselves in and he counts on the reckoning beads while I sit and put things down in the book . 
I am the only person he trusts . 
Mitya believes that I am there , but I came back and have been sitting locked in here , expecting some news . 
How was it Fenya let you in ? 
Fenya , Fenya , run out to the gate , open it and look about whether the captain is to be seen ! 
Perhaps he is hiding and spying , I am dreadfully frightened . '' 
There 's no one there , Agrafena Alexandrovna , I 've just looked out ; I keep running to peep through the crack ; I am in fear and trembling myself . '' 
`` Are the shutters fastened , Fenya ? 
And we must draw the curtains - that 's better ! '' 
She drew the heavy curtains herself . 
`` He 'd rush in at once if he saw a light . 
I am afraid of your brother Mitya to-day , Alyosha . '' 
Grushenka spoke aloud , and , though she was alarmed , she seemed very happy about something . 
`` Why are you so afraid of Mitya to-day ? '' 
inquired Rakitin . 
`` I should have thought you were not timid with him , you 'd twist him round your little finger . '' 
`` I tell you , I am expecting news , priceless news , so I do n't want Mitya at all . 
And he did n't believe , I feel he did n't , that I should stay at Kuzma Kuzmitch 's . 
He must be in his ambush now , behind Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , in the garden , watching for me . 
And if he 's there , he wo n't come here , so much the better ! 
But I really have been to Kuzma Kuzmitch 's , Mitya escorted me there . 
I told him I should stay there till midnight , and I asked him to be sure to come at midnight to fetch me home . 
He went away and I sat ten minutes with Kuzma Kuzmitch and came back here again . 
Ugh , I was afraid , I ran for fear of meeting him . '' 
`` And why are you so dressed up ? 
What a curious cap you 've got on ! '' 
`` How curious you are yourself , Rakitin ! 
