He sat without moving , and unconsciously dozed off and fell asleep as he sat . 
He seemed to have slept for two hours or more . 
He was waked up by his head aching so unbearably that he could have screamed . 
There was a hammering in his temples , and the top of his head ached . 
It was a long time before he could wake up fully and understand what had happened to him . 
At last he realised that the room was full of charcoal fumes from the stove , and that he might die of suffocation . 
And the drunken peasant still lay snoring . 
The candle guttered and was about to go out . 
Mitya cried out , and ran staggering across the passage into the forester 's room . 
The forester waked up at once , but hearing that the other room was full of fumes , to Mitya 's surprise and annoyance , accepted the fact with strange unconcern , though he did go to see to it . 
`` But he 's dead , he 's dead ! 
and ... what am I to do then ? '' 
cried Mitya frantically . 
They threw open the doors , opened a window and the chimney . 
Mitya brought a pail of water from the passage . 
First he wetted his own head , then , finding a rag of some sort , dipped it into the water , and put it on Lyagavy 's head . 
The forester still treated the matter contemptuously , and when he opened the window said grumpily : `` It 'll be all right , now . '' 
He went back to sleep , leaving Mitya a lighted lantern . 
Mitya fussed about the drunken peasant for half an hour , wetting his head , and gravely resolved not to sleep all night . 
But he was so worn out that when he sat down for a moment to take breath , he closed his eyes , unconsciously stretched himself full length on the bench and slept like the dead . 
It was dreadfully late when he waked . 
It was somewhere about nine o'clock . 
The sun was shining brightly in the two little windows of the hut . 
The curly-headed peasant was sitting on the bench and had his coat on . 
He had another samovar and another bottle in front of him . 
Yesterday 's bottle had already been finished , and the new one was more than half empty . 
Mitya jumped up and saw at once that the cursed peasant was drunk again , hopelessly and incurably . 
He stared at him for a moment with wide opened eyes . 
The peasant was silently and slyly watching him , with insulting composure , and even a sort of contemptuous condescension , so Mitya fancied . 
He rushed up to him . 
`` Excuse me , you see ... I. . . 
you 've most likely heard from the forester here in the hut . 
I 'm Lieutenant Dmitri Karamazov , the son of the old Karamazov whose copse you are buying . '' 
`` That 's a lie ! '' 
said the peasant , calmly and confidently . 
`` A lie ? 
You know Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
`` I do n't know any of your Fyodor Pavlovitches , '' said the peasant , speaking thickly . 
`` You 're bargaining with him for the copse , for the copse . 
Do wake up , and collect yourself . 
Father Pavel of Ilyinskoe brought me here . 
You wrote to Samsonov , and he has sent me to you , '' Mitya gasped breathlessly . 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
Lyagavy blurted out again . 
Mitya 's legs went cold . 
`` For mercy 's sake ! 
It is n't a joke ! 
You 're drunk , perhaps . 
Yet you can speak and understand ... or else ... I understand nothing ! '' 
`` You 're a painter ! '' 
