She had n't much brains in her youth , and now at forty she has lost what she had . 
` But she 's awfully sentimental , ' he says ; ` that 's how I shall get hold of her . 
When I marry her , I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper . ' 
And his mouth was simply watering , the beast , not for the widow , but for the hundred and fifty thousand . 
And he made me believe it . 
He came to see me every day . 
` She is coming round , ' he declared . 
He was beaming with delight . 
And then , all of a sudden , he was turned out of the house . 
Perhotin 's carrying everything before him , bravo ! 
I could kiss the silly old noodle for turning him out of the house . 
And he had written this doggerel . 
` It 's the first time I 've soiled my hands with writing poetry , ' he said . 
` It 's to win her heart , so it 's in a good cause . 
When I get hold of the silly woman 's fortune , I can be of great social utility . ' 
They have this social justification for every nasty thing they do ! 
` Anyway it 's better than your Pushkin 's poetry , ' he said , ` for I 've managed to advocate enlightenment even in that . ' 
I understand what he means about Pushkin , I quite see that , if he really was a man of talent and only wrote about women 's feet . 
But was n't Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel ! 
The vanity of these fellows ! 
` On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the object of my affections ' - he thought of that for a title . 
He 's a waggish fellow . 
A captivating little foot , Though swollen and red and tender ! 
The doctors come and plasters put , But still they can not mend her . 
Yet , 't is not for her foot I dread - A theme for Pushkin 's muse more fit - It 's not her foot , it is her head : I tremble for her loss of wit ! 
For as her foot swells , strange to say , Her intellect is on the wane - Oh , for some remedy I pray That may restore both foot and brain ! 
He is a pig , a regular pig , but he 's very arch , the rascal ! 
And he really has put in a progressive idea . 
And was n't he angry when she kicked him out ! 
He was gnashing his teeth ! '' 
`` He 's taken his revenge already , '' said Alyosha . 
`` He 's written a paragraph about Madame Hohlakov . '' 
And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in Gossip . 
`` That 's his doing , that 's his doing ! '' 
Mitya assented , frowning . 
`` That 's him ! 
These paragraphs ... I know ... the insulting things that have been written about Grushenka , for instance ... . 
And about Katya , too ... . 
H 'm ! 
He walked across the room with a harassed air . 
`` Brother , I can not stay long , '' Alyosha said , after a pause . 
`` To-morrow will be a great and awful day for you , the judgment of God will be accomplished ... I am amazed at you , you walk about here , talking of I do n't know what ... '' `` No , do n't be amazed at me , '' Mitya broke in warmly . 
`` Am I to talk of that stinking dog ? 
Of the murderer ? 
We 've talked enough of him . 
I do n't want to say more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta ! 
God will kill him , you will see . 
Hush ! '' 
He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him . 
His eyes glowed . 
