When he was asked to explain how it was apparent now at this moment , the old doctor , with simple-hearted directness , pointed out that the prisoner had `` an extraordinary air , remarkable in the circumstances '' ; that he had `` marched in like a soldier , looking straight before him , though it would have been more natural for him to look to the left where , among the public , the ladies were sitting , seeing that he was a great admirer of the fair sex and must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying of him now , '' the old man concluded in his peculiar language . 
I must add that he spoke Russian readily , but every phrase was formed in German style , which did not , however , trouble him , for it had always been a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly , better indeed than Russians . 
And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs , always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and most expressive sayings in the whole world . 
I may remark , too , that in conversation , through absent-mindedness he often forgot the most ordinary words , which sometimes went out of his head , though he knew them perfectly . 
The same thing happened , though , when he spoke German , and at such times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying to catch the lost word , and no one could induce him to go on speaking till he had found the missing word . 
His remark that the prisoner ought to have looked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in the audience . 
All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor ; they knew , too , that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplary conduct , he looked upon women as lofty creatures . 
And so his unexpected observation struck everyone as very queer . 
The Moscow doctor , being questioned in his turn , definitely and emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner 's mental condition abnormal in the highest degree . 
He talked at length and with erudition of `` aberration '' and `` mania , '' and argued that , from all the facts collected , the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of aberration for several days before his arrest , and , if the crime had been committed by him , it must , even if he were conscious of it , have been almost involuntary , as he had not the power to control the morbid impulse that possessed him . 
But apart from temporary aberration , the doctor diagnosed mania , which promised , in his words , to lead to complete insanity in the future . 
-LRB- It must be noted that I report this in my own words , the doctor made use of very learned and professional language . -RRB- 
`` All his actions are in contravention of common sense and logic , '' he continued . 
`` Not to refer to what I have not seen , that is , the crime itself and the whole catastrophe , the day before yesterday , while he was talking to me , he had an unaccountably fixed look in his eye . 
He laughed unexpectedly when there was nothing to laugh at . 
He showed continual and inexplicable irritability , using strange words , ` Bernard ! ' 
` Ethics ! ' 
and others equally inappropriate . '' 
But the doctor detected mania , above all , in the fact that the prisoner could not even speak of the three thousand roubles , of which he considered himself to have been cheated , without extraordinary irritation , though he could speak comparatively lightly of other misfortunes and grievances . 
According to all accounts , he had even in the past , whenever the subject of the three thousand roubles was touched on , flown into a perfect frenzy , and yet he was reported to be a disinterested and not grasping man . 
`` As to the opinion of my learned colleague , '' the Moscow doctor added ironically in conclusion `` that the prisoner would , entering the court , have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him , I will only say that , apart from the playfulness of this theory , it is radically unsound . 
For though I fully agree that the prisoner , on entering the court where his fate will be decided , would not naturally look straight before him in that fixed way , and that that may really be a sign of his abnormal mental condition , at the same time I maintain that he would naturally not look to the left at the ladies , but , on the contrary , to the right to find his legal adviser , on whose help all his hopes rest and on whose defence all his future depends . '' 
The doctor expressed his opinion positively and emphatically . 
But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last touch of comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts . 
In his opinion the prisoner was now , and had been all along , in a perfectly normal condition , and , although he certainly must have been in a nervous and exceedingly excited state before his arrest , this might have been due to several perfectly obvious causes , jealousy , anger , continual drunkenness , and so on . 
But this nervous condition would not involve the mental abberation of which mention had just been made . 
As to the question whether the prisoner should have looked to the left or to the right on entering the court , `` in his modest opinion , '' the prisoner would naturally look straight before him on entering the court , as he had in fact done , as that was where the judges , on whom his fate depended , were sitting . 
So that it was just by looking straight before him that he showed his perfectly normal state of mind at the present . 
The young doctor concluded his `` modest '' testimony with some heat . 
`` Bravo , doctor ! '' 
cried Mitya , from his seat , `` just so ! '' 
Mitya , of course , was checked , but the young doctor 's opinion had a decisive influence on the judges and on the public , and , as appeared afterwards , everyone agreed with him . 
But Doctor Herzenstube , when called as a witness , was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya . 
As an old resident in the town , who had known the Karamazov family for years , he furnished some facts of great value for the prosecution , and suddenly , as though recalling something , he added : `` But the poor young man might have had a very different life , for he had a good heart both in childhood and after childhood , that I know . 
But the Russian proverb says , ` If a man has one head , it 's good , but if another clever man comes to visit him , it would be better still , for then there will be two heads and not only one . '' ' 
`` One head is good , but two are better , '' the prosecutor put in impatiently . 
He knew the old man 's habit of talking slowly and deliberately , regardless of the impression he was making and of the delay he was causing , and highly prizing his flat , dull and always gleefully complacent German wit . 
The old man was fond of making jokes . 
`` Oh , yes , that 's what I say , '' he went on stubbornly . 
`` One head is good , but two are much better , but he did not meet another head with wits , and his wits went . 
Where did they go ? 
I 've forgotten the word . '' 
He went on , passing his hand before his eyes , `` Oh , yes , spazieren . '' 
* * Promenading . 
`` Wandering ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , wandering , that 's what I say . 
Well , his wits went wandering and fell in such a deep hole that he lost himself . 
And yet he was a grateful and sensitive boy . 
Oh , I remember him very well , a little chap so high , left neglected by his father in the back yard , when he ran about without boots on his feet , and his little breeches hanging by one button . '' 
A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old man 's voice . 
