If she 'd been here she 'd have scratched them out in court . 
She is at home with toothache . 
He he he ! '' 
`` He he he ! '' 
In a third group : `` I dare say they will acquit Mitenka , after all . '' 
`` I should not be surprised if he turns the Metropolis upside down to-morrow . 
He will be drinking for ten days ! '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
`` The devil 's bound to have a hand in it . 
Where should he be if not here ? '' 
`` Well , gentlemen , I admit it was eloquent . 
But still it 's not the thing to break your father 's head with a pestle ! 
Or what are we coming to ? '' 
`` The chariot ! 
Do you remember the chariot ? '' 
`` Yes ; he turned a cart into a chariot ! '' 
`` And to-morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart , just to suit his purpose . '' 
`` What cunning chaps there are nowadays ! 
Is there any justice to be had in Russia ? '' 
But the bell rang . 
The jury deliberated for exactly an hour , neither more nor less . 
A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the public had taken their seats . 
I remember how the jurymen walked into the court . 
At last ! 
I wo n't repeat the questions in order , and , indeed , I have forgotten them . 
I remember only the answer to the President 's first and chief question : `` Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of robbery and with premeditation ? '' 
-LRB- I do n't remember the exact words . -RRB- 
There was a complete hush . 
The foreman of the jury , the youngest of the clerks , pronounced , in a clear , loud voice , amidst the deathlike stillness of the court : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
And the same answer was repeated to every question : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
and without the slightest extenuating comment . 
This no one had expected ; almost everyone had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy , at least . 
The death-like silence in the court was not broken - all seemed petrified : those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager for his acquittal . 
But that was only for the first instant , and it was followed by a fearful hubbub . 
Many of the men in the audience were pleased . 
Some were rubbing their hands with no attempt to conceal their joy . 
Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed , shrugged their shoulders , whispered , but still seemed unable to realise this . 
But how shall I describe the state the ladies were in ? 
I thought they would create a riot . 
At first they could scarcely believe their ears . 
Then suddenly the whole court rang with exclamations : `` What 's the meaning of it ? 
What next ? '' 
They leapt up from their places . 
They seemed to fancy that it might be at once reconsidered and reversed . 
At that instant Mitya suddenly stood up and cried in a heart-rending voice , stretching his hands out before him : `` I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my father 's blood ! 
Katya , I forgive you ! 
Brothers , friends , have pity on the other woman ! '' 
He could not go on , and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all over the court in a strange , unnatural voice unlike his own . 
From the farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek - it was Grushenka . 
She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again before the beginning of the lawyers ' speeches . 
