`` That 's just it . 
I have no proof . 
That cur Smerdyakov wo n't send you proofs from the other world ... in an envelope . 
You think of nothing but envelopes - one is enough . 
I 've no witnesses ... except one , perhaps , '' he smiled thoughtfully . 
`` Who is your witness ? '' 
`` He has a tail , your excellency , and that would be irregular ! 
Le diable n'existe point ! 
Do n't pay attention : he is a paltry , pitiful devil , '' he added suddenly . 
He ceased laughing and spoke as it were , confidentially . 
`` He is here somewhere , no doubt - under that table with the material evidence on it , perhaps . 
Where should he sit if not there ? 
You see , listen to me . 
I told him I do n't want to keep quiet , and he talked about the geological cataclysm ... idiocy ! 
Come , release the monster ... he 's been singing a hymn . 
That 's because his heart is light ! 
It 's like a drunken man in the street bawling how ` Vanka went to Petersburg , ' and I would give a quadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy . 
You do n't know me ! 
Oh , how stupid all this business is ! 
Come , take me instead of him ! 
I did n't come for nothing ... . 
Why , why is everything so stupid ? 
... '' And he began slowly , and as it were reflectively , looking round him again . 
But the court was all excitement by now . 
Alyosha rushed towards him , but the court usher had already seized Ivan by the arm . 
`` What are you about ? '' 
he cried , staring into the man 's face , and suddenly seizing him by the shoulders , he flung him violently to the floor . 
But the police were on the spot and he was seized . 
He screamed furiously . 
And all the time he was being removed , he yelled and screamed something incoherent . 
The whole court was thrown into confusion . 
I do n't remember everything as it happened . 
I was excited myself and could not follow . 
I only know that afterwards , when everything was quiet again and everyone understood what had happened , the court usher came in for a reprimand , though he very reasonably explained that the witness had been quite well , that the doctor had seen him an hour ago , when he had a slight attack of giddiness , but that , until he had come into the court , he had talked quite consecutively , so that nothing could have been foreseen - that he had , in fact , insisted on giving evidence . 
But before everyone had completely regained their composure and recovered from this scene , it was followed by another . 
Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics . 
She sobbed , shrieking loudly , but refused to leave the court , struggled , and besought them not to remove her . 
Suddenly she cried to the President : `` There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once ! 
Here is a document , a letter ... take it , read it quickly , quickly ! 
It 's a letter from that monster ... that man there , there ! '' 
she pointed to Mitya . 
`` It was he killed his father , you will see that directly . 
He wrote to me how he would kill his father ! 
But the other one is ill , he is ill , he is delirious ! '' 
she kept crying out , beside herself . 
The court usher took the document she held out to the President , and she , dropping into her chair , hiding her face in her hands , began convulsively and noiselessly sobbing , shaking all over , and stifling every sound for fear she should be ejected from the court . 
The document she had handed up was that letter Mitya had written at the Metropolis tavern , which Ivan had spoken of as a `` mathematical proof . '' 
Alas ! 
its mathematical conclusiveness was recognised , and had it not been for that letter , Mitya might have escaped his doom or , at least , that doom would have been less terrible . 
It was , I repeat , difficult to notice every detail . 
