`` You 'd better look out , '' the boys called after him ; `` he wo n't be afraid of you . 
He will stab you in a minute , on the sly , as he did Krassotkin . '' 
The boy waited for him without budging . 
Coming up to him , Alyosha saw facing him a child of about nine years old . 
He was an undersized weakly boy with a thin pale face , with large dark eyes that gazed at him vindictively . 
He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat , which he had monstrously outgrown . 
His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves . 
There was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers , and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather , carefully blackened with ink . 
Both the pockets of his greatcoat were weighed down with stones . 
Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him , looking inquiringly at him , The boy , seeing at once from Alyosha 's eyes that he would n't beat him , became less defiant , and addressed him first . 
`` I am alone , and there are six of them . 
I 'll beat them all , alone ! '' 
he said suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` But I hit Smurov on the head ! '' 
cried the boy . 
`` They told me that you know me , and that you threw a stone at me on purpose , '' said Alyosha . 
The boy looked darkly at him . 
`` I do n't know you . 
Do you know me ? '' 
Alyosha continued . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
the boy cried irritably ; but he did not move , as though he were expecting something , and again there was a vindictive light in his eyes . 
`` Very well , I am going , '' said Alyosha ; `` only I do n't know you and I do n't tease you . 
They told me how they tease you , but I do n't want to tease you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Monk in silk trousers ! '' 
cried the boy , following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant expression , and he threw himself into an attitude of defence , feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him ; but Alyosha turned , looked at him , and walked away . 
He had not gone three steps before the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in the back . 
`` So you 'll hit a man from behind ! 
They tell the truth , then , when they say that you attack on the sly , '' said Alyosha , turning round again . 
This time the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha 's face ; but Alyosha just had time to guard himself , and the stone struck him on the elbow . 
`` Are n't you ashamed ? 
What have I done to you ? '' 
he cried . 
The boy waited in silent defiance , certain that now Alyosha would attack him . 
Seeing that even now he would not , his rage was like a little wild beast 's ; he flew at Alyosha himself , and before Alyosha had time to move , the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his middle finger . 
He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before he let go . 
Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with all his might . 
The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance . 
Alyosha 's finger had been badly bitten to the bone , close to the nail ; it began to bleed . 
Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly round his injured hand . 
He was a full minute bandaging it . 
The boy stood waiting all the time . 
At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked at him . 
`` Very well , '' he said , `` You see how badly you 've bitten me . 
That 's enough , is n't it ? 
Now tell me , what have I done to you ? '' 
The boy stared in amazement . 
`` Though I do n't know you and it 's the first time I 've seen you , '' Alyosha went on with the same serenity , `` yet I must have done something to you - you would n't have hurt me like this for nothing . 
