There are people coming ... . 
Now it 's stopped . '' 
She closed her eyes , exhausted , and suddenly fell asleep for an instant . 
There had certainly been the sound of a bell in the distance , but the ringing had ceased . 
Mitya let his head sink on her breast . 
He did not notice that the bell had ceased ringing , nor did he notice that the songs had ceased , and that instead of singing and drunken clamour there was absolute stillness in the house . 
Grushenka opened her eyes . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
Was I asleep ? 
Yes ... a bell ... I 've been asleep and dreamt I was driving over the snow with bells , and I dozed . 
I was with someone I loved , with you . 
And far , far away . 
I was holding you and kissing you , nestling close to you . 
I was cold , and the snow glistened ... . 
You know how the snow glistens at night when the moon shines . 
It was as though I was not on earth . 
I woke up , and my dear one is close to me . 
How sweet that is ! 
... '' `` Close to you , '' murmured Mitya , kissing her dress , her bosom , her hands . 
And suddenly he had a strange fancy : it seemed to him that she was looking straight before her , not at him , not into his face , but over his head , with an intent , almost uncanny fixity . 
An expression of wonder , almost of alarm , came suddenly into her face . 
`` Mitya , who is that looking at us ? '' 
she whispered . 
Mitya turned , and saw that someone had , in fact , parted the curtains and seemed to be watching them . 
And not one person alone , it seemed . 
He jumped up and walked quickly to the intruder . 
`` Here , come to us , come here , '' said a voice , speaking not loudly , but firmly and peremptorily . 
Mitya passed to the other side of the curtain and stood stock still . 
The room was filled with people , but not those who had been there before . 
An instantaneous shiver ran down his back , and he shuddered . 
He recognised all those people instantly . 
That tall , stout old man in the overcoat and forage-cap with a cockade - was the police captain , Mihail Makarovitch . 
And that `` consumptive-looking '' trim dandy , `` who always has such polished boots '' - that was the deputy prosecutor . 
`` He has a chronometer worth four hundred roubles ; he showed it to me . '' 
And that small young man in spectacles ... . 
Mitya forgot his surname though he knew him , had seen him : he was the `` investigating lawyer , '' from the `` school of jurisprudence , '' who had only lately come to the town . 
And this man - the inspector of police , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , a man he knew well . 
And those fellows with the brass plates on , why are they here ? 
And those other two ... peasants ... . 
And there at the door Kalganov with Trifon Borissovitch ... `` Gentlemen ! 
What 's this for , gentlemen ? '' 
began Mitya , but suddenly , as though beside himself , not knowing what he was doing , he cried aloud , at the top of his voice : `` I un-der-stand ! '' 
The young man in spectacles moved forward suddenly , and stepping up to Mitya , began with dignity , though hurriedly : `` We have to make ... in brief , I beg you to come this way , this way to the sofa ... . 
It is absolutely imperative that you should give an explanation . '' 
`` The old man ! '' 
cried Mitya frantically . 
`` The old man and his blood ! 
... I understand . '' 
And he sank , almost fell , on a chair close by , as though he had been mown down by a scythe . 
`` You understand ? 
