I want to say one word to you , '' she whispered , and suddenly raised her face to him . 
`` Listen , tell me who it is I love ? 
I love one man here . 
Who is that man ? 
That 's what you must tell me . '' 
A smile lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping , and her eyes shone in the half darkness . 
`` A falcon flew in , and my heart sank . 
`` Fool ! 
that 's the man you love ! ' 
That was what my heart whispered to me at once . 
You came in and all grew bright . 
What 's he afraid of ? 
I wondered . 
For you were frightened ; you could n't speak . 
It 's not them he 's afraid of - could you be frightened of anyone ? 
It 's me he 's afraid of , I thought , only me . 
So Fenya told you , you little stupid , how I called to Alyosha out of the window that I 'd loved Mityenka for one hour , and that I was going now to love ... another . 
Mitya , Mitya , how could I be such a fool as to think I could love anyone after you ? 
Do you forgive me , Mitya ? 
Do you forgive me or not ? 
Do you love me ? 
Do you love me ? '' 
She jumped up and held him with both hands on his shoulders . 
Mitya , dumb with rapture , gazed into her eyes , at her face , at her smile , and suddenly clasped her tightly his arms and kissed her passionately . 
`` You will forgive me for having tormented you ? 
It was through spite I tormented you all . 
It was for spite I drove the old man out of his mind ... . 
Do you remember how you drank at my house one day and broke the wine-glass ? 
I remembered that and I broke a glass to-day and drank ` to my vile heart . ' 
Mitya , my falcon , why do n't you kiss me ? 
He kissed me once , and now he draws back and looks and listens . 
Why listen to me ? 
Kiss me , kiss me hard , that 's right . 
if you love , well , then , love ! 
I 'll be your slave now , your slave for the rest of my life . 
It 's sweet to be a slave . 
Kiss me ! 
Beat me , ill-treat me , do what you will with me ... . 
And I do deserve to suffer . 
Stay , wait , afterwards , I wo n't have that ... '' she suddenly thrust him away . 
`` Go along , Mitya , I 'll come and have some wine , I want to be drunk , I 'm going to get drunk and dance ; I must , I must ! '' 
She tore herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain . 
Mitya followed like a drunken man . 
`` Yes , come what may - whatever may happen now , for one minute I 'd give the whole world , '' he thought . 
Grushenka did , in fact , toss off a whole glass of champagne at one gulp , and became at once very tipsy . 
She sat down in the same chair as before , with a blissful smile on her face . 
Her cheeks were glowing , her lips were burning , her flashing eyes were moist ; there was passionate appeal in her eyes . 
Even Kalgonov felt a stir at the heart and went up to her . 
`` Did you feel how I kissed you when you were asleep just now ? '' 
she said thickly . 
