What followed is still confused to my mind . 
The President must , I suppose , have at once passed on the document to the judges , the jury , and the lawyers on both sides . 
I only remember how they began examining the witness . 
On being gently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently , Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously : `` I am ready , I am ready ! 
I am quite equal to answering you , '' she added , evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from giving evidence . 
She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was and under what circumstances she received it . 
`` I received it the day before the crime was committed , but he wrote it the day before that , at the tavern - that is , two days before he committed the crime . 
Look , it is written on some sort of bill ! '' 
she cried breathlessly . 
`` He hated me at that time , because he had behaved contemptibly and was running after that creature ... and because he owed me that three thousand ... . 
Oh ! 
he was humiliated by that three thousand on account of his own meanness ! 
This is how it happened about that three thousand . 
I beg you , I beseech you , to hear me . 
Three weeks before he murdered his father , he came to me one morning . 
I knew he was in want of money , and what he wanted it for . 
Yes , yes - to win that creature and carry her off . 
I knew then that he had been false to me and meant to abandon me , and it was I , I , who gave him that money , who offered it to him on the pretext of his sending it to my sister in Moscow . 
And as I gave it him , I looked him in the face and said that he could send it when he liked , ` in a month 's time would do . ' 
How , how could he have failed to understand that I was practically telling him to his face , ` You want money to be false to me with your creature , so here 's the money for you . 
I give it to you myself . 
Take it , if you have so little honour as to take it ! ' 
I wanted to prove what he was , and what happened ? 
He took it , he took it , and squandered it with that creature in one night ... . 
But he knew , he knew that I knew all about it . 
I assure you he understood , too , that I gave him that money to test him , to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honour as to take it from me . 
I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine , and he understood it all and he took it - he carried off my money ! 
`` That 's true , Katya , '' Mitya roared suddenly , `` I looked into your eyes and I knew that you were dishonouring me , and yet I took your money . 
Despise me as a scoundrel , despise me , all of you ! 
I 've deserved it ! '' 
`` Prisoner , '' cried the President , `` another word and I will order you to be removed . '' 
`` That money was a torment to him , '' Katya went on with impulsive haste . 
`` He wanted to repay it me . 
He wanted to , that 's true ; but he needed money for that creature , too . 
So he murdered his father , but he did n't repay me , and went off with her to that village where he was arrested . 
There , again , he squandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father . 
And a day before the murder he wrote me this letter . 
He was drunk when he wrote it . 
I saw it at once , at the time . 
He wrote it from spite , and feeling certain , positively certain , that I should never show it to anyone , even if he did kill him , or else he would n't have written it . 
For he knew I should n't want to revenge myself and ruin him ! 
But read it , read it attentively - more attentively , please - and you will see that he had described it all in his letter , all beforehand , how he would kill his father and where his money was kept . 
Look , please , do n't overlook that , there 's one phrase there , ' I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has gone away . ' 
he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him , '' Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignant triumph . 
Oh ! 
it was clear she had studied every line of that letter and detected every meaning underlining it . 
`` If he had n't been drunk , he would n't have written to me ; but , look , everything is written there beforehand , just as he committed the murder after . 
A complete programme of it ! '' 
she exclaimed frantically . 
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself , though , no doubt , she had foreseen them even a month ago , for even then , perhaps , shaking with anger , she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not . 
