But what taught me better then was a thought of my dear brother 's , which I had heard from him in childhood : `` Am I worth it , that another should serve me and be ordered about by me in his poverty and ignorance ? '' 
And I wondered at the time that such simple and self-evident ideas should be so slow to occur to our minds . 
It is impossible that there should be no servants in the world , but act so that your servant may be freer in spirit than if he were not a servant . 
And why can not I be a servant to my servant and even let him see it , and that without any pride on my part or any mistrust on his ? 
Why should not my servant be like my own kindred , so that I may take him into my family and rejoice in doing so ? 
Even now this can be done , but it will lead to the grand unity of men in the future , when a man will not seek servants for himself , or desire to turn his fellow creatures into servants as he does now , but on the contrary , will long with his whole heart to be the servant of all , as the Gospel teaches . 
And can it be a dream , that in the end man will find his joy only in deeds of light and mercy , and not in cruel pleasures as now , in gluttony , fornication , ostentation , boasting and envious rivalry of one with the other ? 
I firmly believe that it is not and that the time is at hand . 
People laugh and ask : `` When will that time come and does it look like coming ? '' 
I believe that with Christ 's help we shall accomplish this great thing . 
And how many ideas there have been on earth in the history of man which were unthinkable ten years before they appeared ! 
Yet when their destined hour had come , they came forth and spread over the whole earth . 
So it will be with us , and our people will shine forth in the world , and all men will say : `` The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone of the building . '' 
And we may ask the scornful themselves : If our hope is a dream , when will you build up your edifice and order things justly by your intellect alone , without Christ ? 
If they declare that it is they who are advancing towards unity , only the most simple-hearted among them believe it , so that one may positively marvel at such simplicity . 
Of a truth , they have more fantastic dreams than we . 
They aim at justice , but , denying Christ , they will end by flooding the earth with blood , for blood cries out for blood , and he that taketh up the sword shall perish by the sword . 
And if it were not for Christ 's covenant , they would slaughter one another down to the last two men on earth . 
And those two last men would not be able to restrain each other in their pride , and the one would slay the other and then himself . 
And that would come to pass , were it not for the promise of Christ that for the sake of the humble and meek the days shall be shortened . 
While I was still wearing an officer 's uniform after my duel , I talked about servants in general society , and I remember everyone was amazed at me . 
`` What ! '' 
they asked , `` are we to make our servants sit down on the sofa and offer them tea ? '' 
And I answered them : `` Why not , sometimes at least ? '' 
Everyone laughed . 
Their question was frivolous and my answer was not clear ; but the thought in it was to some extent right . 
-LRB- g -RRB- Of Prayer , of Love , and of Contact with other Worlds . 
Young man , be not forgetful of prayer . 
Every time you pray , if your prayer is sincere , there will be new feeling and new meaning in it , which will give you fresh courage , and you will understand that prayer is an education . 
Remember , too , every day , and whenever you can , repeat to yourself , `` Lord , have mercy on all who appear before Thee to-day . '' 
For every hour and every moment thousands of men leave life on this earth , and their souls appear before God . 
And how many of them depart in solitude , unknown , sad , dejected that no one mourns for them or even knows whether they have lived or not ! 
And behold , from the other end of the earth perhaps , your prayer for their rest will rise up to God though you knew them not nor they you . 
How touching it must be to a soul standing in dread before the Lord to feel at that instant that , for him too , there is one to pray , that there is a fellow creature left on earth to love him too ! 
And God will look on you both more graciously , for if you have had so much pity on him , how much will He have pity Who is infinitely more loving and merciful than you ! 
And He will forgive him for your sake . 
Brothers , have no fear of men 's sin . 
Love a man even in his sin , for that is the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth . 
Love all God 's creation , the whole and every grain of sand in it . 
Love every leaf , every ray of God 's light . 
Love the animals , love the plants , love everything . 
If you love everything , you will perceive the divine mystery in things . 
Once you perceive it , you will begin to comprehend it better every day . 
And you will come at last to love the whole world with an all-embracing love . 
Love the animals : God has given them the rudiments of thought and joy untroubled . 
Do not trouble it , do n't harass them , do n't deprive them of their happiness , do n't work against God 's intent . 
Man , do not pride yourself on superiority to the animals ; they are without sin , and you , with your greatness , defile the earth by your appearance on it , and leave the traces of your foulness after you - alas , it is true of almost every one of us ! 
Love children especially , for they too are sinless like the angels ; they live to soften and purify our hearts and , as it were , to guide us . 
Woe to him who offends a child ! 
Father Anfim taught me to love children . 
