`` In America . 
They get it from America now . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
But the bell rang , all rushed to their places . 
Fetyukovitch mounted the tribune . 
The Speech for the Defence . 
An Argument that Cuts Both Ways ALL was hushed as the first words of the famous orator rang out . 
The eyes of the audience were fastened upon him . 
He began very simply and directly , with an air of conviction , but not the slightest trace of conceit . 
He made no attempt at eloquence , at pathos , or emotional phrases . 
He was like a man speaking in a circle of intimate and sympathetic friends . 
His voice was a fine one , sonorous and sympathetic , and there was something genuine and simple in the very sound of it . 
But everyone realised at once that the speaker might suddenly rise to genuine pathos and `` pierce the heart with untold power . '' 
His language was perhaps more irregular than Ippolit Kirillovitch 's , but he spoke without long phrases , and indeed , with more precision . 
One thing did not please the ladies : he kept bending forward , especially at the beginning of his speech , not exactly bowing , but as though he were about to dart at his listeners , bending his long spine in half , as though there were a spring in the middle that enabled him to bend almost at right angles . 
At the beginning of his speech he spoke rather disconnectedly , without system , one may say , dealing with facts separately , though , at the end , these facts formed a whole . 
His speech might be divided into two parts , the first consisting of criticism in refutation of the charge , sometimes malicious and sarcastic . 
But in the second half he suddenly changed his tone , and even his manner , and at once rose to pathos . 
The audience seemed on the lookout for it , and quivered with enthusiasm . 
He went straight to the point , and began by saying that although he practised in Petersburg , he had more than once visited provincial towns to defend prisoners , of whose innocence he had a conviction or at least a preconceived idea . 
`` That is what has happened to me in the present case , '' he explained . 
`` From the very first accounts in the newspapers I was struck by something which strongly prepossessed me in the prisoner 's favour . 
What interested me most was a fact which often occurs in legal practice , but rarely , I think , in such an extreme and peculiar form as in the present case . 
I ought to formulate that peculiarity only at the end of my speech , but I will do so at the very beginning , for it is my weakness to go to work directly , not keeping my effects in reserve and economising my material . 
That may be imprudent on my part , but at least it 's sincere . 
What I have in my mind is this : there is an overwhelming chain of evidence against the prisoner , and at the same time not one fact that will stand criticism , if it is examined separately . 
As I followed the case more closely in the papers my idea was more and more confirmed , and I suddenly received from the prisoner 's relatives a request to undertake his defence . 
I at once hurried here , and here I became completely convinced . 
It was to break down this terrible chain of facts , and to show that each piece of evidence taken separately was unproved and fantastic , that I undertook the case . '' 
So Fetyukovitch began . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' he suddenly protested , `` I am new to this district . 
I have no preconceived ideas . 
The prisoner , a man of turbulent and unbridled temper , has not insulted me . 
But he has insulted perhaps hundreds of persons in this town , and so prejudiced many people against him beforehand . 
Of course I recognise that the moral sentiment of local society is justly excited against him . 
The prisoner is of turbulent and violent temper . 
Yet he was received in society here ; he was even welcome in the family of my talented friend , the prosecutor . '' 
-LRB- N.B. . 
At these words there were two or three laughs in the audience , quickly suppressed , but noticed by all . 
All of us knew that the prosecutor received Mitya against his will , solely because he had somehow interested his wife - a lady of the highest virtue and moral worth , but fanciful , capricious , and fond of opposing her husband , especially in trifles . 
Mitya 's visits , however , had not been frequent . -RRB- 
`` Nevertheless I venture to suggest , '' Fetyukovitch continued , `` that in spite of his independent mind and just character , my opponent may have formed a mistaken prejudice against my unfortunate client . 
Oh , that is so natural ; the unfortunate man has only too well deserved such prejudice . 
Outraged morality , and still more outraged taste , is often relentless . 
We have , in the talented prosecutor 's speech , heard a stern analysis of the prisoner 's character and conduct , and his severe critical attitude to the case was evident . 
And , what 's more , he went into psychological subtleties into which he could not have entered , if he had the least conscious and malicious prejudice against the prisoner . 
But there are things which are even worse , even more fatal in such cases , than the most malicious and consciously unfair attitude . 
It is worse if we are carried away by the artistic instinct , by the desire to create , so to speak , a romance , especially if God has endowed us with psychological insight . 
Before I started on my way here , I was warned in Petersburg , and was myself aware , that I should find here a talented opponent whose psychological insight and subtlety had gained him peculiar renown in legal circles of recent years . 
But profound as psychology is , it 's a knife that cuts both ways . '' 
