The doctors shall make me some sort of wart on my face - what 's the use of their being so mechanical ! 
- or else I 'll put out one eye , let my beard grow a yard , and I shall turn grey , fretting for Russia . 
I dare say they wo n't recognise us . 
And if they do , let them send us to Siberia - I do n't care . 
It will show it 's our fate . 
We 'll work on the land here , too , somewhere in the wilds , and I 'll make up as an American all my life . 
But we shall die on our own soil . 
That 's my plan , and it sha n't be altered . 
Do you approve ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Alyosha , not wanting to contradict him . 
Mitya paused for a minute and said suddenly : `` And how they worked it up at the trial ! 
Did n't they work it up ! '' 
`` If they had not , you would have been convicted just the same , '' said Alyosha , with a sigh . 
`` Yes , people are sick of me here ! 
God bless them , but it 's hard , '' Mitya moaned miserably . 
Again there was silence for a minute . 
`` Alyosha , put me out of my misery at once ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly . 
`` Tell me , is she coming now , or not ? 
Tell me ? 
What did she say ? 
How did she say it ? '' 
`` She said she would come , but I do n't know whether she will come to-day . 
It 's hard for her , you know , '' Alyosha looked timidly at his brother . 
`` I should think it is hard for her ! 
Alyosha , it will drive me out of my mind . 
Grusha keeps looking at me . 
She understands . 
My God , calm my heart : what is it I want ? 
I want Katya ! 
Do I understand what I want ? 
It 's the headstrong , evil Karamazov spirit ! 
No , I am not fit for suffering . 
I am a scoundrel , that 's all one can say . '' 
`` Here she is ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway . 
For a moment she stood still , gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression . 
He leapt pulsively to his feet , and a scared look came into his face . 
He turned pale , but a timid , pleading smile appeared on his lips at once , and with an irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya . 
Seeing it , she flew impetuously to him . 
She seized him by the hands , and almost by force made him sit down on the bed . 
She sat down beside him , and still keeping his hands pressed them violently . 
Several times they both strove to speak , but stopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile , their eyes fastened on one another . 
So passed two minutes . 
`` Have you forgiven me ? '' 
Mitya faltered at last , and at the same moment turning to Alyosha , his face working with joy , he cried , `` Do you hear what I am asking , do you hear ? '' 
`` That 's what I loved you for , that you are generous at heart ! '' 
broke from Katya . 
`` My forgiveness is no good to you , nor yours to me ; whether you forgive me or not , you will always be a sore place in my heart , and I in yours - so it must be ... '' She stopped to take breath . 
