That sum of money , for which I shall be indebted to your generosity ... Oh , madam , since you are so kind , so touchingly generous to me , '' Mitya exclaimed impulsively , `` then let me reveal to you ... though , of course , you 've known it a long time ... that I love somebody here ... . 
I have been false to Katya ... Katerina Ivanovna I should say ... . 
Oh , I 've behaved inhumanly , dishonourably to her , but I fell in love here with another woman ... a woman whom you , madam , perhaps , despise , for you know everything already , but whom I can not leave on any account , and therefore that three thousand now - '' `` Leave everything , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov interrupted in the most decisive tone . 
`` Leave everything , especially women . 
Gold mines are your goal , and there 's no place for women there . 
Afterwards , when you come back rich and famous , you will find the girl of your heart in the highest society . 
That will be a modern girl , a girl of education and advanced ideas . 
By that time the dawning woman question will have gained ground , and the new woman will have appeared . '' 
`` Madam , that 's not the point , not at all ... . 
Mitya clasped his hands in entreaty . 
`` Yes it is , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , just what you need ; the very thing you 're yearning for , though you do n't realise it yourself . 
I am not at all opposed to the present woman movement , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
The development of woman , and even the political emancipation of woman in the near future - that 's my ideal . 
I 've a daughter myself , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , people do n't know that side of me . 
I wrote a letter to the author , Shtchedrin , on that subject . 
He has taught me so much , so much about the vocation of woman . 
So last year I sent him an anonymous letter of two lines : ' I kiss and embrace you , my teacher , for the modern woman . 
Persevere . ' 
And I signed myself , ' A Mother . ' 
I thought of signing myself ' A contemporary Mother , ' and hesitated , but I stuck to the simple ` Mother ' ; there 's more moral beauty in that , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
And the word ` contemporary ' might have reminded him of The Contemporary - a painful recollection owing to the censorship ... . 
Good Heavens , what is the matter ! '' 
`` Madam ! '' 
cried Mitya , jumping up at last , clasping his hands before her in helpless entreaty . 
`` You will make me weep if you delay what you have so generously - '' `` Oh , do weep , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , do weep ! 
That 's a noble feeling ... such a path lies open before you ! 
Tears will ease your heart , and later on you will return rejoicing . 
You will hasten to me from Siberia on purpose to share your joy with me - '' `` But allow me , too ! '' 
Mitya cried suddenly . 
`` For the last time I entreat you , tell me , can I have the sum you promised me to-day , if not , when may I come for it ? '' 
`` What sum , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` The three thousand you promised me ... that you so generously - '' `` Three thousand ? 
Roubles ? 
Oh , no , I have n't got three thousand , '' Madame Hohlakov announced with serene amazement . 
Mitya was stupefied . 
`` Why , you said just now you said ... you said it was as good as in my hands - '' `` Oh , no , you misunderstood me , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
In that case you misunderstood me . 
I was talking of the gold mines . 
It 's true I promised you more , infinitely more than three thousand , I remember it all now , but I was referring to the gold mines . '' 
`` But the money ? 
The three thousand ? '' 
Mitya exclaimed , awkwardly . 
`` Oh , if you meant money , I have n't any . 
I have n't a penny , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm quarrelling with my steward about it , and I 've just borrowed five hundred roubles from Miusov , myself . 
No , no , I 've no money . 
And , do you know , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , if I had , I would n't give it to you . 
In the first place I never lend money . 
Lending money means losing friends . 
And I would n't give it to you particularly . 
