He was suddenly seized with the desire to see the monastery and the holy man . 
As his lawsuit with the monastery still dragged on , he made it the pretext for seeing the Superior , in order to attempt to settle it amicably . 
A visitor coming with such laudable intentions might be received with more attention and consideration than if he came from simple curiosity . 
Influences from within the monastery were brought to bear on the elder , who of late had scarcely left his cell , and had been forced by illness to deny even his ordinary visitors . 
In the end he consented to see them , and the day was fixed . 
`` Who has made me a judge over them ? '' 
was all he said , smilingly , to Alyosha . 
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit . 
Of all the wrangling , quarrelsome party , Dmitri was the only one who could regard the interview seriously . 
All the others would come from frivolous motives , perhaps insulting to the elder . 
Alyosha was well aware of that . 
Ivan and Miusov would come from curiosity , perhaps of the coarsest kind , while his father might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery . 
Though he said nothing , Alyosha thoroughly understood his father . 
The boy , I repeat , was far from being so simple as everyone thought him . 
He awaited the day with a heavy heart . 
No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family discord could be ended . 
But his chief anxiety concerned the elder . 
He trembled for him , for his glory , and dreaded any affront to him , especially the refined , courteous irony of Miusov and the supercilious half-utterances of the highly educated Ivan . 
He even wanted to venture on warning the elder , telling him something about them , but , on second thoughts , said nothing . 
He only sent word the day before , through a friend , to his brother Dmitri , that he loved him and expected him to keep his promise . 
Dmitri wondered , for he could not remember what he had promised , but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let himself be provoked `` by vileness , '' but that , although he had a deep respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan , he was convinced that the meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce . 
`` Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly , '' he wrote in conclusion . 
Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter . 
An Unfortunate Gathering They Arrive at the Monastery IT was a warm , bright day the end of August . 
The interview with the elder had been fixed for half-past eleven , immediately after late mass . 
Our visitors did not take part in the service , but arrived just as it was over . 
First an elegant open carriage , drawn by two valuable horses , drove up with Miusov and a distant relative of his , a young man of twenty , called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov . 
This young man was preparing to enter the university . 
Miusov with whom he was staying for the time , was trying to persuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena . 
The young man was still undecided . 
He was thoughtful and absent-minded . 
He was nice-looking , strongly built , and rather tall . 
There was a strange fixity in his gaze at times . 
Like all very absent-minded people he would sometimes stare at a person without seeing him . 
He was silent and rather awkward , but sometimes , when he was alone with anyone , he became talkative and effusive , and would laugh at anything or nothing . 
But his animation vanished as quickly as it appeared . 
He was always well and even elaborately dressed ; he had already some independent fortune and expectations of much more . 
He was a friend of Alyosha 's . 
In an ancient , jolting , but roomy , hired carriage , with a pair of old pinkish-grey horses , a long way behind Miusov 's carriage , came Fyodor Pavlovitch , with his son Ivan . 
Dmitri was late , though he had been informed of the time the evening before . 
The visitors left their carriage at the hotel , outside the precincts , and went to the gates of the monastery on foot . 
Except Fyodor Pavlovitch , more of the party had ever seen the monastery , and Miusov had probably not even been to church for thirty years . 
He looked about him with curiosity , together with assumed ease . 
But , except the church and the domestic buildings , though these too were ordinary enough , he found nothing of interest in the interior of the monastery . 
The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church bareheaded and crossing themselves . 
Among the humbler people were a few of higher rank - two or three ladies and a very old general . 
They were all staying at the hotel . 
Our visitors were at once surrounded by beggars , but none of them gave them anything , except young Kalganov , who took a ten-copeck piece out of his purse , and , nervous and embarrassed - God knows why ! 
- hurriedly gave it to an old woman , saying : `` Divide it equally . '' 
None of his companions made any remark upon it , so that he had no reason to be embarrassed ; but , perceiving this , he was even more overcome . 
