So that 's where the envelope lay , in the corner behind the ikons . 
It would have been absurd to keep it under the mattress ; the box , anyway , could be locked . 
But all believe it was under the mattress . 
A stupid thing to believe . 
So if Dmitri Fyodorovitch had committed the murder , finding nothing , he would either have run away in a hurry , afraid of every sound , as always happens with murderers , or he would have been arrested . 
So I could always have clambered up to the ikons and have taken away the money next moming or even that night , and it would have all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I could reckon upon that . '' 
`` But what if he did not kill him , but only knocked him down ? '' 
`` If he did not kill him , of course , I would not have ventured to take the money , and nothing would have happened . 
But I calculated that he would beat him senseless , and I should have time to take it then , and then I 'd make out to Fyodor Pavlovitch that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitch who had taken the money after beating him . '' 
`` Stop ... I am getting mixed . 
Then it was Dmitri after all who killed him ; you only took the money ? '' 
`` No , he did n't kill him . 
Well , I might as well have told you now that he was the murderer ... . 
But I do n't want to lie to you now because ... because if you really have n't understood till now , as I see for myself , and are not pretending , so as to throw your guilt on me to my very face , you are still responsible for it all , since you knew of the murder and charged me to do it , and went away knowing all about it . 
And so I want to prove to your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in the whole affair , and I am not the real murderer , though I did kill him . 
You are the rightful murderer . '' 
`` Why , why , am I a murderer ? 
Oh , God ! '' 
Ivan cried , unable to restrain himself at last , and forgetting that he had put off discussing himself till the end of the conversation . 
`` You still mean that Tchermashnya ? 
Stay , tell me , why did you want my consent , if you really took Tchermashnya for consent ? 
How will you explain that now ? '' 
`` Assured of your consent , I should have known that you would n't have made an outcry over those three thousand being lost , even if I 'd been suspected , instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , or as his accomplice ; on the contrary , you would have protected me from others ... . 
And when you got your inheritance you would have rewarded me when you were able , all the rest of your life . 
For you 'd have received your inheritance through me , seeing that if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna , you would n't have had a farthing . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Then you intended to worry me all my life afterwards , '' snarled Ivan . 
`` And what if I had n't gone away then , but had informed against you ? '' 
`` What could you have informed ? 
That I persuaded you to go to Tcherinashnya ? 
That 's all nonsense . 
Besides , after our conversation you would either have gone away or have stayed . 
If you had stayed , nothing would have happened . 
I should have known that you did n't want it done , and should have attempted nothing . 
As you went away , it meant you assured me that you would n't dare to inform against me at the trial , and that you 'd overlook my having the three thousand . 
And , indeed , you could n't have prosecuted me afterwards , because then I should have told it all in the court ; that is , not that I had stolen the money or killed him - I should n't have said that - but that you 'd put me up to the theft and the murder , though I did n't consent to it . 
That 's why I needed your consent , so that you could n't have cornered me afterwards , for what proof could you have had ? 
I could always have cornered you , revealing your eagerness for your father 's death , and I tell you the public would have believed it all , and you would have been ashamed for the rest of your life . '' 
`` Was I then so eager , was I ? '' 
Ivan snarled again . 
`` To be sure you were , and by your consent you silently sanctioned my doing it . '' 
Smerdyakov looked resolutely at Ivan . 
He was very weak and spoke slowly and wearily , but some hidden inner force urged him on . 
He evidently had some design . 
Ivan felt that . 
`` Go on , '' he said . 
`` Tell me what happened that night . '' 
`` What more is there to tell ! 
I lay there and I thought I heard the master shout . 
