`` You are talking nonsense , I see , and I do n't quite understand you , '' he said softly , but with a sort of menace . 
`` Do you mean to pretend to be ill to-morrow for three days , eh ? '' 
Smerdyakov , who was looking at the ground again , and playing with the toe of his right foot , set the foot down , moved the left one forward , and , grinning , articulated : `` If I were able to play such a trick , that is , pretend to have a fit - and it would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them - I should have a perfect right to use such a means to save myself from death . 
For even if Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill , his honour ca n't blame a sick man for not telling him . 
He 'd be ashamed to . '' 
`` Hang it all ! '' 
Ivan cried , his face working with anger , `` Why are you always in such a funk for your life ? 
All my brother Dmitri 's threats are only hasty words and mean nothing . 
He wo n't kill you ; it 's not you he 'll kill ! '' 
`` He 'd kill me first of all , like a fly . 
But even more than that , I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something crazy to his father . '' 
`` Why should you be taken for an accomplice ? '' 
`` They 'll think I am an accomplice , because I let him know the signals as a great secret . '' 
`` What signals ? 
Whom did you tell ? 
Confound you , speak more plainly . '' 
`` I 'm bound to admit the fact , '' Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure , `` that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business . 
As you know yourself -LRB- if only you do know it -RRB- he has for several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on . 
Of late you 've been going upstairs to your room early every evening , and yesterday you did not come down at all , and so perhaps you do n't know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night , and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he wo n't open to him till he hears his voice . 
But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come , because I wait upon him alone in his room now . 
That 's the arrangement he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began . 
But at night , by his orders , I go away to the lodge so that I do n't get to sleep till midnight , but am on the watch , getting up and walking about the yard , waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come . 
For the last few days he 's been perfectly frantic expecting her . 
What he argues is , she is afraid of him , Dmitri Fyodorovitch -LRB- Mitya , as he calls him -RRB- , ` and so , ' says he , ` she 'll come the back-way , late at night , to me . 
You look out for her , ' says he , 'till midnight and later ; and if she does come , you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden . 
Knock at first twice , rather gently , and then three times more quickly , then , ' says he , ' I shall understand at once that she has come , and will open the door to you quietly . ' 
Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens . 
At first , two knocks , and then , after an interval , another much louder . 
Then he will understand that something has happened suddenly and that I must see him , and he will open to me so that I can go and speak to him . 
That 's all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna ca n't come herself , but sends a message . 
Besides , Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come , too , so I must let him know he is near . 
His honour is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time , I should be bound to let him know at once , knocking three times . 
So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , while the second signal of three knocks means ` something important to tell you . ' 
His honour has shown me them several times and explained them . 
And as in the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his honour , so he 'd open the door without the slightest hesitation and without calling out -LRB- he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud -RRB- . 
Well , those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too , now . '' 
`` How are they known ? 
Did you tell him ? 
How dared you tell him ? '' 
`` It was through fright I did it . 
How could I dare to keep it back from him ? 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day , ` You are deceiving me , you are hiding something from me ! 
I 'll break both your legs for you . ' 
So I told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion , and might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him , but was telling him all I could . '' 
`` If you think that he 'll make use of those signals and try to get in , do n't let him in . '' 
`` But if I should be laid up with a fit , how can I prevent him coming in then , even if I dared prevent him , knowing how desperate he is ? '' 
`` Hang it ! 
How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit , confound you ? 
Are you laughing at me ? '' 
`` How could I dare laugh at you ? 
