Her gifts to man are friends in need , The wreath , the foaming must , To angels - vision of God 's throne , To insects - sensual lust . 
But enough poetry ! 
I am in tears ; let me cry . 
It may be foolishness that everyone would laugh at . 
But you wo n't laugh . 
Your eyes are shining , too . 
Enough poetry . 
I want to tell you now about the insects to whom God gave ` sensual lust . ' 
To insects - sensual lust . 
I am that insect , brother , and it is said of me specially . 
All we Karamazovs are such insects , and , angel as you are , that insect lives in you , too , and will stir up a tempest in your blood . 
Tempests , because sensual lust is a tempest worse than a tempest ! 
Beauty is a terrible and awful thing ! 
It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never can be fathomed , for God sets us nothing but riddles . 
Here the boundaries meet and all contradictions exist side by side . 
I am a cultivated man , brother , but I 've thought a lot about this . 
It 's terrible what mysteries there are ! 
Too many riddles weigh men down on earth . 
We must solve them as we can , and try to keep a dry skin in the water . 
Beauty ! 
I ca n't endure the thought that a man of lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal of the Madonna and ends with the ideal of Sodom . 
What 's still more awful is that a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal of the Madonna , and his heart may be on fire with that ideal , genuinely on fire , just as in his days of youth and innocence . 
Yes , man is broad , too broad , indeed . 
I 'd have him narrower . 
The devil only knows what to make of it ! 
What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart . 
Is there beauty in Sodom ? 
Believe me , that for the immense mass of mankind beauty is found in Sodom . 
Did you know that secret ? 
The awful thing is that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible . 
God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man . 
But a man always talks of his own ache . 
Listen , now to come to facts . '' 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - In Anecdote `` I was leading a wild life then . 
Father said just now that I spent several thousand roubles in seducing young girls . 
That 's a swinish invention , and there was nothing of the sort . 
And if there was , I did n't need money simply for that . 
With me money is an accessory , the overflow of my heart , the framework . 
To-day she would be my lady , to-morrow a wench out of the streets in her place . 
I entertained them both . 
I threw away money by the handful on music , rioting , and Gypsies . 
Sometimes I gave it to the ladies , too , for they 'll take it greedily , that must be admitted , and be pleased and thankful for it . 
Ladies used to be fond of me : not all of them , but it happened , it happened . 
But I always liked side-paths , little dark back-alleys behind the main road - there one finds adventures and surprises , and precious metal in the dirt . 
I am speaking figuratively , brother . 
In the town I was in , there were no such back-alleys in the literal sense , but morally there were . 
If you were like me , you 'd know what that means . 
I loved vice , I loved the ignominy of vice . 
I loved cruelty ; am I not a bug , am I not a noxious insect ? 
In fact a Karamazov ! 
