Let us make a compact here , at Ilusha 's stone , that we will never forget Ilusha and one another . 
And whatever happens to us later in life , if we do n't meet for twenty years afterwards , let us always remember how we buried the poor boy at whom we once threw stones , do you remember , by the bridge ? 
and afterwards we all grew so fond of him . 
He was a fine boy , a kindhearted , brave boy , he felt for his father 's honour and resented the cruel insult to him and stood up for him . 
And so in the first place , we will remember him , boys , all our lives . 
And even if we are occupied with most important things , if we attain to honour or fall into great misfortune - still let us remember how good it was once here , when we were all together , united by a good and kind feeling which made us , for the time we were loving that poor boy , better perhaps than we are . 
My little doves let me call you so , for you are very like them , those pretty blue birds , at this minute as I look at your good dear faces . 
My dear children , perhaps you wo n't understand what I am saying to you , because I often speak very unintelligibly , but you 'll remember all the same and will agree with my words some time . 
You must know that there is nothing higher and stronger and more wholesome and good for life in the future than some good memory , especially a memory of childhood , of home . 
People talk to you a great deal about your education , but some good , sacred memory , preserved from childhood , is perhaps the best education . 
If a man carries many such memories with him into life , he is safe to the end of his days , and if one has only one good memory left in one 's heart , even that may sometime be the means of saving us . 
Perhaps we may even grow wicked later on , may be unable to refrain from a bad action , may laugh at men 's tears and at those people who say as Kolya did just now , ' I want to suffer for all men , ' and may even jeer spitefully at such people . 
But however bad we may become - which God forbid - yet , when we recall how we buried Ilusha , how we loved him in his last days , and how we have been talking like friends all together , at this stone , the cruellest and most mocking of us - if we do become so will not dare to laugh inwardly at having been kind and good at this moment ! 
What 's more , perhaps , that one memory may keep him from great evil and he will reflect and say , ` Yes , I was good and brave and honest then ! ' 
Let him laugh to himself , that 's no matter , a man often laughs at what 's good and kind . 
That 's only from thoughtlessness . 
But I assure you , boys , that as he laughs he will say at once in his heart , ` No , I do wrong to laugh , for that 's not a thing to laugh at . ' 
`` That will be so , I understand you , Karamazov ! '' 
cried Kolya , with flashing eyes . 
The boys were excited and they , too , wanted to say something , but they restrained themselves , looking with intentness and emotion at the speaker . 
`` I say this in case we become bad , '' Alyosha went on , `` but there 's no reason why we should become bad , is there , boys ? 
Let us be , first and above all , kind , then honest and then let us never forget each other ! 
I say that again . 
I give you my word for my part that I 'll never forget one of you . 
Every face looking at me now I shall remember even for thirty years . 
Just now Kolya said to Kartashov that we did not care to know whether he exists or not . 
But I can not forget that Kartashov exists and that he is not blushing now as he did when he discovered the founders of Troy , but is looking at me with his jolly , kind , dear little eyes . 
Boys , my dear boys , let us all be generous and brave like Ilusha , clever , brave and generous like Kolya -LRB- though he will be ever so much cleverer when he is grown up -RRB- , and let us all be as modest , as clever and sweet as Kartashov . 
But why am I talking about those two ? 
You are all dear to me , boys ; from this day forth , I have a place in my heart for you all , and I beg you to keep a place in your hearts for me ! 
Well , and who has united us in this kind , good feeling which we shall remember and intend to remember all our lives ? 
Who , if not Ilusha , the good boy , the dear boy , precious to us for ever ! 
Let us never forget him . 
May his memory live for ever in our hearts from this time forth ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , for ever , for ever ! '' 
the boys cried in their ringing voices , with softened faces . 
`` Let us remember his face and his clothes and his poor little boots , his coffin and his unhappy , sinful father , and how boldly he stood up for him alone against the whole school . '' 
`` We will remember , we will remember , '' cried the boys . 
`` He was brave , he was good ! '' 
`` Ah , how I loved him ! '' 
exclaimed Kolya . 
`` Ah , children , ah , dear friends , do n't be afraid of life ! 
How good life is when one does something good and just ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' the boys repeated enthusiastically . 
`` Karamazov , we love you ! '' 
a voice , probably Kartashov 's , cried impulsively . 
`` We love you , we love you ! '' 
they all caught it up . 
There were tears in the eyes of many of them . 
`` Hurrah for Karamazov ! '' 
