How 's that ? 
Why , when you were here a month ago you spent three thousand , not fifteen hundred , everybody knows that . '' 
`` Who knows it ? 
Who counted the money ? 
Did I let anyone count it ? '' 
`` Why , you told everyone yourself that you 'd spent exactly three thousand . '' 
`` It 's true , I did . 
I told the whole town so , and the whole town said so . 
And here , at Mokroe , too , everyone reckoned it was three thousand . 
Yet I did n't spend three thousand , but fifteen hundred . 
And the other fifteen hundred I sewed into a little bag . 
That 's how it was , gentlemen . 
That 's where I got that money yesterday ... '' `` This is almost miraculous , '' murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` Allow me to inquire , '' observed the prosecutor at last , `` have you informed anyone whatever of this circumstance before ; I mean that you had fifteen hundred left about you a month ago ? '' 
`` I told no one . '' 
`` That 's strange . 
Do you mean absolutely no one ? '' 
`` Absolutely no one . 
No one and nobody . '' 
`` What was your reason for this reticence ? 
What was your motive for making such a secret of it ? 
To be more precise : You have told us at last your secret , in your words , so ` disgraceful , ' though in reality - that is , of course , comparatively speaking - this action , that is , the appropriation of three thousand roubles belonging to someone else , and , of course , only for a time is , in my view at least , only an act of the greatest recklessness and not so disgraceful , when one takes into consideration your character ... . 
Even admitting that it was an action in the highest degree discreditable , still , discreditable is not ` disgraceful . ' 
... Many people have already guessed , during this last month , about the three thousand of Katerina Ivanovna 's that you have spent , and I heard the legend myself , apart from your confession ... . 
Mihail Makarovitch , for instance , had heard it , too , so that indeed , it was scarcely a legend , but the gossip of the whole town . 
There are indications , too , if I am not mistaken , that you confessed this yourself to someone , I mean that the money was Katerina Ivanovna 's , and so , it 's extremely surprising to me that hitherto , that is , up to the present moment , you have made such an extraordinary secret of the fifteen hundred you say you put by , apparently connecting a feeling of positive horror with that secret ... . 
It 's not easy to believe that it could cost you such distress to confess such a secret ... . 
You cried out , just now , that Siberia would be better than confessing it ... '' The prosecutor ceased speaking . 
He was provoked . 
He did not conceal his vexation , which was almost anger , and gave vent to all his accumulated spleen , disconnectedly and incoherently , without choosing words . 
`` It 's not the fifteen hundred that 's the disgrace , but that I put it apart from the rest of the three thousand , '' said Mitya firmly . 
`` Why ? '' 
smiled the prosecutor irritably . 
`` What is there disgraceful , to your thinking , in your having set aside half of the three thousand you had discreditably , if you prefer , ` disgracefully , ' appropriated ? 
Your taking the three thousand is more important than what you did with it . 
And by the way , why did you do that - why did you set apart that half , for what purpose , for what object did you do it ? 
Can you explain that to us ? '' 
`` Oh , gentlemen , the purpose is the whole point ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I put it aside because I was vile , that is , because I was calculating , and to be calculating in such a case is vile ... and that vileness has been going on a whole month . '' 
`` It 's incomprehensible . '' 
`` I wonder at you . 
But I 'll make it clearer . 
Perhaps it really is incomprehensible . 
You see , attend to what I say . 
I appropriate three thousand entrusted to my honour ; I spend it on a spree , say I spend it all , and next morning I go to her and say , ` Katya , I 've done wrong , I 've squandered your three thousand ' ; well , is that right ? 
No , it 's not right - it 's dishonest and cowardly ; I 'm a beast , with no more self-control than a beast , that 's so , is n't it ? 
But still I 'm not a thief ? 
Not a downright thief , you 'll admit ! 
I squandered it , but I did n't steal it . 
