` This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness , and this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thou hast exalted above everything . 
Yet in this question lies hid the great secret of this world . 
Choosing `` bread , '' Thou wouldst have satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity - to find someone to worship . 
So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and so painfully as to find someone to worship . 
But man seeks to worship what is established beyond dispute , so that all men would agree at once to worship it . 
For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one or the other can worship , but to find community of worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time . 
For the sake of common worship they 've slain each other with the sword . 
They have set up gods and challenged one another , `` Put away your gods and come and worship ours , or we will kill you and your gods ! '' 
And so it will be to the end of the world , even when gods disappear from the earth ; they will fall down before idols just the same . 
Thou didst know , Thou couldst not but have known , this fundamental secret of human nature , but Thou didst reject the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow down to Thee alone - the banner of earthly bread ; and Thou hast rejected it for the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven . 
Behold what Thou didst further . 
And all again in the name of freedom ! 
I tell Thee that man is tormented by no greater anxiety than to find someone quickly to whom he can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill-fated creature is born . 
But only one who can appease their conscience can take over their freedom . 
In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner ; give bread , and man will worship thee , for nothing is more certain than bread . 
But if someone else gains possession of his conscience - Oh ! 
then he will cast away Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience . 
In that Thou wast right . 
For the secret of man 's being is not only to live but to have something to live for . 
Without a stable conception of the object of life , man would not consent to go on living , and would rather destroy himself than remain on earth , though he had bread in abundance . 
That is true . 
But what happened ? 
Instead of taking men 's freedom from them , Thou didst make it greater than ever ! 
Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace , and even death , to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good and evil ? 
Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom of conscience , but nothing is a greater cause of suffering . 
And behold , instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man at rest for ever , Thou didst choose all that is exceptional , vague and enigmatic ; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men , acting as though Thou didst not love them at all - Thou who didst come to give Thy life for them ! 
Instead of taking possession of men 's freedom , Thou didst increase it , and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with its sufferings for ever . 
Thou didst desire man 's free love , that he should follow Thee freely , enticed and taken captive by Thee . 
In place of the rigid ancient law , man must hereafter with free heart decide for himself what is good and what is evil , having only Thy image before him as his guide . 
But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even Thy image and Thy truth , if he is weighed down with the fearful burden of free choice ? 
They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee , for they could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thou hast caused , laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems . '' 
` So that , in truth , Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the destruction of Thy kingdom , and no one is more to blame for it . 
Yet what was offered Thee ? 
There are three powers , three powers alone , able to conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotent rebels for their happiness those forces are miracle , mystery and authority . 
Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing so . 
When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle of the temple and said to Thee , `` If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art the Son of God then cast Thyself down , for it is written : the angels shall hold him up lest he fall and bruise himself , and Thou shalt know then whether Thou art the Son of God and shalt prove then how great is Thy faith in Thy Father . '' 
But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast Thyself down . 
Oh , of course , Thou didst proudly and well , like God ; but the weak , unruly race of men , are they gods ? 
Oh , Thou didst know then that in taking one step , in making one movement to cast Thyself down , Thou wouldst be tempting God and have lost all Thy faith in Him , and wouldst have been dashed to pieces against that earth which Thou didst come to save . 
And the wise spirit that tempted Thee would have rejoiced . 
But I ask again , are there many like Thee ? 
And couldst Thou believe for one moment that men , too , could face such a temptation ? 
Is the nature of men such , that they can reject miracle , and at the great moments of their life , the moments of their deepest , most agonising spiritual difficulties , cling only to the free verdict of the heart ? 
Oh , Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books , would be handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth , and Thou didst hope that man , following Thee , would cling to God and not ask for a miracle . 
But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejects God too ; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous . 
And as man can not bear to be without the miraculous , he will create new miracles of his own for himself , and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft , though he might be a hundred times over a rebel , heretic and infidel . 
Thou didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee , mocking and reviling Thee , `` Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou art He . '' 
Thou didst not come down , for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle , and didst crave faith given freely , not based on miracle . 
Thou didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him for ever . 
But Thou didst think too highly of men therein , for they are slaves , of course , though rebellious by nature . 
