Damn it ! 
My mind has never been so darkened before . 
Excuse me , why , I was thinking Ivan ... He he he ! '' 
He stopped . 
A broad , drunken , half senseless grin overspread his face . 
At that moment a fearful noise , and clamour was heard in the hall , there were violent shouts , the door was flung open , and Dmitri burst into the room . 
The old man rushed to Ivan in terror . 
`` He 'll kill me ! 
He 'll kill me ! 
Do n't let him get at me ! '' 
he screamed , clinging to the skirt of Ivan 's coat . 
The Sensualists GRIGORY and Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri . 
They had been struggling with him in the passage , refusing to admit him , acting on instructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before . 
Taking advantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on entering the room to look about him , Grigory ran round the table , closed the double doors on the opposite side of the room leading to the inner apartments , and stood before the closed doors , stretching wide his arms , prepared to defend the entrance , so to speak , with the last drop of his blood . 
Seeing this , Dmitri uttered a scream rather than a shout and rushed at Grigory . 
`` Then she 's there ! 
She 's hidden there ! 
Out of the way , scoundrel ! '' 
He tried to pull Grigory away , but the old servant pushed him back . 
Beside himself with fury , Dmitri struck out , and hit Grigory with all his might . 
The old man fell like a log , and Dmitri , leaping over him , broke in the door . 
Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at the other end of the room , huddling close to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` She 's here ! '' 
shouted Dmitri . 
`` I saw her turn towards the house just now , but I could n't catch her . 
Where is she ? 
Where is she ? '' 
That shout , `` She 's here ! '' 
produced an indescribable effect on Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
All his terror left him . 
`` Hold him ! 
Hold him ! '' 
he cried , and dashed after Dmitri . 
Meanwhile Grigory had got up from the floor , but still seemed stunned . 
Ivan and Alyosha ran after their father . 
In the third room something was heard to fall on the floor with a ringing crash : it was a large glass vase - not an expensive one - on a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it . 
`` At him ! '' 
shouted the old man . 
`` Help ! '' 
Ivan and Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him back . 
`` Why do you run after him ? 
He 'll murder you outright , '' Ivan cried wrathfully at his father . 
`` Ivan ! 
Alyosha ! 
She must be here . 
Grushenka 's here . 
He said he saw her himself , running . '' 
He was choking . 
He was not expecting Grushenka at the time , and the sudden news that she was here made him beside himself . 
He was trembling all over . 
