Look round and judge ; fifteen centuries have passed , look upon them . 
Whom hast Thou raised up to Thyself ? 
I swear , man is weaker and baser by nature than Thou hast believed him ! 
Can he , can he do what Thou didst ? 
By showing him so much respect , Thou didst , as it were , cease to feel for him , for Thou didst ask far too much from him - Thou who hast loved him more than Thyself ! 
Respecting him less , Thou wouldst have asked less of him . 
That would have been more like love , for his burden would have been lighter . 
He is weak and vile . 
What though he is everywhere now rebelling against our power , and proud of his rebellion ? 
It is the pride of a child and a schoolboy . 
They are little children rioting and barring out the teacher at school . 
But their childish delight will end ; it will cost them dear . 
Mankind as a whole has always striven to organise a universal state . 
There have been many great nations with great histories , but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were , for they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world-wide union . 
The great conquerors , Timours and Ghenghis-Khans , whirled like hurricanes over the face of the earth striving to subdue its people , and they too were but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universal unity . 
Hadst Thou taken the world and Caesar 's purple , Thou wouldst have founded the universal state and have given universal peace . 
For who can rule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in his hands ? 
We have taken the sword of Caesar , and in taking it , of course , have rejected Thee and followed him . 
Oh , ages are yet to come of the confusion of free thought , of their science and cannibalism . 
For having begun to build their tower of Babel without us , they will end , of course , with cannibalism . 
But then the beast will crawl to us and lick our feet and spatter them with tears of blood . 
And we shall sit upon the beast and raise the cup , and on it will be written , `` Mystery . '' 
But then , and only then , the reign of peace and happiness will come for men . 
Thou art proud of Thine elect , but Thou hast only the elect , while we give rest to all . 
And besides , how many of those elect , those mighty ones who could become elect , have grown weary waiting for Thee , and have transferred and will transfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to the other camp , and end by raising their free banner against Thee . 
Thou didst Thyself lift up that banner . 
But with us all will be happy and will no more rebel nor destroy one another as under Thy freedom . 
Oh , we shall persuade them that they will only become free when they renounce their freedom to us and submit to us . 
And shall we be right or shall we be lying ? 
They will be convinced that we are right , for they will remember the horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them . 
Freedom , free thought , and science will lead them into such straits and will bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries , that some of them , the fierce and rebellious , will destroy themselves , others , rebellious but weak , will destroy one another , while the rest , weak and unhappy , will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us : `` Yes , you were right , you alone possess His mystery , and we come back to you , save us from ourselves ! '' '' 
` Receiving bread from us , they will see clearly that we take the bread made by their hands from them , to give it to them , without any miracle . 
They will see that we do not change the stones to bread , but in truth they will be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the bread itself ! 
For they will remember only too well that in old days , without our help , even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands , while since they have come back to us , the very stones have turned to bread in their hands . 
Too , too well will they know the value of complete submission ! 
And until men know that , they will be unhappy . 
Who is most to blame for their not knowing it ? 
- speak ! 
Who scattered the flock and sent it astray on unknown paths ? 
But the flock will come together again and will submit once more , and then it will be once for all . 
Then we shall give them the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are by nature . 
Oh , we shall persuade them at last not to be proud , for Thou didst lift them up and thereby taught them to be proud . 
We shall show them that they are weak , that they are only pitiful children , but that childlike happiness is the sweetest of all . 
They will become timid and will look to us and huddle close to us in fear , as chicks to the hen . 
They will marvel at us and will be awe-stricken before us , and will be proud at our being so powerful and clever that we have been able to subdue such a turbulent flock of thousands of millions . 
They will tremble impotently before our wrath , their minds will grow fearful , they will be quick to shed tears like women and children , but they will be just as ready at a sign from us to pass to laughter and rejoicing , to happy mirth and childish song . 
Yes , we shall set them to work , but in their leisure hours we shall make their life like a child 's game , with children 's songs and innocent dance . 
Oh , we shall allow them even sin , they are weak and helpless , and they will love us like children because we allow them to sin . 
We shall tell them that every sin will be expiated , if it is done with our permission , that we allow them to sin because we love them , and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves . 
And we shall take it upon ourselves , and they will adore us as their saviours who have taken on themselves their sins before God . 
