`` I shall be told , perhaps , there are witnesses that he spent on one day all that three thousand given him by his betrothed a month before the catastrophe , so he could not have divided the sum in half . 
But who are these witnesses ? 
The value of their evidence has been shown in court already . 
Besides , in another man 's hand a crust always seems larger , and no one of these witnesses counted that money ; they all judged simply at sight . 
And the witness Maximov has testified that the prisoner had twenty thousand in his hand . 
You see , gentlemen of the jury , psychology is a two edged weapon . 
Let me turn the other edge now and see what comes of it . 
`` A month before the catastrophe the prisoner was entrusted by Katerina Ivanovna with three thousand roubles to send off by post . 
But the question is : is it true that they were entrusted to him in such an insulting and degrading way as was proclaimed just now ? 
The first statement made by the young lady on the subject was different , perfectly different . 
In the second statement we heard only cries of resentment and revenge , cries of long-concealed hatred . 
And the very fact that the witness gave her first evidence incorrectly gives us a right to conclude that her second piece of evidence may have been incorrect also . 
The prosecutor will not , dare not -LRB- his own words -RRB- touch on that story . 
So be it . 
I will not touch on it either , but will only venture to observe that if a lofty and high-principled person , such as that highly respected young lady unquestionably is , if such a person , I say , allows herself suddenly in court to contradict her first statement , with the obvious motive of ruining the prisoner , it is clear that this evidence has been given not impartially , not coolly . 
Have not we the right to assume that a revengeful woman might have exaggerated much ? 
Yes , she may well have exaggerated , in particular , the insult and humiliation of her offering him the money . 
No , it was offered in such a way that it was possible to take it , especially for a man so easygoing as the prisoner , above all , as he expected to receive shortly from his father the three thousand roubles that he reckoned was owing to him . 
It was unreflecting of him , but it was just his irresponsible want of reflection that made him so confident that his father would give him the money , that he would get it , and so could always dispatch the money entrusted to him and repay the debt . 
`` But the prosecutor refuses to allow that he could the same day have set aside half the money and sewn it up in a little bag . 
That 's not his character , he tells us , he could n't have had such feelings . 
But yet he talked himself of the broad Karamazov nature ; he cried out about the two extremes which a Karamazov can contemplate at once . 
Karamazov is just such a two-sided nature , fluctuating between two extremes , that even when moved by the most violent craving for riotous gaiety , he can pull himself up , if something strikes him on the other side . 
And on the other side is love that new love which had flamed up in his heart , and for that love he needed money ; oh , far more than for carousing with his mistress . 
If she were to say to him , ' I am yours , I wo n't have Fyodor Pavlovitch , ' then he must have money to take her away . 
That was more important than carousing . 
Could a Karamazov fail to understand it ? 
That anxiety was just what he was suffering from - what is there improbable in his laying aside that money and concealing it in case of emergency ? 
`` But time passed , and Fyodor Pavlovitch did not give the prisoner the expected three thousand ; on the contrary , the latter heard that he meant to use this sum to seduce the woman he , the prisoner , loved . 
` If Fyodor Pavlovitch does n't give the money , ' he thought , ' I shall be put in the position of a thief before Katerina Ivanovna . ' 
And then the idea presented itself to him that he would go to Katerina Ivanovna , lay before her the fifteen hundred roubles he still carried round his neck , and say , ' I am a scoundrel , but not a thief . ' 
So here we have already a twofold reason why he should guard that sum of money as the apple of his eye , why he should n't unpick the little bag , and spend it a hundred at a time . 
Why should you deny the prisoner a sense of honour ? 
Yes , he has a sense of honour , granted that it 's misplaced , granted it 's often mistaken , yet it exists and amounts to a passion , and he has proved that . 
`` But now the affair becomes even more complex ; his jealous torments reach a climax , and those same two questions torture his fevered brain more and more : ` If I repay Katerina Ivanovna , where can I find the means to go off with Grushenka ? ' 
If he behaved wildly , drank , and made disturbances in the taverns in the course of that month , it was perhaps because he was wretched and strained beyond his powers of endurance . 
These two questions became so acute that they drove him at last to despair . 
He sent his younger brother to beg for the last time for the three thousand roubles , but without waiting for a reply , burst in himself and ended by beating the old man in the presence of witnesses . 
After that he had no prospect of getting it from anyone ; his father would not give it him after that beating . 
`` The same evening he struck himself on the breast , just on the upper part of the breast where the little bag was , and swore to his brother that he had the means of not being a scoundrel , but that still he would remain a scoundrel , for he foresaw that he would not use that means , that he would n't have the character , that he would n't have the will-power to do it . 
Why , why does the prosecutor refuse to believe the evidence of Alexey Karamazov , given so genuinely and sincerely , so spontaneously and convincingly ? 
And why , on the contrary , does he force me to believe in money hidden in a crevice , in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho ? 
`` The same evening , after his talk with his brother , the prisoner wrote that fatal letter , and that letter is the chief , the most stupendous proof of the prisoner having committed robbery ! ' 
I shall beg from everyone , and if I do n't get it I shall murder my father and shall take the envelope with the pink ribbon on it from under his mattress as soon as Ivan has gone . ' 
A full programme of the murder , we are told , so it must have been he . 
` It has all been done as he wrote , ' cries the prosecutor . 
`` But in the first place , it 's the letter of a drunken man and written in great irritation ; secondly , he writes of the envelope from what he has heard from Smerdyakov again , for he has not seen the envelope himself ; and thirdly , he wrote it indeed , but how can you prove that he did it ? 
Did the prisoner take the envelope from under the pillow , did he find the money , did that money exist indeed ? 
And was it to get money that the prisoner ran off , if you remember ? 
He ran off post-haste not to steal , but to find out where she was , the woman who had crushed him . 
