But that 's not the point , that 's not the point again . 
You see , I 'm mixing everything up . 
I am in such a hurry . 
Why am I in a hurry ? 
I do n't understand . 
It 's awful how I seem growing unable to understand anything . 
Everything seems mixed up in a sort of tangle . 
I am afraid you are so bored you will jump up and run away , and that will be all I shall see of you . 
Goodness ! 
Why are we sitting here and no coffee ? 
Yulia , Glafira , coffee ! '' 
Alyosha made haste to thank her , and said that he had only just had coffee . 
`` Where ? '' 
`` At Agrfena Alexandrovna 's . '' 
`` At ... at that woman 's ? 
Ah , it 's she has brought ruin on everyone . 
I know nothing about it though . 
They say she has become a saint , though it 's rather late in the day . 
She had better have done it before . 
What use is it now ? 
Hush , hush , Alexey Fyodorovitch , for I have so much to say to you that I am afraid I shall tell you nothing . 
This awful trial ... I shall certainly go , I am making arrangements . 
I shall be carried there in my chair ; besides I can sit up . 
I shall have people with me . 
And , you know , I am a witness . 
How shall I speak , how shall I speak ? 
I do n't know what I shall say . 
One has to take an oath , has n't one ? '' 
`` Yes ; but I do n't think you will be able to go . '' 
`` I can sit up . 
Ah , you put me out ! 
Ah ! 
this trial , this savage act , and then they are all going to Siberia , some are getting married , and all this so quickly , so quickly , everything 's changing , and at last - nothing . 
All grow old and have death to look forward to . 
Well , so be it ! 
I am weary . 
This Katya , cette charmante personne , has disappointed all my hopes . 
Now she is going to follow one of your brothers to Siberia , and your other brother is going to follow her , and will live in the nearest town , and they will all torment one another . 
It drives me out of my mind . 
Worst of all - the publicity . 
The story has been told a million times over in all the papers in Moscow and Petersburg . 
Ah ! 
yes , would you believe it , there 's a paragraph that I was ' a dear friend ' of your brother 's - , I ca n't repeat the horrid word . 
just fancy , just fancy ! '' 
`` Impossible ! 
Where was the paragraph ? 
What did it say ? '' 
`` I 'll show you directly . 
I got the paper and read it yesterday . 
Here , in the Petersburg paper Gossip . 
