When Pyotr Ilyitch , though still unwilling to believe in it , threatened to tell someone so as to prevent the suicide , Mitya had answered grinning : `` You 'll be too late . '' 
So they must make haste to Mokroe to find the criminal , before he really did shoot himself . 
`` That 's clear , that 's clear ! '' 
repeated the prosecutor in great excitement . 
`` That 's just the way with mad fellows like that : ' I shall kill myself to-morrow , so I 'll make merry till I die ! ' '' 
The story of how he had bought the wine and provisions excited the prosecutor more than ever . 
`` Do you remember the fellow that murdered a merchant called Olsufyev , gentlemen ? 
He stole fifteen hundred , went at once to have his hair curled , and then , without even hiding the money , carrying it almost in his hand in the same way , he went off to the girls . '' 
All were delayed , however , by the inquiry , the search , and the formalities , etc. , in the house of Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It all took time and so , two hours before starting , they sent on ahead to Mokroe the officer of the rural police , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch Schmertsov , who had arrived in the town the morning before to get his pay . 
He was instructed to avoid raising the alarm when he reached Mokroe , but to keep constant watch over the `` criminal '' till the arrival of the proper authorities , to procure also witnesses for the arrest , police constables , and so on . 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch did as he was told , preserving his incognito , and giving no one but his old acquaintance , Trifon Borissovitch , the slightest hint of his secret business . 
He had spoken to him just before Mitya met the landlord in the balcony , looking for him in the dark , and noticed at once a change in Trifon Borissovitch 's face and voice . 
So neither Mitya nor anyone else knew that he was being watched . 
The box with the pistols had been carried off by Trifon Borissovitch and put in a suitable place . 
Only after four o'clock , almost at sunrise , all the officials , the police captain , the prosecutor , the investigating lawyer , drove up in two carriages , each drawn by three horses . 
The doctor remained at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's to make a post-mortem next day on the body . 
But he was particularly interested in the condition of the servant , Smerdyakov . 
`` Such violent and protracted epileptic fits , recurring continually for twenty-four hours , are rarely to be met with , and are of interest to science , '' he declared enthusiastically to his companions , and as they left they laughingly congratulated him on his find . 
The prosecutor and the investigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor 's saying that Smerdyakov could not outlive the night . 
After these long , but I think necessary explanations , we will return to that moment of our tale at which we broke off . 
The Sufferings of a Soul The First Ordeal AND so Mitya sat looking wildly at the people round him , not understanding what was said to him . 
Suddenly he got up , flung up his hands , and shouted aloud : `` I 'm not guilty ! 
I 'm not guilty of that blood ! 
I 'm not guilty of my father 's blood ... . 
I meant to kill him . 
But I 'm not guilty . 
Not I. '' But he had hardly said this , before Grushenka rushed from behind the curtain and flung herself at the police captain 's feet . 
`` It was my fault ! 
Mine ! 
My wickedness ! '' 
she cried , in a heart-rending voice , bathed in tears , stretching out her clasped hands towards them . 
`` He did it through me . 
I tortured him and drove him to it . 
I tortured that poor old man that 's dead , too , in my wickedness , and brought him to this ! 
It 's my fault , mine first , mine most , my fault ! '' 
`` Yes , it 's your fault ! 
You 're the chief criminal ! 
You fury ! 
You harlot ! 
You 're the most to blame ! '' 
shouted the police captain , threatening her with his hand . 
But he was quickly and resolutely suppressed . 
The prosecutor positively seized hold of him . 
`` This is absolutely irregular , Mihail Makarovitch ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You are positively hindering the inquiry ... . 
You 're ruining the case . '' 
he almost gasped . 
`` Follow the regular course ! 
