You loved me for an hour , remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever ... . 
She always used to call me Mityenka , do you remember ? '' 
And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen . 
Fenya was almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in and attacked her . 
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin , the young official with whom he had pawned his pistols . 
It was by now half-past eight , and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea , and had just put his coat on again to go to the Metropolis to play billiards . 
Mitya caught him coming out . 
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood , the young man uttered a cry of surprise . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What is the matter ? '' 
`` I 've come for my pistols , '' said Mitya , `` and brought you the money . 
And thanks very much . 
I 'm in a hurry , Pyotr Ilyitch , please make haste . '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised ; he suddenly caught sight of a bundle of banknotes in Mitya 's hand , and what was more , he had walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money : he had them in his right hand , and held them outstretched as if to show them . 
Perhotin 's servant-boy , who met Mitya in the passage , said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way , with the money outstretched in his hand , so he must have been carrying them like that even in the streets . 
They were all rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes , and the fingers holding them were covered with blood . 
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money , he said that it was difficult to judge at a glance , but that it might have been two thousand , or perhaps three , but it was a big , `` fat '' bundle . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' so he testified afterwards , `` seemed unlike himself , too ; not drunk , but , as it were , exalted , lost to everything , but at the same time , as it were , absorbed , as though pondering and searching for something and unable to come to a decision . 
He was in great haste , answered abruptly and very strangely , and at moments seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful . '' 
`` But what is the matter with you ? 
What 's wrong ? '' 
cried Pyotr Ilyitch , looking wildly at his guest . 
`` How is it that you 're all covered with blood ? 
Have you had a fall ? 
Look at yourself ! '' 
He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass . 
Seeing his blood-stained face , Mitya started and scowled wrathfully . 
`` Damnation ! 
That 's the last straw , '' he muttered angrily , hurriedly changing the notes from his right hand to the left , and impulsively jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket . 
But the handkerchief turned out to be soaked with blood , too -LRB- it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe Grigory 's face -RRB- . 
There was scarcely a white spot on it , and it had not merely begun to dry , but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not be pulled apart . 
Mitya threw it angrily on the floor . 
`` Oh , damn it ! '' 
he said . 
`` Have n't you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my face ? '' 
`` So you 're only stained , not wounded ? 
You 'd better wash , '' said Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` Here 's a wash-stand . 
I 'll pour you out some water . '' 
`` A wash-stand ? 
That 's all right ... but where am I to put this ? '' 
With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble notes , looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to decide what he , Mitya , was to do with his own money . 
`` In your pocket , or on the table here . 
They wo n't be lost . '' 
`` In my pocket ? 
Yes , in my pocket . 
All right ... . 
But , I say , that 's all nonsense , '' he cried , as though suddenly coming out of his absorption . 
`` Look here , let 's first settle that business of the pistols . 
Give them back to me . 
