I only speak from rapture , and forgive my tears , for I love the Bible . 
Let him too weep , the priest of God , and be sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response . 
Only a little tiny seed is needed - drop it into the heart of the peasant and it wo n't die , it will live in his soul all his life , it will be hidden in the midst of his darkness and sin , like a bright spot , like a great reminder . 
And there 's no need of much teaching or explanation , he will understand it all simply . 
Do you suppose that the peasants do n't understand ? 
Try reading them the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti ; or the miraculous story of Jonah in the whale . 
Do n't forget either the parables of Our Lord , choose especially from the Gospel of St. Luke -LRB- that is what I did -RRB- , and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul -LRB- that you must n't leave out on any account -RRB- , and from the Lives of the Saints , for instance , the life of Alexey , the man of God and , greatest of all , the happy martyr and the seer of God , Mary of Egypt - and you will penetrate their hearts with these simple tales . 
Give one hour a week to it in spite of your poverty , only one little hour . 
And you will see for yourselves that our people is gracious and grateful , and will repay you a hundred foId . 
Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words they have heard from him , they will of their own accord help him in his fields and in his house and will treat him with more respect than before - so that it will even increase his worldly well-being too . 
The thing is so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words , for fear of being laughed at , and yet how true it is ! 
One who does not believe in God will not believe in God 's people . 
He who believes in God 's people will see His Holiness too , even though he had not believed in it till then . 
Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert our atheists , who have torn themselves away from their native soil . 
And what is the use of Christ 's words , unless we set an example ? 
The people is lost without the Word of God , for its soul is athirst for the Word and for all that is good . 
In my youth , long ago , nearly forty years ago , I travelled all over Russia with Father Anfim , collecting funds for our monastery , and we stayed one night on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen . 
A good looking peasant lad , about eighteen , joined us ; he had to hurry back next morning to pull a merchant 's barge along the bank . 
I noticed him looking straight before him with clear and tender eyes . 
It was a bright , warm , still , July night , a cool mist rose from the broad river , we could hear the plash of a fish , the birds were still , all was hushed and beautiful , everything praying to God . 
Only we two were not sleeping , the lad and I , and we talked of the beauty of this world of God 's and of the great mystery of it . 
Every blade of grass , every insect , ant , and golden bee , all so marvellously know their path , though they have not intelligence , they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish it themselves . 
I saw the dear lad 's heart was moved . 
He told me that he loved the forest and the forest birds . 
He was a bird-catcher , knew the note of each of them , could call each bird . 
`` I know nothing better than to be in the forest , '' said he , `` though all things are good . '' 
`` Truly , '' I answered him , `` all things are good and fair , because all is truth . 
Look , '' said I , `` at the horse , that great beast that is so near to man ; or the lowly , pensive ox , which feeds him and works for him ; look at their faces , what meekness , what devotion to man , who often beats them mercilessly . 
What gentleness , what confidence and what beauty ! 
It 's touching to know that there 's no sin in them , for all , all except man , is sinless , and Christ has been with them before us . '' 
`` Why , '' asked the boy , `` is Christ with them too ? '' 
`` It can not but be so , '' said I , `` since the Word is for all . 
All creation and all creatures , every leaf is striving to the Word , singing glory to God , weeping to Christ , unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery of their sinless life . 
Yonder , '' said I , `` in the forest wanders the dreadful bear , fierce and menacing , and yet innocent in it . '' 
And I told him how once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell in the wood . 
And the great saint pitied him , went up to him without fear and gave him a piece of bread . 
`` Go along , '' said he , `` Christ be with you , '' and the savage beast walked away meekly and obediently , doing no harm . 
And the lad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint , and that Christ was with him too . 
`` Ah , '' said he , `` how good that is , how good and beautiful is all God 's work ! '' 
He sat musing softly and sweetly . 
I saw he understood . 
And he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep . 
May God bless youth ! 
And I prayed for him as I went to sleep . 
Lord , send peace and light to Thy people ! 
-LRB- c -RRB- Recollections of Father Zossima 's Youth before he became a Monk . 
The Duel I SPENT a long time , almost eight years , in the military cadet school at Petersburg , and in the novelty of my surroundings there , many of my childish impressions grew dimmer , though I forgot nothing . 
I picked up so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel , absurd , almost savage creature . 
A surface polish of courtesy and society manners I did acquire together with the French language . 
But we all , myself included , looked upon the soldiers in our service as cattle . 
