For the last time I give him the chance to be a father . 
Tell him God Himself sends him this chance . '' 
`` Mitya , he wo n't give it for anything . '' 
`` I know he wo n't . 
I know it perfectly well . 
Now , especially . 
That 's not all . 
I know something more . 
Now , only a few days ago , perhaps only yesterday he found out for the first time in earnest -LRB- underline in earnest -RRB- that Grushenka is really perhaps not joking , and really means to marry me . 
He knows her nature ; he knows the cat . 
And do you suppose he 's going to give me money to help to bring that about when he 's crazy about her himself ? 
And that 's not all , either . 
I can tell you more than that . 
I know that for the last five days he has had three thousand drawn out of the bank , changed into notes of a hundred roubles . 
packed into a large envelope , sealed with five seals , and tied across with red tape . 
You see how well I know all about it ! 
On the envelope is written : ` To my angel , Grushenka , when she will come to me . ' 
He scrawled it himself in silence and in secret , and no one knows that the money 's there except the valet , Smerdyakov , whom he trusts like himself . 
So now he has been expecting Grushenka for the last three or four days ; he hopes she 'll come for the money . 
He has sent her word of it , and she has sent him word that perhaps she 'll come . 
And if she does go to the old man , can I marry her after that ? 
You understand now why I 'm here in secret and what I 'm on the watch for . '' 
`` For her ? '' 
`` Yes , for her . 
Foma has a room in the house of these sluts here . 
Foma comes from our parts ; he was a soldier in our regiment . 
He does jobs for them . 
He 's watchman at night and goes grouse-shooting in the day-time ; and that 's how he lives . 
I 've established myself in his room . 
Neither he nor the women of the house know the secret - that is , that I am on the watch here . '' 
`` No one but Smerdyakov knows , then ? '' 
`` No one else . 
He will let me know if she goes to the old man . '' 
`` It was he told you about the money , then ? '' 
`` Yes . 
It 's a dead secret . 
Even Ivan does n't know about the money , or anything . 
The old man is sending Ivan to Tchermashnya on a two or three days ' journey . 
A purchaser has turned up for the copse : he 'll give eight thousand for the timber . 
So the old man keeps asking Ivan to help him by going to arrange it . 
It will take him two or three days . 
That 's what the old man wants , so that Grushenka can come while he 's away . '' 
`` Then he 's expecting Grushenka to-day ? '' 
`` No , she wo n't come to-day ; there are signs , She 's certain not to come , '' cried Mitya suddenly . 
`` Smerdyakov thinks so , too . 
Father 's drinking now . 
He 's sitting at table with Ivan . 
Go to him , Alyosha , and ask for the three thousand . '' 
`` Mitya , dear , what 's the matter with you ? '' 
cried Alyosha , jumping up from his place , and looking keenly at his brother 's frenzied face . 
