P.S. - I write my curse , but I adore you ! 
I hear it in my heart . 
One string is left , and it vibrates . 
Better tear my heart in two ! 
I shall kill myself , but first of all that cur . 
I shall tear three thousand from him and fling it to you . 
Though I 've been a scoundrel to you , I am not a thief ! 
You can expect three thousand . 
The cur keeps it under his mattress , in pink ribbon . 
I am not a thief , but I 'll murder my thief . 
Katya , do n't look disdainful . 
Dmitri is not a thief ! 
but a murderer ! 
He has murdered his father and ruined himself to hold his ground , rather than endure your pride . 
And he does n't love you . 
P.P.S. - I kiss your feet , farewel ! 
P.P.P.S. - Katya , pray to God that someone 'll give me the money . 
Then I shall not be steeped in gore , and if no one does - I shall ! 
Kill me ! 
Your slave and enemy , D. KARAMAZOV When Ivan read this `` document '' he was convinced . 
So then it was his brother , not Smerdyakov . 
And if not Smerdyakov , then not he , Ivan . 
This letter at once assumed in his eyes the aspect of a logical proof . 
There could be no longer the slightest doubt of Mitya 's guilt . 
The suspicion never occurred to Ivan , by the way , that Mitya might have committed the murder in conjunction with Smerdyakov , and , indeed , such a theory did not fit in with the facts . 
Ivan was completely reassured . 
The next morning he only thought of Smerdyakov and his gibes with contempt . 
A few days later he positively wondered how he could have been so horribly distressed at his suspicions . 
He resolved to dismiss him with contempt and forget him . 
So passed a month . 
He made no further inquiry about Smerdyakov , but twice he happened to hear that he was very ill and out of his mind . 
`` He 'll end in madness , '' the young doctor Varvinsky observed about him , and Ivan remembered this . 
During the last week of that month Ivan himself began to feel very ill . 
He went to consult the Moscow doctor who had been sent for by Katerina Ivanovna just before the trial . 
And just at that time his relations with Katerina Ivanovna became acutely strained . 
They were like two enemies in love with one another . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's `` returns '' to Mitya , that is , her brief but violent revulsions of feeling in his favour , drove Ivan to perfect frenzy . 
Strange to say , until that last scene described above , when Alyosha came from Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna , Ivan had never once , during that month , heard her express a doubt of Mitya 's guilt , in spite of those `` returns '' that were so hateful to him . 
It is remarkable , too , that while he felt that he hated Mitya more and more every day , he realised that it was not on account of Katya 's `` returns '' that he hated him , but just because he was the murderer of his father . 
He was conscious of this and fully recognised it to himself Nevertheless , he went to see Mitya ten days before the trial and proposed to him a plan of escape - a plan he had obviously thought over a long time . 
He was partly impelled to do this by a sore place still left in his heart from a phrase of Smerdyakov 's , that it was to his , Ivan 's , advantage that his brother should be convicted , as that would increase his inheritance and Alyosha 's from forty to sixty thousand roubles . 
He determined to sacrifice thirty thousand on arranging Mitya 's escape . 
On his return from seeing him , he was very mournful and dispirited ; he suddenly began to feel that he was anxious for Mitya 's escape , not only to heal that sore place by sacrificing thirty thousand , but for another reason . 
`` Is it because I am as much a murderer at heart ? '' 
he asked himself . 
Something very deep down seemed burning and rankling in his soul . 
His pride above all suffered cruelly all that month . 
But of that later ... . 
When , after his conversation with Alyosha , Ivan suddenly decided with his hand on the bell of his lodging to go to Smerdyakov , he obeyed a sudden and peculiar impulse of indignation . 
He suddenly remembered how Katerina Ivanovna had only just cried out to him in Alyosha 's presence : `` It was you , you , persuaded me of his '' -LRB- that is , Mitya 's -RRB- `` guilt ! '' 
