`` But he said I was a stinking lackey . 
He thinks that I might be unruly . 
He is mistaken there . 
If I had a certain sum in my pocket , I would have left here long ago . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his behaviour , in his mind , and in his poverty . 
He does n't know how to do anything , and yet he is respected by everyone . 
I may be only a soup-maker , but with luck I could open a cafe restaurant in Petrovka , in Moscow , for my cookery is something special , and there 's no one in Moscow , except the foreigners , whose cookery is anything special . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is a beggar , but if he were to challenge the son of the first count in the country , he 'd fight him . 
Though in what way is he better than I am ? 
For he is ever so much stupider than I am . 
Look at the money he has wasted without any need ! '' 
`` It must be lovely , a duel , '' Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly . 
`` How so ? '' 
`` It must be so dreadful and so brave , especially when young officers with pistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady . 
A perfect picture ! 
Ah , if only girls were allowed to look on , I 'd give anything to see one ! '' 
`` It 's all very well when you are firing at someone , but when he is firing straight in your mug , you must feel pretty silly . 
You 'd be glad to run away , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` You do n't mean you would run away ? '' 
But Smerdyakov did not deign to reply . 
After a moment 's silence the guitar tinkled again , and he sang again in the same falsetto : Whatever you may say , I shall go far away . 
Life will be bright and gay In the city far away . 
I shall not grieve , I shall not grieve at all , I do n't intend to grieve at all . 
Then something unexpected happened . 
Alyosha suddenly sneezed . 
They were silent . 
Alyosha got up and walked towards them . 
He found Smerdyakov dressed up and wearing polished boots , his hair pomaded , and perhaps curled . 
The guitar lay on the garden-seat . 
His companion was the daughter of the house , wearing a light-blue dress with a train two yards long . 
She was young and would not have been bad-looking , but that her face was so round and terribly freckled . 
`` Will my brother Dmitri soon be back ? 
asked Alyosha with as much composure as he could . 
Smerdyakov got up slowly ; Marya Kondratyevna rose too . 
`` How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
It 's not as if I were his keeper , '' answered Smerdyakov quietly , distinctly , and superciliously . 
`` But I simply asked whether you do know ? '' 
Alyosha explained . 
`` I know nothing of his whereabouts and do n't want to . '' 
`` But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in the house , and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes . '' 
Smerdyakov turned a deliberate , unmoved glance upon him . 
`` And how did you get in this time , since the gate was bolted an hour ago ? '' 
he asked , looking at Alyosha . 
`` I came in from the back-alley , over the fence , and went straight to the summer-house . 
I hope you 'll forgive me , he added addressing Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` I was in a hurry to find my brother . '' 
`` Ach , as though we could take it amiss in you ! '' 
drawled Marya Kondratyevna , flattered by Alyosha 's apology . 
`` For Dmitri Fyodorovitch often goes to the summer-house in that way . 
We do n't know he is here and he is sitting in the summer-house . '' 
