`` Well , I know nothing of it so far , and ca n't understand it , and the innumerable mass of mankind are with me there . 
The question is , whether that 's due to men 's bad qualities or whether it 's inherent in their nature . 
To my thinking , Christ-like love for men is a miracle impossible on earth . 
He was God . 
But we are not gods . 
Suppose I , for instance , suffer intensely . 
Another can never know how much I suffer , because he is another and not I. And what 's more , a man is rarely ready to admit another 's suffering -LRB- as though it were a distinction -RRB- . 
Why wo n't he admit it , do you think ? 
Because I smell unpleasant , because I have a stupid face , because I once trod on his foot . 
Besides , there is suffering and suffering ; degrading , humiliating suffering such as humbles me - hunger , for instance - my benefactor will perhaps allow me ; but when you come to higher suffering - for an idea , for instance - he will very rarely admit that , perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man should have who suffers for an idea . 
And so he deprives me instantly of his favour , and not at all from badness of heart . 
Beggars , especially genteel beggars , ought never to show themselves , but to ask for charity through the newspapers . 
One can love one 's neighbours in the abstract , or even at a distance , but at close quarters it 's almost impossible . 
If it were as on the stage , in the ballet , where if beggars come in , they wear silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully , then one might like looking at them . 
But even then we should not love them . 
But enough of that . 
I simply wanted to show you my point of view . 
I meant to speak of the suffering of mankind generally , but we had better confine ourselves to the sufferings of the children . 
That reduces the scope of my argument to a tenth of what it would be . 
Still we 'd better keep to the children , though it does weaken my case . 
But , in the first place , children can be loved even at close quarters , even when they are dirty , even when they are ugly -LRB- I fancy , though , children never are ugly -RRB- . 
The second reason why I wo n't speak of grown-up people is that , besides being disgusting and unworthy of love , they have a compensation - they 've eaten the apple and know good and evil , and they have become ` like gods . ' 
They go on eating it still . 
But the children have n't eaten anything , and are so far innocent . 
Are you fond of children , Alyosha ? 
I know you are , and you will understand why I prefer to speak of them . 
If they , too , suffer horribly on earth , they must suffer for their fathers ' sins , they must be punished for their fathers , who have eaten the apple ; but that reasoning is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on earth . 
The innocent must not suffer for another 's sins , and especially such innocents ! 
You may be surprised at me , Alyosha , but I am awfully fond of children , too . 
And observe , cruel people , the violent , the rapacious , the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children . 
Children while they are quite little - up to seven , for instance - are so remote from grown-up people they are different creatures , as it were , of a different species . 
I knew a criminal in prison who had , in the course of his career as a burglar , murdered whole families , including several children . 
But when he was in prison , he had a strange affection for them . 
He spent all his time at his window , watching the children playing in the prison yard . 
He trained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friends with him ... . 
You do n't know why I am telling you all this , Alyosha ? 
My head aches and I am sad . '' 
`` You speak with a strange air , '' observed Alyosha uneasily , `` as though you were not quite yourself . '' 
`` By the way , a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow , '' Ivan went on , seeming not to hear his brother 's words , `` told me about the crimes committed by Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general rising of the Slavs . 
They burn villages , murder , outrage women and children , they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences , leave them so till morning , and in the morning they hang them - all sorts of things you ca n't imagine . 
People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty , but that 's a great injustice and insult to the beasts ; a beast can never be so cruel as a man , so artistically cruel . 
The tiger only tears and gnaws , that 's all he can do . 
He would never think of nailing people by the ears , even if he were able to do it . 
These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children , - too ; cutting the unborn child from the mothers womb , and tossing babies up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before their mothers ' eyes . 
Doing it before the mothers ' eyes was what gave zest to the amusement . 
Here is another scene that I thought very interesting . 
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms , a circle of invading Turks around her . 
They 've planned a diversion : they pet the baby , laugh to make it laugh . 
They succeed , the baby laughs . 
At that moment a Turk points a pistol four inches from the baby 's face . 
