Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their hands , and he felt fearfully ashamed again . 
`` Though I acted quite sincerely , I must be more sensible in the future , '' he concluded suddenly , and did not even smile at his conclusion . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's commission took him to Lake Street , and his brother Dmitri lived close by , in a turning out of Lake Street . 
Alyosha decided to go to him in any case before going to the captain , though he had a presentiment that he would not find his brother . 
He suspected that he would intentionally keep out of his way now , but he must find him anyhow . 
Time was passing : the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for one minute from the time he set off from the monastery . 
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina Ivanovna 's commission ; when she had mentioned the captain 's son , the little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying , the idea had at once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his finger when he , Alyosha , asked him what he had done to hurt him . 
Now Alyosha felt practically certain of this , though he could not have said why . 
Thinking of another subject was a relief , and he resolved to think no more about the `` mischief '' he had done , and not to torture himself with remorse , but to do what he had to do , let come what would . 
At that thought he was completely comforted . 
Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged , he felt hungry , and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from his father 's , he ate it . 
It made him feel stronger . 
Dmitri was not at home . 
The people of the house , an old cabinet-maker , his son , and his old wife , looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha . 
`` He has n't slept here for the last three nights . 
Maybe he has gone away , '' the old man said in answer to Alyosha 's persistent inquiries . 
Alyosha saw that he was answering in accordance with instructions . 
When he asked whether he were not at Grushenka 's or in hiding at Foma 's -LRB- Alyosha spoke so freely on purpose -RRB- , all three looked at him in alarm . 
`` They are fond of him , they are doing their best for him , '' thought Alyosha . 
`` That 's good . '' 
At last he found the house in Lake Street . 
It was a decrepit little house , sunk on one side , with three windows looking into the street , and with a muddy yard , in the middle of which stood a solitary cow . 
He crossed the yard and found the door opening into the passage . 
On the left of the passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter . 
Both seemed to be deaf . 
In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain , one of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers , and pointed to a door across the passage . 
The captain 's lodging turned out to be a simple cottage room . 
Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to open the door , when he was struck by the strange hush within . 
Yet he knew from Katerina Ivanovna 's words that the man had a family . 
`` Either they are all asleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to open the door . 
I 'd better knock first , '' and he knocked . 
An answer came , but not at once , after an interval of perhaps ten seconds . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
shouted someone in a loud and very angry voice . 
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold . 
He found himself in a regular peasant 's room . 
Though it was large , it was cumbered up with domestic belongings of all sorts , and there were several people in it . 
On the left was a large Russian stove . 
From the stove to the window on the left was a string running across the room , and on it there were rags hanging . 
There was a bedstead against the wall on each side , right and left , covered with knitted quilts . 
On the one on the left was a pyramid of four print-covered pillows , each smaller than the one beneath . 
On the other there was only one very small pillow . 
The opposite corner was screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string . 
Behind this curtain could be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair . 
The rough square table of plain wood had been moved into the middle window . 
The three windows , which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes , gave little light , and were close shut , so that the room was not very light and rather stuffy . 
On the table was a frying pan with the remains of some fried eggs , a half-eaten piece of bread , and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka . 
A woman of genteel appearance , wearing a cotton gown , was sitting on a chair by the bed on the left . 
Her face was thin and yellow , and her sunken cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill . 
But what struck Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman 's eyes - a look of surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride . 
