But he 's always besought me not to tell anyone here of it , he is so dreadfully ashamed of me . '' 
This fact was a complete surprise to everyone ; no one in the town nor in the monastery , not even Mitya , knew of it . 
I was told that Rakitin turned purple with shame where he sat . 
Grushenka had somehow heard before she came into the court that he had given evidence against Mitya , and so she was angry . 
The whole effect on the public , of Rakitin 's speech , of his noble sentiments , of his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorder of Russia , was this time finally ruined . 
Fetyukovitch was satisfied : it was another godsend . 
Grushenka 's cross-examination did not last long and , of course , there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence . 
She left a very disagreeable impression on the public ; hundreds of contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her , as she finished giving her evidence and sat down again in the court , at a good distance from Katerina Ivanovna . 
Mitya was silent throughout her evidence . 
He sat as though turned to stone , with his eyes fixed on the ground . 
Ivan was called to give evidence . 
A Sudden Catastrophe I MAY note that he had been called before Alyosha . 
But the usher of the court announced to the President that , owing to an attack of illness or some sort of fit , the witness could not appear at the moment , but was ready to give his evidence as soon as he recovered . 
But no one seemed to have heard it and it only came out later . 
His entrance was for the first moment almost unnoticed . 
The principal witnesses , especially the two rival ladies , had already been questioned . 
Curiosity was satisfied for the time ; the public was feeling almost fatigued . 
Several more witnesses were still to be heard , who probably had little information to give after all that had been given . 
Time was passing . 
Ivan walked up with extraordinary slowness , looking at no one , and with his head bowed , as though plunged in gloomy thought . 
He was irreproachably dressed , but his face made a painful impression , on me at least : there was an earthy look in it , a look like a dying man 's . 
His eyes were lustreless ; he raised them and looked slowly round the court . 
Alyosha jumped up from his seat and moaned `` Ah ! '' 
I remember that , but it was hardly noticed . 
The President began by informing him that he was a witness not on oath , that he might answer or refuse to answer , but that , of course , he must bear witness according to his conscience , and so on , and so on . 
Ivan listened and looked at him blankly , but his face gradually relaxed into a smile , and as soon as the President , looking at him in astonishment , finished , he laughed outright . 
`` Well , and what else ? '' 
he asked in a loud voice . 
There was a hush in the court ; there was a feeling of something strange . 
The President showed signs of uneasiness . 
`` You ... are perhaps still unwell ? '' 
he began , looking everywhere for the usher . 
`` Do n't trouble yourself , your excellency , I am well enough and can tell you something interesting , '' Ivan answered with sudden calmness and respectfulness . 
`` You have some special communication to make ? '' 
the President went on , still mistrustfully . 
Ivan looked down , waited a few seconds and , raising his head , answered , almost stammering : `` No ... I have n't . 
I have nothing particular . '' 
They began asking him questions . 
He answered , as it were , reluctantly , with extreme brevity , with a sort of disgust which grew more and more marked , though he answered rationally . 
To many questions he answered that he did not know . 
He knew nothing of his father 's money relations with Dmitri . 
`` I was n't interested in the subject , '' he added . 
Threats to murder his father he had heard from the prisoner . 
Of the money in the envelope he had heard from Smerdyakov . 
`` The same thing over and over again , '' he interrupted suddenly , with a look of weariness . 
`` I have nothing particular to tell the court . '' 
`` I see you are unwell and understand your feelings , '' the President began . 
He turned to the prosecutor and the counsel for the defence to invite them to examine the witness , if necessary , when Ivan suddenly asked in an exhausted voice : `` Let me go , your excellency , I feel very ill . '' 
And with these words , without waiting for permission , he turned to walk out of the court . 
But after taking four steps he stood still , as though he had reached a decision , smiled slowly , and went back . 
