- -LRB- I 'm being abusive , that 's stupid . -RRB- 
Not for scoundrels , but for pedantic poseurs , ` haunted by profound , unsolved doubts . ' 
He 's showing off , and what it all comes to is , ` on the one hand we can not but admit ' and ` on the other it must be confessed ! ' 
His whole theory is a fraud ! 
Humanity will find in itself the power to live for virtue even without believing in immortality . 
It will find it in love for freedom , for equality , for fraternity . '' 
Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat , but , suddenly , as though remembering something , he stopped short . 
`` Well , that 's enough , '' he said , with a still more crooked smile . 
`` Why are you laughing ? 
Do you think I 'm a vulgar fool ? '' 
`` No , I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool . 
You are clever but ... never mind , I was silly to smile . 
I understand your getting hot about it , Misha . 
I guess from your warmth that you are not indifferent to Katerina Ivanovna yourself ; I 've suspected that for a long time , brother , that 's why you do n't like my brother Ivan . 
Are you jealous of him ? '' 
`` And jealous of her money , too ? 
Wo n't you add that ? '' 
`` I 'll say nothing about money . 
I am not going to insult you . '' 
`` I believe it , since you say so , but confound you , and your brother Ivan with you . 
Do n't you understand that one might very well dislike him , apart from Katerina Ivanovna . 
And why the devil should I like him ? 
He condescends to abuse me , you know . 
Why have n't I a right to abuse him ? '' 
`` I never heard of his saying anything about you , good or bad . 
He does n't speak of you at all . '' 
`` But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna 's he was abusing me for all he was worth - you see what an interest he takes in your humble servant . 
And which is the jealous one after that , brother , I ca n't say . 
He was so good as to express the opinion that , if I do n't go in for the career of an archimandrite in the immediate future and do n't become a monk , I shall be sure to go to Petersburg and get on to some solid magazine as a reviewer , that I shall write for the next ten years , and in the end become the owner of the magazine , and bring it out on the liberal and atheistic side , with a socialistic tinge , with a tiny gloss of socialism , but keeping a sharp lookout all the time , that is , keeping in with both sides and hoodwinking the fools . 
According to your brother 's account , the tinge of socialism wo n't hinder me from laying by the proceeds and investing them under the guidance of some Jew , till at the end of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move my publishing offices to it , and let out the upper stories to lodgers . 
He has even chosen the place for it , near the new stone bridge across the Neva , which they say is to be built in Petersburg . '' 
`` Ah , Misha , that 's just what will really happen , every word of it , '' cried Alyosha , unable to restrain a good-humoured smile . 
`` You are pleased to be sarcastic , too , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` No , no , I 'm joking , forgive me . 
I 've something quite different in my mind . 
But , excuse me , who can have told you all this ? 
You ca n't have been at Katerina Ivanovna 's yourself when he was talking about you ? '' 
`` I was n't there , but Dmitri Fyodorovitch was ; and I heard him tell it with my own ears ; if you want to know , he did n't tell me , but I overheard him , unintentionally , of course , for I was sitting in Grushenka 's bedroom and I could n't go away because Dmitri Fyodorovitch was in the next room . '' 
`` Oh yes , I 'd forgotten she was a relation of yours . '' 
`` A relation ! 
That Grushenka a relation of mine ! '' 
cried Rakitin , turning crimson . 
`` Are you mad ? 
You 're out of your mind ! '' 
`` Why , is n't she a relation of yours ? 
I heard so . '' 
`` Where can you have heard it ? 
You Karamazovs brag of being an ancient , noble family , though your father used to run about playing the buffoon at other men 's tables , and was only admitted to the kitchen as a favour . 
I may be only a priest 's son , and dirt in the eyes of noblemen like you , but do n't insult me so lightly and wantonly . 
I have a sense of honour , too , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I could n't be a relation of Grushenka , a common harlot . 
