The official , delighted , began trying to persuade him to sell them outright . 
But Mitya would not consent , so the young man gave him ten roubles , protesting that nothing would induce him to take interest . 
They parted friends . 
Mitya was in haste ; he rushed towards Fyodor Pavlovitch 's by the back way , to his arbour , to get hold of Smerdyakov as soon as possible . 
In this way the fact was established that three or four hours before a certain event , of which I shall speak later on , Mitya had not a farthing , and pawned for ten roubles a possession he valued , though , three hours later , he was in possession of thousands ... . 
But I am anticipating . 
From Marya Kondratyevna -LRB- the woman living near Fyodor Pavlovitch 's -RRB- he learned the very disturbing fact of Smerdyakov 's illness . 
He heard the story of his fall in the cellar , his fit , the doctor 's visit , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's anxiety ; he heard with interest , too , that his brother Ivan had set off that morning for Moscow . 
`` Then he must have driven through Volovya before me , '' thought Dmitri , but he was terribly distressed about Smerdyakov . 
`` What will happen now ? 
Who 'll keep watch for me ? 
Who 'll bring me word ? '' 
he thought . 
He began greedily questioning the women whether they had seen anything the evening before . 
They quite understood what he was trying to find out , and completely reassured him . 
No one had been there . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch had been there that night ; everything had been perfectly as usual . 
Mitya grew thoughtful . 
He would certainly have to keep watch to-day , but where ? 
Here or at Samsonov 's gate ? 
He decided that he must be on the lookout both here and there , and meanwhile ... meanwhile ... The difficulty was that he had to carry out the new plan that he had made on the journey back . 
He was sure of its success , but he must not delay acting upon it . 
Mitya resolved to sacrifice an hour to it : `` In an hour I shall know everything , I shall settle everything , and then , then , then , first of all to Samsonov 's . 
I 'll inquire whether Grushenka 's there and instantly be back here again , stay till eleven , and then to Samsonov 's again to bring her home . '' 
This was what he decided . 
He flew home , washed , combed his hair , brushed his clothes , dressed , and went to Madame Hohlakov 's . 
Alas ! 
he had built his hopes on her . 
He had resolved to borrow three thousand from that lady . 
And what was more , he felt suddenly convinced that she would not refuse to lend it to him . 
It may be wondered why , if he felt so certain , he had not gone to her at first , one of his own sort , so to speak , instead of to Samsonov , a man he did not know , who was not of his own class , and to whom he hardly knew how to speak . 
But the fact was that he had never known Madame Hohlakov well , and had seen nothing of her for the last month , and that he knew she could not endure him . 
She had detested him from the first because he was engaged to Katerina Ivanovna , while she had , for some reason , suddenly conceived the desire that Katerina Ivanovna should throw him over , and marry the `` charming , chivalrously refined Ivan , who had such excellent manners . '' 
Mitya 's manners she detested . 
Mitya positively laughed at her , and had once said about her that she was just as lively and at her ease as she was uncultivated . 
But that morning in the cart a brilliant idea had struck him : `` If she is so anxious I should not marry Katerina Ivanovna '' -LRB- and he knew she was positively hysterical upon the subject -RRB- `` why should she refuse me now that three thousand , just to enable me to leave Katya and get away from her for ever . 
These spoilt fine ladies , if they set their hearts on anything , will spare no expense to satisfy their caprice . 
Besides , she 's so rich , '' Mitya argued . 
As for his `` plan '' it was just the same as before ; it consisted of the offer of his rights to Tchermashnya - but not with a commercial object , as it had been with Samsonov , not trying to allure the lady with the possibility of making a profit of six or seven thousand - but simply as a security for the debt . 
As he worked out this new idea , Mitya was enchanted with it , but so it always was with him in all his undertakings , in all his sudden decisions . 
He gave himself up to every new idea with passionate enthusiasm . 
Yet , when he mounted the steps of Madame Hohlakov 's house he felt a shiver of fear run down his spine . 
At that moment he saw fully , as a mathematical certainty , that this was his last hope , that if this broke down , nothing else was left him in the world but to `` rob and murder someone for the three thousand . '' 
It was half-past seven when he rang at the bell . 
At first fortune seemed to smile upon him . 
As soon as he was announced he was received with extraordinary rapidity . 
`` As though she were waiting for me , '' thought Mitya , and as soon as he had been led to the drawing-room , the lady of the house herself ran in , and declared at once that she was expecting him . 
`` I was expecting you ! 
I was expecting you ! 
Though I 'd no reason to suppose you would come to see me , as you will admit yourself . 
