of the fatal position of Russia ? 
of the Emperor Napoleon ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Then you know what for . 
It 's different for other people ; but we in our green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all . 
That 's what we care about . 
Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal questions now . 
just when the old folks are all taken up with practical questions . 
Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last three months ? 
To ask me , ` What do you believe , or do n't you believe at all ? ' 
That 's what your eyes have been meaning for these three months , have n't they ? '' 
`` Perhaps so , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` You are not laughing at me , now , Ivan ? 
`` Me laughing ! 
I do n't want to wound my little brother who has been watching me with such expectation for three months . 
Alyosha , look straight at me ! 
Of course , I am just such a little boy as you are , only not a novice . 
And what have Russian boys been doing up till now , some of them , I mean ? 
In this stinking tavern , for instance , here , they meet and sit down in a corner . 
They 've never met in their lives before and , when they go out of the tavern , they wo n't meet again for forty years . 
And what do they talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern ? 
Of the eternal questions , of the existence of God and immortality . 
And those who do not believe in God talk of socialism or anarchism , of the transformation of all humanity on a new pattern , so that it all comes to the same , they 're the same questions turned inside out . 
And masses , masses of the most original Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions ! 
Is n't it so ? '' 
`` Yes , for real Russians the questions of God 's existence and of immortality , or , as you say , the same questions turned inside out , come first and foremost , of course , and so they should , '' said Alyosha , still watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile . 
`` Well , Alyosha , it 's sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all , but anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can hardly imagine . 
But there 's one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully fond of . '' 
`` How nicely you put that in ! '' 
Alyosha laughed suddenly . 
`` Well , tell me where to begin , give your orders . 
The existence of God , eh ? '' 
`` Begin where you like . 
You declared yesterday at father 's that there was no God . '' 
Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother . 
`` I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your eyes glow . 
But now I 've no objection to discussing with you , and I say so very seriously . 
I want to be friends with you , Alyosha , for I have no friends and want to try it . 
Well , only fancy , perhaps I too accept God , '' laughed Ivan ; `` that 's a surprise for you , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes of course , if you are not joking now . '' 
`` Joking ? 
I was told at the elder 's yesterday that I was joking . 
You know , dear boy , there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared that , if there were no God , he would have to be invented . 
S'il n'existait pas Dieu , il faudrait l'inventer . 
And man has actually invented God . 
And what 's strange , what would be marvellous , is not that God should really exist ; the marvel is that such an idea , the idea of the necessity of God , could enter the head of such a savage , vicious beast as man . 
So holy it is , so touching , so wise and so great a credit it does to man . 
As for me , I 've long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man . 
And I wo n't go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject , all derived from European hypotheses ; for what 's a hypothesis there is an axiom with the Russian boy , and not only with the boys but with their teachers too , for our Russian professors are often just the same boys themselves . 
