- Lise . 
Alyosha read the note in amazement , read it through twice , thought a little , and suddenly laughed a soft , sweet laugh . 
He started . 
That laugh seemed to him sinful . 
But a minute later he laughed again just as softly and happily . 
He slowly replaced the note in the envelope , crossed himself and lay down . 
The agitation in his heart passed at once . 
`` God , have mercy upon all of them , have all these unhappy and turbulent souls in Thy keeping , and set them in the right path . 
All ways are Thine . 
Save them according to Thy wisdom . 
Thou art love . 
Thou wilt send joy to all ! '' 
Alyosha murmured , crossing himself , and falling into peaceful sleep . 
Father Ferapont ALYOSHA was roused early , before daybreak . 
Father Zossima woke up feeling very weak , though he wanted to get out of bed and sit up in a chair . 
His mind was quite clear ; his face looked very tired , yet bright and almost joyful . 
It wore an expression of gaiety , kindness and cordiality . 
`` Maybe I shall not live through the coming day , '' he said to Alyosha . 
Then he desired to confess and take the sacrament at once . 
He always confessed to Father Paissy . 
After taking the communion , the service of extreme unction followed . 
The monks assembled and the cell was gradually filled up by the inmates of the hermitage . 
Meantime it was daylight . 
People began coming from the monastery . 
After the service was over the elder desired to kiss and take leave of everyone . 
As the cell was so small the earlier visitors withdrew to make room for others . 
Alyosha stood beside the elder , who was seated again in his arm-chair . 
He talked as much as he could . 
Though his voice was weak , it was fairly steady . 
`` I 've been teaching you so many years , and therefore I 've been talking aloud so many years , that I 've got into the habit of talking , and so much so that it 's almost more difficult for me to hold my tongue than to talk , even now , in spite of my weakness , dear Fathers and brothers , '' he jested , looking with emotion at the group round him . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards something of what he said to them . 
But though he spoke out distinctly and his voice was fairly steady , his speech was somewhat disconnected . 
He spoke of many things , he seemed anxious before the moment of death to say everything he had not said in his life , and not simply for the sake of instructing them , but as though thirsting to share with all men and all creation his joy and ecstasy , and once more in his life to open his whole heart . 
`` Love one another , Fathers , '' said Father Zossima , as far as Alyosha could remember afterwards . 
`` Love God 's people . 
Because we have come here and shut ourselves within these walls , we are no holier than those that are outside , but on the contrary , from the very fact of coming here , each of us has confessed to himself that he is worse than others , than all men on earth ... . 
And the longer the monk lives in his seclusion , the more keenly he must recognise that . 
Else he would have had no reason to come here . 
When he realises that he is not only worse than others , but that he is responsible to all men for all and everything , for all human sins , national and individual , only then the aim of our seclusion is attained . 
For know , dear ones , that every one of us is undoubtedly responsible for all men - and everything on earth , not merely through the general sinfulness of creation , but each one personally for all mankind and every individual man . 
This knowledge is the crown of life for the monk and for every man . 
For monks are not a special sort of men , but only what all men ought to be . 
Only through that knowledge , our heart grows soft with infinite , universal , inexhaustible love . 
Then every one of you will have the power to win over the whole world by love and to wash away the sins of the world with your tears ... Each of you keep watch over your heart and confess your sins to yourself unceasingly . 
Be not afraid of your sins , even when perceiving them , if only there be penitence , but make no conditions with God . 
Again , I say , be not proud . 
Be proud neither to the little nor to the great . 
Hate not those who reject you , who insult you , who abuse and slander you . 
Hate not the atheists , the teachers of evil , the materialists - and I mean not only the good ones - for there are many good ones among them , especially in our day - hate not even the wicked ones . 
Remember them in your prayers thus : Save , O Lord , all those who have none to pray for them , save too all those who will not pray . 
