`` You wo n't go . 
You want to keep an eye on me . 
That 's what you want , spiteful fellow . 
That 's why you wo n't go . '' 
The old man persisted . 
He had reached that state of drunkenness when the drunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and to assert himself . 
`` Why are you looking at me ? 
Why do you look like that ? 
Your eyes look at me and say , ` You ugly drunkard ! ' 
Your eyes are mistrustful . 
They 're contemptuous ... . 
You 've come here with some design . 
Alyosha , here , looks at me and his eyes shine . 
Alyosha does n't despise me . 
Alexey , you must n't love Ivan . '' 
`` Do n't be ill-tempered with my brother . 
Leave off attacking him , '' Alyosha said emphatically . 
`` Oh , all right . 
Ugh , my head aches . 
Take away the brandy , Ivan . 
It 's the third time I 've told you . '' 
He mused , and suddenly a slow , cunning grin spread over his face . 
`` Do n't be angry with a feeble old man , Ivan . 
I know you do n't love me , but do n't be angry all the same . 
You 've nothing to love me for . 
You go to Tchermashnya . 
I 'll come to you myself and bring you a present . 
I 'll show you a little wench there . 
I 've had my eye on her a long time . 
She 's still running about bare-foot . 
Do n't be afraid of bare-footed wenches - do n't despise them - they 're pearls ! '' 
And he kissed his hand with a smack . 
`` To my thinking , '' he revived at once , seeming to grow sober the instant he touched on his favourite topic . 
`` To my thinking ... Ah , you boys ! 
You children , little sucking-pigs , to my thinking ... I never thought a woman ugly in my life - that 's been my rule ! 
Can you understand that ? 
How could you understand it ? 
You 've milk in your veins , not blood . 
You 're not out of your shells yet . 
My rule has been that you can always find something devilishly interesting in every woman that you would n't find in any other . 
Only , one must know how to find it , that 's the point ! 
That 's a talent ! 
To my mind there are no ugly women . 
The very fact that she is a woman is half the battle ... but how could you understand that ? 
Even in vieilles filles , even in them you may discover something that makes you simply wonder that men have been such fools as to let them grow old without noticing them . 
Bare-footed girls or unattractive ones , you must take by surprise . 
Did n't you know that ? 
You must astound them till they 're fascinated , upset , ashamed that such a gentleman should fall in love with such a little slut . 
It 's a jolly good thing that there always are and will be masters and slaves in the world , so there always will be a little maid-of-all-work and her master , and you know , that 's all that 's needed for happiness . 
Stay ... listen , Alyosha , I always used to surprise your mother , but in a different way . 
