And in very truth , so soon as men understand that , the Kingdom of Heaven will be for them not a dream , but a living reality . '' 
`` And when , '' I cried out to him bitterly , `` when will that come to pass ? 
and will it ever come to pass ? 
Is not it simply a dream of ours ? '' 
`` What then , you do n't believe it , '' he said . 
`` You preach it and do n't believe it yourself . 
Believe me , this dream , as you call it , will come to pass without doubt ; it will come , but not now , for every process has its law . 
It 's a spiritual , psychological process . 
To transform the world , to recreate it afresh , men must turn into another path psychologically . 
Until you have become really , in actual fact , a brother to everyone , brotherhood will not come to pass . 
No sort of scientific teaching , no kind of common interest , will ever teach men to share property and privileges with equal consideration for all . 
Everyone will think his share too small and they will be always envying , complaining and attacking one another . 
You ask when it will come to pass ; it will come to pass , but first we have to go though the period of isolation . '' 
`` What do you mean by isolation ? '' 
I asked him . 
`` Why , the isolation that prevails everywhere , above all in our age - it has not fully developed , it has not reached its limit yet . 
For everyone strives to keep his individuality as apart as possible , wishes to secure the greatest possible fullness of life for himself ; but meantime all his efforts result not in attaining fullness of life but self-destruction , for instead of self-realisation he ends by arriving at complete solitude . 
All mankind in our age have split up into units , they all keep apart , each in his own groove ; each one holds aloof , hides himself and hides what he has , from the rest , and he ends by being repelled by others and repelling them . 
He heaps up riches by himself and thinks , ` How strong I am now and how secure , ' and in his madness he does not understand that the more he heaps up , the more he sinks into self-destructive impotence . 
For he is accustomed to rely upon himself alone and to cut himself off from the whole ; he has trained himself not to believe in the help of others , in men and in humanity , and only trembles for fear he should lose his money and the privileges that he has won for himself . 
Everywhere in these days men have , in their mockery , ceased to understand that the true security is to be found in social solidarity rather than in isolated individual effort . 
But this terrible individualism must inevitably have an end , and all will suddenly understand how unnaturally they are separated from one another . 
It will be the spirit of the time , and people will marvel that they have sat so long in darkness without seeing the light . 
And then the sign of the Son of Man will be seen in the heavens ... . 
But , until then , we must keep the banner flying . 
Sometimes even if he has to do it alone , and his conduct seems to be crazy , a man must set an example , and so draw men 's souls out of their solitude , and spur them to some act of brotherly love , that the great idea may not die . '' 
Our evenings , one after another , were spent in such stirring and fervent talk . 
I gave up society and visited my neighbours much less frequently . 
Besides , my vogue was somewhat over . 
I say this , not as blame , for they still loved me and treated me good-humouredly , but there 's no denying that fashion is a great power in society . 
I began to regard my mysterious visitor with admiration , for besides enjoying his intelligence , I began to perceive that he was brooding over some plan in his heart , and was preparing himself perhaps for a great deed . 
Perhaps he liked my not showing curiosity about his secret , not seeking to discover it by direct question nor by insinuation . 
But I noticed at last , that he seemed to show signs of wanting to tell me something . 
This had become quite evident , indeed , about a month after he first began to visit me . 
`` Do you know , '' he said to me once , `` that people are very inquisitive about us in the town and wonder why I come to see you so often . 
But let them wonder , for soon all will be explained . '' 
Sometimes an extraordinary agitation would come over him , and almost always on such occasions he would get up and go away . 
Sometimes he would fix a long piercing look upon me , and I thought , `` He will say something directly now . '' 
But he would suddenly begin talking of something ordinary and familiar . 
He often complained of headache too . 
One day , quite unexpectedly indeed , after he had been talking with great fervour a long time , I saw him suddenly turn pale , and his face worked convulsively , while he stared persistently at me . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
I said ; `` do you feel ill ? '' 
- he had just been complaining of headache . 
`` I. . . 
do you know ... I murdered someone . '' 
He said this and smiled with a face as white as chalk . 
`` Why is it he is smiling ? '' 
The thought flashed through my mind before I realised anything else . 
I too turned pale . 
