Father Zossima raised his hand to bless him . 
Alyosha could make no protest , though he had a great longing to remain . 
He longed , moreover , to ask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri , the question was on the tip of his tongue , but he dared not ask it . 
He knew that the elder would have explained it unasked if he had thought fit . 
But evidently it was not his will . 
That action had made a terrible impression on Alyosha ; he believed blindly in its mysterious significance . 
Mysterious , and perhaps awful . 
As he hastened out of the hermatage precincts to reach the monastery in time to serve at the Father Superior 's dinner , he felt a sudden pang at his heart , and stopped short . 
He seemed to hear again Father Zossima 's words , foretelling his approaching end . 
What he had foretold so exactly must infallibly come to pass . 
Alyosha believed that implicitly . 
But how could he go ? 
He had told him not to weep , and to leave the monastery . 
Good God ! 
It was long since Alyosha had known such anguish . 
He hurried through the copse that divided the monastery from the hermitage , and unable to bear the burden of his thoughts , he gazed at the ancient pines beside the path . 
He had not far to go - about five hundred paces . 
He expected to meet no one at that hour , but at the first turn of the path he noticed Rakitin . 
He was waiting for someone . 
`` Are you waiting for me ? '' 
asked Alyosha , overtaking him . 
`` Yes , '' grinned Rakitin . 
`` You are hurrying to the Father Superior , I know ; he has a banquet . 
There 's not been such a banquet since the Superior entertained the Bishop and General Pahatov , do you remember ? 
I sha n't be there , but you go and hand the sauces . 
Tell me one thing , Alexey , what does that vision mean ? 
That 's what I want to ask you . '' 
`` What vision ? '' 
`` That bowing to your brother , Dmitri . 
And did n't he tap the ground with his forehead , too ! '' 
`` You speak of Father Zossima ? '' 
`` Yes , of Father Zossima , '' `` Tapped the ground ? '' 
`` Ah , an irreverent expression ! 
Well , what of it ? 
Anyway , what does that vision mean ? '' 
`` I do n't know what it means , Misha . '' 
`` I knew he would n't explain it to you There 's nothing wonderful about it , of course , only the usual holy mummery . 
But there was an object in the performance . 
All the pious people in the town will talk about it and spread the story through the province , wondering what it meant . 
To my thinking the old man really has a keen nose ; he sniffed a crime . 
Your house stinks of it . '' 
Rakitin evidently had something he was eager to speak of . 
`` It 'll be in your family , this crime . 
Between your brothers and your rich old father . 
So Father Zossima flopped down to be ready for what may turn up . 
If something happens later on , it 'll be : ` Ah , the holy man foresaw it , prophesied it ! ' 
though it 's a poor sort of prophecy , flopping like that . 
` Ah , but it was symbolic , ' they 'll say , ` an allegory , ' and the devil knows what all ! 
It 'll be remembered to his glory : ` He predicted the crime and marked the criminal ! ' 
That 's always the way with these crazy fanatics ; they cross themselves at the tavern and throw stones at the temple . 
