Yes , it 's worth saying a word or two about that envelope . 
I was somewhat surprised just now to hear the highly talented prosecutor declare of himself - of himself , observe - that but for that envelope , but for its being left on the floor , no one in the world would have known of the existence of that envelope and the notes in it , and therefore of the prisoner 's having stolen it . 
And so that torn scrap of paper is , by the prosecutor 's own admission , the sole proof on which the charge of robbery rests , ` otherwise no one would have known of the robbery , nor perhaps even of the money . ' 
But is the mere fact that that scrap of paper was lying on the floor a proof that there was money in it , and that that money had been stolen ? 
Yet , it will be objected , Smerdyakov had seen the money in the envelope . 
But when , when had he seen it for the last time , I ask you that ? 
I talked to Smerdyakov , and he told me that he had seen the notes two days before the catastrophe . 
Then why not imagine that old Fyodor Pavlovitch , locked up alone in impatient and hysterical expectation of the object of his adoration , may have whiled away the time by breaking open the envelope and taking out the notes . 
` What 's the use of the envelope ? ' 
he may have asked himself . 
` She wo n't believe the notes are there , but when I show her the thirty rainbow-coloured notes in one roll , it will make more impression , you may be sure , it will make her mouth water . ' 
And so he tears open the envelope , takes out the money , and flings the envelope on the floor , conscious of being the owner and untroubled by any fears of leaving evidence . 
`` Listen , gentlemen , could anything be more likely than this theory and such an action ? 
Why is it out of the question ? 
But if anything of the sort could have taken place , the charge of robbery falls to the ground ; if there was no money , there was no theft of it . 
If the envelope on the floor may be taken as evidence that there had been money in it , why may I not maintain the opposite , that the envelope was on the floor because the money had been taken from it by its owner ? 
`` But I shall be asked what became of the money if Fyodor Pavlovitch took it out of the envelope since it was not found when the police searched the house ? 
In the first place , part of the money was found in the cash-box , and secondly , he might have taken it out that morning or the evening before to make some other use of it , to give or send it away ; he may have changed his idea , his plan of action completely , without thinking it necessary to announce the fact to Smerdyakov beforehand . 
And if there is the barest possibility of such an explanation , how can the prisoner be so positively accused of having committed murder for the sake of robbery , and of having actually carried out that robbery ? 
This is encroaching on the domain of romance . 
If it is maintained that something has been stolen , the thing must be produced , or at least its existence must be proved beyond doubt . 
Yet no one had ever seen these notes . 
`` Not long ago in Petersburg a young man of eighteen , hardly more than a boy , who carried on a small business as a costermonger , went in broad daylight into a moneychanger 's shop with an axe , and with extraordinary , typical audacity killed the master of the shop and carried off fifteen hundred roubles . 
Five hours later he was arrested , and , except fifteen roubles he had already managed to spend , the whole sum was found on him . 
Moreover , the shopman , on his return to the shop after the murder , informed the police not only of the exact sum stolen , but even of the notes and gold coins of which that sum was made up , and those very notes and coins were found on the criminal . 
This was followed by a full and genuine confession on the part of the murderer . 
That 's what I call evidence , gentlemen of the jury ! 
In that case I know , I see , I touch the money , and can not deny its existence . 
Is it the same in the present case ? 
And yet it is a question of life and death . 
`` Yes , I shall be told , but he was carousing that night , squandering money ; he was shown to have had fifteen hundred roubles - where did he get the money ? 
But the very fact that only fifteen hundred could be found , and the other half of the sum could nowhere be discovered , shows that that money was not the same , and had never been in any envelope . 
By strict calculation of time it was proved at the preliminary inquiry that the prisoner ran straight from those women servants to Perhotin 's without going home , and that he had been nowhere . 
So he had been all the time in company and therefore could not have divided the three thousand in half and hidden half in the town . 
It 's just this consideration that has led the prosecutor to assume that the money is hidden in some crevice at Mokroe . 
Why not in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho , gentlemen ? 
Is n't this supposition really too fantastic and too romantic ? 
And observe , if that supposition breaks down , the whole charge of robbery is scattered to the winds , for in that case what could have become of the other fifteen hundred roubles ? 
By what miracle could they have disappeared , since it 's proved the prisoner went nowhere else ? 
And we are ready to ruin a man 's life with such tales ! 
`` I shall be told that he could not explain where he got the fifteen hundred that he had . 
and everyone knew that he was without money before that night . 
Who knew it , pray ? 
The prisoner has made a clear and unflinching statement of the source of that money , and if you will have it so , gentlemen of the jury , nothing can be more probable than that statement , and more consistent with the temper and spirit of the prisoner . 
The prosecutor is charmed with his own romance . 
A man of weak will , who had brought himself to take the three thousand so insultingly offered by his betrothed , could not , we are told , have set aside half and sewn it up , but would , even if he had done so , have unpicked it every two days and taken out a hundred , and so would have spent it all in a month . 
All this , you will remember , was put forward in a tone what brooked no contradiction . 
But what if the thing happened quite differently ? 
What if you 've been weaving a romance , and about quite a different kind of man ? 
That 's just it , you have invented quite a different man ! 
