I am a wretch , but I love Thee . 
If Thou sendest me to hell , I shall love Thee there , and from there I shall cry out that I love Thee for ever and ever ... . 
But let me love to the end ... . 
Here and now for just five hours ... till the first light of Thy day ... for I love the queen of my soul ... I love her and I can not help loving her . 
Thou seest my whole heart ... I shall gallop up , I shall fall before her and say , ` You are right to pass on and leave me . 
Farewell and forget your victim ... never fret yourself about me ! ' '' 
`` Mokroe ! '' 
cried Andrey , pointing ahead with his whip . 
Through the pale darkness of the night loomed a solid black mass of buildings , flung down , as it were , in the vast plain . 
The village of Mokroe numbered two thousand inhabitants , but at that hour all were asleep , and only here and there a few lights still twinkled . 
`` Drive on , Andrey , I come ! '' 
Mitya exclaimed , feverishly . 
`` They 're not asleep , '' said Andrey again , pointing with his whip to the Plastunovs ' inn , which was at the entrance to the village . 
The six windows , looking on the street , were all brightly lighted up . 
`` They 're not asleep , '' Mitya repeated joyously . 
`` Quicker , Andrey ! 
Gallop ! 
Drive up with a dash ! 
Set the bells ringing ! 
Let all know that I have come . 
I 'm coming ! 
I 'm coming , too ! '' 
Andrey lashed his exhausted team into a gallop , drove with a dash and pulled up his steaming , panting horses at the high flight of steps . 
Mitya jumped out of the cart just as the innkeeper , on his way to bed , peeped out from the steps curious to see who had arrived . 
`` Trifon Borissovitch , is that you ? '' 
The innkeeper bent down , looked intently , ran down the steps , and rushed up to the guest with obsequious delight . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , your honour ! 
Do I see you again ? '' 
Trifon Borissovitch was a thick-set , healthy peasant , of middle height , with a rather fat face . 
His expression was severe and uncompromising , especially with the peasants of Mokroe , but he had the power of assuming the most obsequious countenance , when he had an inkling that it was to his interest . 
He dressed in Russian style , with a shirt buttoning down on one side , and a full-skirted coat . 
He had saved a good sum of money , but was for ever dreaming of improving his position . 
More than half the peasants were in his clutches , everyone in the neighbourhood was in debt to him . 
From the neighbouring landowners he bought and rented lands which were worked by the peasants , in payment of debts which they could never shake off . 
He was a widower , with four grown-up daughters . 
One of them was already a widow and lived in the inn with her two children , his grandchildren , and worked for him like a charwoman . 
Another of his daughters was married to a petty official , and in one of the rooms of the inn , on the wall could be seen , among the family photographs , a miniature photograph of this official in uniform and official epaulettes . 
The two younger daughters used to wear fashionable blue or green dresses , fitting tight at the back , and with trains a yard long , on Church holidays or when they went to pay visits . 
But next morning they would get up at dawn , as usual , sweep out the rooms with a birch-broom , empty the slops , and clean up after lodgers . 
In spite of the thousands of roubles he had saved , Trifon Borissovitch was very fond of emptying the pockets of a drunken guest , and remembering that not a month ago he had , in twenty-four hours , made two if not three hundred roubles out of Dmitri , when he had come on his escapade with Grushenka , he met him now with eager welcome , scenting his prey the moment Mitya drove up to the steps . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , dear sir , we see you once more ! '' 
`` Stay , Trifon Borissovitch , '' began Mitya , `` first and foremost , where is she ? '' 
`` Agrafena Alexandrovna ? '' 
The inn-keeper understood at once , looking sharply into Mitya 's face . 
`` She 's here , too ... '' `` With whom ? 
With whom ? '' 
`` Some strangers . 
One is an official gentleman , a Pole , to judge from his speech . 
He sent the horses for her from here ; and there 's another with him , a friend of his , or a fellow traveller , there 's no telling . 
They 're dressed like civilians . '' 
