In the distance the cathedral clock struck half-past eleven . 
The boys made haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov 's lodging , a considerable distance , quickly and almost in silence . 
Twenty paces from the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov to come out to him . 
`` One must sniff round a bit first , '' he observed to Smurov . 
`` Why ask him to come out ? '' 
Smurov protested . 
`` You go in ; they will be awfully glad to see you . 
What 's the sense of making friends in the frost out here ? '' 
`` I know why I want to see him out here in the frost , '' Kolya cut him short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with `` small boys , '' and Smurov ran to do his bidding . 
The Lost Dog KOLYA leaned against the fence with an air of dignity , waiting for Alyosha to appear . 
Yes , he had long wanted to meet him . 
He had heard a great deal about him from the boys , but hitherto he had always maintained an appearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned , and he had even `` criticised '' what he heard about Alyosha . 
But secretely he had a great longing to make his acquaintance ; there was something sympathetic and attractive in all he was told about Alyosha . 
So the present moment was important : to begin with , he had to show himself at his best , to show his independence . 
`` Or he 'll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy , like the rest of them . 
And what are these boys to him ? 
I shall ask him when I get to know him . 
It 's a pity I am so short , though . 
Tuzikov is younger than I am , yet he is half a head taller . 
But I have a clever face . 
I am not good-looking . 
I know I 'm hideous , but I 've a clever face . 
I must n't talk too freely ; if I fall into his arms all at once , he may think - Tfoo ! 
how horrible if he should think - ! '' 
Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost to assume the most independent air . 
What distressed him most was his being so short ; he did not mind so much his `` hideous '' face , as being so short . 
On the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil-mark to show his height , and every two months since he anxiously measured himself against it to see how much he had gained . 
But alas ! 
he grew very slowly , and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair . 
His face was in reality by no means `` hideous '' ; on the contrary , it was rather attractive , with a fair , pale skin , freckled . 
His small , lively grey eyes had a fearless look , and often glowed with feeling . 
He had rather high cheekbones ; small , very red , but not very thick , lips ; his nose was small and unmistakably turned up . 
`` I 've a regular pug nose , a regular pug nose , '' Kolya used to mutter to himself when he looked in the looking-glass , and he always left it with indignation . 
`` But perhaps I have n't got a clever face ? '' 
he sometimes thought , doubtful even of that . 
But it must not be supposed that his mind was preoccupied with his face and his height . 
On the contrary , however bitter the moments before the looking-glass were to him , he quickly forgot them , and forgot them for a long time , `` abandoning himself entirely to ideas and to real life , '' as he formulated it to himself . 
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya . 
Before he reached him , Kolya could see that he looked delighted . 
`` Can he be so glad to see me ? '' 
Kolya wondered , feeling pleased . 
We may note here , in passing , that Alyosha 's appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw him last . 
He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a wellcut coat , a soft , round hat , and his hair had been cropped short . 
All this was very becoming to him , and he looked quite handsome . 
His charming face always had a good-humoured expression ; but there was a gentleness and serenity in his good-humour . 
To Kolya 's surprise , Alyosha came out to him just as he was , without an overcoat . 
He had evidently come in haste . 
He held out his hand to Kolya at once . 
`` Here you are at last ! 
How anxious we 've been to see you ! '' 
