He must be killed ! 
Katya despises me . 
I 've seen that for a month past . 
Even Lise will begin to despise me ! 
` You are going in order to be praised . ' 
That 's a brutal lie ! 
And you despise me too , Alyosha . 
Now I am going to hate you again ! 
And I hate the monster , too ! 
I hate the monster ! 
I do n't want to save the monster . 
Let him rot in Siberia ! 
He 's begun singing a hymn ! 
Oh , to-morrow I 'll go , stand before them , and spit in their faces ! '' 
He jumped up in a frenzy , flung off the towel , and fell to pacing up and down the room again . 
Alyosha recalled what he had just said . 
`` I seem to be sleeping awake ... I walk , I speak , I see , but I am asleep . '' 
It seemed to be just like that now . 
Alyosha did not leave him . 
The thought passed through his mind to run for a doctor , but he was afraid to leave his brother alone : there was no one to whom he could leave him . 
By degrees Ivan lost consciousness completely at last . 
He still went on talking , talking incessantly , but quite incoherently , and even articulated his words with difficulty . 
Suddenly he staggered violently ; but Alyosha was in time to support him . 
Ivan let him lead him to his bed . 
Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed . 
He sat watching over him for another two hours . 
The sick man slept soundly , without stirring , breathing softly and evenly . 
Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa , without undressing . 
As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan . 
He began to understand Ivan 's illness . 
`` The anguish of a proud determination . 
An earnest conscience ! '' 
God , in Whom he disbelieved , and His truth were gaining mastery over his heart , which still refused to submit . 
`` Yes , '' the thought floated through Alyosha 's head as it lay on the pillow , `` yes , if Smerdyakov is dead , no one will believe Ivan 's evidence ; but he will go and give it . '' 
Alyosha smiled softly . 
`` God will conquer ! '' 
he thought . 
`` He will either rise up in the light of truth , or ... he 'll perish in hate , revenging on himself and on everyone his having served the cause he does not believe in , '' Alyosha added bitterly , and again he prayed for Ivan . 
A Judicial Error The Fatal Day AT ten o'clock in the morning of the day following the events I have described , the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court . 
I hasten to emphasise the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capable of reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail , or even in the actual order of events . 
I imagine that to mention everything with full explanation would fill a volume , even a very large one . 
And so I trust I may not be reproached , for confining myself to what struck me . 
I may have selected as of most interest what was of secondary importance , and may have omitted the most prominent and essential details . 
But I see I shall do better not to apologise . 
I will do my best and the reader will see for himself that I have done all I can . 
And , to begin with , before entering the court , I will mention what surprised me most on that day . 
Indeed , as it appeared later , everyone was surprised at it , too . 
We all knew that the affair had aroused great interest , that everyone was burning with impatience for the trial to begin , that it had been a subject of talk , conjecture , exclamation and surmise for the last two months in local society . 
Everyone knew , too , that the case had become known throughout Russia , but yet we had not imagined that it had aroused such burning , such intense , interest in everyone , not only among ourselves , but all over Russia . 
This became evident at the trial this day . 
