`` Why unhappy ? '' 
Ivan asked smiling . 
`` Because , in all probability you do n't believe yourself in the immortality of your soul , nor in what you have written yourself in your article on Church Jurisdiction . '' 
`` Perhaps you are right ! 
... But I was n't altogether joking , '' Ivan suddenly and strangely confessed , flushing quickly . 
`` You were not altogether joking . 
That 's true . 
The question is still fretting your heart , and not answered . 
But the martyr likes sometimes to divert himself with his despair , as it were driven to it by despair itself . 
Meanwhile , in your despair , you , too , divert yourself with magazine articles , and discussions in society , though you do n't believe your own arguments , and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly ... . 
That question you have not answered , and it is your great grief , for it clamours for an answer . '' 
`` But can it be answered by me ? 
Answered in the affirmative ? '' 
Ivan went on asking strangely , still looking at the elder with the same inexplicable smile . 
`` If it ca n't be decided in the affirmative , it will never be decided in the negative . 
You know that that is the peculiarity of your heart , and all its suffering is due to it . 
But thank the Creator who has given you a lofty heart capable of such suffering ; of thinking and seeking higher things , for our dwelling is in the heavens . 
God grant that your heart will attain the answer on earth , and may God bless your path . '' 
The elder raised his hand and would have made the sign of the cross over Ivan from where he stood . 
But the latter rose from his seat , went up to him , received his blessing , and kissing his hand went back to his place in silence . 
His face looked firm and earnest . 
This action and all the preceding conversation , which was so surprising from Ivan , impressed everyone by its strangeness and a certain solemnity , so that all were silent for a moment , and there was a look almost of apprehension in Alyosha 's face . 
But Miusov suddenly shrugged his shoulders . 
And at the same moment Fyodor Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat . 
`` Most pious and holy elder , '' he cried pointing to Ivan , `` that is my son , flesh of my flesh , the dearest of my flesh ! 
He is my most dutiful Karl Moor , so to speak , while this son who has just come in , Dmitri , against whom I am seeking justice from you , is the undutiful Franz Moor - they are both out of Schiller 's Robbers , and so I am the reigning Count von Moor ! 
Judge and save us ! 
We need not only your prayers but your prophecies ! '' 
`` Speak without buffoonery , and do n't begin by insulting the members of your family , '' answered the elder , in a faint , exhausted voice . 
He was obviously getting more and more fatigued , and his strength was failing . 
`` An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here ! '' 
cried Dmitri indignantly . 
He too leapt up . 
`` Forgive it , reverend Father , '' he added , addressing the elder . 
`` I am not a cultivated man , and I do n't even know how to address you properly , but you have been deceived and you have been too good-natured in letting us meet here . 
All my father wants is a scandal . 
Why he wants it only he can tell . 
He always has some motive . 
But I believe I know why - '' `` They all blame me , all of them ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn . 
`` Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too . 
You have been blaming me , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , you have ! '' 
he turned suddenly to Miusov , although the latter was not dreaming of interrupting him . 
`` They all accuse me of having hidden the children 's money in my boots , and cheated them , but is n't there a court of law ? 
There they will reckon out for you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , from your notes , your letters , and your agreements , how much money you had , how much you have spent , and how much you have left . 
Why does Pyotr Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment ? 
Dmitri is not a stranger to him . 
Because they are all against me , while Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt to me , and not a little , but some thousands of which I have documentary proof . 
The whole town is echoing with his debaucheries . 
And where he was stationed before , he several times spent a thousand or two for the seduction of some respectable girl ; we know all about that , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , in its most secret details . 
