So there is a little devil sitting in your heart , Alyosha Karamazov ! '' 
`` What I said was absurd , but - '' `` That 's just the point , that ` but ' ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Let me tell you , novice , that the absurd is only too necessary on earth . 
The world stands on absurdities , and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without them . 
We know what we know ! '' 
`` What do you know ? '' 
`` I understand nothing , '' Ivan went on , as though in delirium . 
`` I do n't want to understand anything now . 
I want to stick to the fact . 
I made up my mind long ago not to understand . 
If I try to understand anything , I shall be false to the fact , and I have determined to stick to the fact . '' 
`` Why are you trying me ? '' 
Alyosha cried , with sudden distress . 
`` Will you say what you mean at last ? '' 
`` Of course , I will ; that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
You are dear to me , I do n't want to let you go , and I wo n't give you up to your Zossima . '' 
Ivan for a minute was silent , his face became all at once very sad . 
`` Listen ! 
I took the case of children only to make my case clearer . 
Of the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to its centre , I will say nothing . 
I have narrowed my subject on purpose . 
I am a bug , and I recognise in all humility that I can not understand why the world is arranged as it is . 
Men are themselves to blame , I suppose ; they were given paradise , they wanted freedom , and stole fire from heaven , though they knew they would become unhappy , so there is no need to pity them . 
With my pitiful , earthly , Euclidian understanding , all I know is that there is suffering and that there are none guilty ; that cause follows effect , simply and directly ; that everything flows and finds its level - but that 's only Euclidian nonsense , I know that , and I ca n't consent to live by it ! 
What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect simply and directly , and that I know it ? 
- I must have justice , or I will destroy myself . 
And not justice in some remote infinite time and space , but here on earth , and that I could see myself . 
I have believed in it . 
I want to see it , and if I am dead by then , let me rise again , for if it all happens without me , it will be too unfair . 
Surely I have n't suffered simply that I , my crimes and my sufferings , may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else . 
I want to see with my own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer . 
I want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for . 
All the religions of the world are built on this longing , and I am a believer . 
But then there are the children , and what am I to do about them ? 
That 's a question I ca n't answer . 
For the hundredth time I repeat , there are numbers of questions , but I 've only taken the children , because in their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear . 
Listen ! 
If all must suffer to pay for the eternal harmony , what have children to do with it , tell me , please ? 
It 's beyond all comprehension why they should suffer , and why they should pay for the harmony . 
Why should they , too , furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future ? 
I understand solidarity in sin among men . 
I understand solidarity in retribution , too ; but there can be no such solidarity with children . 
And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for all their fathers ' crimes , such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension . 
Some jester will say , perhaps , that the child would have grown up and have sinned , but you see he did n't grow up , he was torn to pieces by the dogs , at eight years old . 
Oh , Alyosha , I am not blaspheming ! 
I understand , of course , what an upheaval of the universe it will be when everything in heaven and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud : ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed . ' 
When the mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to the dogs , and all three cry aloud with tears , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
then , of course , the crown of knowledge will be reached and all will be made clear . 
But what pulls me up here is that I ca n't accept that harmony . 
