I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect , for I was so much more impressionable than my companions . 
By the time we left the school as officers , we were ready to lay down our lives for the honour of the regiment , but no one of us had any knowledge of the real meaning of honour , and if anyone had known it , he would have been the first to ridicule it . 
Drunkenness , debauchery and devilry were what we almost prided ourselves on . 
I do n't say that we were bad by nature , all these young men were good fellows , but they behaved badly , and I worst of all . 
What made it worse for me was that I had come into my own money , and so I flung myself into a life of pleasure , and plunged headlong into all the recklessness of youth . 
I was fond of reading , yet strange to say , the Bible was the one book I never opened at that time , though I always carried it about with me , and I was never separated from it ; in very truth I was keeping that book `` for the day and the hour , for the month and the year , '' though I knew it not . 
After four years of this life , I chanced to be in the town of K. where our regiment was stationed at the time . 
We found the people of the town hospitable , rich , and fond of entertainments . 
I met with a cordial reception everywhere , as I was of a lively temperament and was known to be well off , which always goes a long way in the world . 
And then a circumstance happened which was the beginning of it all . 
I formed an attachment to a beautiful and intelligent young girl of noble and lofty character , the daughter of people much respected . 
They were well-to-do people of influence and position . 
They always gave me a cordial and friendly reception . 
I fancied that the young lady looked on me with favour and my heart was aflame at such an idea . 
Later on I saw and fully realised that I perhaps was not so passionately in love with her at all , but only recognised the elevation of her mind and character , which I could not indeed have helped doing . 
I was prevented , however , from making her an offer at the time by my selfishness ; I was loath to part with the allurements of my free and licentious bachelor life in the heyday of my youth , and with my pockets full of money . 
I did drop some hint as to my feelings however , though I put off taking any decisive step for a time . 
Then , all of a sudden , we were ordered off for two months to another district . 
On my return two months later , I found the young lady already married to a rich neighbouring landowner , a very amiable man , still young though older than I was , connected with the best Petersburg society , which I was not , and of excellent education , which I also was not . 
I was so overwhelmed at this unexpected circumstance that my mind was positively clouded . 
The worst of it all was that , as I learned then , the young landowner had been a long while betrothed to her , and I had met him indeed many times in her house , but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing . 
And this particularly mortified me ; almost everybody had known all about it , while I knew nothing . 
I was filled with sudden irrepressible fury . 
With flushed face I began recalling how often I had been on the point of declaring my love to her , and as she had not attempted to stop me or to warn me , she must , I concluded , have been laughing at me all the time . 
Later on , of course , I reflected and remembered that she had been very far from laughing at me ; on the contrary , she used to turn off any love-making on my part with a jest and begin talking of other subjects ; but at that moment I was incapable of reflecting and was all eagerness for revenge . 
I am surprised to remember that my wrath and revengeful feelings were extremely repugnant to my own nature , for being of an easy temper , I found it difficult to be angry with anyone for long , and so I had to work myself up artificially and became at last revolting and absurd . 
I waited for an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my `` rival '' in the presence of a large company . 
I insulted him on a perfectly extraneous pretext , jeering at his opinion upon an important public event - it was in the year 1826 - my jeer was , so people said , clever and effective . 
Then I forced him to ask for an explanation , and behaved so rudely that he accepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us , as I was younger , a person of no consequence , and of inferior rank . 
I learned afterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling on his side also that my challenge was accepted ; he had been rather jealous of me on his wife 's account before their marriage ; he fancied now that if he submitted to be insulted by me and refused to accept my challenge , and if she heard of it , she might begin to despise him and waver in her love for him . 
I soon found a second in a comrade , an ensign of our regiment . 
In those days though duels were severely punished , yet duelling was a kind of fashion among the officers - so strong and deeply rooted will a brutal prejudice sometimes be . 
It was the end of June , and our meeting was to take place at seven o'clock the next day on the outskirts of the town - and then something happened that in very truth was the turning point of my life . 
In the evening , returning home in a savage and brutal humour , I flew into a rage with my orderly Afanasy , and gave him two blows in the face with all my might , so that it was covered with blood . 
He had not long been in my service and I had struck him before , but never with such ferocious cruelty . 
And , believe me , though it 's forty years ago , I recall it now with shame and pain . 
I went to bed and slept for about three hours ; when I waked up the day was breaking . 
I got up - I did not want to sleep any more - I went to the window - opened it , it looked out upon the garden ; I saw the sun rising ; it was warm and beautiful , the birds were singing . 
`` What 's the meaning of it ? '' 
I thought . 
`` I feel in my heart as it were something vile and shameful . 
Is it because I am going to shed blood ? 
No , '' I thought , `` I feel it 's not that . 
Can it be that I am afraid of death , afraid of being killed ? 
No , that 's not it , that 's not it at all . '' 
... And all at once I knew what it was : it was because I had beaten Afanasy the evening before ! 
It all rose before my mind , it all was , as it were , repeated over again ; he stood before me and I was beating him straight on the face and he was holding his arms stiffly down , his head erect , his eyes fixed upon me as though on parade . 
He staggered at every blow and did not even dare to raise his hands to protect himself . 
That is what a man has been brought to , and that was a man beating a fellow creature ! 
What a crime ! 
