He 'd no sooner paid it than he fell ill , took to his bed , and , three weeks later , softening of the brain set in , and he died five days afterwards . 
He was buried with military honours , for he had not had time to receive his discharge . 
Ten days after his funeral , Katerina Ivanovna , with her aunt and sister , went to Moscow . 
And , behold , on the very day they went away -LRB- I had n't seen them , did n't see them off or take leave -RRB- I received a tiny note , a sheet of thin blue paper , and on it only one line in pencil : ' I will write to you . 
Wait . 
K. ' And that was all . 
`` I 'll explain the rest now , in two words . 
In Moscow their fortunes changed with the swiftness of lightning and the unexpectedness of an Arabian fairy-tale . 
That general 's widow , their nearest relation , suddenly lost the two nieces who were her heiresses and next-of-kin - both died in the same week of small-pox . 
The old lady , prostrated with grief , welcomed Katya as a daughter , as her one hope , clutched at her , altered her will in Katya 's favour . 
But that concerned the future . 
Meanwhile she gave her , for present use , eighty thousand roubles , as a marriage portion , to do what she liked with . 
She was an hysterical woman . 
I saw something of her in Moscow , later . 
`` Well , suddenly I received by post four thousand five hundred roubles . 
I was speechless with surprise , as you may suppose . 
Three days later came the promised letter . 
I have it with me now . 
You must read it . 
She offers to be my wife , offers herself to me . ' 
I love you madly , she says , ` even if you do n't love me , never mind . 
Be my husband . 
Do n't be afraid . 
I wo n't hamper you in any way . 
I will be your chattel . 
I will be the carpet under your feet . 
I want to love you for ever . 
I want to save you from yourself . ' 
Alyosha , I am not worthy to repeat those lines in my vulgar words and in my vulgar tone , my everlastingly vulgar tone , that I can never cure myself of . 
That letter stabs me even now . 
Do you think I do n't mind - that I do n't mind still ? 
I wrote her an answer at once , as it was impossible for me to go to Moscow . 
I wrote to her with tears . 
One thing I shall be ashamed of for ever . 
I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was only a stuck-up beggar ! 
I mentioned money ! 
I ought to have borne it in silence , but it slipped from my pen . 
Then I wrote at once to Ivan , and told him all I could about it in a letter of six pages , and sent him to her . 
Why do you look like that ? 
Why are you staring at me ? 
Yes , Ivan fell in love with her ; he 's in love with her still . 
I know that . 
I did a stupid thing , in the world 's opinion ; but perhaps that one stupid thing may be the saving of us all now . 
Oo ! 
Do n't you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan , how she respects him ? 
When she compares us , do you suppose she can love a man like me , especially after all that has happened here ? '' 
`` But I 'm convinced that she does love a man like you , and not a man like him . '' 
`` She loves her own virtue , not me . '' 
The words broke involuntarily , and almost malignantly , from Dmitri . 
He laughed , but a minute later his eyes gleamed , he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist . 
