Now she had taken the fatal plunge . 
I remember that the letter was read aloud by the clerk , directly afterwards , I believe . 
It made an overwhelming impression . 
They asked Mitya whether he admitted having written the letter . 
`` It 's mine , mine ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I should n't have written it if I had n't been drunk ! 
... We 've hated each other for many things , Katya , but I swear , I swear I loved you even while I hated you , and you did n't love me ! '' 
He sank back on his seat , wringing his hands in despair . 
The prosecutor and counsel for the defence began cross-examining her , chiefly to ascertain what had induced her to conceal such a document and to give her evidence in quite a different tone and spirit just before . 
`` Yes , yes . 
I was telling lies just now . 
I was lying against my honour and my conscience , but I wanted to save him , for he has hated and despised me so ! '' 
Katya cried madly . 
`` Oh , he has despised me horribly , he has always despised me , and do you know , he has despised me from the very moment that I bowed down to him for that money . 
I saw that ... . 
I felt it at once at the time , but for a long time I would n't believe it . 
How often I have read it in his eyes , ` You came of yourself , though . ' 
Oh , he did n't understand , he had no idea why I ran to him , he can suspect nothing but baseness , he judged me by himself , he thought everyone was like himself ! '' 
Katya hissed furiously , in a perfect frenzy . 
`` And he only wanted to marry me , because I 'd inherited a fortune , because of that , because of that ! 
I always suspected it was because of that ! 
Oh , he is a brute ! 
He was always convinced that I should be trembling with shame all my life before him , because I went to him then , and that he had a right to despise me forever for it , and so to be superior to me - that 's why he wanted to marry me ! 
That 's so , that 's all so ! 
I tried to conquer him by my love - a love that knew no bounds . 
I even tried to forgive his faithlessness ; but he understood nothing , nothing ! 
How could he understand indeed ? 
He is a monster ! 
I only received that letter the next evening : it was brought me from the tavern - and only that morning , only that morning I wanted to forgive him everything , everything - even his treachery ! '' 
The President and the prosecutor , of course , tried to calm her . 
I ca n't help thinking that they felt ashamed of taking advantage of her hysteria and of listening to such avowals . 
I remember hearing them say to her , `` We understand how hard it is for you ; be sure we are able to feel for you , '' and so on , and so on . 
And yet they dragged the evidence out of the raving , hysterical woman . 
She described at last with extraordinary clearness , which is so often seen , though only for a moment , in such overwrought states , how Ivan had been nearly driven out of his mind during the last two months trying to save `` the monster and murderer , '' his brother . 
`` He tortured himself , '' she exclaimed , `` he was always trying to minimise his brother 's guilt and confessing to me that he , too , had never loved his father , and perhaps desired his death himself . 
Oh , he has a tender , over-tender conscience ! 
He tormented himself with his conscience ! 
He told me everything , everything ! 
He came every day and talked to me as his only friend . 
I have the honour to be his only friend ! '' 
she cried suddenly with a sort of defiance , and her eyes flashed . 
`` He had been twice to see Smerdyakov . 
One day he came to me and said , ` If it was not my brother , but Smerdyakov committed the murder ' -LRB- for the legend was circulating everywhere that Smerdyakov had done it -RRB- , ` perhaps I too am guilty , for Smerdyakov knew I did n't like my father and perhaps believed that I desired my father 's death . ' 
Then I brought out that letter and showed it him . 
He was entirely convinced that his brother had done it , and he was overwhelmed by it . 
He could n't endure the thought that his own brother was a parricide ! 
Only a week ago I saw that it was making him ill . 
During the last few days he has talked incoherently in my presence . 
I saw his mind was giving way . 
