He dragged me out of the tavern into the market place ; at that moment the boys were coming out of school , and with them Ilusha . 
As soon as he saw me in such a state he rushed up to me . 
` Father , ' he cried , ` father ! ' 
He caught hold of me , hugged me , tried to pull me away , crying to my assailant , ` Let go , let go , it 's my father , forgive him ! ' 
- yes , he actually cried ` forgive him . ' 
He clutched at that hand , that very hand , in his little hands and kissed it ... . 
I remember his little face at that moment , I have n't forgotten it and I never shall ! '' 
`` I swear , '' cried Alyosha , `` that my brother will express his most deep and sincere regret , even if he has to go down on his knees in that same market-place ... . 
I 'll make him or he is no brother of mine ! 
`` Aha , then it 's only a suggestion ! 
And it does not come from him but simply from the generosity of your own warm heart . 
You should have said so . 
No , in that case allow me to tell you of your brother 's highly chivalrous soldierly generosity , for he did give expression to it at the time . 
He left off dragging me by my beard and released me : ` You are an officer , ' he said , ` and I am an officer , if you can find a decent man to be your second send me your challenge . 
I will give satisfaction , though you are a scoundrel . ' 
That 's what he said . 
A chivalrous spirit indeed ! 
I retired with Ilusha , and that scene is a family record imprinted forever on Ilusha 's soul . 
No , it 's not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen . 
Judge for yourself . 
You 've just been in our mansion , what did you see there ? 
Three ladies , one a cripple and weak-minded , another a cripple and hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever . 
She is a student , dying to get back to Petersburg , to work for the emancipation of the Russian woman on the banks of the Neva . 
I wo n't speak of Ilusha , he is only nine . 
I am alone in the world , and if I die , what will become of all of them ? 
I simply ask you that . 
And if I challenge him and he kills me on the spot , what then ? 
What will become of them ? 
And worse still , if he does n't kill me but only cripples me : I could n't work , but I should still be a mouth to feed . 
Who would feed it and who would feed them all ? 
Must I take Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets ? 
That 's what it means for me to challenge him to a duel . 
It 's silly talk and nothing else . '' 
`` He will beg your forgiveness , he will bow down at your feet in the middle of the marketplace , '' cried Alyosha again , with glowing eyes . 
`` I did think of prosecuting him , '' the captain went on , `` but look in our code , could I get much compensation for a personal injury ? 
And then Agrafena Alexandrovna * sent for me and shouted at me : ` Do n't dare to dream of it ! 
If you proceed against him , I 'll publish it to all the world that he beat you for your dishonesty , and then you will be prosecuted . ' 
I call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I acted , was n't it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
And what 's more , ' she went on , ` I 'll dismiss you for good and you 'll never earn another penny from me . 
I 'll speak to my merchant too ' -LRB- that 's what she calls her old man -RRB- ` and he will dismiss you ! ' 
And if he dismisses me , what can I earn then from anyone ? 
Those two are all I have to look to , for your Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me , for another reason , but he means to make use of papers I 've signed to go to law against me . 
And so I kept quiet , and you have seen our retreat . 
But now let me ask you : did Ilusha hurt your finger much ? 
I did n't like to go into it in our mansion before him . '' 
* Grushenka . 
`` Yes , very much , and he was in a great fury . 
He was avenging you on me as a Karamazov , I see that now . 
But if only you had seen how he was throwing stones at his schoolfellows ! 
It 's very dangerous . 
