For I can not imagine the horror and moral suffering of Karamazov when he learnt that she loved him , that for his sake she had rejected her first lover , that she was summoning him , Mitya , to a new life , that she was promising him happiness - and when ? 
When everything was over for him and nothing was possible ! 
`` By the way , I will note in parenthesis a point of importance for the light it throws on the prisoner 's position at the moment . 
This woman , this love of his , had been till the last moment , till the very instant of his arrest , a being unattainable , passionately desired by him but unattainable . 
Yet why did he not shoot himself then , why did he relinquish his design and even forget where his pistol was ? 
It was just that passionate desire for love and the hope of satisfying it that restrained him . 
Throughout their revels he kept close to his adored mistress , who was at the banquet with him and was more charming and fascinating to him than ever - he did not leave her side , abasing himself in his homage before her . 
`` His passion might well , for a moment , stifle not only the fear of arrest , but even the torments of conscience . 
For a moment , oh , only for a moment ! 
I can picture the state of mind of the criminal hopelessly enslaved by these influences - first , the influence of drink , of noise and excitement , of the thud of the dance and the scream of the song , and of her , flushed with wine , singing and dancing and laughing to him ! 
Secondly , the hope in the background that the fatal end might still be far off , that not till next morning , at least , they would come and take him . 
So he had a few hours and that 's much , very much ! 
In a few hours one can think of many things . 
I imagine that he felt something like what criminals feel when they are being taken to the scaffold . 
They have another long , long street to pass down and at walking pace , past thousands of people . 
Then there will be a turning into another street and only at the end of that street the dread place of execution ! 
I fancy that at the beginning of the journey the condemned man , sitting on his shameful cart , must feel that he has infinite life still before him . 
The houses recede , the cart moves on - oh , that 's nothing , it 's still far to the turning into the second street and he still looks boldly to right and to left at those thousands of callously curious people with their eyes fixed on him , and he still fancies that he is just such a man as they . 
But now the turning comes to the next street . 
Oh , that 's nothing , nothing , there 's still a whole street before him , and however many houses have been passed , he will still think there are many left . 
And so to the very end , to the very scaffold . 
`` This I imagine is how it was with Karamazov then . 
` They 've not had time yet , ' he must have thought , ' I may still find some way out , oh , there 's still time to make some plan of defence , and now , now - she is so fascinating ! ' 
`` His soul was full of confusion and dread , but he managed , however , to put aside half his money and hide it somewhere - I can not otherwise explain the disappearance of quite half of the three thousand he had just taken from his father 's pillow . 
He had been in Mokroe more than once before , he had caroused there for two days together already , he knew the old big house with all its passages and outbuildings . 
I imagine that part of the money was hidden in that house , not long before the arrest , in some crevice , under some floor , in some corner , under the roof . 
With what object ? 
I shall be asked . 
Why , the catastrophe may take place at once , of course ; he had n't yet considered how to meet it , he had n't the time , his head was throbbing and his heart was with her , but money - money was indispensable in any case ! 
With money a man is always a man . 
Perhaps such foresight at such a moment may strike you as unnatural ? 
But he assures us himself that a month before , at a critical and exciting moment , he had halved his money and sewn it up in a little bag . 
And though that was not true , as we shall prove directly , it shows the idea was a familiar one to Karamazov , he had contemplated it . 
What 's more , when he declared at the inquiry that he had put fifteen hundred roubles in a bag -LRB- which never existed -RRB- he may have invented that little bag on the inspiration of the moment , because he had two hours before divided his money and hidden half of it at Mokroe till morning , in case of emergency , simply not to have it on himself . 
Two extremes , gentlemen of the jury , remember that Karamazov can contemplate two extremes and both at once . 
`` We have looked in the house , but we have n't found the money . 
It may still be there or it may have disappeared next day and be in the prisoner 's hands now . 
In any case he was at her side , on his knees before her , she was lying on the bed , he had his hands stretched out to her and he had so entirely forgotten everything that he did not even hear the men coming to arrest him . 
He had n't time to prepare any line of defence in his mind . 
He was caught unawares and confronted with his judges , the arbiters of his destiny . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , there are moments in the execution of our duties when it is terrible for us to face a man , terrible on his account , too ! 
The moments of contemplating that animal fear , when the criminal sees that all is lost , but still struggles , still means to struggle , the moments when every instinct of self-preservation rises up in him at once and he looks at you with questioning and suffering eyes , studies you , your face , your thoughts , uncertain on which side you will strike , and his distracted mind frames thousands of plans in an instant , but he is still afraid to speak , afraid of giving himself away ! 
This purgatory of the spirit , this animal thirst for self-preservation , these humiliating moments of the human soul , are awful , and sometimes arouse horror and compassion for the criminal even in the lawyer . 
And this was what we all witnessed then . 
`` At first he was thunderstruck and in his terror dropped some very compromising phrases . 
` Blood ! 
I 've deserved it ! ' 
But he quickly restrained himself . 
He had not prepared what he was to say , what answer he was to make , he had nothing but a bare denial ready . ' 
I am not guilty of my father 's death . ' 
