I came back to you then , remembering that you had a dagger lying on your table . 
I sat down and asked you to sit down , and for a whole minute I pondered . 
If I had killed you , I should have been ruined by that murder even if I had not confessed the other . 
But I did n't think about that at all , and I did n't want to think of it at that moment . 
I only hated you and longed to revenge myself on you for everything . 
The Lord vanquished the devil in my heart . 
But let me tell you , you were never nearer death . '' 
A week later he died . 
The whole town followed him to the grave . 
The chief priest made a speech full of feeling . 
All lamented the terrible illness that had cut short his days . 
But all the town was up in arms against me after the funeral , and people even refused to see me . 
Some , at first a few and afterwards more , began indeed to believe in the truth of his story , and they visited me and questioned me with great interest and eagerness , for man loves to see the downfall and disgrace of the righteous . 
But I held my tongue , and very shortly after , I left the town , and five months later by God 's grace I entered the safe and blessed path , praising the unseen finger which had guided me so clearly to it . 
But I remember in my prayer to this day , the servant of God , Mihail , who suffered so greatly . 
Conversations and Exhortations of Father Zossima -LRB- e -RRB- The Russian Monk and his possible Significance . 
FATHERS and teachers , what is the monk ? 
In the cultivated world the word is nowadays pronounced by some people with a jeer , and by others it is used as a term of abuse , and this contempt for the monk is growing . 
It is true , alas , it is true , that there are many sluggards , gluttons , profligates , and insolent beggars among monks . 
Educated people point to these : `` You are idlers , useless members of society , you live on the labour of others , you are shameless beggars . '' 
And yet how many meek and humble monks there are , yearning for solitude and fervent prayer in peace ! 
These are less noticed , or passed over in silence . 
And how suprised men would be if I were to say that from these meek monks , who yearn for solitary prayer , the salvation of Russia will come perhaps once more ! 
For they are in truth made ready in peace and quiet `` for the day and the hour , the month and the year . '' 
Meanwhile , in their solitude , they keep the image of Christ fair and undefiled , in the purity of God 's truth , from the times of the Fathers of old , the Apostles and the martyrs . 
And when the time comes they will show it to the tottering creeds of the world . 
That is a great thought . 
That star will rise out of the East . 
That is my view of the monk , and is it false ? 
Is it too proud ? 
Look at the worldly and all who set themselves up above the people of God ; has not God 's image and His truth been distorted in them ? 
They have science ; but in science there is nothing but what is the object of sense . 
The spiritual world , the higher part of man 's being is rejected altogether , dismissed with a sort of triumph , even with hatred . 
The world has proclaimed the reign of freedom , especially of late , but what do we see in this freedom of theirs ? 
Nothing but slavery and self-destruction ! 
For the world says : `` You have desires and so satisfy them , for you have the same rights as the most rich and powerful . 
Do n't be afraid of satisfying them and even multiply your desires . '' 
That is the modern doctrine of the world . 
In that they see freedom . 
And what follows from this right of multiplication of desires ? 
In the rich , isolation and spiritual suicide ; in the poor , envy and murder ; for they have been given rights , but have not been shown the means of satisfying their wants . 
They maintain that the world is getting more and more united , more and more bound together in brotherly community , as it overcomes distance and sets thoughts flying through the air . 
Alas , put no faith in such a bond of union . 
Interpreting freedom as the multiplication and rapid satisfaction of desires , men distort their own nature , for many senseless and foolish desires and habits and ridiculous fancies are fostered in them . 
They live only for mutual envy , for luxury and ostentation . 
To have dinners visits , carriages , rank , and slaves to wait on one is looked upon as a necessity , for which life , honour and human feeling are sacrificed , and men even commit suicide if they are unable to satisfy it . 
We see the same thing among those who are not rich , while the poor drown their unsatisfied need and their envy in drunkenness . 
But soon they will drink blood instead of wine , they are being led on to it . 
I ask you is such a man free ? 
I knew one `` champion of freedom '' who told me himself that , when he was deprived of tobacco in prison , he was so wretched at the privation that he almost went and betrayed his cause for the sake of getting tobacco again ! 
