But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity . 
You 've put yourself out to no purpose . ' 
`` I should have lost the game , of course . 
She 'd have run away . 
But it would have been an infernal revenge . 
It would have been worth it all . 
I 'd have howled with regret all the rest of my life , only to have played that trick . 
Would you believe it , it has never happened to me with any other woman , not one , to look at her at such a moment with hatred . 
But , on my oath , I looked at her for three seconds , or five perhaps , with fearful hatred - that hate which is only a hair 's - breadth from love , from the maddest love ! 
`` I went to the window , put my forehead against the frozen pane , and I remember the ice burnt my forehead like fire . 
I did not keep her long , do n't be afraid . 
I turned round , went up to the table , opened the drawer and took out a banknote for five thousand roubles -LRB- it was lying in a French dictionary -RRB- . 
Then I showed it her in silence , folded it , handed it to her , opened the door into the passage , and , stepping back , made her a deep bow . 
a most respectful , a most impressive bow , believe me ! 
She shuddered all over , gazed at me for a second , turned horribly pale-white as a sheet , in fact - and all at once , not impetuously but softly , gently , bowed down to my feet - not a boarding-school curtsey , but a Russian bow , with her forehead to the floor . 
She jumped up and ran away . 
I was wearing my sword . 
I drew it and nearly stabbed myself with it on the spot ; why , I do n't know . 
It would have been frightfully stupid , of course . 
I suppose it was from delight . 
Can you understand that one might kill oneself from delight ? 
But I did n't stab myself . 
I only kissed my sword and put it back in the scabbard - which there was no need to have told you , by the way . 
And I fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it on rather thick to glorify myself . 
But let it pass , and to hell with all who pry into the human heart ! 
Well , so much for that ` adventure ' with Katerina Ivanovna . 
So now Ivan knows of it , and you - no one else . '' 
Dmitri got up , took a step or two in his excitement , pulled out his handkerchief and mopped his forehead , then sat down again , not in the same place as before , but on the opposite side , so that Alyosha had to turn quite round to face him . 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - `` Heels Up '' `` NOW , '' said Alyosha , `` I understand the first half . '' 
`` You understand the first half . 
That half is a drama , and it was played out there . 
The second half is a tragedy , and it is being acted here . '' 
`` And I understand nothing of that second half so far , '' said Alyosha . 
`` And I ? 
Do you suppose I understand it ? '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri . 
There 's one important question . 
Tell me , you were betrothed , betrothed still ? '' 
`` We were n't betrothed at once , not for three months after that adventure . 
The next day I told myself that the incident was closed , concluded , that there would be no sequel . 
It seemed to me caddish to make her an offer . 
On her side she gave no sign of life for the six weeks that she remained in the town ; except , indeed , for one action . 
The day after her visit the maid-servant slipped round with an envelope addressed to me . 
I tore it open ; it contained the change out of the banknote . 
Only four thousand five hundred roubles was needed , but there was a discount of about two hundred on changing it . 
She only sent me about two hundred and sixty . 
I do n't remember exactly , but not a note , not a word of explanation . 
I searched the packet for a pencil mark n-nothing ! 
Well , I spent the rest of the money on such an orgy that the new major was obliged to reprimand me . 
`` Well , the lieutenant-colonel produced the battalion money , to the astonishment of everyone , for nobody believed that he had the money untouched . 
