And add : it is not in pride that I make this prayer , O Lord , for I am lower than all men ... . 
Love God 's people , let not strangers draw away the flock , for if you slumber in your slothfulness and disdainful pride , or worse still , in covetousness , they will come from all sides and draw away your flock . 
Expound the Gospel to the people unceasingly ... be not extortionate ... . 
Do not love gold and silver , do not hoard them ... . 
Have faith . 
Cling to the banner and raise it on high . '' 
But the elder spoke more disconnectedly than Alyosha reported his words afterwards . 
Sometimes he broke off altogether , as though to take breath and recover his strength , but he was in a sort of ecstasy . 
They heard him with emotion , though many wondered at his words and found them obscure ... . 
Afterwards all remembered those words . 
When Alyosha happened for a moment to leave the cell , he was struck by the general excitement and suspense in the monks who were crowding about it . 
This anticipation showed itself in some by anxiety , in others by devout solemnity . 
All were expecting that some marvel would happen immediately after the elder 's death . 
Their suspense was , from one point of view , almost frivolous , but even the most austere of the monks were affected by it . 
Father Paissy 's face looked the gravest of all . 
Alyosha was mysteriously summoned by a monk to see Rakitin , who had arrived from town with a singular letter for him from Madame Hohlakov . 
In it she informed Alyosha of a strange and very opportune incident . 
It appeared that among the women who had come on the previous day to receive Father Zossima 's blessing , there had been an old woman from the town , a sergeant 's widow , called Prohorovna . 
She had inquired whether she might pray for the rest of the soul of her son , Vassenka , who had gone to Irkutsk , and had sent her no news for over a year . 
To which Father Zossima had answered sternly , forbidding her to do so , and saying that to pray for the living as though they were dead was a kind of sorcery . 
He afterwards forgave her on account of her ignorance , and added , `` as though reading the book of the future '' -LRB- this was Madame Hohlakov 's expression -RRB- , words of comfort : `` that her son Vassya was certainly alive and he would either come himself very shortly or send a letter , and that she was to go home and expect him . '' 
And `` Would you believe it ? '' 
exclaimed Madame Hohlakov enthusiastically , `` the prophecy has been fulfilled literally indeed , and more than that . '' 
Scarcely had the old woman reached home when they gave her a letter from Siberia which had been awaiting her . 
But that was not all ; in the letter written on the road from Ekaterinenburg , Vassya informed his mother that he was returning to Russia with an official , and that three weeks after her receiving the letter he hoped `` to embrace his mother . '' 
Madame Hohlakov warmly entreated Alyosha to report this new `` miracle of prediction '' to the Superior and all the brotherhood . 
`` All , all , ought to know of it '' she concluded . 
The letter had been written in haste , the excitement of the writer was apparent in every line of it . 
But Alyosha had no need to tell the monks , for all knew of it already . 
Rakitin had commissioned the monk who brought his message `` to inform most respectfully his reverence Father Paissy , that he , Rakitin , has a matter to speak of with him , of such gravity that he dare not defer it for a moment , and humbly begs forgiveness for his presumption . '' 
As the monk had given the message to Father Paissy , before that to Alyosha , the latter found after reading the letter , there was nothing left for him to do but to hand it to Father Paissy in confirmation of the story . 
And even that austere and cautious man , though he frowned as he read the news of the `` miracle , '' could not completely restrain some inner emotion . 
His eyes gleamed , and a grave and solemn smile came into his lips . 
`` We shall see greater things ! '' 
broke from him . 
`` We shall see greater things , greater things yet ! '' 
the monks around repeated . 
But Father Paissy , frowning again , begged all of them , at least for a time , not to speak of the matter `` till it be more fully confirmed , seeing there is so much credulity among those of this world , and indeed this might well have chanced naturally , '' he added , prudently , as it were to satisfy his conscience , though scarcely believing his own disavowal , a fact his listeners very clearly perceived . 
Within the hour the `` miracle '' was of course known to the whole monastery , and many visitors who had come for the mass . 
No one seemed more impressed by it than the monk who had come the day before from St. Sylvester , from the little monastery of Obdorsk in the far North . 
It was he who had been standing near Madame Hohlakov the previous day and had asked Father Zossima earnestly , referring to the `` healing '' of the lady 's daughter , `` How can you presume to do such things ? '' 
He was now somewhat puzzled and did not know whom to believe . 
The evening before he had visited Father Ferapont in his cell apart , behind the apiary , and had been greatly impressed and overawed by the visit . 
This Father Ferapont was that aged monk so devout in fasting and observing silence who has been mentioned already , as antagonistic to Father Zossima and the whole institution of `` elders , '' which he regarded as a pernicious and frivolous innovation . 
He was a very formidable opponent , although from his practice of silence he scarcely spoke a word to anyone . 
What made him formidable was that a number of monks fully shared his feeling , and many of the visitors looked upon him as a great saint and ascetic , although they had no doubt that he was crazy . 
But it was just his craziness attracted them . 
Father Ferapont never went to see the elder . 
Though he lived in the hermitage they did not worry him to keep its regulations , and this too because he behaved as though he were crazy . 
He was seventy-five or more , and he lived in a corner beyond the apiary in an old decaying wooden cell which had been built long ago for another great ascetic , Father Iona , who had lived to be a hundred and five , and of whose saintly doings many curious stories were still extant in the monastery and the neighbourhood . 
