-LRB- Laughter among the public . -RRB- 
`` You will , of course , forgive me my comparison ; I ca n't boast of eloquence . 
But I will take as an example any point in the prosecutor 's speech . 
`` The prisoner , running away in the garden in the dark , climbed over the fence , was seized by the servant , and knocked him down with a brass pestle . 
Then he jumped back into the garden and spent five minutes over the man , trying to discover whether he had killed him or not . 
And the prosecutor refuses to believe the prisoner 's statement that he ran to old Grigory out of pity . 
` No , ' he says , ` such sensibility is impossible at such a moment , that 's unnatural ; he ran to find out whether the only witness of his crime was dead or alive , and so showed that he had committed the murder , since he would not have run back for any other reason . ' 
`` Here you have psychology ; but let us take the same method and apply it to the case the other way round , and our result will be no less probable . 
The murderer , we are told , leapt down to find out , as a precaution , whether the witness was alive or not , yet he had left in his murdered father 's study , as the prosecutor himself argues , an amazing piece of evidence in the shape of a torn envelope , with an inscription that there had been three thousand roubles in it . 
` If he had carried that envelope away with him , no one in the world would have known of that envelope and of the notes in it , and that the money had been stolen by the prisoner . ' 
Those are the prosecutor 's own words . 
So on one side you see a complete absence of precaution , a man who has lost his head and run away in a fright , leaving that clue on the floor , and two minutes later , when he has killed another man , we are entitled to assume the most heartless and calculating foresight in him . 
But even admitting this was so , it is psychological subtlety , I suppose , that discerns that under certain circumstances I become as bloodthirsty and keen-sighted as a Caucasian eagle , while at the next I am as timid and blind as a mole . 
But if I am so bloodthirsty and cruelly calculating that when I kill a man I only run back to find out whether he is alive to witness against me , why should I spend five minutes looking after my victim at the risk of encountering other witnesses ? 
Why soak my handkerchief , wiping the blood off his head so that it may be evidence against me later ? 
If he were so cold-hearted and calculating , why not hit the servant on the head again and again with the same pestle so as to kill him outright and relieve himself of all anxiety about the witness ? 
`` Again , though he ran to see whether the witness was alive , he left another witness on the path , that brass pestle which he had taken from the two women , and which they could always recognise afterwards as theirs , and prove that he had taken it from them . 
And it is not as though he had forgotten it on the path , dropped it through carelessness or haste , no , he had flung away his weapon , for it was found fifteen paces from where Grigory lay . 
Why did he do so ? 
just because he was grieved at having killed a man , an old servant ; and he flung away the pestle with a curse , as a murderous weapon . 
That 's how it must have been , what other reason could he have had for throwing it so far ? 
And if he was capable of feeling grief and pity at having killed a man , it shows that he was innocent of his father 's murder . 
Had he murdered him , he would never have run to another victim out of pity ; then he would have felt differently ; his thoughts would have been centred on self-preservation . 
He would have had none to spare for pity , that is beyond doubt . 
On the contrary , he would have broken his skull instead of spending five minutes looking after him . 
There was room for pity and good-feeling just because his conscience had been clear till then . 
Here we have a different psychology . 
I have purposely resorted to this method , gentlemen of the jury , to show that you can prove anything by it . 
It all depends on who makes use of it . 
Psychology lures even most serious people into romancing , and quite unconsciously . 
I am speaking of the abuse of psychology , gentlemen . '' 
Sounds of approval and laughter , at the expense of the prosecutor , were again audible in the court . 
I will not repeat the speech in detail ; I will only quote some passages from it , some leading points . 
There Was No Money . 
There Was No Robbery THERE was one point that struck everyone in Fetyukovitch 's speech . 
He flatly denied the existence of the fatal three thousand roubles , and consequently , the possibility of their having been stolen . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' he began . 
`` Every new and unprejudiced observer must be struck by a characteristic peculiarity in the present case , namely , the charge of robbery , and the complete impossibility of proving that there was anything to be stolen . 
We are told that money was stolen - three thousand roubles but whether those roubles ever existed , nobody knows . 
Consider , how have we heard of that sum , and who has seen the notes ? 
The only person who saw them , and stated that they had been put in the envelope , was the servant , Smerdyakov . 
He had spoken of it to the prisoner and his brother , Ivan Fyodorovitch , before the catastrophe . 
Madame Svyetlov , too , had been told of it . 
But not one of these three persons had actually seen the notes , no one but Smerdyakov had seen them . 
`` Here the question arises , if it 's true that they did exist , and that Smerdyakov had seen them , when did he see them for the last time ? 
What if his master had taken the notes from under his bed and put them back in his cash-box without telling him ? 
Note , that according to Smerdyakov 's story the notes were kept under the mattress ; the prisoner must have pulled them out , and yet the bed was absolutely unrumpled ; that is carefully recorded in the protocol . 
How could the prisoner have found the notes without disturbing the bed ? 
How could he have helped soiling with his blood-stained hands the fine and spotless linen with which the bed had been purposely made ? 
`` But I shall be asked : What about the envelope on the floor ? 
