I tell you , I am expecting a message . 
If the message comes , I shall fly , I shall gallop away and you will see no more of me . 
That 's why I am dressed up , so as to be ready . '' 
`` And where are you flying to ? '' 
`` If you know too much , you 'll get old too soon . '' 
`` Upon my word ! 
You are highly delighted ... I 've never seen you like this before . 
You are dressed up as if you were going to a ball . '' 
Rakitin looked her up and down . 
`` Much you know about balls . '' 
`` And do you know much about them ? '' 
`` I have seen a ball . 
The year before last , Kuzma Kuzmitch 's son was married and I looked on from the gallery . 
Do you suppose I want to be talking to you , Rakitin , while a prince like this is standing here . 
Such a visitor ! 
Alyosha , my dear boy , I gaze at you and ca n't believe my eyes . 
Good heavens , can you have come here to see me ! 
To tell you the truth , I never had a thought of seeing you and I did n't think that you would ever come and see me . 
Though this is not the moment now , I am awfully glad to see you . 
Sit down on the sofa , here , that 's right , my bright young moon . 
I really ca n't take it in even now ... . 
Eh , Rakitin , if only you had brought him yesterday or the day before ! 
But I am glad as it is ! 
Perhaps it 's better he has come now , at such a moment , and not the day before yesterday . '' 
She gaily sat down beside Alyosha on the sofa , looking at him with positive delight . 
And she really was glad , she was not lying when she said so . 
Her eyes glowed , her lips laughed , but it was a good-hearted merry laugh . 
Alyosha had not expected to see such a kind expression in her face ... . 
He had hardly met her till the day before , he had formed an alarming idea of her , and had been horribly distressed the day before by the spiteful and treacherous trick she had played on Katerina Ivanovna . 
He was greatly surprised to find her now altogether different from what he had expected . 
And , crushed as he was by his own sorrow , his eyes involuntarily rested on her with attention . 
Her whole manner seemed changed for the better since yesterday , there was scarcely any trace of that mawkish sweetness in her speech , of that voluptuous softness in her movements . 
Everything was simple and good-natured , her gestures were rapid , direct , confiding , but she was greatly excited . 
`` Dear me , how everything comes together to-day ! '' 
she chattered on again . 
`` And why I am so glad to see you , Alyosha , I could n't say myself ! 
If you ask me , I could n't tell you . '' 
`` Come , do n't you know why you 're glad ? '' 
said Rakitin , grinning . 
`` You used to be always pestering me to bring him , you 'd some object , I suppose . '' 
`` I had a different object once , but now that 's over , this is not the moment . 
I say , I want you to have something nice . 
I am so good-natured now . 
You sit down , too , Rakitin ; why are you standing ? 
You 've sat down already ? 
There 's no fear of Rakitin 's forgetting to look after himself . 
Look , Alyosha , he 's sitting there opposite us , so offended that I did n't ask him to sit down before you . 
Ugh , Rakitin is such a one to take offence ! '' 
laughed Grushenka . 
`` Do n't be angry , Rakitin , I 'm kind to-day . 
