Has it not lasted nineteen centuries , is it not still a living , a moving power in the individual soul and in the masses of people ? 
It is still as strong and living even in the souls of atheists , who have destroyed everything ! 
For even those who have renounced Christianity and attack it , in their inmost being still follow the Christian ideal , for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardour of their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue than the ideal given by Christ of old . 
When it has been attempted , the result has been only grotesque . 
Remember this especially , young man , since you are being sent into the world by your departing elder . 
Maybe , remembering this great day , you will not forget my words , uttered from the heart for your guidance , seeing you are young , and the temptations of the world are great and beyond your strength to endure . 
Well , now go , my orphan . '' 
With these words Father Paissy blessed him . 
As Alyosha left the monastery and thought them over , he suddenly realised that he had met a new and unexpected friend , a warmly loving teacher , in this austere monk who had hitherto treated him sternly . 
It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his death , and `` perhaps that 's just what had passed between them , '' Alyosha thought suddenly . 
The philosophic reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Paissy 's heart . 
He was in haste to arm the boy 's mind for conflict with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defence he could imagine . 
At His Father 's FIRST of all , Alyosha went to his father . 
On the way he remembered that his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his brother Ivan seeing him . 
`` Why so ? '' 
Alyosha wondered suddenly . 
`` Even if my father has something to say to me alone , why should I go in unseen ? 
Most likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different , '' he decided . 
Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna , who opened the garden gate to him -LRB- Grigory , it appeared , was ill in bed in the lodge -RRB- , told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two hours ago . 
`` And my father ? '' 
`` He is up , taking his coffee , '' Marfa answered somewhat drily . 
Alyosha went in . 
The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing slippers and a little old overcoat . 
He was amusing himself by looking through some accounts , rather inattentively however . 
He was quite alone in the house , for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing . 
Though he had got up early and was trying to put a bold face on it , he looked tired and weak . 
His forehead , upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the night , was bandaged with a red handkerchief ; his nose too was swollen terribly in the night , and some smaller bruises covered it in patches , giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look . 
The old man was aware of this , and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he came in . 
`` The coffee is cold , '' he cried harshly ; `` I wo n't offer you any . 
I 've ordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to-day , and I do n't invite anyone to share it . 
Why have you come ? '' 
`` To find out how you are , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Yes . 
Besides , I told you to come yesterday . 
It 's all of no consequence . 
You need not have troubled . 
But I knew you 'd come poking in directly . '' 
He said this with almost hostile feeling . 
At the same time he got up and looked anxiously in the looking-glass -LRB- perhaps for the fortieth time that morning -RRB- at his nose . 
He began , too , binding his red handkerchief more becomingly on his forehead . 
`` Red 's better . 
It 's just like the hospital in a white one , '' he observed sententiously . 
`` Well , how are things over there ? 
How is your elder ? '' 
`` He is very bad ; he may die to-day , '' answered Alyosha . 
But his father had not listened , and had forgotten his own question at once . 
`` Ivan 's gone out , '' he said suddenly . 
`` He is doing his utmost to carry off Mitya 's betrothed . 
That 's what he is staying here for , '' he added maliciously , and , twisting his mouth , looked at Alyosha . 
`` Surely he did not tell you so ? '' 
