And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose . 
Receiving this amiable greeting , he stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going upstairs , till he passed out of sight . 
`` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
he promptly asked Smerdyakov , who had followed Ivan . 
`` Angry about something . 
Who can tell ? '' 
the valet muttered evasively . 
`` Confound him ! 
Let him be angry then . 
Bring in the samovar , and get along with you . 
Look sharp ! 
No news ? '' 
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained of to Ivan , all relating to his expected visitor , and these questions we will omit . 
Half an hour later the house was locked , and the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon . 
Now and then he peered out into the darkness , seeing nothing . 
It was very late , but Ivan was still awake and reflecting . 
He sat up late that night , till two o'clock . 
But we will not give an account of his thoughts , and this is not the place to look into that soul - its turn will come . 
And even if one tried , it would be very hard to give an account of them , for there were no thoughts in his brain , but something very vague , and , above all , intense excitement . 
He felt himself that he had lost his bearings . 
He was fretted , too , by all sorts of strange and almost surprising desires ; for instance , after midnight he suddenly had an intense irresistible inclination to go down , open the door , go to the lodge and beat Smerdyakov . 
But if he had been asked why , he could not have given any exact reason , except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than anyone in the world . 
On the other hand , he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror , which he felt positively paralysed his physical powers . 
His head ached and he was giddy . 
A feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart , as though he meant to avenge himself on someone . 
He even hated Alyosha , recalling the conversation he had just had with him . 
At moments he hated himself intensely . 
Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot to think , and wondered greatly at this afterwards , especially as he remembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina Ivanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow , something had whispered in his heart , `` That 's nonsense , you are not going , and it wo n't be so easy to tear yourself away as you are boasting now . '' 
Remembering that night long afterwards , Ivan recalled with peculiar repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily , as though he were afraid of being watched , opened the door , gone out on the staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below , had listened a long while - some five minutes - with a sort of strange curiosity , holding his breath while his heart throbbed . 
And why he had done all this , why he was listening , he could not have said . 
That `` action '' all his life afterwards he called `` infamous , '' and at the bottom of his heart , he thought of it as the basest action of his life . 
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment , but was simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now . 
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room , listening , listening - for someone to knock . 
Ivan went out on the stairs twice to listen like this . 
About two o'clock when everything was quiet , and even Fyodor Pavlovitch had gone to bed , Ivan had got into bed , firmly resolved to fall asleep at once , as he felt fearfully exhausted . 
And he did fall asleep at once , and slept soundly without dreams , but waked early , at seven o'clock , when it was broad daylight . 
Opening his eyes , he was surprised to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous . 
He jumped up at once and dressed quickly ; then dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately . 
His linen had come back from the laundress the previous morning . 
Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure . 
And his departure certainly was sudden . 
Though Ivan had said the day before -LRB- to Katerina Ivanovna , Alyosha , and Smerdyakov -RRB- that he was leaving next day , yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed , or , at least , had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk . 
At last his trunk and bag were ready . 
It was about nine o'clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry , `` Where will your honour take your tea , in your own room or downstairs ? '' 
He looked almost cheerful , but there was about him , about his words and gestures , something hurried and scattered . 
Greeting his father affably , and even inquiring specially after his health , though he did not wait to hear his answer to the end , he announced that he was starting off in an hour to return to Moscow for good , and begged him to send for the horses . 
His father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise , and forgot in an unmannerly way to show regret at losing him . 
Instead of doing so , he flew into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his own . 
`` What a fellow you are ! 
Not to tell me yesterday ! 
