What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your observing it in yourself . 
Avoid fear , too , though fear is only the consequence of every sort of falsehood . 
Never be frightened at your own faint-heartedness in attaining love . 
Do n't be frightened overmuch even at your evil actions . 
I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you , for love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams . 
Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action , rapidly performed and in the sight of all . 
Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon over , with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage . 
But active love is labour and fortitude , and for some people too , perhaps , a complete science . 
But I predict that just when you see with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther from your goal instead of nearer to it - at that very moment I predict that you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you . 
Forgive me for not being able to stay longer with you . 
They are waiting for me . 
Good-bye . '' 
The lady was weeping . 
`` Lise , Lise ! 
Bless her - bless her ! '' 
she cried , starting up suddenly . 
`` She does not deserve to be loved . 
I have seen her naughtiness all along , '' the elder said jestingly . 
`` Why have you been laughing at Alexey ? '' 
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time . 
She had noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her , and she found this extremely amusing . 
She waited intently to catch his eye . 
Alyosha , unable to endure her persistent stare , was irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her , and at once she smiled triumphantly in his face . 
Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed . 
At last he turned away from her altogether and hid behind the elder 's back . 
After a few minutes , drawn by the same irresistible force , he turned again to see whether he was being looked at or not , and found Lise almost hanging out of her chair to peep sideways at him , eagerly waiting for him to look . 
Catching his eye , she laughed so that the elder could not help saying , `` Why do you make fun of him like that , naughty girl ? '' 
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed . 
Her eyes flashed and her face became quite serious . 
She began speaking quickly and nervously in a warm and resentful voice : `` Why has he forgotten everything , then ? 
He used to carry me about when I was little . 
We used to play together . 
He used to come to teach me to read , do you know . 
Two years ago , when he went away , he said that he would never forget me , that we were friends for ever , for ever , for ever ! 
And now he 's afraid of me all at once . 
Am I going to eat him ? 
Why does n't he want to come near me ? 
Why does n't he talk ? 
Why wo n't he come and see us ? 
It 's not that you wo n't let him . 
We know that he goes everywhere . 
It 's not good manners for me to invite him . 
He ought to have thought of it first , if he has n't forgotten me . 
No , now he 's saving his soul ! 
Why have you put that long gown on him ? 
If he runs he 'll fall . '' 
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible , prolonged , nervous , inaudible laughter . 
The elder listened to her with a smile , and blessed her tenderly . 
As she kissed his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying . 
`` Do n't be angry with me . 
