`` We will continue it in the town , and I , for my part , of course , am ready to wish you all success ... in your defence ... . 
As a matter of fact , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , I 've always been disposed to regard you as , so to speak , more unfortunate than guilty . 
All of us here , if I may make bold to speak for all , we are all ready to recognise that you are , at bottom , a young man of honour , but , alas , one who has been carried away by certain passions to a somewhat excessive degree ... '' Nikolay Parfenovitch 's little figure was positively majestic by the time he had finished speaking . 
It struck Mitya that in another minute this `` boy '' would take his arm , lead him to another corner , and renew their conversation about `` girls . '' 
But many quite irrelevant and inappropriate thoughts sometimes occur even to a prisoner when he is being led out to execution . 
`` Gentlemen , you are good , you are humane , may I see her to say ` good-bye ' for the last time ? '' 
asked Mitya . 
`` Certainly , but considering ... in fact , now it 's impossible except in the presence of - '' `` Oh , well , if it must be so , it must ! '' 
Grushenka was brought in , but the farewell was brief , and of few words , and did not at all satisfy Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
Grushenka made a deep bow to Mitya . 
`` I have told you I am yours , and I will be yours . 
I will follow you for ever , wherever they may send you . 
Farewell ; you are guiltless , though you 've been your own undoing . '' 
Her lips quivered , tears flowed from her eyes . 
`` Forgive me , Grusha , for my love , for ruining you , too , with my love . '' 
Mitya would have said something more , but he broke off and went out . 
He was at once surrounded by men who kept a constant watch on him . 
At the bottom of the steps to which he had driven up with such a dash the day before with Andrey 's three horses , two carts stood in readiness . 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , a sturdy , thick-set man with a wrinkled face , was annoyed about something , some sudden irregularity . 
He was shouting angrily . 
He asked Mitya to get into the cart with somewhat excessive surliness . 
`` When I stood him drinks in the tavern , the man had quite a different face , '' thought Mitya , as he got in . 
At the gates there was a crowd of people , peasants , women , and drivers . 
Trifon Borissovitch came down the steps too . 
All stared at Mitya . 
`` Forgive me at parting , good people ! '' 
Mitya shouted suddenly from the cart . 
`` Forgive us too ! '' 
he heard two or three voices . 
`` Good-bye to you , too , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
But Trifon Borissovitch did not even turn round . 
He was , perhaps , too busy . 
He , too , was shouting and fussing about something . 
It appeared that everything was not yet ready in the second cart , in which two constables were to accompany Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
The peasant who had been ordered to drive the second cart was pulling on his smock , stoutly maintaining that it was not his turn to go , but Akim 's . 
But Akim was not to be seen . 
They ran to look for him . 
The peasant persisted and besought them to wait . 
`` You see what our peasants are , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
They 've no shame ! '' 
exclaimed Trifon Borissovitch . 
`` Akim gave you twenty-five copecks the day before yesterday . 
You 've drunk it all and now you cry out . 
I 'm simply surprised at your good-nature , with our low peasants , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , that 's all I can say . '' 
`` But what do we want a second cart for ? '' 
Mitya put in . 
`` Let 's start with the one , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
I wo n't be unruly , I wo n't run away from you , old fellow . 
What do we want an escort for ? '' 
`` I 'll trouble you , sir , to learn how to speak to me if you 've never been taught . 
