It 's still lying on my floor ... . 
Hang it ! '' 
He reached the tavern in a bad humour and at once made up a game . 
The game cheered him . 
He played a second game , and suddenly began telling one of his partners that Dmitri Karamazov had come in for some cash again - something like three thousand roubles , and had gone to Mokroe again to spend it with Grushenka ... . 
This news roused singular interest in his listeners . 
They all spoke of it , not laughing , but with a strange gravity . 
They left off playing . 
`` Three thousand ? 
But where can he have got three thousand ? '' 
Questions were asked . 
The story of Madame Hohlakov 's present was received with scepticism . 
`` Has n't he robbed his old father ? 
- that 's the question . '' 
`` Three thousand ! 
There 's something odd about it . '' 
`` He boasted aloud that he would kill his father ; we all heard him , here . 
And it was three thousand he talked about ... '' Pyotr Ilyitch listened . 
All at once he became short and dry in his answers . 
He said not a word about the blood on Mitya 's face and hands , though he had meant to speak of it at first . 
They began a third game , and by degrees the talk about Mitya died away . 
But by the end of the third game , Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire for billiards ; he laid down the cue , and without having supper as he had intended , he walked out of the tavern . 
When he reached the market-place he stood still in perplexity , wondering at himself . 
He realised that what he wanted was to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's and find out if anything had happened there . 
`` On account of some stupid nonsense as it 's sure to turn out - am I going to wake up the household and make a scandal ? 
Fooh ! 
damn it , is it my business to look after them ? '' 
In a very bad humour he went straight home , and suddenly remembered Fenya . 
`` Damn it all ! 
I ought to have questioned her just now , '' he thought with vexation , `` I should have heard everything . '' 
And the desire to speak to her , and so find out , became so pressing and importunate that when he was halfway home he turned abruptly and went towards the house where Grushenka lodged . 
Going up to the gate he knocked . 
The sound of the knock in the silence of the night sobered him and made him feel annoyed . 
And no one answered him ; everyone in the house was asleep . 
`` And I shall be making a fuss ! '' 
he thought , with a feeling of positive discomfort . 
But instead of going away altogether , he fell to knocking again with all his might , filling the street with clamour . 
`` Not coming ? 
Well , I will knock them up , I will ! '' 
he muttered at each knock , fuming at himself , but at the same time he redoubled his knocks on the gate . 
`` I Am Coming , Too ! '' 
BUT Dmitri Fyodorovitch was speeding along the road . 
It was a little more than twenty versts to Mokroe , but Andrey 's three horses galloped at such a pace that the distance might be covered in an hour and a quarter . 
The swift motion revived Mitya . 
The air was fresh and cool , there were big stars shining in the sky . 
It was the very night , and perhaps the very hour , in which Alyosha fell on the earth , and rapturously swore to love it for ever and ever . 
All was confusion , confusion in Mitya 's soul , but although many things were goading his heart , at that moment his whole being was yearning for her , his queen , to whom he was flying to look on her for the last time . 
One thing I can say for certain ; his heart did not waver for one instant . 
I shall perhaps not be believed when I say that this jealous lover felt not the slightest jealousy of this new rival , who seemed to have sprung out of the earth . 
If any other had appeared on the scene , he would have been jealous at once , and would-perhaps have stained his fierce hands with blood again . 
