This railway does not run in a direct line across India . 
The distance between Bombay and Calcutta , as the bird flies , is only from one thousand to eleven hundred miles ; but the deflections of the road increase this distance by more than a third . 
The general route of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway is as follows : Leaving Bombay , it passes through Salcette , crossing to the continent opposite Tannah , goes over the chain of the Western Ghauts , runs thence north-east as far as Burhampoor , skirts the nearly independent territory of Bundelcund , ascends to Allahabad , turns thence eastwardly , meeting the Ganges at Benares , then departs from the river a little , and , descending south-eastward by Burdivan and the French town of Chandernagor , has its terminus at Calcutta . 
The passengers of the Mongolia went ashore at half-past four p.m. ; at exactly eight the train would start for Calcutta . 
Mr. Fogg , after bidding good-bye to his whist partners , left the steamer , gave his servant several errands to do , urged it upon him to be at the station promptly at eight , and , with his regular step , which beat to the second , like an astronomical clock , directed his steps to the passport office . 
As for the wonders of Bombay its famous city hall , its splendid library , its forts and docks , its bazaars , mosques , synagogues , its Armenian churches , and the noble pagoda on Malabar Hill , with its two polygonal towers -- he cared not a straw to see them . 
He would not deign to examine even the masterpieces of Elephanta , or the mysterious hypogea , concealed south-east from the docks , or those fine remains of Buddhist architecture , the Kanherian grottoes of the island of Salcette . 
Having transacted his business at the passport office , Phileas Fogg repaired quietly to the railway station , where he ordered dinner . 
Among the dishes served up to him , the landlord especially recommended a certain giblet of `` native rabbit , '' on which he prided himself . 
Mr. Fogg accordingly tasted the dish , but , despite its spiced sauce , found it far from palatable . 
He rang for the landlord , and , on his appearance , said , fixing his clear eyes upon him , `` Is this rabbit , sir ? '' 
`` Yes , my lord , '' the rogue boldly replied , `` rabbit from the jungles . '' 
`` And this rabbit did not mew when he was killed ? '' 
`` Mew , my lord ! 
What , a rabbit mew ! 
I swear to you -- '' `` Be so good , landlord , as not to swear , but remember this : cats were formerly considered , in India , as sacred animals . 
That was a good time . '' 
`` For the cats , my lord ? '' 
`` Perhaps for the travellers as well ! '' 
After which Mr. Fogg quietly continued his dinner . 
Fix had gone on shore shortly after Mr. Fogg , and his first destination was the headquarters of the Bombay police . 
He made himself known as a London detective , told his business at Bombay , and the position of affairs relative to the supposed robber , and nervously asked if a warrant had arrived from London . 
It had not reached the office ; indeed , there had not yet been time for it to arrive . 
Fix was sorely disappointed , and tried to obtain an order of arrest from the director of the Bombay police . 
This the director refused , as the matter concerned the London office , which alone could legally deliver the warrant . 
Fix did not insist , and was fain to resign himself to await the arrival of the important document ; but he was determined not to lose sight of the mysterious rogue as long as he stayed in Bombay . 
He did not doubt for a moment , any more than Passepartout , that Phileas Fogg would remain there , at least until it was time for the warrant to arrive . 
Passepartout , however , had no sooner heard his master 's orders on leaving the Mongolia than he saw at once that they were to leave Bombay as they had done Suez and Paris , and that the journey would be extended at least as far as Calcutta , and perhaps beyond that place . 
He began to ask himself if this bet that Mr. Fogg talked about was not really in good earnest , and whether his fate was not in truth forcing him , despite his love of repose , around the world in eighty days ! 
Having purchased the usual quota of shirts and shoes , he took a leisurely promenade about the streets , where crowds of people of many nationalities -- Europeans , Persians with pointed caps , Banyas with round turbans , Sindes with square bonnets , Parsees with black mitres , and long-robed Armenians -- were collected . 
It happened to be the day of a Parsee festival . 
These descendants of the sect of Zoroaster -- the most thrifty , civilised , intelligent , and austere of the East Indians , among whom are counted the richest native merchants of Bombay -- were celebrating a sort of religious carnival , with processions and shows , in the midst of which Indian dancing-girls , clothed in rose-coloured gauze , looped up with gold and silver , danced airily , but with perfect modesty , to the sound of viols and the clanging of tambourines . 
It is needless to say that Passepartout watched these curious ceremonies with staring eyes and gaping mouth , and that his countenance was that of the greenest booby imaginable . 
Unhappily for his master , as well as himself , his curiosity drew him unconsciously farther off than he intended to go . 
At last , having seen the Parsee carnival wind away in the distance , he was turning his steps towards the station , when he happened to espy the splendid pagoda on Malabar Hill , and was seized with an irresistible desire to see its interior . 
He was quite ignorant that it is forbidden to Christians to enter certain Indian temples , and that even the faithful must not go in without first leaving their shoes outside the door . 
It may be said here that the wise policy of the British Government severely punishes a disregard of the practices of the native religions . 
Passepartout , however , thinking no harm , went in like a simple tourist , and was soon lost in admiration of the splendid Brahmin ornamentation which everywhere met his eyes , when of a sudden he found himself sprawling on the sacred flagging . 
He looked up to behold three enraged priests , who forthwith fell upon him ; tore off his shoes , and began to beat him with loud , savage exclamations . 
The agile Frenchman was soon upon his feet again , and lost no time in knocking down two of his long-gowned adversaries with his fists and a vigorous application of his toes ; then , rushing out of the pagoda as fast as his legs could carry him , he soon escaped the third priest by mingling with the crowd in the streets . 
At five minutes before eight , Passepartout , hatless , shoeless , and having in the squabble lost his package of shirts and shoes , rushed breathlessly into the station . 
Fix , who had followed Mr. Fogg to the station , and saw that he was really going to leave Bombay , was there , upon the platform . 
He had resolved to follow the supposed robber to Calcutta , and farther , if necessary . 
Passepartout did not observe the detective , who stood in an obscure corner ; but Fix heard him relate his adventures in a few words to Mr. Fogg . 
`` I hope that this will not happen again , '' said Phileas Fogg coldly , as he got into the train . 
Poor Passepartout , quite crestfallen , followed his master without a word . 
Fix was on the point of entering another carriage , when an idea struck him which induced him to alter his plan . 
`` No , I 'll stay , '' muttered he . 
`` An offence has been committed on Indian soil . 
I 've got my man . '' 
