The resolution taken , it remained to carry it out . 
It was only after a long search that Passepartout discovered a native dealer in old clothes , to whom he applied for an exchange . 
The man liked the European costume , and ere long Passepartout issued from his shop accoutred in an old Japanese coat , and a sort of one-sided turban , faded with long use . 
A few small pieces of silver , moreover , jingled in his pocket . 
Good ! '' 
thought he . 
`` I will imagine I am at the Carnival ! '' 
His first care , after being thus `` Japanesed , '' was to enter a tea-house of modest appearance , and , upon half a bird and a little rice , to breakfast like a man for whom dinner was as yet a problem to be solved . 
`` Now , '' thought he , when he had eaten heartily , `` I must n't lose my head . 
I ca n't sell this costume again for one still more Japanese . 
I must consider how to leave this country of the Sun , of which I shall not retain the most delightful of memories , as quickly as possible . '' 
It occurred to him to visit the steamers which were about to leave for America . 
He would offer himself as a cook or servant , in payment of his passage and meals . 
Once at San Francisco , he would find some means of going on . 
The difficulty was , how to traverse the four thousand seven hundred miles of the Pacific which lay between Japan and the New World . 
Passepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging , and directed his steps towards the docks . 
But , as he approached them , his project , which at first had seemed so simple , began to grow more and more formidable to his mind . 
What need would they have of a cook or servant on an American steamer , and what confidence would they put in him , dressed as he was ? 
What references could he give ? 
As he was reflecting in this wise , his eyes fell upon an immense placard which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets . 
This placard , which was in English , read as follows : ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE , HONOURABLE WILLIAM BATULCAR , PROPRIETOR , LAST REPRESENTATIONS , PRIOR TO THEIR DEPARTURE TO THE UNITED STATES , OF THE LONG NOSES ! 
LONG NOSES ! 
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU ! 
GREAT ATTRACTION ! 
`` The United States ! '' 
said Passepartout ; `` that 's just what I want ! '' 
He followed the clown , and soon found himself once more in the Japanese quarter . 
A quarter of an hour later he stopped before a large cabin , adorned with several clusters of streamers , the exterior walls of which were designed to represent , in violent colours and without perspective , a company of jugglers . 
This was the Honourable William Batulcar 's establishment . 
That gentleman was a sort of Barnum , the director of a troupe of mountebanks , jugglers , clowns , acrobats , equilibrists , and gymnasts , who , according to the placard , was giving his last performances before leaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the Union . 
Passepartout entered and asked for Mr. Batulcar , who straightway appeared in person . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
said he to Passepartout , whom he at first took for a native . 
`` Would you like a servant , sir ? '' 
asked Passepartout . 
`` A servant ! '' 
cried Mr. Batulcar , caressing the thick grey beard which hung from his chin . 
`` I already have two who are obedient and faithful , have never left me , and serve me for their nourishment and here they are , '' added he , holding out his two robust arms , furrowed with veins as large as the strings of a bass-viol . 
`` So I can be of no use to you ? '' 
`` None . '' 
`` The devil ! 
I should so like to cross the Pacific with you ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the Honourable Mr. Batulcar . 
`` You are no more a Japanese than I am a monkey ! 
Who are you dressed up in that way ? '' 
`` A man dresses as he can . '' 
`` That 's true . 
You are a Frenchman , are n't you ? '' 
`` Yes ; a Parisian of Paris . '' 
