Happily the temple walls were built of brick and wood , which could be penetrated with little difficulty ; after one brick had been taken out , the rest would yield easily . 
They set noiselessly to work , and the Parsee on one side and Passepartout on the other began to loosen the bricks so as to make an aperture two feet wide . 
They were getting on rapidly , when suddenly a cry was heard in the interior of the temple , followed almost instantly by other cries replying from the outside . 
Passepartout and the guide stopped . 
Had they been heard ? 
Was the alarm being given ? 
Common prudence urged them to retire , and they did so , followed by Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis . 
They again hid themselves in the wood , and waited till the disturbance , whatever it might be , ceased , holding themselves ready to resume their attempt without delay . 
But , awkwardly enough , the guards now appeared at the rear of the temple , and there installed themselves , in readiness to prevent a surprise . 
It would be difficult to describe the disappointment of the party , thus interrupted in their work . 
They could not now reach the victim ; how , then , could they save her ? 
Sir Francis shook his fists , Passepartout was beside himself , and the guide gnashed his teeth with rage . 
The tranquil Fogg waited , without betraying any emotion . 
`` We have nothing to do but to go away , '' whispered Sir Francis . 
`` Nothing but to go away , '' echoed the guide . 
`` Stop , '' said Fogg . 
`` I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon . '' 
`` But what can you hope to do ? '' 
asked Sir Francis . 
`` In a few hours it will be daylight , and -- '' `` The chance which now seems lost may present itself at the last moment . '' 
Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Fogg 's eyes . 
What was this cool Englishman thinking of ? 
Was he planning to make a rush for the young woman at the very moment of the sacrifice , and boldly snatch her from her executioners ? 
This would be utter folly , and it was hard to admit that Fogg was such a fool . 
Sir Francis consented , however , to remain to the end of this terrible drama . 
The guide led them to the rear of the glade , where they were able to observe the sleeping groups . 
Meanwhile Passepartout , who had perched himself on the lower branches of a tree , was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like a flash , and which was now firmly lodged in his brain . 
He had commenced by saying to himself , `` What folly ! '' 
and then he repeated , `` Why not , after all ? 
It 's a chance perhaps the only one ; and with such sots ! '' 
Thinking thus , he slipped , with the suppleness of a serpent , to the lowest branches , the ends of which bent almost to the ground . 
The hours passed , and the lighter shades now announced the approach of day , though it was not yet light . 
This was the moment . 
The slumbering multitude became animated , the tambourines sounded , songs and cries arose ; the hour of the sacrifice had come . 
The doors of the pagoda swung open , and a bright light escaped from its interior , in the midst of which Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis espied the victim . 
She seemed , having shaken off the stupor of intoxication , to be striving to escape from her executioner . 
Sir Francis 's heart throbbed ; and , convulsively seizing Mr. Fogg 's hand , found in it an open knife . 
Just at this moment the crowd began to move . 
The young woman had again fallen into a stupor caused by the fumes of hemp , and passed among the fakirs , who escorted her with their wild , religious cries . 
Phileas Fogg and his companions , mingling in the rear ranks of the crowd , followed ; and in two minutes they reached the banks of the stream , and stopped fifty paces from the pyre , upon which still lay the rajah 's corpse . 
In the semi-obscurity they saw the victim , quite senseless , stretched out beside her husband 's body . 
Then a torch was brought , and the wood , heavily soaked with oil , instantly took fire . 
At this moment Sir Francis and the guide seized Phileas Fogg , who , in an instant of mad generosity , was about to rush upon the pyre . 
But he had quickly pushed them aside , when the whole scene suddenly changed . 
A cry of terror arose . 
The whole multitude prostrated themselves , terror-stricken , on the ground . 
The old rajah was not dead , then , since he rose of a sudden , like a spectre , took up his wife in his arms , and descended from the pyre in the midst of the clouds of smoke , which only heightened his ghostly appearance . 
Fakirs and soldiers and priests , seized with instant terror , lay there , with their faces on the ground , not daring to lift their eyes and behold such a prodigy . 
The inanimate victim was borne along by the vigorous arms which supported her , and which she did not seem in the least to burden . 
Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis stood erect , the Parsee bowed his head , and Passepartout was , no doubt , scarcely less stupefied . 
