`` Do as you please , sir . 
But if you wish to do me a favour , you will remain with Aouda . 
In case anything should happen to me -- '' A sudden pallor overspread the detective 's face . 
Separate himself from the man whom he had so persistently followed step by step ! 
Leave him to wander about in this desert ! 
Fix gazed attentively at Mr. Fogg , and , despite his suspicions and of the struggle which was going on within him , he lowered his eyes before that calm and frank look . 
`` I will stay , '' said he . 
A few moments after , Mr. Fogg pressed the young woman 's hand , and , having confided to her his precious carpet-bag , went off with the sergeant and his little squad . 
But , before going , he had said to the soldiers , `` My friends , I will divide five thousand dollars among you , if we save the prisoners . '' 
It was then a little past noon . 
Aouda retired to a waiting-room , and there she waited alone , thinking of the simple and noble generosity , the tranquil courage of Phileas Fogg . 
He had sacrificed his fortune , and was now risking his life , all without hesitation , from duty , in silence . 
Fix did not have the same thoughts , and could scarcely conceal his agitation . 
He walked feverishly up and down the platform , but soon resumed his outward composure . 
He now saw the folly of which he had been guilty in letting Fogg go alone . 
What ! 
This man , whom he had just followed around the world , was permitted now to separate himself from him ! 
He began to accuse and abuse himself , and , as if he were director of police , administered to himself a sound lecture for his greenness . 
`` I have been an idiot ! '' 
he thought , `` and this man will see it . 
He has gone , and wo n't come back ! 
But how is it that I , Fix , who have in my pocket a warrant for his arrest , have been so fascinated by him ? 
Decidedly , I am nothing but an ass ! '' 
So reasoned the detective , while the hours crept by all too slowly . 
He did not know what to do . 
Sometimes he was tempted to tell Aouda all ; but he could not doubt how the young woman would receive his confidences . 
What course should he take ? 
He thought of pursuing Fogg across the vast white plains ; it did not seem impossible that he might overtake him . 
Footsteps were easily printed on the snow ! 
But soon , under a new sheet , every imprint would be effaced . 
Fix became discouraged . 
He felt a sort of insurmountable longing to abandon the game altogether . 
He could now leave Fort Kearney station , and pursue his journey homeward in peace . 
Towards two o'clock in the afternoon , while it was snowing hard , long whistles were heard approaching from the east . 
A great shadow , preceded by a wild light , slowly advanced , appearing still larger through the mist , which gave it a fantastic aspect . 
No train was expected from the east , neither had there been time for the succour asked for by telegraph to arrive ; the train from Omaha to San Francisco was not due till the next day . 
The mystery was soon explained . 
The locomotive , which was slowly approaching with deafening whistles , was that which , having been detached from the train , had continued its route with such terrific rapidity , carrying off the unconscious engineer and stoker . 
It had run several miles , when , the fire becoming low for want of fuel , the steam had slackened ; and it had finally stopped an hour after , some twenty miles beyond Fort Kearney . 
Neither the engineer nor the stoker was dead , and , after remaining for some time in their swoon , had come to themselves . 
The train had then stopped . 
The engineer , when he found himself in the desert , and the locomotive without cars , understood what had happened . 
He could not imagine how the locomotive had become separated from the train ; but he did not doubt that the train left behind was in distress . 
He did not hesitate what to do . 
It would be prudent to continue on to Omaha , for it would be dangerous to return to the train , which the Indians might still be engaged in pillaging . 
Nevertheless , he began to rebuild the fire in the furnace ; the pressure again mounted , and the locomotive returned , running backwards to Fort Kearney . 
This it was which was whistling in the mist . 
The travellers were glad to see the locomotive resume its place at the head of the train . 
They could now continue the journey so terribly interrupted . 
Aouda , on seeing the locomotive come up , hurried out of the station , and asked the conductor , `` Are you going to start ? '' 
