Shortly before the detachment arrived , Passepartout and his companions had begun to struggle with their captors , three of whom the Frenchman had felled with his fists , when his master and the soldiers hastened up to their relief . 
All were welcomed with joyful cries . 
Phileas Fogg distributed the reward he had promised to the soldiers , while Passepartout , not without reason , muttered to himself , `` It must certainly be confessed that I cost my master dear ! '' 
Fix , without saying a word , looked at Mr. Fogg , and it would have been difficult to analyse the thoughts which struggled within him . 
As for Aouda , she took her protector 's hand and pressed it in her own , too much moved to speak . 
Meanwhile , Passepartout was looking about for the train ; he thought he should find it there , ready to start for Omaha , and he hoped that the time lost might be regained . 
`` The train ! 
the train ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Gone , '' replied Fix . 
`` And when does the next train pass here ? '' 
said Phileas Fogg . 
`` Not till this evening . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned the impassible gentleman quietly . 
IN WHICH FIX , THE DETECTIVE , CONSIDERABLY FURTHERS THE INTERESTS OF PHILEAS FOGG Phileas Fogg found himself twenty hours behind time . 
Passepartout , the involuntary cause of this delay , was desperate . 
He had ruined his master ! 
At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg , and , looking him intently in the face , said : `` Seriously , sir , are you in great haste ? '' 
`` Quite seriously . '' 
`` I have a purpose in asking , '' resumed Fix . 
`` Is it absolutely necessary that you should be in New York on the 11th , before nine o'clock in the evening , the time that the steamer leaves for Liverpool ? '' 
`` It is absolutely necessary . '' 
`` And , if your journey had not been interrupted by these Indians , you would have reached New York on the morning of the 11th ? '' 
`` Yes ; with eleven hours to spare before the steamer left . '' 
`` Good ! 
you are therefore twenty hours behind . 
Twelve from twenty leaves eight . 
You must regain eight hours . 
Do you wish to try to do so ? '' 
`` On foot ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` No ; on a sledge , '' replied Fix . 
`` On a sledge with sails . 
A man has proposed such a method to me . '' 
It was the man who had spoken to Fix during the night , and whose offer he had refused . 
Phileas Fogg did not reply at once ; but Fix , having pointed out the man , who was walking up and down in front of the station , Mr. Fogg went up to him . 
An instant after , Mr. Fogg and the American , whose name was Mudge , entered a hut built just below the fort . 
There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vehicle , a kind of frame on two long beams , a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge , and upon which there was room for five or six persons . 
A high mast was fixed on the frame , held firmly by metallic lashings , to which was attached a large brigantine sail . 
This mast held an iron stay upon which to hoist a jib-sail . 
Behind , a sort of rudder served to guide the vehicle . 
It was , in short , a sledge rigged like a sloop . 
During the winter , when the trains are blocked up by the snow , these sledges make extremely rapid journeys across the frozen plains from one station to another . 
Provided with more sails than a cutter , and with the wind behind them , they slip over the surface of the prairies with a speed equal if not superior to that of the express trains . 
Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft . 
The wind was favourable , being fresh , and blowing from the west . 
The snow had hardened , and Mudge was very confident of being able to transport Mr. Fogg in a few hours to Omaha . 
Thence the trains eastward run frequently to Chicago and New York . 
It was not impossible that the lost time might yet be recovered ; and such an opportunity was not to be rejected . 
