`` Very well ; then let us go to the steamer , young man ! '' 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout passed through the lobby of the theatre to the outside , where they encountered the Honourable Mr. Batulcar , furious with rage . 
He demanded damages for the `` breakage '' of the pyramid ; and Phileas Fogg appeased him by giving him a handful of banknotes . 
At half-past six , the very hour of departure , Mr. Fogg and Aouda , followed by Passepartout , who in his hurry had retained his wings , and nose six feet long , stepped upon the American steamer . 
DURING WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN What happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will be easily guessed . 
The signals made by the Tankadere had been seen by the captain of the Yokohama steamer , who , espying the flag at half-mast , had directed his course towards the little craft . 
Phileas Fogg , after paying the stipulated price of his passage to John Busby , and rewarding that worthy with the additional sum of five hundred and fifty pounds , ascended the steamer with Aouda and Fix ; and they started at once for Nagasaki and Yokohama . 
They reached their destination on the morning of the 14th of November . 
Phileas Fogg lost no time in going on board the Carnatic , where he learned , to Aouda 's great delight -- and perhaps to his own , though he betrayed no emotion -- that Passepartout , a Frenchman , had really arrived on her the day before . 
The San Francisco steamer was announced to leave that very evening , and it became necessary to find Passepartout , if possible , without delay . 
Mr. Fogg applied in vain to the French and English consuls , and , after wandering through the streets a long time , began to despair of finding his missing servant . 
Chance , or perhaps a kind of presentiment , at last led him into the Honourable Mr. Batulcar 's theatre . 
He certainly would not have recognised Passepartout in the eccentric mountebank 's costume ; but the latter , lying on his back , perceived his master in the gallery . 
He could not help starting , which so changed the position of his nose as to bring the `` pyramid '' pell-mell upon the stage . 
All this Passepartout learned from Aouda , who recounted to him what had taken place on the voyage from Hong Kong to Shanghai on the Tankadere , in company with one Mr. Fix . 
Passepartout did not change countenance on hearing this name . 
He thought that the time had not yet arrived to divulge to his master what had taken place between the detective and himself ; and , in the account he gave of his absence , he simply excused himself for having been overtaken by drunkenness , in smoking opium at a tavern in Hong Kong . 
Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coldly , without a word ; and then furnished his man with funds necessary to obtain clothing more in harmony with his position . 
Within an hour the Frenchman had cut off his nose and parted with his wings , and retained nothing about him which recalled the sectary of the god Tingou . 
The steamer which was about to depart from Yokohama to San Francisco belonged to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company , and was named the General Grant . 
She was a large paddle-wheel steamer of two thousand five hundred tons ; well equipped and very fast . 
The massive walking-beam rose and fell above the deck ; at one end a piston-rod worked up and down ; and at the other was a connecting-rod which , in changing the rectilinear motion to a circular one , was directly connected with the shaft of the paddles . 
The General Grant was rigged with three masts , giving a large capacity for sails , and thus materially aiding the steam power . 
By making twelve miles an hour , she would cross the ocean in twenty-one days . 
Phileas Fogg was therefore justified in hoping that he would reach San Francisco by the 2nd of December , New York by the 11th , and London on the 20th -- thus gaining several hours on the fatal date of the 21st of December . 
There was a full complement of passengers on board , among them English , many Americans , a large number of coolies on their way to California , and several East Indian officers , who were spending their vacation in making the tour of the world . 
Nothing of moment happened on the voyage ; the steamer , sustained on its large paddles , rolled but little , and the Pacific almost justified its name . 
Mr. Fogg was as calm and taciturn as ever . 
His young companion felt herself more and more attached to him by other ties than gratitude ; his silent but generous nature impressed her more than she thought ; and it was almost unconsciously that she yielded to emotions which did not seem to have the least effect upon her protector . 
Aouda took the keenest interest in his plans , and became impatient at any incident which seemed likely to retard his journey . 
She often chatted with Passepartout , who did not fail to perceive the state of the lady 's heart ; and , being the most faithful of domestics , he never exhausted his eulogies of Phileas Fogg 's honesty , generosity , and devotion . 
He took pains to calm Aouda 's doubts of a successful termination of the journey , telling her that the most difficult part of it had passed , that now they were beyond the fantastic countries of Japan and China , and were fairly on their way to civilised places again . 
A railway train from San Francisco to New York , and a transatlantic steamer from New York to Liverpool , would doubtless bring them to the end of this impossible journey round the world within the period agreed upon . 
On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama , Phileas Fogg had traversed exactly one half of the terrestrial globe . 
The General Grant passed , on the 23rd of November , the one hundred and eightieth meridian , and was at the very antipodes of London . 
Mr. Fogg had , it is true , exhausted fifty-two of the eighty days in which he was to complete the tour , and there were only twenty-eight left . 
But , though he was only half-way by the difference of meridians , he had really gone over two-thirds of the whole journey ; for he had been obliged to make long circuits from London to Aden , from Aden to Bombay , from Calcutta to Singapore , and from Singapore to Yokohama . 
Could he have followed without deviation the fiftieth parallel , which is that of London , the whole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles ; whereas he would be forced , by the irregular methods of locomotion , to traverse twenty-six thousand , of which he had , on the 23rd of November , accomplished seventeen thousand five hundred . 
And now the course was a straight one , and Fix was no longer there to put obstacles in their way ! 
It happened also , on the 23rd of November , that Passepartout made a joyful discovery . 
It will be remembered that the obstinate fellow had insisted on keeping his famous family watch at London time , and on regarding that of the countries he had passed through as quite false and unreliable . 
Now , on this day , though he had not changed the hands , he found that his watch exactly agreed with the ship 's chronometers . 
His triumph was hilarious . 
He would have liked to know what Fix would say if he were aboard ! 
`` The rogue told me a lot of stories , '' repeated Passepartout , `` about the meridians , the sun , and the moon ! 
Moon , indeed ! 
moonshine more likely ! 
If one listened to that sort of people , a pretty sort of time one would keep ! 
I was sure that the sun would some day regulate itself by my watch ! '' 
Passepartout was ignorant that , if the face of his watch had been divided into twenty-four hours , like the Italian clocks , he would have no reason for exultation ; for the hands of his watch would then , instead of as now indicating nine o'clock in the morning , indicate nine o'clock in the evening , that is , the twenty-first hour after midnight precisely the difference between London time and that of the one hundred and eightieth meridian . 
