He found himself , then , about twenty-four hours behind-hand , thirty-five days after leaving London . 
The Carnatic was announced to leave Hong Kong at five the next morning . 
Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in which to attend to his business there , which was to deposit Aouda safely with her wealthy relative . 
On landing , he conducted her to a palanquin , in which they repaired to the Club Hotel . 
A room was engaged for the young woman , and Mr. Fogg , after seeing that she wanted for nothing , set out in search of her cousin Jeejeeh . 
He instructed Passepartout to remain at the hotel until his return , that Aouda might not be left entirely alone . 
Mr. Fogg repaired to the Exchange , where , he did not doubt , every one would know so wealthy and considerable a personage as the Parsee merchant . 
Meeting a broker , he made the inquiry , to learn that Jeejeeh had left China two years before , and , retiring from business with an immense fortune , had taken up his residence in Europe -- in Holland the broker thought , with the merchants of which country he had principally traded . 
Phileas Fogg returned to the hotel , begged a moment 's conversation with Aouda , and without more ado , apprised her that Jeejeeh was no longer at Hong Kong , but probably in Holland . 
Aouda at first said nothing . 
She passed her hand across her forehead , and reflected a few moments . 
Then , in her sweet , soft voice , she said : `` What ought I to do , Mr. Fogg ? '' 
`` It is very simple , '' responded the gentleman . 
`` Go on to Europe . '' 
`` But I can not intrude -- '' `` You do not intrude , nor do you in the least embarrass my project . 
Passepartout ! '' 
`` Monsieur . '' 
`` Go to the Carnatic , and engage three cabins . '' 
Passepartout , delighted that the young woman , who was very gracious to him , was going to continue the journey with them , went off at a brisk gait to obey his master 's order . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TAKES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS MASTER , AND WHAT COMES OF IT Hong Kong is an island which came into the possession of the English by the Treaty of Nankin , after the war of 1842 ; and the colonising genius of the English has created upon it an important city and an excellent port . 
The island is situated at the mouth of the Canton River , and is separated by about sixty miles from the Portuguese town of Macao , on the opposite coast . 
Hong Kong has beaten Macao in the struggle for the Chinese trade , and now the greater part of the transportation of Chinese goods finds its depot at the former place . 
Docks , hospitals , wharves , a Gothic cathedral , a government house , macadamised streets , give to Hong Kong the appearance of a town in Kent or Surrey transferred by some strange magic to the antipodes . 
Passepartout wandered , with his hands in his pockets , towards the Victoria port , gazing as he went at the curious palanquins and other modes of conveyance , and the groups of Chinese , Japanese , and Europeans who passed to and fro in the streets . 
Hong Kong seemed to him not unlike Bombay , Calcutta , and Singapore , since , like them , it betrayed everywhere the evidence of English supremacy . 
At the Victoria port he found a confused mass of ships of all nations : English , French , American , and Dutch , men-of-war and trading vessels , Japanese and Chinese junks , sempas , tankas , and flower-boats , which formed so many floating parterres . 
Passepartout noticed in the crowd a number of the natives who seemed very old and were dressed in yellow . 
On going into a barber 's to get shaved he learned that these ancient men were all at least eighty years old , at which age they are permitted to wear yellow , which is the Imperial colour . 
Passepartout , without exactly knowing why , thought this very funny . 
On reaching the quay where they were to embark on the Carnatic , he was not astonished to find Fix walking up and down . 
The detective seemed very much disturbed and disappointed . 
`` This is bad , '' muttered Passepartout , `` for the gentlemen of the Reform Club ! '' 
He accosted Fix with a merry smile , as if he had not perceived that gentleman 's chagrin . 
The detective had , indeed , good reasons to inveigh against the bad luck which pursued him . 
The warrant had not come ! 
It was certainly on the way , but as certainly it could not now reach Hong Kong for several days ; and , this being the last English territory on Mr. Fogg 's route , the robber would escape , unless he could manage to detain him . 
`` Well , Monsieur Fix , '' said Passepartout , `` have you decided to go with us so far as America ? '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Fix , through his set teeth . 
`` Good ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout , laughing heartily . 
`` I knew you could not persuade yourself to separate from us . 
Come and engage your berth . '' 
They entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons . 
The clerk , as he gave them the tickets , informed them that , the repairs on the Carnatic having been completed , the steamer would leave that very evening , and not next morning , as had been announced . 
`` That will suit my master all the better , '' said Passepartout . 
`` I will go and let him know . '' 
Fix now decided to make a bold move ; he resolved to tell Passepartout all . 
It seemed to be the only possible means of keeping Phileas Fogg several days longer at Hong Kong . 
He accordingly invited his companion into a tavern which caught his eye on the quay . 
On entering , they found themselves in a large room handsomely decorated , at the end of which was a large camp-bed furnished with cushions . 
