At the fiftieth , still nothing . 
At the fifty-fifth , a loud cry was heard in the street , followed by applause , hurrahs , and some fierce growls . 
The players rose from their seats . 
At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened ; and the pendulum had not beat the sixtieth second when Phileas Fogg appeared , followed by an excited crowd who had forced their way through the club doors , and in his calm voice , said , `` Here I am , gentlemen ! '' 
IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT PHILEAS FOGG GAINED NOTHING BY HIS TOUR AROUND THE WORLD , UNLESS IT WERE HAPPINESS Yes ; Phileas Fogg in person . 
The reader will remember that at five minutes past eight in the evening -- about five and twenty hours after the arrival of the travellers in London -- Passepartout had been sent by his master to engage the services of the Reverend Samuel Wilson in a certain marriage ceremony , which was to take place the next day . 
Passepartout went on his errand enchanted . 
He soon reached the clergyman 's house , but found him not at home . 
Passepartout waited a good twenty minutes , and when he left the reverend gentleman , it was thirty-five minutes past eight . 
But in what a state he was ! 
With his hair in disorder , and without his hat , he ran along the street as never man was seen to run before , overturning passers-by , rushing over the sidewalk like a waterspout . 
In three minutes he was in Saville Row again , and staggered back into Mr. Fogg 's room . 
He could not speak . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` My master ! '' 
gasped Passepartout -- `` marriage -- impossible -- '' `` Impossible ? '' 
`` Impossible -- for to-morrow . '' 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` Because to-morrow -- is Sunday ! '' 
`` Monday , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` No -- to-day is Saturday . '' 
`` Saturday ? 
Impossible ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , yes , yes ! '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` You have made a mistake of one day ! 
We arrived twenty-four hours ahead of time ; but there are only ten minutes left ! '' 
Passepartout had seized his master by the collar , and was dragging him along with irresistible force . 
Phileas Fogg , thus kidnapped , without having time to think , left his house , jumped into a cab , promised a hundred pounds to the cabman , and , having run over two dogs and overturned five carriages , reached the Reform Club . 
The clock indicated a quarter before nine when he appeared in the great saloon . 
Phileas Fogg had accomplished the journey round the world in eighty days ! 
Phileas Fogg had won his wager of twenty thousand pounds ! 
How was it that a man so exact and fastidious could have made this error of a day ? 
How came he to think that he had arrived in London on Saturday , the twenty-first day of December , when it was really Friday , the twentieth , the seventy-ninth day only from his departure ? 
The cause of the error is very simple . 
Phileas Fogg had , without suspecting it , gained one day on his journey , and this merely because he had travelled constantly eastward ; he would , on the contrary , have lost a day had he gone in the opposite direction , that is , westward . 
In journeying eastward he had gone towards the sun , and the days therefore diminished for him as many times four minutes as he crossed degrees in this direction . 
There are three hundred and sixty degrees on the circumference of the earth ; and these three hundred and sixty degrees , multiplied by four minutes , gives precisely twenty-four hours -- that is , the day unconsciously gained . 
In other words , while Phileas Fogg , going eastward , saw the sun pass the meridian eighty times , his friends in London only saw it pass the meridian seventy-nine times . 
This is why they awaited him at the Reform Club on Saturday , and not Sunday , as Mr. Fogg thought . 
And Passepartout 's famous family watch , which had always kept London time , would have betrayed this fact , if it had marked the days as well as the hours and the minutes ! 
Phileas Fogg , then , had won the twenty thousand pounds ; but , as he had spent nearly nineteen thousand on the way , the pecuniary gain was small . 
His object was , however , to be victorious , and not to win money . 
He divided the one thousand pounds that remained between Passepartout and the unfortunate Fix , against whom he cherished no grudge . 
He deducted , however , from Passepartout 's share the cost of the gas which had burned in his room for nineteen hundred and twenty hours , for the sake of regularity . 
That evening , Mr. Fogg , as tranquil and phlegmatic as ever , said to Aouda : `` Is our marriage still agreeable to you ? '' 
`` Mr. Fogg , '' replied she , `` it is for me to ask that question . 
You were ruined , but now you are rich again . '' 
`` Pardon me , madam ; my fortune belongs to you . 
