He was not listening , but was cogitating a project . 
Passepartout and he had now reached the shop , where Fix left his companion to make his purchases , after recommending him not to miss the steamer , and hurried back to the consulate . 
Now that he was fully convinced , Fix had quite recovered his equanimity . 
`` Consul , '' said he , `` I have no longer any doubt . 
I have spotted my man . 
He passes himself off as an odd stick who is going round the world in eighty days . '' 
`` Then he 's a sharp fellow , '' returned the consul , `` and counts on returning to London after putting the police of the two countries off his track . '' 
`` We 'll see about that , '' replied Fix . 
`` But are you not mistaken ? '' 
`` I am not mistaken . '' 
`` Why was this robber so anxious to prove , by the visa , that he had passed through Suez ? '' 
`` Why ? 
I have no idea ; but listen to me . '' 
He reported in a few words the most important parts of his conversation with Passepartout . 
`` In short , '' said the consul , `` appearances are wholly against this man . 
And what are you going to do ? '' 
`` Send a dispatch to London for a warrant of arrest to be dispatched instantly to Bombay , take passage on board the Mongolia , follow my rogue to India , and there , on English ground , arrest him politely , with my warrant in my hand , and my hand on his shoulder . '' 
Having uttered these words with a cool , careless air , the detective took leave of the consul , and repaired to the telegraph office , whence he sent the dispatch which we have seen to the London police office . 
A quarter of an hour later found Fix , with a small bag in his hand , proceeding on board the Mongolia ; and , ere many moments longer , the noble steamer rode out at full steam upon the waters of the Red Sea . 
IN WHICH THE RED SEA AND THE INDIAN OCEAN PROVE PROPITIOUS TO THE DESIGNS OF PHILEAS FOGG The distance between Suez and Aden is precisely thirteen hundred and ten miles , and the regulations of the company allow the steamers one hundred and thirty-eight hours in which to traverse it . 
The Mongolia , thanks to the vigorous exertions of the engineer , seemed likely , so rapid was her speed , to reach her destination considerably within that time . 
The greater part of the passengers from Brindisi were bound for India some for Bombay , others for Calcutta by way of Bombay , the nearest route thither , now that a railway crosses the Indian peninsula . 
Among the passengers was a number of officials and military officers of various grades , the latter being either attached to the regular British forces or commanding the Sepoy troops , and receiving high salaries ever since the central government has assumed the powers of the East India Company : for the sub-lieutenants get 280 pounds , brigadiers , 2,400 pounds , and generals of divisions , 4,000 pounds . 
What with the military men , a number of rich young Englishmen on their travels , and the hospitable efforts of the purser , the time passed quickly on the Mongolia . 
The best of fare was spread upon the cabin tables at breakfast , lunch , dinner , and the eight o'clock supper , and the ladies scrupulously changed their toilets twice a day ; and the hours were whirled away , when the sea was tranquil , with music , dancing , and games . 
But the Red Sea is full of caprice , and often boisterous , like most long and narrow gulfs . 
When the wind came from the African or Asian coast the Mongolia , with her long hull , rolled fearfully . 
Then the ladies speedily disappeared below ; the pianos were silent ; singing and dancing suddenly ceased . 
Yet the good ship ploughed straight on , unretarded by wind or wave , towards the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb . 
What was Phileas Fogg doing all this time ? 
It might be thought that , in his anxiety , he would be constantly watching the changes of the wind , the disorderly raging of the billows -- every chance , in short , which might force the Mongolia to slacken her speed , and thus interrupt his journey . 
But , if he thought of these possibilities , he did not betray the fact by any outward sign . 
Always the same impassible member of the Reform Club , whom no incident could surprise , as unvarying as the ship 's chronometers , and seldom having the curiosity even to go upon the deck , he passed through the memorable scenes of the Red Sea with cold indifference ; did not care to recognise the historic towns and villages which , along its borders , raised their picturesque outlines against the sky ; and betrayed no fear of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf , which the old historians always spoke of with horror , and upon which the ancient navigators never ventured without propitiating the gods by ample sacrifices . 
How did this eccentric personage pass his time on the Mongolia ? 
He made his four hearty meals every day , regardless of the most persistent rolling and pitching on the part of the steamer ; and he played whist indefatigably , for he had found partners as enthusiastic in the game as himself . 
A tax-collector , on the way to his post at Goa ; the Rev. Decimus Smith , returning to his parish at Bombay ; and a brigadier-general of the English army , who was about to rejoin his brigade at Benares , made up the party , and , with Mr. Fogg , played whist by the hour together in absorbing silence . 
As for Passepartout , he , too , had escaped sea-sickness , and took his meals conscientiously in the forward cabin . 
He rather enjoyed the voyage , for he was well fed and well lodged , took a great interest in the scenes through which they were passing , and consoled himself with the delusion that his master 's whim would end at Bombay . 
He was pleased , on the day after leaving Suez , to find on deck the obliging person with whom he had walked and chatted on the quays . 
`` If I am not mistaken , '' said he , approaching this person , with his most amiable smile , `` you are the gentleman who so kindly volunteered to guide me at Suez ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I quite recognise you . 
You are the servant of the strange Englishman -- '' `` Just so , monsieur -- '' `` Fix . '' 
`` Monsieur Fix , '' resumed Passepartout , `` I 'm charmed to find you on board . 
Where are you bound ? '' 
`` Like you , to Bombay . '' 
`` That 's capital ! 
Have you made this trip before ? '' 
`` Several times . 
I am one of the agents of the Peninsular Company . '' 
