Not wishing to expose Aouda to the discomforts of travelling in the open air , Mr. Fogg proposed to leave her with Passepartout at Fort Kearney , the servant taking upon himself to escort her to Europe by a better route and under more favourable conditions . 
But Aouda refused to separate from Mr. Fogg , and Passepartout was delighted with her decision ; for nothing could induce him to leave his master while Fix was with him . 
It would be difficult to guess the detective 's thoughts . 
Was this conviction shaken by Phileas Fogg 's return , or did he still regard him as an exceedingly shrewd rascal , who , his journey round the world completed , would think himself absolutely safe in England ? 
Perhaps Fix 's opinion of Phileas Fogg was somewhat modified ; but he was nevertheless resolved to do his duty , and to hasten the return of the whole party to England as much as possible . 
At eight o'clock the sledge was ready to start . 
The passengers took their places on it , and wrapped themselves up closely in their travelling-cloaks . 
The two great sails were hoisted , and under the pressure of the wind the sledge slid over the hardened snow with a velocity of forty miles an hour . 
The distance between Fort Kearney and Omaha , as the birds fly , is at most two hundred miles . 
If the wind held good , the distance might be traversed in five hours ; if no accident happened the sledge might reach Omaha by one o'clock . 
What a journey ! 
The travellers , huddled close together , could not speak for the cold , intensified by the rapidity at which they were going . 
The sledge sped on as lightly as a boat over the waves . 
When the breeze came skimming the earth the sledge seemed to be lifted off the ground by its sails . 
Mudge , who was at the rudder , kept in a straight line , and by a turn of his hand checked the lurches which the vehicle had a tendency to make . 
All the sails were up , and the jib was so arranged as not to screen the brigantine . 
A top-mast was hoisted , and another jib , held out to the wind , added its force to the other sails . 
Although the speed could not be exactly estimated , the sledge could not be going at less than forty miles an hour . 
`` If nothing breaks , '' said Mudge , `` we shall get there ! '' 
Mr. Fogg had made it for Mudge 's interest to reach Omaha within the time agreed on , by the offer of a handsome reward . 
The prairie , across which the sledge was moving in a straight line , was as flat as a sea . 
It seemed like a vast frozen lake . 
The railroad which ran through this section ascended from the south-west to the north-west by Great Island , Columbus , an important Nebraska town , Schuyler , and Fremont , to Omaha . 
It followed throughout the right bank of the Platte River . 
The sledge , shortening this route , took a chord of the arc described by the railway . 
Mudge was not afraid of being stopped by the Platte River , because it was frozen . 
The road , then , was quite clear of obstacles , and Phileas Fogg had but two things to fear -- an accident to the sledge , and a change or calm in the wind . 
But the breeze , far from lessening its force , blew as if to bend the mast , which , however , the metallic lashings held firmly . 
These lashings , like the chords of a stringed instrument , resounded as if vibrated by a violin bow . 
The sledge slid along in the midst of a plaintively intense melody . 
`` Those chords give the fifth and the octave , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
These were the only words he uttered during the journey . 
Aouda , cosily packed in furs and cloaks , was sheltered as much as possible from the attacks of the freezing wind . 
As for Passepartout , his face was as red as the sun 's disc when it sets in the mist , and he laboriously inhaled the biting air . 
With his natural buoyancy of spirits , he began to hope again . 
They would reach New York on the evening , if not on the morning , of the 11th , and there was still some chances that it would be before the steamer sailed for Liverpool . 
Passepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally , Fix , by the hand . 
He remembered that it was the detective who procured the sledge , the only means of reaching Omaha in time ; but , checked by some presentiment , he kept his usual reserve . 
One thing , however , Passepartout would never forget , and that was the sacrifice which Mr. Fogg had made , without hesitation , to rescue him from the Sioux . 
Mr. Fogg had risked his fortune and his life . 
No ! 
His servant would never forget that ! 
While each of the party was absorbed in reflections so different , the sledge flew past over the vast carpet of snow . 
The creeks it passed over were not perceived . 
Fields and streams disappeared under the uniform whiteness . 
The plain was absolutely deserted . 
Between the Union Pacific road and the branch which unites Kearney with Saint Joseph it formed a great uninhabited island . 
Neither village , station , nor fort appeared . 
From time to time they sped by some phantom-like tree , whose white skeleton twisted and rattled in the wind . 
Sometimes flocks of wild birds rose , or bands of gaunt , famished , ferocious prairie-wolves ran howling after the sledge . 
