Mr. Fogg went to bed , but did he sleep ? 
Aouda did not once close her eyes . 
Passepartout watched all night , like a faithful dog , at his master 's door . 
Mr. Fogg called him in the morning , and told him to get Aouda 's breakfast , and a cup of tea and a chop for himself . 
He desired Aouda to excuse him from breakfast and dinner , as his time would be absorbed all day in putting his affairs to rights . 
In the evening he would ask permission to have a few moment 's conversation with the young lady . 
Passepartout , having received his orders , had nothing to do but obey them . 
He looked at his imperturbable master , and could scarcely bring his mind to leave him . 
His heart was full , and his conscience tortured by remorse ; for he accused himself more bitterly than ever of being the cause of the irretrievable disaster . 
Yes ! 
if he had warned Mr. Fogg , and had betrayed Fix 's projects to him , his master would certainly not have given the detective passage to Liverpool , and then -- Passepartout could hold in no longer . 
`` My master ! 
Mr. Fogg ! '' 
he cried , `` why do you not curse me ? 
It was my fault that -- '' `` I blame no one , '' returned Phileas Fogg , with perfect calmness . 
`` Go ! '' 
Passepartout left the room , and went to find Aouda , to whom he delivered his master 's message . 
`` Madam , '' he added , `` I can do nothing myself -- nothing ! 
I have no influence over my master ; but you , perhaps -- '' `` What influence could I have ? '' 
replied Aouda . 
`` Mr. Fogg is influenced by no one . 
Has he ever understood that my gratitude to him is overflowing ? 
Has he ever read my heart ? 
My friend , he must not be left alone an instant ! 
You say he is going to speak with me this evening ? '' 
`` Yes , madam ; probably to arrange for your protection and comfort in England . '' 
`` We shall see , '' replied Aouda , becoming suddenly pensive . 
Throughout this day -LRB- Sunday -RRB- the house in Saville Row was as if uninhabited , and Phileas Fogg , for the first time since he had lived in that house , did not set out for his club when Westminster clock struck half-past eleven . 
Why should he present himself at the Reform ? 
His friends no longer expected him there . 
As Phileas Fogg had not appeared in the saloon on the evening before -LRB- Saturday , the 21st of December , at a quarter before nine -RRB- , he had lost his wager . 
It was not even necessary that he should go to his bankers for the twenty thousand pounds ; for his antagonists already had his cheque in their hands , and they had only to fill it out and send it to the Barings to have the amount transferred to their credit . 
Mr. Fogg , therefore , had no reason for going out , and so he remained at home . 
He shut himself up in his room , and busied himself putting his affairs in order . 
Passepartout continually ascended and descended the stairs . 
The hours were long for him . 
He listened at his master 's door , and looked through the keyhole , as if he had a perfect right so to do , and as if he feared that something terrible might happen at any moment . 
Sometimes he thought of Fix , but no longer in anger . 
Fix , like all the world , had been mistaken in Phileas Fogg , and had only done his duty in tracking and arresting him ; while he , Passepartout ... . 
This thought haunted him , and he never ceased cursing his miserable folly . 
Finding himself too wretched to remain alone , he knocked at Aouda 's door , went into her room , seated himself , without speaking , in a corner , and looked ruefully at the young woman . 
Aouda was still pensive . 
About half-past seven in the evening Mr. Fogg sent to know if Aouda would receive him , and in a few moments he found himself alone with her . 
Phileas Fogg took a chair , and sat down near the fireplace , opposite Aouda . 
No emotion was visible on his face . 
Fogg returned was exactly the Fogg who had gone away ; there was the same calm , the same impassibility . 
He sat several minutes without speaking ; then , bending his eyes on Aouda , `` Madam , '' said he , `` will you pardon me for bringing you to England ? '' 
`` I , Mr. Fogg ! '' 
replied Aouda , checking the pulsations of her heart . 
`` Please let me finish , '' returned Mr. Fogg . 
