Then he cried , `` Well -- yes ! 
Your honour is right . 
To Shanghai ! '' 
So the Tankadere kept steadily on her northward track . 
The night was really terrible ; it would be a miracle if the craft did not founder . 
Twice it could have been all over with her if the crew had not been constantly on the watch . 
Aouda was exhausted , but did not utter a complaint . 
More than once Mr. Fogg rushed to protect her from the violence of the waves . 
Day reappeared . 
The tempest still raged with undiminished fury ; but the wind now returned to the south-east . 
It was a favourable change , and the Tankadere again bounded forward on this mountainous sea , though the waves crossed each other , and imparted shocks and counter-shocks which would have crushed a craft less solidly built . 
From time to time the coast was visible through the broken mist , but no vessel was in sight . 
The Tankadere was alone upon the sea . 
There were some signs of a calm at noon , and these became more distinct as the sun descended toward the horizon . 
The tempest had been as brief as terrific . 
The passengers , thoroughly exhausted , could now eat a little , and take some repose . 
The night was comparatively quiet . 
Some of the sails were again hoisted , and the speed of the boat was very good . 
The next morning at dawn they espied the coast , and John Bunsby was able to assert that they were not one hundred miles from Shanghai . 
A hundred miles , and only one day to traverse them ! 
That very evening Mr. Fogg was due at Shanghai , if he did not wish to miss the steamer to Yokohama . 
Had there been no storm , during which several hours were lost , they would be at this moment within thirty miles of their destination . 
The wind grew decidedly calmer , and happily the sea fell with it . 
All sails were now hoisted , and at noon the Tankadere was within forty-five miles of Shanghai . 
There remained yet six hours in which to accomplish that distance . 
All on board feared that it could not be done , and every one -- Phileas Fogg , no doubt , excepted -- felt his heart beat with impatience . 
The boat must keep up an average of nine miles an hour , and the wind was becoming calmer every moment ! 
It was a capricious breeze , coming from the coast , and after it passed the sea became smooth . 
Still , the Tankadere was so light , and her fine sails caught the fickle zephyrs so well , that , with the aid of the currents John Bunsby found himself at six o'clock not more than ten miles from the mouth of Shanghai River . 
Shanghai itself is situated at least twelve miles up the stream . 
At seven they were still three miles from Shanghai . 
The pilot swore an angry oath ; the reward of two hundred pounds was evidently on the point of escaping him . 
He looked at Mr. Fogg . 
Mr. Fogg was perfectly tranquil ; and yet his whole fortune was at this moment at stake . 
At this moment , also , a long black funnel , crowned with wreaths of smoke , appeared on the edge of the waters . 
It was the American steamer , leaving for Yokohama at the appointed time . 
`` Confound her ! '' 
cried John Bunsby , pushing back the rudder with a desperate jerk . 
`` Signal her ! '' 
said Phileas Fogg quietly . 
A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the Tankadere , for making signals in the fogs . 
It was loaded to the muzzle ; but just as the pilot was about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole , Mr. Fogg said , `` Hoist your flag ! '' 
The flag was run up at half-mast , and , this being the signal of distress , it was hoped that the American steamer , perceiving it , would change her course a little , so as to succour the pilot-boat . 
`` Fire ! '' 
said Mr. Fogg . 
And the booming of the little cannon resounded in the air . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT , EVEN AT THE ANTIPODES , IT IS CONVENIENT TO HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE 'S POCKET The Carnatic , setting sail from Hong Kong at half-past six on the 7th of November , directed her course at full steam towards Japan . 
She carried a large cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers . 
Two state-rooms in the rear were , however , unoccupied -- those which had been engaged by Phileas Fogg . 
The next day a passenger with a half-stupefied eye , staggering gait , and disordered hair , was seen to emerge from the second cabin , and to totter to a seat on deck . 
