Elder Hitch , as is seen , was trying to make proselytes on the very railway trains . 
Then , emphasising his words with his loud voice and frequent gestures , he related the history of the Mormons from Biblical times : how that , in Israel , a Mormon prophet of the tribe of Joseph published the annals of the new religion , and bequeathed them to his son Mormon ; how , many centuries later , a translation of this precious book , which was written in Egyptian , was made by Joseph Smith , junior , a Vermont farmer , who revealed himself as a mystical prophet in 1825 ; and how , in short , the celestial messenger appeared to him in an illuminated forest , and gave him the annals of the Lord . 
Several of the audience , not being much interested in the missionary 's narrative , here left the car ; but Elder Hitch , continuing his lecture , related how Smith , junior , with his father , two brothers , and a few disciples , founded the church of the `` Latter Day Saints , '' which , adopted not only in America , but in England , Norway and Sweden , and Germany , counts many artisans , as well as men engaged in the liberal professions , among its members ; how a colony was established in Ohio , a temple erected there at a cost of two hundred thousand dollars , and a town built at Kirkland ; how Smith became an enterprising banker , and received from a simple mummy showman a papyrus scroll written by Abraham and several famous Egyptians . 
The Elder 's story became somewhat wearisome , and his audience grew gradually less , until it was reduced to twenty passengers . 
But this did not disconcert the enthusiast , who proceeded with the story of Joseph Smith 's bankruptcy in 1837 , and how his ruined creditors gave him a coat of tar and feathers ; his reappearance some years afterwards , more honourable and honoured than ever , at Independence , Missouri , the chief of a flourishing colony of three thousand disciples , and his pursuit thence by outraged Gentiles , and retirement into the Far West . 
Ten hearers only were now left , among them honest Passepartout , who was listening with all his ears . 
Thus he learned that , after long persecutions , Smith reappeared in Illinois , and in 1839 founded a community at Nauvoo , on the Mississippi , numbering twenty-five thousand souls , of which he became mayor , chief justice , and general-in-chief ; that he announced himself , in 1843 , as a candidate for the Presidency of the United States ; and that finally , being drawn into ambuscade at Carthage , he was thrown into prison , and assassinated by a band of men disguised in masks . 
Passepartout was now the only person left in the car , and the Elder , looking him full in the face , reminded him that , two years after the assassination of Joseph Smith , the inspired prophet , Brigham Young , his successor , left Nauvoo for the banks of the Great Salt Lake , where , in the midst of that fertile region , directly on the route of the emigrants who crossed Utah on their way to California , the new colony , thanks to the polygamy practised by the Mormons , had flourished beyond expectations . 
`` And this , '' added Elder William Hitch , `` this is why the jealousy of Congress has been aroused against us ! 
Why have the soldiers of the Union invaded the soil of Utah ? 
Why has Brigham Young , our chief , been imprisoned , in contempt of all justice ? 
Shall we yield to force ? 
Never ! 
Driven from Vermont , driven from Illinois , driven from Ohio , driven from Missouri , driven from Utah , we shall yet find some independent territory on which to plant our tents . 
And you , my brother , '' continued the Elder , fixing his angry eyes upon his single auditor , `` will you not plant yours there , too , under the shadow of our flag ? '' 
`` No ! '' 
replied Passepartout courageously , in his turn retiring from the car , and leaving the Elder to preach to vacancy . 
During the lecture the train had been making good progress , and towards half-past twelve it reached the northwest border of the Great Salt Lake . 
Thence the passengers could observe the vast extent of this interior sea , which is also called the Dead Sea , and into which flows an American Jordan . 
It is a picturesque expanse , framed in lofty crags in large strata , encrusted with white salt -- a superb sheet of water , which was formerly of larger extent than now , its shores having encroached with the lapse of time , and thus at once reduced its breadth and increased its depth . 
The Salt Lake , seventy miles long and thirty-five wide , is situated three miles eight hundred feet above the sea . 
Quite different from Lake Asphaltite , whose depression is twelve hundred feet below the sea , it contains considerable salt , and one quarter of the weight of its water is solid matter , its specific weight being 1,170 , and , after being distilled , 1,000 . 
Fishes are , of course , unable to live in it , and those which descend through the Jordan , the Weber , and other streams soon perish . 
The country around the lake was well cultivated , for the Mormons are mostly farmers ; while ranches and pens for domesticated animals , fields of wheat , corn , and other cereals , luxuriant prairies , hedges of wild rose , clumps of acacias and milk-wort , would have been seen six months later . 
Now the ground was covered with a thin powdering of snow . 
The train reached Ogden at two o'clock , where it rested for six hours , Mr. Fogg and his party had time to pay a visit to Salt Lake City , connected with Ogden by a branch road ; and they spent two hours in this strikingly American town , built on the pattern of other cities of the Union , like a checker-board , `` with the sombre sadness of right-angles , '' as Victor Hugo expresses it . 
The founder of the City of the Saints could not escape from the taste for symmetry which distinguishes the Anglo-Saxons . 
In this strange country , where the people are certainly not up to the level of their institutions , everything is done `` squarely '' -- cities , houses , and follies . 
The travellers , then , were promenading , at three o'clock , about the streets of the town built between the banks of the Jordan and the spurs of the Wahsatch Range . 
They saw few or no churches , but the prophet 's mansion , the court-house , and the arsenal , blue-brick houses with verandas and porches , surrounded by gardens bordered with acacias , palms , and locusts . 
A clay and pebble wall , built in 1853 , surrounded the town ; and in the principal street were the market and several hotels adorned with pavilions . 
The place did not seem thickly populated . 
The streets were almost deserted , except in the vicinity of the temple , which they only reached after having traversed several quarters surrounded by palisades . 
There were many women , which was easily accounted for by the `` peculiar institution '' of the Mormons ; but it must not be supposed that all the Mormons are polygamists . 
They are free to marry or not , as they please ; but it is worth noting that it is mainly the female citizens of Utah who are anxious to marry , as , according to the Mormon religion , maiden ladies are not admitted to the possession of its highest joys . 
These poor creatures seemed to be neither well off nor happy . 
Some -- the more well-to-do , no doubt -- wore short , open , black silk dresses , under a hood or modest shawl ; others were habited in Indian fashion . 
Passepartout could not behold without a certain fright these women , charged , in groups , with conferring happiness on a single Mormon . 
His common sense pitied , above all , the husband . 
It seemed to him a terrible thing to have to guide so many wives at once across the vicissitudes of life , and to conduct them , as it were , in a body to the Mormon paradise with the prospect of seeing them in the company of the glorious Smith , who doubtless was the chief ornament of that delightful place , to all eternity . 
He felt decidedly repelled from such a vocation , and he imagined -- perhaps he was mistaken -- that the fair ones of Salt Lake City cast rather alarming glances on his person . 
Happily , his stay there was but brief . 
At four the party found themselves again at the station , took their places in the train , and the whistle sounded for starting . 
Just at the moment , however , that the locomotive wheels began to move , cries of `` Stop ! 
stop ! '' 
were heard . 
Trains , like time and tide , stop for no one . 
The gentleman who uttered the cries was evidently a belated Mormon . 
He was breathless with running . 
Happily for him , the station had neither gates nor barriers . 
