For if they had had another neighbor who was less chimerical and more attentive , any ordinary and charitable man , evidently their indigence would have been noticed , their signals of distress would have been perceived , and they would have been taken hold of and rescued ! 
They appeared very corrupt and very depraved , no doubt , very vile , very odious even ; but those who fall without becoming degraded are rare ; besides , there is a point where the unfortunate and the infamous unite and are confounded in a single word , a fatal word , the miserable ; whose fault is this ? 
And then should not the charity be all the more profound , in proportion as the fall is great ? 
While reading himself this moral lesson , for there were occasions on which Marius , like all truly honest hearts , was his own pedagogue and scolded himself more than he deserved , he stared at the wall which separated him from the Jondrettes , as though he were able to make his gaze , full of pity , penetrate that partition and warm these wretched people . 
The wall was a thin layer of plaster upheld by lathes and beams , and , as the reader had just learned , it allowed the sound of voices and words to be clearly distinguished . 
Only a man as dreamy as Marius could have failed to perceive this long before . 
There was no paper pasted on the wall , either on the side of the Jondrettes or on that of Marius ; the coarse construction was visible in its nakedness . 
Marius examined the partition , almost unconsciously ; sometimes revery examines , observes , and scrutinizes as thought would . 
All at once he sprang up ; he had just perceived , near the top , close to the ceiling , a triangular hole , which resulted from the space between three lathes . 
The plaster which should have filled this cavity was missing , and by mounting on the commode , a view could be had through this aperture into the Jondrettes ' attic . 
Commiseration has , and should have , its curiosity . 
This aperture formed a sort of peep-hole . 
It is permissible to gaze at misfortune like a traitor in order to succor it . 
-LSB- 27 -RSB- -LSB- 27 -RSB- The peep-hole is a Judas in French . 
Hence the half-punning allusion . 
`` Let us get some little idea of what these people are like , '' thought Marius , `` and in what condition they are . '' 
He climbed upon the commode , put his eye to the crevice , and looked . 
THE WILD MAN IN HIS LAIR Cities , like forests , have their caverns in which all the most wicked and formidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves . 
Only , in cities , that which thus conceals itself is ferocious , unclean , and petty , that is to say , ugly ; in forests , that which conceals itself is ferocious , savage , and grand , that is to say , beautiful . 
Taking one lair with another , the beast 's is preferable to the man 's . 
Caverns are better than hovels . 
What Marius now beheld was a hovel . 
Marius was poor , and his chamber was poverty-stricken , but as his poverty was noble , his garret was neat . 
The den upon which his eye now rested was abject , dirty , fetid , pestiferous , mean , sordid . 
The only furniture consisted of a straw chair , an infirm table , some old bits of crockery , and in two of the corners , two indescribable pallets ; all the light was furnishd by a dormer window of four panes , draped with spiders ' webs . 
Through this aperture there penetrated just enough light to make the face of a man appear like the face of a phantom . 
The walls had a leprous aspect , and were covered with seams and scars , like a visage disfigured by some horrible malady ; a repulsive moisture exuded from them . 
Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could be distinguished upon them . 
The chamber which Marius occupied had a dilapidated brick pavement ; this one was neither tiled nor planked ; its inhabitants stepped directly on the antique plaster of the hovel , which had grown black under the long-continued pressure of feet . 
Upon this uneven floor , where the dirt seemed to be fairly incrusted , and which possessed but one virginity , that of the broom , were capriciously grouped constellations of old shoes , socks , and repulsive rags ; however , this room had a fireplace , so it was let for forty francs a year . 
There was every sort of thing in that fireplace , a brazier , a pot , broken boards , rags suspended from nails , a bird-cage , ashes , and even a little fire . 
Two brands were smouldering there in a melancholy way . 
One thing which added still more to the horrors of this garret was , that it was large . 
It had projections and angles and black holes , the lower sides of roofs , bays , and promontories . 
Hence horrible , unfathomable nooks where it seemed as though spiders as big as one 's fist , wood-lice as large as one 's foot , and perhaps even -- who knows ? 
-- some monstrous human beings , must be hiding . 
One of the pallets was near the door , the other near the window . 
One end of each touched the fireplace and faced Marius . 
In a corner near the aperture through which Marius was gazing , a colored engraving in a black frame was suspended to a nail on the wall , and at its bottom , in large letters , was the inscription : THE DREAM . 
This represented a sleeping woman , and a child , also asleep , the child on the woman 's lap , an eagle in a cloud , with a crown in his beak , and the woman thrusting the crown away from the child 's head , without awaking the latter ; in the background , Napoleon in a glory , leaning on a very blue column with a yellow capital ornamented with this inscription : MARINGO AUSTERLITS IENA WAGRAMME ELOT Beneath this frame , a sort of wooden panel , which was no longer than it was broad , stood on the ground and rested in a sloping attitude against the wall . 
It had the appearance of a picture with its face turned to the wall , of a frame probably showing a daub on the other side , of some pier-glass detached from a wall and lying forgotten there while waiting to be rehung . 
Near the table , upon which Marius descried a pen , ink , and paper , sat a man about sixty years of age , small , thin , livid , haggard , with a cunning , cruel , and uneasy air ; a hideous scoundrel . 
If Lavater had studied this visage , he would have found the vulture mingled with the attorney there , the bird of prey and the pettifogger rendering each other mutually hideous and complementing each other ; the pettifogger making the bird of prey ignoble , the bird of prey making the pettifogger horrible . 
This man had a long gray beard . 
He was clad in a woman 's chemise , which allowed his hairy breast and his bare arms , bristling with gray hair , to be seen . 
Beneath this chemise , muddy trousers and boots through which his toes projected were visible . 
He had a pipe in his mouth and was smoking . 
There was no bread in the hovel , but there was still tobacco . 
He was writing probably some more letters like those which Marius had read . 
On the corner of the table lay an ancient , dilapidated , reddish volume , and the size , which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms , betrayed a romance . 
