It is honest money . 
You may be rich with a tranquil mind . 
Thou must have a carriage , a box at the theatres now and then , and handsome ball dresses , my Cosette , and then , thou must give good dinners to thy friends , and be very happy . 
I was writing to Cosette a while ago . 
She will find my letter . 
I bequeath to her the two candlesticks which stand on the chimney-piece . 
They are of silver , but to me they are gold , they are diamonds ; they change candles which are placed in them into wax-tapers . 
I do not know whether the person who gave them to me is pleased with me yonder on high . 
I have done what I could . 
My children , you will not forget that I am a poor man , you will have me buried in the first plot of earth that you find , under a stone to mark the spot . 
This is my wish . 
No name on the stone . 
If Cosette cares to come for a little while now and then , it will give me pleasure . 
And you too , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
I must admit that I have not always loved you . 
I ask your pardon for that . 
Now she and you form but one for me . 
I feel very grateful to you . 
I am sure that you make Cosette happy . 
If you only knew , Monsieur Pontmercy , her pretty rosy cheeks were my delight ; when I saw her in the least pale , I was sad . 
In the chest of drawers , there is a bank-bill for five hundred francs . 
I have not touched it . 
It is for the poor . 
Cosette , dost thou see thy little gown yonder on the bed ? 
dost thou recognize it ? 
That was ten years ago , however . 
How time flies ! 
We have been very happy . 
All is over . 
Do not weep , my children , I am not going very far , I shall see you from there , you will only have to look at night , and you will see me smile . 
Cosette , dost thou remember Montfermeil ? 
Thou wert in the forest , thou wert greatly terrified ; dost thou remember how I took hold of the handle of the water-bucket ? 
That was the first time that I touched thy poor , little hand . 
It was so cold ! 
Ah ! 
your hands were red then , mademoiselle , they are very white now . 
And the big doll ! 
dost thou remember ? 
Thou didst call her Catherine . 
Thou regrettedest not having taken her to the convent ! 
How thou didst make me laugh sometimes , my sweet angel ! 
When it had been raining , thou didst float bits of straw on the gutters , and watch them pass away . 
One day I gave thee a willow battledore and a shuttlecock with yellow , blue and green feathers . 
Thou hast forgotten it . 
Thou wert roguish so young ! 
Thou didst play . 
Thou didst put cherries in thy ears . 
Those are things of the past . 
The forests through which one has passed with one 's child , the trees under which one has strolled , the convents where one has concealed oneself , the games , the hearty laughs of childhood , are shadows . 
I imagined that all that belonged to me . 
