He did whatever he could . 
His sister worked also but what could she do with seven little children ? 
It was a sad group enveloped in misery , which was being gradually annihilated . 
A very hard winter came . 
Jean had no work . 
The family had no bread . 
No bread literally . 
Seven children ! 
One Sunday evening , Maubert Isabeau , the baker on the Church Square at Faverolles , was preparing to go to bed , when he heard a violent blow on the grated front of his shop . 
He arrived in time to see an arm passed through a hole made by a blow from a fist , through the grating and the glass . 
The arm seized a loaf of bread and carried it off . 
Isabeau ran out in haste ; the robber fled at the full speed of his legs . 
Isabeau ran after him and stopped him . 
The thief had flung away the loaf , but his arm was still bleeding . 
It was Jean Valjean . 
This took place in 1795 . 
Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals of the time for theft and breaking and entering an inhabited house at night . 
He had a gun which he used better than any one else in the world , he was a bit of a poacher , and this injured his case . 
There exists a legitimate prejudice against poachers . 
The poacher , like the smuggler , smacks too strongly of the brigand . 
Nevertheless , we will remark cursorily , there is still an abyss between these races of men and the hideous assassin of the towns . 
The poacher lives in the forest , the smuggler lives in the mountains or on the sea . 
The cities make ferocious men because they make corrupt men . 
The mountain , the sea , the forest , make savage men ; they develop the fierce side , but often without destroying the humane side . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty . 
The terms of the Code were explicit . 
There occur formidable hours in our civilization ; there are moments when the penal laws decree a shipwreck . 
What an ominous minute is that in which society draws back and consummates the irreparable abandonment of a sentient being ! 
Jean Valjean was condemned to five years in the galleys . 
On the 22d of April , 1796 , the victory of Montenotte , won by the general-in-chief of the army of Italy , whom the message of the Directory to the Five Hundred , of the 2d of Floreal , year IV. , calls Buona-Parte , was announced in Paris ; on that same day a great gang of galley-slaves was put in chains at Bicetre . 
Jean Valjean formed a part of that gang . 
An old turnkey of the prison , who is now nearly eighty years old , still recalls perfectly that unfortunate wretch who was chained to the end of the fourth line , in the north angle of the courtyard . 
He was seated on the ground like the others . 
He did not seem to comprehend his position , except that it was horrible . 
It is probable that he , also , was disentangling from amid the vague ideas of a poor man , ignorant of everything , something excessive . 
While the bolt of his iron collar was being riveted behind his head with heavy blows from the hammer , he wept , his tears stifled him , they impeded his speech ; he only managed to say from time to time , `` I was a tree-pruner at Faverolles . '' 
Then still sobbing , he raised his right hand and lowered it gradually seven times , as though he were touching in succession seven heads of unequal heights , and from this gesture it was divined that the thing which he had done , whatever it was , he had done for the sake of clothing and nourishing seven little children . 
He set out for Toulon . 
He arrived there , after a journey of twenty-seven days , on a cart , with a chain on his neck . 
At Toulon he was clothed in the red cassock . 
All that had constituted his life , even to his name , was effaced ; he was no longer even Jean Valjean ; he was number 24,601 . 
What became of his sister ? 
What became of the seven children ? 
Who troubled himself about that ? 
What becomes of the handful of leaves from the young tree which is sawed off at the root ? 
It is always the same story . 
These poor living beings , these creatures of God , henceforth without support , without guide , without refuge , wandered away at random , -- who even knows ? 
-- each in his own direction perhaps , and little by little buried themselves in that cold mist which engulfs solitary destinies ; gloomy shades , into which disappear in succession so many unlucky heads , in the sombre march of the human race . 
They quitted the country . 
The clock-tower of what had been their village forgot them ; the boundary line of what had been their field forgot them ; after a few years ' residence in the galleys , Jean Valjean himself forgot them . 
