why , no ! 
etc. . 
Gavroche balanced on his heels , clenched both fists in his pockets , moved his neck around like a bird , expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity of his lower lip . 
He was astounded , uncertain , incredulous , convinced , dazzled . 
He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart , discovering a Venus among the blowsy females , and the air of an amateur recognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs . 
His whole being was at work , the instinct which scents out , and the intelligence which combines . 
It was evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche 's life . 
It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras accosted him . 
`` You are small , '' said Enjolras , `` you will not be seen . 
Go out of the barricade , slip along close to the houses , skirmish about a bit in the streets , and come back and tell me what is going on . '' 
Gavroche raised himself on his haunches . 
`` So the little chaps are good for something ! 
that 's very lucky ! 
I 'll go ! 
In the meanwhile , trust to the little fellows , and distrust the big ones . '' 
And Gavroche , raising his head and lowering his voice , added , as he indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes : `` Do you see that big fellow there ? '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He 's a police spy . '' 
`` Are you sure of it ? '' 
`` It is n't two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port Royal , where I was taking the air , by my ear . '' 
Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand . 
The man left the room , and returned almost immediately , accompanied by three others . 
The four men , four porters with broad shoulders , went and placed themselves without doing anything to attract his attention , behind the table on which the man of the Rue des Billettes was leaning with his elbows . 
They were evidently ready to hurl themselves upon him . 
Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him : -- `` Who are you ? '' 
At this abrupt query , the man started . 
He plunged his gaze deep into Enjolras ' clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter 's meaning . 
He smiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful , more energetic , and more resolute could be seen in the world , and replied with haughty gravity : -- `` I see what it is . 
Well , yes ! '' 
`` You are a police spy ? '' 
`` I am an agent of the authorities . '' 
`` And your name ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Enjolras made a sign to the four men . 
In the twinkling of an eye , before Javert had time to turn round , he was collared , thrown down , pinioned and searched . 
They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of glass , and bearing on one side the arms of France , engraved , and with this motto : Supervision and vigilance , and on the other this note : `` JAVERT , inspector of police , aged fifty-two , '' and the signature of the Prefect of Police of that day , M. Gisquet . 
Besides this , he had his watch and his purse , which contained several gold pieces . 
They left him his purse and his watch . 
Under the watch , at the bottom of his fob , they felt and seized a paper in an envelope , which Enjolras unfolded , and on which he read these five lines , written in the very hand of the Prefect of Police : -- `` As soon as his political mission is accomplished , Inspector Javert will make sure , by special supervision , whether it is true that the malefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine , near the Jena bridge . '' 
The search ended , they lifted Javert to his feet , bound his arms behind his back , and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name . 
Gavroche , who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved of everything with a silent toss of his head , stepped up to Javert and said to him : -- `` It 's the mouse who has caught the cat . '' 
All this was so rapidly executed , that it was all over when those about the wine-shop noticed it . 
Javert had not uttered a single cry . 
At the sight of Javert bound to the post , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Combeferre , and the men scattered over the two barricades came running up . 
Javert , with his back to the post , and so surrounded with ropes that he could not make a movement , raised his head with the intrepid serenity of the man who has never lied . 
`` He is a police spy , '' said Enjolras . 
And turning to Javert : `` You will be shot ten minutes before the barricade is taken . '' 
Javert replied in his most imperious tone : -- `` Why not at once ? '' 
`` We are saving our powder . '' 
`` Then finish the business with a blow from a knife . '' 
