The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the street became ferocious . 
A cannon made its appearance . 
Artillery-men were pushing the piece ; it was in firing trim ; the fore-carriage had been detached ; two upheld the gun-carriage , four were at the wheels ; others followed with the caisson . 
They could see the smoke of the burning lint-stock . 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The whole barricade fired , the report was terrible ; an avalanche of smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men ; after a few seconds , the cloud dispersed , and the cannon and men re-appeared ; the gun-crew had just finished rolling it slowly , correctly , without haste , into position facing the barricade . 
Not one of them had been struck . 
Then the captain of the piece , bearing down upon the breech in order to raise the muzzle , began to point the cannon with the gravity of an astronomer levelling a telescope . 
`` Bravo for the cannoneers ! '' 
cried Bossuet . 
And the whole barricade clapped their hands . 
A moment later , squarely planted in the very middle of the street , astride of the gutter , the piece was ready for action . 
A formidable pair of jaws yawned on the barricade . 
`` Come , merrily now ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` That 's the brutal part of it . 
After the fillip on the nose , the blow from the fist . 
The army is reaching out its big paw to us . 
The barricade is going to be severely shaken up . 
The fusillade tries , the cannon takes . '' 
`` It is a piece of eight , new model , brass , '' added Combeferre . 
`` Those pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin to one hundred of brass is exceeded . 
The excess of tin renders them too tender . 
Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers when looked at from the vent hole . 
In order to obviate this danger , and to render it possible to force the charge , it may become necessary to return to the process of the fourteenth century , hooping , and to encircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steel bands , from the breech to the trunnions . 
In the meantime , they remedy this defect as best they may ; they manage to discover where the holes are located in the vent of a cannon , by means of a searcher . 
But there is a better method , with Gribeauval 's movable star . '' 
`` In the sixteenth century , '' remarked Bossuet , `` they used to rifle cannon . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` that augments the projectile force , but diminishes the accuracy of the firing . 
In firing at short range , the trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired , the parabola is exaggerated , the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects , which is , nevertheless , a necessity of battle , the importance of which increases with the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge . 
This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge ; small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic necessities , such , for instance , as the preservation of the gun-carriage . 
In short , that despot , the cannon , can not do all that it desires ; force is a great weakness . 
A cannon-ball only travels six hundred leagues an hour ; light travels seventy thousand leagues a second . 
Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon . '' 
`` Reload your guns , '' said Enjolras . 
How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the cannon-balls ? 
Would they effect a breach ? 
That was the question . 
While the insurgents were reloading their guns , the artillery-men were loading the cannon . 
The anxiety in the redoubt was profound . 
The shot sped the report burst forth . 
`` Present ! '' 
shouted a joyous voice . 
And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed against it . 
He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne , and he had nimbly climbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the cannon-ball . 
The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish . 
At the most there was an omnibus wheel broken , and the old Anceau cart was demolished . 
On seeing this , the barricade burst into a laugh . 
