Where is your stable ? '' 
`` Sir ! '' 
exclaimed Thenardier , with a smile , `` I will conduct you , sir . '' 
He took the candle ; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel , and Thenardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor , which was of rare splendor , all furnished in mahogany , with a low bedstead , curtained with red calico . 
`` What is this ? '' 
said the traveller . 
`` It is really our bridal chamber , '' said the tavern-keeper . 
`` My wife and I occupy another . 
This is only entered three or four times a year . '' 
`` I should have liked the stable quite as well , '' said the man , abruptly . 
Thenardier pretended not to hear this unamiable remark . 
He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on the chimney-piece . 
A very good fire was flickering on the hearth . 
On the chimney-piece , under a glass globe , stood a woman 's head-dress in silver wire and orange flowers . 
`` And what is this ? '' 
resumed the stranger . 
`` That , sir , '' said Thenardier , `` is my wife 's wedding bonnet . '' 
The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say , `` There really was a time , then , when that monster was a maiden ? '' 
Thenardier lied , however . 
When he had leased this paltry building for the purpose of converting it into a tavern , he had found this chamber decorated in just this manner , and had purchased the furniture and obtained the orange flowers at second hand , with the idea that this would cast a graceful shadow on `` his spouse , '' and would result in what the English call respectability for his house . 
When the traveller turned round , the host had disappeared . 
Thenardier had withdrawn discreetly , without venturing to wish him a good night , as he did not wish to treat with disrespectful cordiality a man whom he proposed to fleece royally the following morning . 
The inn-keeper retired to his room . 
His wife was in bed , but she was not asleep . 
When she heard her husband 's step she turned over and said to him : -- `` Do you know , I 'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-morrow . '' 
Thenardier replied coldly : -- `` How you do go on ! '' 
They exchanged no further words , and a few moments later their candle was extinguished . 
As for the traveller , he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in a corner . 
The landlord once gone , he threw himself into an arm-chair and remained for some time buried in thought . 
Then he removed his shoes , took one of the two candles , blew out the other , opened the door , and quitted the room , gazing about him like a person who is in search of something . 
He traversed a corridor and came upon a staircase . 
There he heard a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child . 
He followed this sound , and came to a sort of triangular recess built under the staircase , or rather formed by the staircase itself . 
This recess was nothing else than the space under the steps . 
There , in the midst of all sorts of old papers and potsherds , among dust and spiders ' webs , was a bed -- if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet so full of holes as to display the straw , and a coverlet so tattered as to show the pallet . 
No sheets . 
This was placed on the floor . 
In this bed Cosette was sleeping . 
The man approached and gazed down upon her . 
Cosette was in a profound sleep ; she was fully dressed . 
In the winter she did not undress , in order that she might not be so cold . 
Against her breast was pressed the doll , whose large eyes , wide open , glittered in the dark . 
From time to time she gave vent to a deep sigh as though she were on the point of waking , and she strained the doll almost convulsively in her arms . 
Beside her bed there was only one of her wooden shoes . 
A door which stood open near Cosette 's pallet permitted a view of a rather large , dark room . 
The stranger stepped into it . 
At the further extremity , through a glass door , he saw two small , very white beds . 
They belonged to Eponine and Azelma . 
Behind these beds , and half hidden , stood an uncurtained wicker cradle , in which the little boy who had cried all the evening lay asleep . 
The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of the Thenardier pair . 
