The Abbe Gregoire , ex-bishop , ex-conventionary , ex-senator , had passed , in the royalist polemics , to the state of `` Infamous Gregoire . '' 
The locution of which we have made use -- passed to the state of -- has been condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard . 
Under the third arch of the Pont de Jena , the new stone with which , the two years previously , the mining aperture made by Blucher to blow up the bridge had been stopped up , was still recognizable on account of its whiteness . 
Justice summoned to its bar a man who , on seeing the Comte d'Artois enter Notre Dame , had said aloud : `` Sapristi ! 
I regret the time when I saw Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage , arm in arm . '' 
A seditious utterance . 
Six months in prison . 
Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned ; men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secret of their recompense , and strutted immodestly in the light of day , in the cynicism of riches and dignities ; deserters from Ligny and Quatre-Bras , in the brazenness of their well-paid turpitude , exhibited their devotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner . 
This is what floats up confusedly , pell-mell , for the year 1817 , and is now forgotten . 
History neglects nearly all these particulars , and can not do otherwise ; the infinity would overwhelm it . 
Nevertheless , these details , which are wrongly called trivial , -- there are no trivial facts in humanity , nor little leaves in vegetation , -- are useful . 
It is of the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries is composed . 
In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged `` a fine farce . '' 
A DOUBLE QUARTETTE These Parisians came , one from Toulouse , another from Limoges , the third from Cahors , and the fourth from Montauban ; but they were students ; and when one says student , one says Parisian : to study in Paris is to be born in Paris . 
These young men were insignificant ; every one has seen such faces ; four specimens of humanity taken at random ; neither good nor bad , neither wise nor ignorant , neither geniuses nor fools ; handsome , with that charming April which is called twenty years . 
They were four Oscars ; for , at that epoch , Arthurs did not yet exist . 
Burn for him the perfumes of Araby ! 
exclaimed romance . 
Oscar advances . 
Oscar , I shall behold him ! 
People had just emerged from Ossian ; elegance was Scandinavian and Caledonian ; the pure English style was only to prevail later , and the first of the Arthurs , Wellington , had but just won the battle of Waterloo . 
These Oscars bore the names , one of Felix Tholomyes , of Toulouse ; the second , Listolier , of Cahors ; the next , Fameuil , of Limoges ; the last , Blachevelle , of Montauban . 
Naturally , each of them had his mistress . 
Blachevelle loved Favourite , so named because she had been in England ; Listolier adored Dahlia , who had taken for her nickname the name of a flower ; Fameuil idolized Zephine , an abridgment of Josephine ; Tholomyes had Fantine , called the Blonde , because of her beautiful , sunny hair . 
Favourite , Dahlia , Zephine , and Fantine were four ravishing young women , perfumed and radiant , still a little like working-women , and not yet entirely divorced from their needles ; somewhat disturbed by intrigues , but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity of toil , and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives the first fall in woman . 
One of the four was called the young , because she was the youngest of them , and one was called the old ; the old one was twenty-three . 
Not to conceal anything , the three first were more experienced , more heedless , and more emancipated into the tumult of life than Fantine the Blonde , who was still in her first illusions . 
Dahlia , Zephine , and especially Favourite , could not have said as much . 
There had already been more than one episode in their romance , though hardly begun ; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second , and Gustave in the third . 
Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors ; one scolds and the other flatters , and the beautiful daughters of the people have both of them whispering in their ear , each on its own side . 
These badly guarded souls listen . 
Hence the falls which they accomplish , and the stones which are thrown at them . 
They are overwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible . 
Alas ! 
what if the Jungfrau were hungry ? 
Favourite having been in England , was admired by Dahlia and Zephine . 
She had had an establishment of her own very early in life . 
Her father was an old unmarried professor of mathematics , a brutal man and a braggart , who went out to give lessons in spite of his age . 
This professor , when he was a young man , had one day seen a chambermaid 's gown catch on a fender ; he had fallen in love in consequence of this accident . 
The result had been Favourite . 
She met her father from time to time , and he bowed to her . 
One morning an old woman with the air of a devotee , had entered her apartments , and had said to her , `` You do not know me , Mamemoiselle ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I am your mother . '' 
Then the old woman opened the sideboard , and ate and drank , had a mattress which she owned brought in , and installed herself . 
This cross and pious old mother never spoke to Favourite , remained hours without uttering a word , breakfasted , dined , and supped for four , and went down to the porter 's quarters for company , where she spoke ill of her daughter . 
It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia to Listolier , to others perhaps , to idleness . 
How could she make such nails work ? 
She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her hands . 
As for Zephine , she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and caressing little way of saying `` Yes , sir . '' 
