I am going to sum up the arguments . '' 
At that moment there was a movement just beside the President ; a voice was heard crying : -- `` Brevet ! 
Chenildieu ! 
Cochepaille ! 
look here ! '' 
All who heard that voice were chilled , so lamentable and terrible was it ; all eyes were turned to the point whence it had proceeded . 
A man , placed among the privileged spectators who were seated behind the court , had just risen , had pushed open the half-door which separated the tribunal from the audience , and was standing in the middle of the hall ; the President , the district-attorney , M. Bamatabois , twenty persons , recognized him , and exclaimed in concert : -- `` M. Madeleine ! '' 
CHAMPMATHIEU MORE AND MORE ASTONISHED It was he , in fact . 
The clerk 's lamp illumined his countenance . 
He held his hat in his hand ; there was no disorder in his clothing ; his coat was carefully buttoned ; he was very pale , and he trembled slightly ; his hair , which had still been gray on his arrival in Arras , was now entirely white : it had turned white during the hour he had sat there . 
All heads were raised : the sensation was indescribable ; there was a momentary hesitation in the audience , the voice had been so heart-rending ; the man who stood there appeared so calm that they did not understand at first . 
They asked themselves whether he had indeed uttered that cry ; they could not believe that that tranquil man had been the one to give that terrible outcry . 
This indecision only lasted a few seconds . 
Even before the President and the district-attorney could utter a word , before the ushers and the gendarmes could make a gesture , the man whom all still called , at that moment , M. Madeleine , had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille , Brevet , and Chenildieu . 
`` Do you not recognize me ? '' 
said he . 
All three remained speechless , and indicated by a sign of the head that they did not know him . 
Cochepaille , who was intimidated , made a military salute . 
M. Madeleine turned towards the jury and the court , and said in a gentle voice : -- `` Gentlemen of the jury , order the prisoner to be released ! 
Mr. President , have me arrested . 
He is not the man whom you are in search of ; it is I : I am Jean Valjean . '' 
Not a mouth breathed ; the first commotion of astonishment had been followed by a silence like that of the grave ; those within the hall experienced that sort of religious terror which seizes the masses when something grand has been done . 
In the meantime , the face of the President was stamped with sympathy and sadness ; he had exchanged a rapid sign with the district-attorney and a few low-toned words with the assistant judges ; he addressed the public , and asked in accents which all understood : -- `` Is there a physician present ? '' 
The district-attorney took the word : -- `` Gentlemen of the jury , the very strange and unexpected incident which disturbs the audience inspires us , like yourselves , only with a sentiment which it is unnecessary for us to express . 
You all know , by reputation at least , the honorable M. Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. ; if there is a physician in the audience , we join the President in requesting him to attend to M. Madeleine , and to conduct him to his home . '' 
M.Madeleine did not allow the district-attorney to finish ; he interrupted him in accents full of suavity and authority . 
These are the words which he uttered ; here they are literally , as they were written down , immediately after the trial by one of the witnesses to this scene , and as they now ring in the ears of those who heard them nearly forty years ago : -- `` I thank you , Mr. District-Attorney , but I am not mad ; you shall see ; you were on the point of committing a great error ; release this man ! 
I am fulfilling a duty ; I am that miserable criminal . 
I am the only one here who sees the matter clearly , and I am telling you the truth . 
God , who is on high , looks down on what I am doing at this moment , and that suffices . 
You can take me , for here I am : but I have done my best ; I concealed myself under another name ; I have become rich ; I have become a mayor ; I have tried to re-enter the ranks of the honest . 
It seems that that is not to be done . 
In short , there are many things which I can not tell . 
I will not narrate the story of my life to you ; you will hear it one of these days . 
I robbed Monseigneur the Bishop , it is true ; it is true that I robbed Little Gervais ; they were right in telling you that Jean Valjean was a very vicious wretch . 
Perhaps it was not altogether his fault . 
Listen , honorable judges ! 
a man who has been so greatly humbled as I have has neither any remonstrances to make to Providence , nor any advice to give to society ; but , you see , the infamy from which I have tried to escape is an injurious thing ; the galleys make the convict what he is ; reflect upon that , if you please . 
Before going to the galleys , I was a poor peasant , with very little intelligence , a sort of idiot ; the galleys wrought a change in me . 
I was stupid ; I became vicious : I was a block of wood ; I became a firebrand . 
Later on , indulgence and kindness saved me , as severity had ruined me . 
But , pardon me , you can not understand what I am saying . 
You will find at my house , among the ashes in the fireplace , the forty-sou piece which I stole , seven years ago , from little Gervais . 
I have nothing farther to add ; take me . 
Good God ! 
the district-attorney shakes his head ; you say , 'M . 
Madeleine has gone mad ! ' 
you do not believe me ! 
that is distressing . 
Do not , at least , condemn this man ! 
