Now he saw , and on the one hand he admired , while on the other he adored . 
He was filled with regret and remorse , and he reflected in despair that all he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb . 
Oh ! 
if his father had still been in existence , if he had still had him , if God , in his compassion and his goodness , had permitted his father to be still among the living , how he would have run , how he would have precipitated himself , how he would have cried to his father : `` Father ! 
Here I am ! 
It is I ! 
I have the same heart as thou ! 
I am thy son ! '' 
How he would have embraced that white head , bathed his hair in tears , gazed upon his scar , pressed his hands , adored his garment , kissed his feet ! 
Oh ! 
Why had his father died so early , before his time , before the justice , the love of his son had come to him ? 
Marius had a continual sob in his heart , which said to him every moment : `` Alas ! '' 
At the same time , he became more truly serious , more truly grave , more sure of his thought and his faith . 
At each instant , gleams of the true came to complete his reason . 
An inward growth seemed to be in progress within him . 
He was conscious of a sort of natural enlargement , which gave him two things that were new to him -- his father and his country . 
As everything opens when one has a key , so he explained to himself that which he had hated , he penetrated that which he had abhorred ; henceforth he plainly perceived the providential , divine and human sense of the great things which he had been taught to detest , and of the great men whom he had been instructed to curse . 
When he reflected on his former opinions , which were but those of yesterday , and which , nevertheless , seemed to him already so very ancient , he grew indignant , yet he smiled . 
From the rehabilitation of his father , he naturally passed to the rehabilitation of Napoleon . 
But the latter , we will confess , was not effected without labor . 
From his infancy , he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of 1814 , on Bonaparte . 
Now , all the prejudices of the Restoration , all its interests , all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon . 
It execrated him even more than it did Robespierre . 
It had very cleverly turned to sufficiently good account the fatigue of the nation , and the hatred of mothers . 
Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster , and in order to paint him to the imagination of the people , which , as we lately pointed out , resembles the imagination of children , the party of 1814 made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks in succession , from that which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that which is terrible and becomes grotesque , from Tiberius to the bugaboo . 
Thus , in speaking of Bonaparte , one was free to sob or to puff up with laughter , provided that hatred lay at the bottom . 
Marius had never entertained -- about that man , as he was called -- any other ideas in his mind . 
They had combined with the tenacity which existed in his nature . 
There was in him a headstrong little man who hated Napoleon . 
On reading history , on studying him , especially in the documents and materials for history , the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyes of Marius was gradually rent . 
He caught a glimpse of something immense , and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment , on the score of Bonaparte as about all the rest ; each day he saw more distinctly ; and he set about mounting , slowly , step by step , almost regretfully in the beginning , then with intoxication and as though attracted by an irresistible fascination , first the sombre steps , then the vaguely illuminated steps , at last the luminous and splendid steps of enthusiasm . 
One night , he was alone in his little chamber near the roof . 
His candle was burning ; he was reading , with his elbows resting on his table close to the open window . 
All sorts of reveries reached him from space , and mingled with his thoughts . 
What a spectacle is the night ! 
One hears dull sounds , without knowing whence they proceed ; one beholds Jupiter , which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth , glowing like a firebrand , the azure is black , the stars shine ; it is formidable . 
He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army , those heroic strophes penned on the field of battle ; there , at intervals , he beheld his father 's name , always the name of the Emperor ; the whole of that great Empire presented itself to him ; he felt a flood swelling and rising within him ; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close to him like a breath , and whispered in his ear ; he gradually got into a singular state ; he thought that he heard drums , cannon , trumpets , the measured tread of battalions , the dull and distant gallop of the cavalry ; from time to time , his eyes were raised heavenward , and gazed upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless depths of space , then they fell upon his book once more , and there they beheld other colossal things moving confusedly . 
His heart contracted within him . 
He was in a transport , trembling , panting . 
All at once , without himself knowing what was in him , and what impulse he was obeying , he sprang to his feet , stretched both arms out of the window , gazed intently into the gloom , the silence , the infinite darkness , the eternal immensity , and exclaimed : `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
From that moment forth , all was over ; the Ogre of Corsica , -- the usurper , -- the tyrant , -- the monster who was the lover of his own sisters , -- the actor who took lessons of Talma , -- the poisoner of Jaffa , -- the tiger , -- Buonaparte , -- all this vanished , and gave place in his mind to a vague and brilliant radiance in which shone , at an inaccessible height , the pale marble phantom of Caesar . 
The Emperor had been for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires , for whom one sacrifices one 's self ; he was something more to Marius . 
He was the predestined constructor of the French group , succeeding the Roman group in the domination of the universe . 
He was a prodigious architect , of a destruction , the continuer of Charlemagne , of Louis XI. , of Henry IV. , of Richelieu , of Louis XIV. , and of the Committee of Public Safety , having his spots , no doubt , his faults , his crimes even , being a man , that is to say ; but august in his faults , brilliant in his spots , powerful in his crime . 
He was the predestined man , who had forced all nations to say : `` The great nation ! '' 
He was better than that , he was the very incarnation of France , conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped , and the world by the light which he shed . 
Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzling spectre which will always rise upon the frontier , and which will guard the future . 
Despot but dictator ; a despot resulting from a republic and summing up a revolution . 
Napoleon became for him the man-people as Jesus Christ is the man-God . 
It will be perceived , that like all new converts to a religion , his conversion intoxicated him , he hurled himself headlong into adhesion and he went too far . 
