Lon la . 
My friend Pierrot , thou pratest , because Mila knocked at her pane the other day and called me . 
The jades are very charming , their poison which bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila . 
I 'm fond of love and its bickerings , I love Agnes , I love Pamela , Lise burned herself in setting me aflame . 
In former days when I saw the mantillas of Suzette and of Zeila , my soul mingled with their folds . 
Love , when thou gleamest in the dark thou crownest Lola with roses , I would lose my soul for that . 
Jeanne , at thy mirror thou deckest thyself ! 
One fine day , my heart flew forth . 
I think that it is Jeanne who has it . 
At night , when I come from the quadrilles , I show Stella to the stars , and I say to them : `` Behold her . '' 
Where fair maids go , lon la . 
Gavroche , as he sang , was lavish of his pantomime . 
Gesture is the strong point of the refrain . 
His face , an inexhaustible repertory of masks , produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the rents of a cloth torn in a high gale . 
Unfortunately , as he was alone , and as it was night , this was neither seen nor even visible . 
Such wastes of riches do occur . 
All at once , he stopped short . 
`` Let us interrupt the romance , '' said he . 
His feline eye had just descried , in the recess of a carriage door , what is called in painting , an ensemble , that is to say , a person and a thing ; the thing was a hand-cart , the person was a man from Auvergene who was sleeping therein . 
The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement , and the Auvergnat 's head was supported against the front of the cart . 
His body was coiled up on this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground . 
Gavroche , with his experience of the things of this world , recognized a drunken man . 
He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and was sleeping too much . 
`` There now , '' thought Gavroche , `` that 's what the summer nights are good for . 
We 'll take the cart for the Republic , and leave the Auvergnat for the Monarchy . '' 
His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light : -- `` How bully that cart would look on our barricade ! '' 
The Auvergnat was snoring . 
Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind , and at the Auvergnat from the front , that is to say , by the feet , and at the expiration of another minute the imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on the pavement . 
The cart was free . 
Gavroche , habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters , had everything about him . 
He fumbled in one of his pockets , and pulled from it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter . 
He wrote : -- `` French Republic . '' 
`` Received thy cart . '' 
And he signed it : `` GAVROCHE . '' 
That done , he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring Auvergnat 's velvet vest , seized the cart shafts in both hands , and set off in the direction of the Halles , pushing the cart before him at a hard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar . 
This was perilous . 
There was a post at the Royal Printing Establishment . 
Gavroche did not think of this . 
This post was occupied by the National Guards of the suburbs . 
The squad began to wake up , and heads were raised from camp beds . 
Two street lanterns broken in succession , that ditty sung at the top of the lungs . 
This was a great deal for those cowardly streets , which desire to go to sleep at sunset , and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour . 
For the last hour , that boy had been creating an uproar in that peaceable arrondissement , the uproar of a fly in a bottle . 
The sergeant of the banlieue lent an ear . 
He waited . 
He was a prudent man . 
The mad rattle of the cart , filled to overflowing the possible measure of waiting , and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance . 
`` There 's a whole band of them there ! '' 
said he , `` let us proceed gently . '' 
It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and that it was stalking abroad through the quarter . 
