When these men were re-united , one of them lifted the latch of the gate in the fence , and all four entered the enclosure in which the shanty stood . 
They halted directly under Thenardier . 
These men had evidently chosen this vacant space in order that they might consult without being seen by the passers-by or by the sentinel who guards the wicket of La Force a few paces distant . 
It must be added , that the rain kept this sentinel blocked in his box . 
Thenardier , not being able to distinguish their visages , lent an ear to their words with the desperate attention of a wretch who feels himself lost . 
Thenardier saw something resembling a gleam of hope flash before his eyes , -- these men conversed in slang . 
The first said in a low but distinct voice : -- `` Let 's cut . 
What are we up to here ? '' 
The second replied : `` It 's raining hard enough to put out the very devil 's fire . 
And the bobbies will be along instanter . 
There 's a soldier on guard yonder . 
We shall get nabbed here . '' 
These two words , icigo and icicaille , both of which mean ici , and which belong , the first to the slang of the barriers , the second to the slang of the Temple , were flashes of light for Thenardier . 
By the icigo he recognized Brujon , who was a prowler of the barriers , by the icicaille he knew Babet , who , among his other trades , had been an old-clothes broker at the Temple . 
The antique slang of the great century is no longer spoken except in the Temple , and Babet was really the only person who spoke it in all its purity . 
Had it not been for the icicaille , Thenardier would not have recognized him , for he had entirely changed his voice . 
In the meanwhile , the third man had intervened . 
`` There 's no hurry yet , let 's wait a bit . 
How do we know that he does n't stand in need of us ? '' 
By this , which was nothing but French , Thenardier recognized Montparnasse , who made it a point in his elegance to understand all slangs and to speak none of them . 
As for the fourth , he held his peace , but his huge shoulders betrayed him . 
Thenardier did not hesitate . 
It was Guelemer . 
Brujon replied almost impetuously but still in a low tone : -- `` What are you jabbering about ? 
The tavern-keeper has n't managed to cut his stick . 
He do n't tumble to the racket , that he do n't ! 
You have to be a pretty knowing cove to tear up your shirt , cut up your sheet to make a rope , punch holes in doors , get up false papers , make false keys , file your irons , hang out your cord , hide yourself , and disguise yourself ! 
The old fellow has n't managed to play it , he does n't understand how to work the business . '' 
Babet added , still in that classical slang which was spoken by Poulailler and Cartouche , and which is to the bold , new , highly colored and risky argot used by Brujon what the language of Racine is to the language of Andre Chenier : -- `` Your tavern-keeper must have been nabbed in the act . 
You have to be knowing . 
He 's only a greenhorn . 
He must have let himself be taken in by a bobby , perhaps even by a sheep who played it on him as his pal . 
Listen , Montparnasse , do you hear those shouts in the prison ? 
You have seen all those lights . 
He 's recaptured , there ! 
He 'll get off with twenty years . 
I ai n't afraid , I ai n't a coward , but there ai n't anything more to do , or otherwise they 'd lead us a dance . 
Do n't get mad , come with us , let 's go drink a bottle of old wine together . '' 
`` One does n't desert one 's friends in a scrape , '' grumbled Montparnasse . 
`` I tell you he 's nabbed ! '' 
retorted Brujon . 
`` At the present moment , the inn-keeper ai n't worth a ha ` penny . 
We ca n't do nothing for him . 
Let 's be off . 
Every minute I think a bobby has got me in his fist . '' 
Montparnasse no longer offered more than a feeble resistance ; the fact is , that these four men , with the fidelity of ruffians who never abandon each other , had prowled all night long about La Force , great as was their peril , in the hope of seeing Thenardier make his appearance on the top of some wall . 
But the night , which was really growing too fine , -- for the downpour was such as to render all the streets deserted , -- the cold which was overpowering them , their soaked garments , their hole-ridden shoes , the alarming noise which had just burst forth in the prison , the hours which had elapsed , the patrol which they had encountered , the hope which was vanishing , all urged them to beat a retreat . 
Montparnasse himself , who was , perhaps , almost Thenardier 's son-in-law , yielded . 
A moment more , and they would be gone . 
Thenardier was panting on his wall like the shipwrecked sufferers of the Meduse on their raft when they beheld the vessel which had appeared in sight vanish on the horizon . 
