This inspired Aunt Gillenormand with a second idea . 
She had , on the first occasion , hit upon the plan of having Marius spied upon by Theodule ; now she plotted to have Theodule take Marius ' place . 
At all events and in case the grandfather should feel the vague need of a young face in the house , -- these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet to ruin , -- it was expedient to find another Marius . 
`` Take it as a simple erratum , '' she thought , `` such as one sees in books . 
For Marius , read Theodule . '' 
A grandnephew is almost the same as a grandson ; in default of a lawyer one takes a lancer . 
One morning , when M. Gillenormand was about to read something in the Quotidienne , his daughter entered and said to him in her sweetest voice ; for the question concerned her favorite : -- `` Father , Theodule is coming to present his respects to you this morning . '' 
`` Who 's Theodule ? '' 
`` Your grandnephew . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the grandfather . 
Then he went back to his reading , thought no more of his grandnephew , who was merely some Theodule or other , and soon flew into a rage , which almost always happened when he read . 
The `` sheet '' which he held , although Royalist , of course , announced for the following day , without any softening phrases , one of these little events which were of daily occurrence at that date in Paris : `` That the students of the schools of law and medicine were to assemble on the Place du Pantheon , at midday , -- to deliberate . '' 
The discussion concerned one of the questions of the moment , the artillery of the National Guard , and a conflict between the Minister of War and `` the citizen 's militia , '' on the subject of the cannon parked in the courtyard of the Louvre . 
The students were to `` deliberate '' over this . 
It did not take much more than this to swell M. Gillenormand 's rage . 
He thought of Marius , who was a student , and who would probably go with the rest , to `` deliberate , at midday , on the Place du Pantheon . '' 
As he was indulging in this painful dream , Lieutenant Theodule entered clad in plain clothes as a bourgeois , which was clever of him , and was discreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
The lancer had reasoned as follows : `` The old druid has not sunk all his money in a life pension . 
It is well to disguise one 's self as a civilian from time to time . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand said aloud to her father : -- `` Theodule , your grandnephew . '' 
And in a low voice to the lieutenant : -- `` Approve of everything . '' 
And she withdrew . 
The lieutenant , who was but little accustomed to such venerable encounters , stammered with some timidity : `` Good day , uncle , '' -- and made a salute composed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of the military salute finished off as a bourgeois salute . 
`` Ah ! 
so it 's you ; that is well , sit down , '' said the old gentleman . 
That said , he totally forgot the lancer . 
Theodule seated himself , and M. Gillenormand rose . 
M. Gillenormand began to pace back and forth , his hands in his pockets , talking aloud , and twitching , with his irritated old fingers , at the two watches which he wore in his two fobs . 
`` That pack of brats ! 
they convene on the Place du Pantheon ! 
by my life ! 
urchins who were with their nurses but yesterday ! 
If one were to squeeze their noses , milk would burst out . 
And they deliberate to-morrow , at midday . 
What are we coming to ? 
What are we coming to ? 
It is clear that we are making for the abyss . 
That is what the descamisados have brought us to ! 
To deliberate on the citizen artillery ! 
To go and jabber in the open air over the jibes of the National Guard ! 
And with whom are they to meet there ? 
Just see whither Jacobinism leads . 
I will bet anything you like , a million against a counter , that there will be no one there but returned convicts and released galley-slaves . 
The Republicans and the galley-slaves , -- they form but one nose and one handkerchief . 
Carnot used to say : ` Where would you have me go , traitor ? ' 
Fouche replied : ` Wherever you please , imbecile ! ' 
That 's what the Republicans are like . '' 
`` That is true , '' said Theodule . 
M. Gillenormand half turned his head , saw Theodule , and went on : -- `` When one reflects that that scoundrel was so vile as to turn carbonaro ! 
