It behooved wise people to play the part of their own police , and to guard themselves well , and care must be taken to duly close , bar and barricade their houses , and to fasten the doors well . 
Madame Magloire emphasized these last words ; but the Bishop had just come from his room , where it was rather cold . 
He seated himself in front of the fire , and warmed himself , and then fell to thinking of other things . 
He did not take up the remark dropped with design by Madame Magloire . 
She repeated it . 
Then Mademoiselle Baptistine , desirous of satisfying Madame Magloire without displeasing her brother , ventured to say timidly : -- `` Did you hear what Madame Magloire is saying , brother ? '' 
`` I have heard something of it in a vague way , '' replied the Bishop . 
Then half-turning in his chair , placing his hands on his knees , and raising towards the old servant woman his cordial face , which so easily grew joyous , and which was illuminated from below by the firelight , -- `` Come , what is the matter ? 
What is the matter ? 
Are we in any great danger ? '' 
Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh , exaggerating it a little without being aware of the fact . 
It appeared that a Bohemian , a bare-footed vagabond , a sort of dangerous mendicant , was at that moment in the town . 
He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre 's to obtain lodgings , but the latter had not been willing to take him in . 
He had been seen to arrive by the way of the boulevard Gassendi and roam about the streets in the gloaming . 
A gallows-bird with a terrible face . 
`` Really ! '' 
said the Bishop . 
This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire ; it seemed to her to indicate that the Bishop was on the point of becoming alarmed ; she pursued triumphantly : -- `` Yes , Monseigneur . 
That is how it is . 
There will be some sort of catastrophe in this town to-night . 
Every one says so . 
And withal , the police is so badly regulated '' -LRB- a useful repetition -RRB- . 
`` The idea of living in a mountainous country , and not even having lights in the streets at night ! 
One goes out . 
Black as ovens , indeed ! 
And I say , Monseigneur , and Mademoiselle there says with me -- '' `` I , '' interrupted his sister , `` say nothing . 
What my brother does is well done . '' 
Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest : -- `` We say that this house is not safe at all ; that if Monseigneur will permit , I will go and tell Paulin Musebois , the locksmith , to come and replace the ancient locks on the doors ; we have them , and it is only the work of a moment ; for I say that nothing is more terrible than a door which can be opened from the outside with a latch by the first passer-by ; and I say that we need bolts , Monseigneur , if only for this night ; moreover , Monseigneur has the habit of always saying ` come in ' ; and besides , even in the middle of the night , O mon Dieu ! 
there is no need to ask permission . '' 
At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
THE HEROISM OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE . 
The door opened . 
It opened wide with a rapid movement , as though some one had given it an energetic and resolute push . 
A man entered . 
We already know the man . 
It was the wayfarer whom we have seen wandering about in search of shelter . 
He entered , advanced a step , and halted , leaving the door open behind him . 
He had his knapsack on his shoulders , his cudgel in his hand , a rough , audacious , weary , and violent expression in his eyes . 
The fire on the hearth lighted him up . 
He was hideous . 
It was a sinister apparition . 
Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry . 
She trembled , and stood with her mouth wide open . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine turned round , beheld the man entering , and half started up in terror ; then , turning her head by degrees towards the fireplace again , she began to observe her brother , and her face became once more profoundly calm and serene . 
The Bishop fixed a tranquil eye on the man . 
As he opened his mouth , doubtless to ask the new-comer what he desired , the man rested both hands on his staff , directed his gaze at the old man and the two women , and without waiting for the Bishop to speak , he said , in a loud voice : -- `` See here . 
My name is Jean Valjean . 
I am a convict from the galleys . 
I have passed nineteen years in the galleys . 
