and which runs straight to the collecting sewer , called the Grand Sewer , with but a single elbow , on the right , on the elevation of the ancient Cour des Miracles , and a single branch , the Saint-Martin sewer , whose four arms describe a cross . 
But the gut of the Petite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of the Corinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the Rue Saint-Denis ; it ended at the Montmartre sewer , and it was in this that Jean Valjean was entangled . 
There opportunities of losing oneself abound . 
The Montmartre sewer is one of the most labyrinthine of the ancient network . 
Fortunately , Jean Valjean had left behind him the sewer of the markets whose geometrical plan presents the appearance of a multitude of parrots ' roosts piled on top of each other ; but he had before him more than one embarrassing encounter and more than one street corner -- for they are streets -- presenting itself in the gloom like an interrogation point ; first , on his left , the vast sewer of the Platriere , a sort of Chinese puzzle , thrusting out and entangling its chaos of Ts and Zs under the Post-Office and under the rotunda of the Wheat Market , as far as the Seine , where it terminates in a Y ; secondly , on his right , the curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran with its three teeth , which are also blind courts ; thirdly , on his left , the branch of the Mail , complicated , almost at its inception , with a sort of fork , and proceeding from zig-zag to zig-zag until it ends in the grand crypt of the outlet of the Louvre , truncated and ramified in every direction ; and lastly , the blind alley of a passage of the Rue des Jeuneurs , without counting little ducts here and there , before reaching the belt sewer , which alone could conduct him to some issue sufficiently distant to be safe . 
Had Jean Valjean had any idea of all that we have here pointed out , he would speedily have perceived , merely by feeling the wall , that he was not in the subterranean gallery of the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Instead of the ancient stone , instead of the antique architecture , haughty and royal even in the sewer , with pavement and string courses of granite and mortar costing eight hundred livres the fathom , he would have felt under his hand contemporary cheapness , economical expedients , porous stone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation , which costs two hundred francs the metre , and the bourgeoise masonry known as a petits materiaux -- small stuff ; but of all this he knew nothing . 
He advanced with anxiety , but with calmness , seeing nothing , knowing nothing , buried in chance , that is to say , engulfed in providence . 
By degrees , we will admit , a certain horror seized upon him . 
The gloom which enveloped him penetrated his spirit . 
He walked in an enigma . 
This aqueduct of the sewer is formidable ; it interlaces in a dizzy fashion . 
It is a melancholy thing to be caught in this Paris of shadows . 
Jean Valjean was obliged to find and even to invent his route without seeing it . 
In this unknown , every step that he risked might be his last . 
How was he to get out ? 
should he find an issue ? 
should he find it in time ? 
would that colossal subterranean sponge with its stone cavities , allow itself to be penetrated and pierced ? 
should he there encounter some unexpected knot in the darkness ? 
should he arrive at the inextricable and the impassable ? 
would Marius die there of hemorrhage and he of hunger ? 
should they end by both getting lost , and by furnishing two skeletons in a nook of that night ? 
He did not know . 
He put all these questions to himself without replying to them . 
The intestines of Paris form a precipice . 
Like the prophet , he was in the belly of the monster . 
All at once , he had a surprise . 
At the most unforeseen moment , and without having ceased to walk in a straight line , he perceived that he was no longer ascending ; the water of the rivulet was beating against his heels , instead of meeting him at his toes . 
The sewer was now descending . 
Why ? 
Was he about to arrive suddenly at the Seine ? 
This danger was a great one , but the peril of retreating was still greater . 
He continued to advance . 
It was not towards the Seine that he was proceeding . 
The ridge which the soil of Paris forms on its right bank empties one of its water-sheds into the Seine and the other into the Grand Sewer . 
The crest of this ridge which determines the division of the waters describes a very capricious line . 
The culminating point , which is the point of separation of the currents , is in the Sainte-Avoye sewer , beyond the Rue Michelle-Comte , in the sewer of the Louvre , near the boulevards , and in the Montmartre sewer , near the Halles . 
It was this culminating point that Jean Valjean had reached . 
He was directing his course towards the belt sewer ; he was on the right path . 
But he did not know it . 
Every time that he encountered a branch , he felt of its angles , and if he found that the opening which presented itself was smaller than the passage in which he was , he did not enter but continued his route , rightly judging that every narrower way must needs terminate in a blind alley , and could only lead him further from his goal , that is to say , the outlet . 
Thus he avoided the quadruple trap which was set for him in the darkness by the four labyrinths which we have just enumerated . 
At a certain moment , he perceived that he was emerging from beneath the Paris which was petrified by the uprising , where the barricades had suppressed circulation , and that he was entering beneath the living and normal Paris . 
Overhead he suddenly heard a noise as of thunder , distant but continuous . 
It was the rumbling of vehicles . 
He had been walking for about half an hour , at least according to the calculation which he made in his own mind , and he had not yet thought of rest ; he had merely changed the hand with which he was holding Marius . 
The darkness was more profound than ever , but its very depth reassured him . 
All at once , he saw his shadow in front of him . 
It was outlined on a faint , almost indistinct reddish glow , which vaguely empurpled the flooring vault underfoot , and the vault overhead , and gilded to his right and to his left the two viscous walls of the passage . 
