The young men were comrades ; the young girls were friends . 
Such loves are always accompanied by such friendships . 
Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things ; the proof of this is that , after making all due allowances for these little irregular households , Favourite , Zephine , and Dahlia were philosophical young women , while Fantine was a good girl . 
Good ! 
some one will exclaim ; and Tholomyes ? 
Solomon would reply that love forms a part of wisdom . 
We will confine ourselves to saying that the love of Fantine was a first love , a sole love , a faithful love . 
She alone , of all the four , was not called `` thou '' by a single one of them . 
Fantine was one of those beings who blossom , so to speak , from the dregs of the people . 
Though she had emerged from the most unfathomable depths of social shadow , she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous and the unknown . 
She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents ? 
Who can say ? 
She had never known father or mother . 
She was called Fantine . 
Why Fantine ? 
She had never borne any other name . 
At the epoch of her birth the Directory still existed . 
She had no family name ; she had no family ; no baptismal name ; the Church no longer existed . 
She bore the name which pleased the first random passer-by , who had encountered her , when a very small child , running bare-legged in the street . 
She received the name as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it rained . 
She was called little Fantine . 
No one knew more than that . 
This human creature had entered life in just this way . 
At the age of ten , Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in the neighborhood . 
At fifteen she came to Paris `` to seek her fortune . '' 
Fantine was beautiful , and remained pure as long as she could . 
She was a lovely blonde , with fine teeth . 
She had gold and pearls for her dowry ; but her gold was on her head , and her pearls were in her mouth . 
She worked for her living ; then , still for the sake of her living , -- for the heart , also , has its hunger , -- she loved . 
She loved Tholomyes . 
An amour for him ; passion for her . 
The streets of the Latin quarter , filled with throngs of students and grisettes , saw the beginning of their dream . 
Fantine had long evaded Tholomyes in the mazes of the hill of the Pantheon , where so many adventurers twine and untwine , but in such a way as constantly to encounter him again . 
There is a way of avoiding which resembles seeking . 
In short , the eclogue took place . 
Blachevelle , Listolier , and Fameuil formed a sort of group of which Tholomyes was the head . 
It was he who possessed the wit . 
Tholomyes was the antique old student ; he was rich ; he had an income of four thousand francs ; four thousand francs ! 
a splendid scandal on Mount Sainte-Genevieve . 
Tholomyes was a fast man of thirty , and badly preserved . 
He was wrinkled and toothless , and he had the beginning of a bald spot , of which he himself said with sadness , the skull at thirty , the knee at forty . 
His digestion was mediocre , and he had been attacked by a watering in one eye . 
But in proportion as his youth disappeared , gayety was kindled ; he replaced his teeth with buffooneries , his hair with mirth , his health with irony , his weeping eye laughed incessantly . 
He was dilapidated but still in flower . 
His youth , which was packing up for departure long before its time , beat a retreat in good order , bursting with laughter , and no one saw anything but fire . 
He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville . 
He made a few verses now and then . 
In addition to this he doubted everything to the last degree , which is a vast force in the eyes of the weak . 
Being thus ironical and bald , he was the leader . 
Iron is an English word . 
