Fables of nurses ; bugaboo for children ; Jehovah for men . 
No ; our to-morrow is the night . 
Beyond the tomb there is nothing but equal nothingness . 
You have been Sardanapalus , you have been Vincent de Paul -- it makes no difference . 
That is the truth . 
Then live your life , above all things . 
Make use of your I while you have it . 
In truth , Bishop , I tell you that I have a philosophy of my own , and I have my philosophers . 
I do n't let myself be taken in with that nonsense . 
Of course , there must be something for those who are down , -- for the barefooted beggars , knife-grinders , and miserable wretches . 
Legends , chimeras , the soul , immortality , paradise , the stars , are provided for them to swallow . 
They gobble it down . 
They spread it on their dry bread . 
He who has nothing else has the good . 
God . 
That is the least he can have . 
I oppose no objection to that ; but I reserve Monsieur Naigeon for myself . 
The good God is good for the populace . '' 
The Bishop clapped his hands . 
`` That 's talking ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` What an excellent and really marvellous thing is this materialism ! 
Not every one who wants it can have it . 
Ah ! 
when one does have it , one is no longer a dupe , one does not stupidly allow one 's self to be exiled like Cato , nor stoned like Stephen , nor burned alive like Jeanne d'Arc . 
Those who have succeeded in procuring this admirable materialism have the joy of feeling themselves irresponsible , and of thinking that they can devour everything without uneasiness , -- places , sinecures , dignities , power , whether well or ill acquired , lucrative recantations , useful treacheries , savory capitulations of conscience , -- and that they shall enter the tomb with their digestion accomplished . 
How agreeable that is ! 
I do not say that with reference to you , senator . 
Nevertheless , it is impossible for me to refrain from congratulating you . 
You great lords have , so you say , a philosophy of your own , and for yourselves , which is exquisite , refined , accessible to the rich alone , good for all sauces , and which seasons the voluptuousness of life admirably . 
This philosophy has been extracted from the depths , and unearthed by special seekers . 
But you are good-natured princes , and you do not think it a bad thing that belief in the good God should constitute the philosophy of the people , very much as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is the truffled turkey of the poor . '' 
THE BROTHER AS DEPICTED BY THE SISTER In order to furnish an idea of the private establishment of the Bishop of D -- , and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinated their actions , their thoughts , their feminine instincts even , which are easily alarmed , to the habits and purposes of the Bishop , without his even taking the trouble of speaking in order to explain them , we can not do better than transcribe in this place a letter from Mademoiselle Baptistine to Madame the Vicomtess de Boischevron , the friend of her childhood . 
This letter is in our possession . 
D -- , Dec. 16 , 18 -- . 
MY GOOD MADAM : Not a day passes without our speaking of you . 
It is our established custom ; but there is another reason besides . 
Just imagine , while washing and dusting the ceilings and walls , Madam Magloire has made some discoveries ; now our two chambers hung with antique paper whitewashed over , would not discredit a chateau in the style of yours . 
Madam Magloire has pulled off all the paper . 
There were things beneath . 
My drawing-room , which contains no furniture , and which we use for spreading out the linen after washing , is fifteen feet in height , eighteen square , with a ceiling which was formerly painted and gilded , and with beams , as in yours . 
This was covered with a cloth while this was the hospital . 
And the woodwork was of the era of our grandmothers . 
But my room is the one you ought to see . 
Madam Magloire has discovered , under at least ten thicknesses of paper pasted on top , some paintings , which without being good are very tolerable . 
The subject is Telemachus being knighted by Minerva in some gardens , the name of which escapes me . 
In short , where the Roman ladies repaired on one single night . 
What shall I say to you ? 
I have Romans , and Roman ladies -LSB- here occurs an illegible word -RSB- , and the whole train . 
Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off ; this summer she is going to have some small injuries repaired , and the whole revarnished , and my chamber will be a regular museum . 
