I voted the end of the tyrant , that is to say , the end of prostitution for woman , the end of slavery for man , the end of night for the child . 
In voting for the Republic , I voted for that . 
I voted for fraternity , concord , the dawn . 
I have aided in the overthrow of prejudices and errors . 
The crumbling away of prejudices and errors causes light . 
We have caused the fall of the old world , and the old world , that vase of miseries , has become , through its upsetting upon the human race , an urn of joy . '' 
`` Mixed joy , '' said the Bishop . 
`` You may say troubled joy , and to-day , after that fatal return of the past , which is called 1814 , joy which has disappeared ! 
Alas ! 
The work was incomplete , I admit : we demolished the ancient regime in deeds ; we were not able to suppress it entirely in ideas . 
To destroy abuses is not sufficient ; customs must be modified . 
The mill is there no longer ; the wind is still there . '' 
`` You have demolished . 
It may be of use to demolish , but I distrust a demolition complicated with wrath . '' 
`` Right has its wrath , Bishop ; and the wrath of right is an element of progress . 
In any case , and in spite of whatever may be said , the French Revolution is the most important step of the human race since the advent of Christ . 
Incomplete , it may be , but sublime . 
It set free all the unknown social quantities ; it softened spirits , it calmed , appeased , enlightened ; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over the earth . 
It was a good thing . 
The French Revolution is the consecration of humanity . '' 
The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring : -- `` Yes ? ' 
93 ! '' 
The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair with an almost lugubrious solemnity , and exclaimed , so far as a dying man is capable of exclamation : -- `` Ah , there you go ; ' 93 ! 
I was expecting that word . 
A cloud had been forming for the space of fifteen hundred years ; at the end of fifteen hundred years it burst . 
You are putting the thunderbolt on its trial . '' 
The Bishop felt , without , perhaps , confessing it , that something within him had suffered extinction . 
Nevertheless , he put a good face on the matter . 
He replied : -- `` The judge speaks in the name of justice ; the priest speaks in the name of pity , which is nothing but a more lofty justice . 
A thunderbolt should commit no error . '' 
And he added , regarding the member of the Convention steadily the while , `` Louis XVII . ? '' 
The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop 's arm . 
`` Louis XVII . ! 
let us see . 
For whom do you mourn ? 
is it for the innocent child ? 
very good ; in that case I mourn with you . 
Is it for the royal child ? 
I demand time for reflection . 
To me , the brother of Cartouche , an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Greve , until death ensued , for the sole crime of having been the brother of Cartouche , is no less painful than the grandson of Louis XV. , an innocent child , martyred in the tower of the Temple , for the sole crime of having been grandson of Louis XV . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the Bishop , `` I like not this conjunction of names . '' 
`` Cartouche ? 
Louis XV . ? 
To which of the two do you object ? '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The Bishop almost regretted having come , and yet he felt vaguely and strangely shaken . 
The conventionary resumed : -- `` Ah , Monsieur Priest , you love not the crudities of the true . 
Christ loved them . 
He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple . 
His scourge , full of lightnings , was a harsh speaker of truths . 
