I have fulfilled this duty towards Cosette . 
I do not think that so slight a thing can be called a good action ; but if it be a good action , well , say that I have done it . 
Register this attenuating circumstance . 
To-day , Cosette passes out of my life ; our two roads part . 
Henceforth , I can do nothing for her . 
She is Madame Pontmercy . 
Her providence has changed . 
And Cosette gains by the change . 
All is well . 
As for the six hundred thousand francs , you do not mention them to me , but I forestall your thought , they are a deposit . 
How did that deposit come into my hands ? 
What does that matter ? 
I restore the deposit . 
Nothing more can be demanded of me . 
I complete the restitution by announcing my true name . 
That concerns me . 
I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am . '' 
And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face . 
All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent . 
Certain gusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls . 
We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us is dispersed ; we say the first things that occur to us , which are not always precisely those which should be said . 
There are sudden revelations which one can not bear , and which intoxicate like baleful wine . 
Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presented itself to him , to the point of addressing that man almost like a person who was angry with him for this avowal . 
`` But why , '' he exclaimed , `` do you tell me all this ? 
Who forces you to do so ? 
You could have kept your secret to yourself . 
You are neither denounced , nor tracked nor pursued . 
You have a reason for wantonly making such a revelation . 
Conclude . 
There is something more . 
In what connection do you make this confession ? 
What is your motive ? '' 
`` My motive ? '' 
replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one would have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius . 
`` From what motive , in fact , has this convict just said ` I am a convict ' ? 
Well , yes ! 
the motive is strange . 
It is out of honesty . 
Stay , the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart , which keeps me fast . 
It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly solid . 
All life falls in ruin around one ; one resists . 
Had I been able to tear out that thread , to break it , to undo the knot or to cut it , to go far away , I should have been safe . 
I had only to go away ; there are diligences in the Rue Bouloy ; you are happy ; I am going . 
I have tried to break that thread , I have jerked at it , it would not break , I tore my heart with it . 
Then I said : ` I can not live anywhere else than here . ' 
I must stay . 
Well , yes , you are right , I am a fool , why not simply remain here ? 
You offer me a chamber in this house , Madame Pontmercy is sincerely attached to me , she said to the arm-chair : ` Stretch out your arms to him , ' your grandfather demands nothing better than to have me , I suit him , we shall live together , and take our meals in common , I shall give Cosette my arm ... Madame Pontmercy , excuse me , it is a habit , we shall have but one roof , one table , one fire , the same chimney-corner in winter , the same promenade in summer , that is joy , that is happiness , that is everything . 
We shall live as one family . 
One family ! '' 
