Some unique chaplet ? 
Some authentic relic ? 
They lost themselves in conjectures . 
When the poor old woman died , they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting , perhaps , and opened it . 
They found the object beneath a triple linen cloth , like some consecrated paten . 
It was a Faenza platter representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary lads armed with enormous syringes . 
The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures . 
One of the charming little Loves is already fairly spitted . 
He is resisting , fluttering his tiny wings , and still making an effort to fly , but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air . 
Moral : Love conquered by the colic . 
This platter , which is very curious , and which had , possibly , the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea , was still in existence in September , 1845 ; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais . 
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because , said she , the parlor is too gloomy . 
ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION However , this almost sepulchral parlor , of which we have sought to convey an idea , is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in other convents . 
At the convent of the Rue du Temple , in particular , which belonged , in truth , to another order , the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains , and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor , whose windows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames , a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face , painted bouquets , and even the head of a Turk . 
It is in that garden of the Temple convent , that stood that famous chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France , and which bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm . 
As we have said , this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration , Benedictines quite different from those who depended on Citeaux . 
This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years . 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart , in two churches in Paris , at Saint-Sulpice and at Saint-Jean en Greve , a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town in an uproar . 
M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy , in which the Pope 's Nuncio officiated . 
But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted women , Madame Courtin , Marquise de Boucs , and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux . 
This outrage committed on `` the most holy sacrament of the altar , '' though but temporary , would not depart from these holy souls , and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a `` Perpetual Adoration '' in some female monastery . 
Both of them , one in 1652 , the other in 1653 , made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine de Bar , called of the Holy Sacrament , a Benedictine nun , for the purpose of founding , to this pious end , a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoit ; the first permission for this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz , Abbe of Saint-Germain , `` on condition that no woman could be received unless she contributed three hundred livres income , which amounts to six thousand livres , to the principal . '' 
After the Abbe of Saint-Germain , the king accorded letters-patent ; and all the rest , abbatial charter , and royal letters , was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament . 
Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at Paris . 
Their first convent was `` a new building '' in the Rue Cassette , out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux . 
This order , as it will be seen , was not to be confounded with the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux . 
It mounted back to the Abbe of Saint-Germain des Pres , in the same manner that the ladies of the Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits , and the sisters of charity to the general of the Lazarists . 
It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus , whose interior we have just shown . 
In 1657 , Pope Alexander VII . 
had authorized , by a special brief , the Bernardines of the Rue Petit-Picpus , to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine nuns of the Holy Sacrament . 
But the two orders remained distinct none the less . 
END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS At the beginning of the Restoration , the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in its decay ; this forms a part of the general death of the order , which , after the eighteenth century , has been disappearing like all the religious orders . 
Contemplation is , like prayer , one of humanity 's needs ; but , like everything which the Revolution touched , it will be transformed , and from being hostile to social progress , it will become favorable to it . 
The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated . 
In 1840 , the Little Convent had disappeared , the school had disappeared . 
There were no longer any old women , nor young girls ; the first were dead , the latter had taken their departure . 
Volaverunt . 
The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that it alarms , vocations recoil before it , the order receives no recruits . 
In 1845 , it still obtained lay-sisters here and there . 
But of professed nuns , none at all . 
Forty years ago , the nuns numbered nearly a hundred ; fifteen years ago there were not more than twenty-eight of them . 
How many are there to-day ? 
In 1847 , the prioress was young , a sign that the circle of choice was restricted . 
She was not forty years old . 
In proportion as the number diminishes , the fatigue increases , the service of each becomes more painful ; the moment could then be seen drawing near when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy rule of Saint-Benoit . 
The burden is implacable , and remains the same for the few as for the many . 
It weighs down , it crushes . 
Thus they die . 
At the period when the author of this book still lived in Paris , two died . 
One was twenty-five years old , the other twenty-three . 
