You did not expect to find your grandfather still more foolish than yourself , you are wasting the discourse which you meant to bestow upon me , Mr. Lawyer , and that 's vexatious . 
Well , so much the worse , rage away . 
I 'll do whatever you wish , and that cuts you short , imbecile ! 
Listen . 
I have made my inquiries , I 'm cunning too ; she is charming , she is discreet , it is not true about the lancer , she has made heaps of lint , she 's a jewel , she adores you , if you had died , there would have been three of us , her coffin would have accompanied mine . 
I have had an idea , ever since you have been better , of simply planting her at your bedside , but it is only in romances that young girls are brought to the bedsides of handsome young wounded men who interest them . 
It is not done . 
What would your aunt have said to it ? 
You were nude three quarters of the time , my good fellow . 
Ask Nicolette , who has not left you for a moment , if there was any possibility of having a woman here . 
And then , what would the doctor have said ? 
A pretty girl does not cure a man of fever . 
In short , it 's all right , let us say no more about it , all 's said , all 's done , it 's all settled , take her . 
Such is my ferocity . 
You see , I perceived that you did not love me . 
I said to myself : ` Here now , I have my little Cosette right under my hand , I 'm going to give her to him , he will be obliged to love me a little then , or he must tell the reason why . ' 
Ah ! 
so you thought that the old man was going to storm , to put on a big voice , to shout no , and to lift his cane at all that aurora . 
Not a bit of it . 
Cosette , so be it ; love , so be it ; I ask nothing better . 
Pray take the trouble of getting married , sir . 
Be happy , my well-beloved child . '' 
That said , the old man burst forth into sobs . 
And he seized Marius ' head , and pressed it with both arms against his breast , and both fell to weeping . 
This is one of the forms of supreme happiness . 
`` Father ! '' 
cried Marius . 
`` Ah , so you love me ! '' 
said the old man . 
An ineffable moment ensued . 
They were choking and could not speak . 
At length the old man stammered : `` Come ! 
his mouth is unstopped at last . 
He has said : ` Father ' to me . '' 
Marius disengaged his head from his grandfather 's arms , and said gently : `` But , father , now that I am quite well , it seems to me that I might see her . '' 
`` Agreed again , you shall see her to-morrow . '' 
`` Father ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Why not to-day ? '' 
`` Well , to-day then . 
Let it be to-day . 
You have called me ` father ' three times , and it is worth it . 
I will attend to it . 
She shall be brought hither . 
Agreed , I tell you . 
It has already been put into verse . 
This is the ending of the elegy of the ` Jeune Malade ' by Andre Chenier , by Andre Chenier whose throat was cut by the ras ... by the giants of ' 93 . '' 
M. Gillenormand fancied that he detected a faint frown on the part of Marius , who , in truth , as we must admit , was no longer listening to him , and who was thinking far more of Cosette than of 1793 . 
The grandfather , trembling at having so inopportunely introduced Andre Chenier , resumed precipitately : `` Cut his throat is not the word . 
The fact is that the great revolutionary geniuses , who were not malicious , that is incontestable , who were heroes , pardi ! 
