You understand : suppose that I were to let her go and to sacrifice myself , I should like to know what becomes of her ; I should not wish to lose sight of her ; I should like to know with whom she is living , so that I could go to see her from time to time ; so that she may know that her good foster-father is alive , that he is watching over her . 
In short , there are things which are not possible . 
I do not even know your name . 
If you were to take her away , I should say : ` Well , and the Lark , what has become of her ? ' 
One must , at least , see some petty scrap of paper , some trifle in the way of a passport , you know ! '' 
The stranger , still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates , as the saying goes , to the very depths of the conscience , replied in a grave , firm voice : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier , one does not require a passport to travel five leagues from Paris . 
If I take Cosette away , I shall take her away , and that is the end of the matter . 
You will not know my name , you will not know my residence , you will not know where she is ; and my intention is that she shall never set eyes on you again so long as she lives . 
I break the thread which binds her foot , and she departs . 
Does that suit you ? 
Yes or no ? '' 
Since geniuses , like demons , recognize the presence of a superior God by certain signs , Thenardier comprehended that he had to deal with a very strong person . 
It was like an intuition ; he comprehended it with his clear and sagacious promptitude . 
While drinking with the carters , smoking , and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening , he had devoted the whole of the time to observing the stranger , watching him like a cat , and studying him like a mathematician . 
He had watched him , both on his own account , for the pleasure of the thing , and through instinct , and had spied upon him as though he had been paid for so doing . 
Not a movement , not a gesture , on the part of the man in the yellow great-coat had escaped him . 
Even before the stranger had so clearly manifested his interest in Cosette , Thenardier had divined his purpose . 
He had caught the old man 's deep glances returning constantly to the child . 
Who was this man ? 
Why this interest ? 
Why this hideous costume , when he had so much money in his purse ? 
Questions which he put to himself without being able to solve them , and which irritated him . 
He had pondered it all night long . 
He could not be Cosette 's father . 
Was he her grandfather ? 
Then why not make himself known at once ? 
When one has a right , one asserts it . 
This man evidently had no right over Cosette . 
What was it , then ? 
Thenardier lost himself in conjectures . 
He caught glimpses of everything , but he saw nothing . 
Be that as it may , on entering into conversation with the man , sure that there was some secret in the case , that the latter had some interest in remaining in the shadow , he felt himself strong ; when he perceived from the stranger 's clear and firm retort , that this mysterious personage was mysterious in so simple a way , he became conscious that he was weak . 
He had expected nothing of the sort . 
His conjectures were put to the rout . 
He rallied his ideas . 
He weighed everything in the space of a second . 
Thenardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance . 
He decided that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward , and quickly at that . 
He did as great leaders do at the decisive moment , which they know that they alone recognize ; he abruptly unmasked his batteries . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` I am in need of fifteen hundred francs . '' 
The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of black leather , opened it , drew out three bank-bills , which he laid on the table . 
Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to the inn-keeper : -- `` Go and fetch Cosette . '' 
While this was taking place , what had Cosette been doing ? 
On waking up , Cosette had run to get her shoe . 
In it she had found the gold piece . 
It was not a Napoleon ; it was one of those perfectly new twenty-franc pieces of the Restoration , on whose effigy the little Prussian queue had replaced the laurel wreath . 
Cosette was dazzled . 
Her destiny began to intoxicate her . 
She did not know what a gold piece was ; she had never seen one ; she hid it quickly in her pocket , as though she had stolen it . 
Still , she felt that it really was hers ; she guessed whence her gift had come , but the joy which she experienced was full of fear . 
