is that all ! '' 
eh ! 
yes , childish prattle , repetitions , laughter at nothing , nonsense , everything that is deepest and most sublime in the world ! 
The only things which are worth the trouble of saying and hearing ! 
The man who has never heard , the man who has never uttered these absurdities , these paltry remarks , is an imbecile and a malicious fellow . 
Cosette said to Marius : -- `` Dost thou know ? 
-- '' -LSB- In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness , and without either of them being able to say how it had come about , they had begun to call each other thou . -RSB- 
`` Dost thou know ? 
My name is Euphrasie . '' 
`` Euphrasie ? 
Why , no , thy name is Cosette . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was a little thing . 
But my real name is Euphrasie . 
Dost thou like that name -- Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Yes . 
But Cosette is not ugly . '' 
`` Do you like it better than Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Why , yes . '' 
`` Then I like it better too . 
Truly , it is pretty , Cosette . 
Call me Cosette . '' 
And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of a grove situated in heaven . 
On another occasion she gazed intently at him and exclaimed : -- `` Monsieur , you are handsome , you are good-looking , you are witty , you are not at all stupid , you are much more learned than I am , but I bid you defiance with this word : I love you ! '' 
And Marius , in the very heavens , thought he heard a strain sung by a star . 
Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed , and she said to him : -- `` Do n't cough , sir ; I will not have people cough on my domain without my permission . 
It 's very naughty to cough and to disturb me . 
I want you to be well , because , in the first place , if you were not well , I should be very unhappy . 
What should I do then ? '' 
And this was simply divine . 
Once Marius said to Cosette : -- `` Just imagine , I thought at one time that your name was Ursule . '' 
This made both of them laugh the whole evening . 
In the middle of another conversation , he chanced to exclaim : -- `` Oh ! 
One day , at the Luxembourg , I had a good mind to finish breaking up a veteran ! '' 
But he stopped short , and went no further . 
He would have been obliged to speak to Cosette of her garter , and that was impossible . 
This bordered on a strange theme , the flesh , before which that immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright . 
Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this , without anything else ; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet , to displace the old and accommodating bar of the chief-justice 's gate , to sit elbow to elbow on that bench , to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of the on-coming night , to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the ample fall of Cosette 's gown , to caress her thumb-nail , to call her thou , to smell of the same flower , one after the other , forever , indefinitely . 
During this time , clouds passed above their heads . 
Every time that the wind blows it bears with it more of the dreams of men than of the clouds of heaven . 
This chaste , almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry , by any means . 
To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of bestowing caresses , and he is half audacious who tries it . 
A compliment is something like a kiss through a veil . 
Voluptuousness mingles there with its sweet tiny point , while it hides itself . 
The heart draws back before voluptuousness only to love the more . 
Marius ' blandishments , all saturated with fancy , were , so to speak , of azure hue . 
The birds when they fly up yonder , in the direction of the angels , must hear such words . 
There were mingled with them , nevertheless , life , humanity , all the positiveness of which Marius was capable . 
It was what is said in the bower , a prelude to what will be said in the chamber ; a lyrical effusion , strophe and sonnet intermingled , pleasing hyperboles of cooing , all the refinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet and exhaling a celestial perfume , an ineffable twitter of heart to heart . 
`` Oh ! '' 
