The branches , wild with the brilliant glow of midday , seemed endeavoring to embrace . 
In the sycamores there was an uproar of linnets , sparrows triumphed , woodpeckers climbed along the chestnut trees , administering little pecks on the bark . 
The flower-beds accepted the legitimate royalty of the lilies ; the most august of perfumes is that which emanates from whiteness . 
The peppery odor of the carnations was perceptible . 
The old crows of Marie de Medici were amorous in the tall trees . 
The sun gilded , empurpled , set fire to and lighted up the tulips , which are nothing but all the varieties of flame made into flowers . 
All around the banks of tulips the bees , the sparks of these flame-flowers , hummed . 
All was grace and gayety , even the impending rain ; this relapse , by which the lilies of the valley and the honeysuckles were destined to profit , had nothing disturbing about it ; the swallows indulged in the charming threat of flying low . 
He who was there aspired to happiness ; life smelled good ; all nature exhaled candor , help , assistance , paternity , caress , dawn . 
The thoughts which fell from heaven were as sweet as the tiny hand of a baby when one kisses it . 
The statues under the trees , white and nude , had robes of shadow pierced with light ; these goddesses were all tattered with sunlight ; rays hung from them on all sides . 
Around the great fountain , the earth was already dried up to the point of being burnt . 
There was sufficient breeze to raise little insurrections of dust here and there . 
A few yellow leaves , left over from the autumn , chased each other merrily , and seemed to be playing tricks on each other . 
This abundance of light had something indescribably reassuring about it . 
Life , sap , heat , odors overflowed ; one was conscious , beneath creation , of the enormous size of the source ; in all these breaths permeated with love , in this interchange of reverberations and reflections , in this marvellous expenditure of rays , in this infinite outpouring of liquid gold , one felt the prodigality of the inexhaustible ; and , behind this splendor as behind a curtain of flame , one caught a glimpse of God , that millionaire of stars . 
Thanks to the sand , there was not a speck of mud ; thanks to the rain , there was not a grain of ashes . 
The clumps of blossoms had just been bathed ; every sort of velvet , satin , gold and varnish , which springs from the earth in the form of flowers , was irreproachable . 
This magnificence was cleanly . 
The grand silence of happy nature filled the garden . 
A celestial silence that is compatible with a thousand sorts of music , the cooing of nests , the buzzing of swarms , the flutterings of the breeze . 
All the harmony of the season was complete in one gracious whole ; the entrances and exits of spring took place in proper order ; the lilacs ended ; the jasmines began ; some flowers were tardy , some insects in advance of their time ; the van-guard of the red June butterflies fraternized with the rear-guard of the white butterflies of May . 
The plantain trees were getting their new skins . 
The breeze hollowed out undulations in the magnificent enormity of the chestnut-trees . 
It was splendid . 
A veteran from the neighboring barracks , who was gazing through the fence , said : `` Here is the Spring presenting arms and in full uniform . '' 
All nature was breakfasting ; creation was at table ; this was its hour ; the great blue cloth was spread in the sky , and the great green cloth on earth ; the sun lighted it all up brilliantly . 
God was serving the universal repast . 
Each creature had his pasture or his mess . 
The ring-dove found his hemp-seed , the chaffinch found his millet , the goldfinch found chickweed , the red-breast found worms , the green finch found flies , the fly found infusoriae , the bee found flowers . 
They ate each other somewhat , it is true , which is the misery of evil mixed with good ; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach . 
The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of the grand fountain , and , rather bewildered by all this light , they tried to hide themselves , the instinct of the poor and the weak in the presence of even impersonal magnificence ; and they kept behind the swans ' hutch . 
Here and there , at intervals , when the wind blew , shouts , clamor , a sort of tumultuous death rattle , which was the firing , and dull blows , which were discharges of cannon , struck the ear confusedly . 
Smoke hung over the roofs in the direction of the Halles . 
A bell , which had the air of an appeal , was ringing in the distance . 
These children did not appear to notice these noises . 
The little one repeated from time to time : `` I am hungry . '' 
Almost at the same instant with the children , another couple approached the great basin . 
They consisted of a goodman , about fifty years of age , who was leading by the hand a little fellow of six . 
No doubt , a father and his son . 
The little man of six had a big brioche . 
At that epoch , certain houses abutting on the river , in the Rues Madame and d'Enfer , had keys to the Luxembourg garden , of which the lodgers enjoyed the use when the gates were shut , a privilege which was suppressed later on . 
This father and son came from one of these houses , no doubt . 
The two poor little creatures watched `` that gentleman '' approaching , and hid themselves a little more thoroughly . 
He was a bourgeois . 
The same person , perhaps , whom Marius had one day heard , through his love fever , near the same grand basin , counselling his son `` to avoid excesses . '' 
He had an affable and haughty air , and a mouth which was always smiling , since it did not shut . 
This mechanical smile , produced by too much jaw and too little skin , shows the teeth rather than the soul . 
The child , with his brioche , which he had bitten into but had not finished eating , seemed satiated . 
The child was dressed as a National Guardsman , owing to the insurrection , and the father had remained clad as a bourgeois out of prudence . 
