The mattress slipped between the two poles and fell into the street . 
The barricade applauded . 
All voices cried : `` Here is a mattress ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Combeferre , `` but who will go and fetch it ? '' 
The mattress had , in fact , fallen outside the barricade , between besiegers and besieged . 
Now , the death of the sergeant of artillery having exasperated the troop , the soldiers had , for several minutes , been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stones which they had erected , and , in order to supply the forced silence of the piece , which was quiet while its service was in course of reorganization , they had opened fire on the barricade . 
The insurgents did not reply to this musketry , in order to spare their ammunition The fusillade broke against the barricade ; but the street , which it filled , was terrible . 
Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut , entered the street , traversed the storm of bullets , walked up to the mattress , hoisted it upon his back , and returned to the barricade . 
He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands . 
He fixed it there against the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see it . 
That done , they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot . 
It was not long in coming . 
The cannon vomited forth its package of buck-shot with a roar . 
But there was no rebound . 
The effect which they had foreseen had been attained . 
The barricade was saved . 
`` Citizen , '' said Enjolras to Jean Valjean , `` the Republic thanks you . '' 
Bossuet admired and laughed . 
He exclaimed : `` It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power . 
Triumph of that which yields over that which strikes with lightning . 
But never mind , glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon ! '' 
DAWN At that moment , Cosette awoke . 
Her chamber was narrow , neat , unobtrusive , with a long sash-window , facing the East on the back court-yard of the house . 
Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris . 
She had not been there on the preceding evening , and she had already retired to her chamber when Toussaint had said : `` It appears that there is a row . '' 
Cosette had slept only a few hours , but soundly . 
She had had sweet dreams , which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very white . 
Some one , who was Marius , had appeared to her in the light . 
She awoke with the sun in her eyes , which , at first , produced on her the effect of being a continuation of her dream . 
Her first thought on emerging from this dream was a smiling one . 
Cosette felt herself thoroughly reassured . 
Like Jean Valjean , she had , a few hours previously , passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely will not hear of unhappiness . 
She began to cherish hope , with all her might , without knowing why . 
Then she felt a pang at her heart . 
It was three days since she had seen Marius . 
But she said to herself that he must have received her letter , that he knew where she was , and that he was so clever that he would find means of reaching her . 
-- And that certainly to-day , and perhaps that very morning . 
-- It was broad daylight , but the rays of light were very horizontal ; she thought that it was very early , but that she must rise , nevertheless , in order to receive Marius . 
She felt that she could not live without Marius , and that , consequently , that was sufficient and that Marius would come . 
No objection was valid . 
All this was certain . 
It was monstrous enough already to have suffered for three days . 
Marius absent three days , this was horrible on the part of the good God . 
Now , this cruel teasing from on high had been gone through with . 
Marius was about to arrive , and he would bring good news . 
Youth is made thus ; it quickly dries its eyes ; it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it . 
Youth is the smile of the future in the presence of an unknown quantity , which is itself . 
It is natural to it to be happy . 
It seems as though its respiration were made of hope . 
Moreover , Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the subject of this absence which was to last only one day , and what explanation of it he had given her . 
