M. de Rohan 's name really was Auguste . 
It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very highest society , since she knew M. de Rohan , and that her own rank there was of the highest , since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a lord , and that there existed between them some connection , of relationship , perhaps , but a very close one in any case , since she knew his `` pet name . '' 
Two very severe duchesses , Mesdames de Choiseul and de Serent , often visited the community , whither they penetrated , no doubt , in virtue of the privilege Magnates mulieres , and caused great consternation in the boarding-school . 
When these two old ladies passed by , all the poor young girls trembled and dropped their eyes . 
Moreover , M. de Rohan , quite unknown to himself , was an object of attention to the school-girls . 
At that epoch he had just been made , while waiting for the episcopate , vicar-general of the Archbishop of Paris . 
It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus . 
Not one of the young recluses could see him , because of the serge curtain , but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice , which they had come to know and to distinguish . 
He had been a mousquetaire , and then , he was said to be very coquettish , that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed in a roll around his head , and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent moire , and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the world . 
He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen years . 
Not a sound from without made its way into the convent . 
But there was one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither . 
This was an event , and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall it . 
It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood . 
This flute always played the same air , an air which is very far away nowadays , -- `` My Zetulbe , come reign o'er my soul , '' -- and it was heard two or three times a day . 
The young girls passed hours in listening to it , the vocal mothers were upset by it , brains were busy , punishments descended in showers . 
This lasted for several months . 
The girls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician . 
Each one dreamed that she was Zetulbe . 
The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the Rue Droit-Mur ; and they would have given anything , compromised everything , attempted anything for the sake of seeing , of catching a glance , if only for a second , of the `` young man '' who played that flute so deliciously , and who , no doubt , played on all these souls at the same time . 
There were some who made their escape by a back door , and ascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side , in order to attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps . 
Impossible ! 
One even went so far as to thrust her arm through the grating , and to wave her white handkerchief . 
Two were still bolder . 
They found means to climb on a roof , and risked their lives there , and succeeded at last in seeing `` the young man . '' 
He was an old emigre gentleman , blind and penniless , who was playing his flute in his attic , in order to pass the time . 
THE LITTLE CONVENT In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly distinct buildings , -- the Great Convent , inhabited by the nuns , the Boarding-school , where the scholars were lodged ; and lastly , what was called the Little Convent . 
It was a building with a garden , in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders , the relics of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution ; a reunion of all the black , gray , and white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties ; what might be called , if such a coupling of words is permissible , a sort of harlequin convent . 
When the Empire was established , all these poor old dispersed and exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines . 
The government paid them a small pension , the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received them cordially . 
It was a singular pell-mell . 
Each followed her own rule , Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed , as a great recreation , to pay them a visit ; the result is , that all those young memories have retained among other souvenirs that of Mother Sainte-Bazile , Mother Sainte-Scolastique , and Mother Jacob . 
One of these refugees found herself almost at home . 
She was a nun of Sainte-Aure , the only one of her order who had survived . 
The ancient convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied , at the beginning of the eighteenth century , this very house of the Petit-Picpus , which belonged later to the Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
This holy woman , too poor to wear the magnificent habit of her order , which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary , had piously put it on a little manikin , which she exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her death . 
In 1824 , only one nun of this order remained ; to-day , there remains only a doll . 
In addition to these worthy mothers , some old society women had obtained permission of the prioress , like Madame Albertine , to retire into the Little Convent . 
Among the number were Madame Beaufort d'Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne . 
Another was never known in the convent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew her nose . 
The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini -LRB- hubbub -RRB- . 
About 1820 or 1821 , Madame de Genlis , who was at that time editing a little periodical publication called l'Intrepide , asked to be allowed to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident . 
The Duc d'Orleans recommended her . 
Uproar in the hive ; the vocal-mothers were all in a flutter ; Madame de Genlis had made romances . 
But she declared that she was the first to detest them , and then , she had reached her fierce stage of devotion . 
With the aid of God , and of the Prince , she entered . 
She departed at the end of six or eight months , alleging as a reason , that there was no shade in the garden . 
The nuns were delighted . 
Although very old , she still played the harp , and did it very well . 
When she went away she left her mark in her cell . 
