In that lay my stupidity . 
Those Thenardiers were wicked . 
Thou must forgive them . 
Cosette , the moment has come to tell thee the name of thy mother . 
She was called Fantine . 
Remember that name -- Fantine . 
Kneel whenever thou utterest it . 
She suffered much . 
She loved thee dearly . 
She had as much unhappiness as thou hast had happiness . 
That is the way God apportions things . 
He is there on high , he sees us all , and he knows what he does in the midst of his great stars . 
I am on the verge of departure , my children . 
Love each other well and always . 
There is nothing else but that in the world : love for each other . 
You will think sometimes of the poor old man who died here . 
Oh my Cosette , it is not my fault , indeed , that I have not seen thee all this time , it cut me to the heart ; I went as far as the corner of the street , I must have produced a queer effect on the people who saw me pass , I was like a madman , I once went out without my hat . 
I no longer see clearly , my children , I had still other things to say , but never mind . 
Think a little of me . 
Come still nearer . 
I die happy . 
Give me your dear and well-beloved heads , so that I may lay my hands upon them . '' 
Cosette and Marius fell on their knees , in despair , suffocating with tears , each beneath one of Jean Valjean 's hands . 
Those august hands no longer moved . 
He had fallen backwards , the light of the candles illuminated him . 
His white face looked up to heaven , he allowed Cosette and Marius to cover his hands with kisses . 
He was dead . 
The night was starless and extremely dark . 
No doubt , in the gloom , some immense angel stood erect with wings outspread , awaiting that soul . 
THE GRASS COVERS AND THE RAIN EFFACES In the cemetery of Pere-Lachaise , in the vicinity of the common grave , far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres , far from all the tombs of fancy which display in the presence of eternity all the hideous fashions of death , in a deserted corner , beside an old wall , beneath a great yew tree over which climbs the wild convolvulus , amid dandelions and mosses , there lies a stone . 
That stone is no more exempt than others from the leprosy of time , of dampness , of the lichens and from the defilement of the birds . 
The water turns it green , the air blackens it . 
It is not near any path , and people are not fond of walking in that direction , because the grass is high and their feet are immediately wet . 
When there is a little sunshine , the lizards come thither . 
All around there is a quivering of weeds . 
In the spring , linnets warble in the trees . 
This stone is perfectly plain . 
In cutting it the only thought was the requirements of the tomb , and no other care was taken than to make the stone long enough and narrow enough to cover a man . 
No name is to be read there . 
Only , many years ago , a hand wrote upon it in pencil these four lines , which have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust , and which are , to-day , probably effaced : Il dort . 
Quoique le sort fut pour lui bien etrange , Il vivait . 
Il mourut quand il n'eut plus son ange . 
La chose simplement d'elle-meme arriva , Comme la nuit se fait lorsque le jour s ` en va. -LSB- 70 -RSB- -LSB- 70 -RSB- He sleeps . 
Although his fate was very strange , he lived . 
He died when he had no longer his angel . 
The thing came to pass simply , of itself , as the night comes when day is gone . 
LETTER TO M. DAELLI Publisher of the Italian translation of Les Miserables in Milan . 
HAUTEVILLE-HOUSE , October 18 , 1862 . 
You are right , sir , when you tell me that Les Miserables is written for all nations . 
I do not know whether it will be read by all , but I wrote it for all . 
