In the meanwhile , the assailants did not stir , they could be heard marching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did not venture into it , either because they were awaiting orders or because they were awaiting reinforcements before hurling themselves afresh on this impregnable redoubt . 
The insurgents had posted sentinels , and some of them , who were medical students , set about caring for the wounded . 
They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop , with the exception of the two tables reserved for lint and cartridges , and of the one on which lay Father Mabeuf ; they had added them to the barricade , and had replaced them in the tap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widow Hucheloup and her servants . 
On these mattresses they had laid the wounded . 
As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe , no one knew what had become of them . 
They were finally found , however , hidden in the cellar . 
A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade . 
The roll was called . 
One of the insurgents was missing . 
And who was it ? 
One of the dearest . 
One of the most valiant . 
Jean Prouvaire . 
He was sought among the wounded , he was not there . 
He was sought among the dead , he was not there . 
He was evidently a prisoner . 
Combeferre said to Enjolras : -- `` They have our friend ; we have their agent . 
Are you set on the death of that spy ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Enjolras ; `` but less so than on the life of Jean Prouvaire . '' 
This took place in the tap-room near Javert 's post . 
`` Well , '' resumed Combeferre , `` I am going to fasten my handkerchief to my cane , and go as a flag of truce , to offer to exchange our man for theirs . '' 
`` Listen , '' said Enjolras , laying his hand on Combeferre 's arm . 
At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms . 
They heard a manly voice shout : -- `` Vive la France ! 
Long live France ! 
Long live the future ! '' 
They recognized the voice of Prouvaire . 
A flash passed , a report rang out . 
Silence fell again . 
`` They have killed him , '' exclaimed Combeferre . 
Enjolras glanced at Javert , and said to him : -- `` Your friends have just shot you . '' 
THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE A peculiarity of this species of war is , that the attack of the barricades is almost always made from the front , and that the assailants generally abstain from turning the position , either because they fear ambushes , or because they are afraid of getting entangled in the tortuous streets . 
The insurgents ' whole attention had been directed , therefore , to the grand barricade , which was , evidently , the spot always menaced , and there the struggle would infallibly recommence . 
But Marius thought of the little barricade , and went thither . 
It was deserted and guarded only by the fire-pot which trembled between the paving-stones . 
Moreover , the Mondetour alley , and the branches of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne were profoundly calm . 
As Marius was withdrawing , after concluding his inspection , he heard his name pronounced feebly in the darkness . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
He started , for he recognized the voice which had called to him two hours before through the gate in the Rue Plumet . 
Only , the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath . 
He looked about him , but saw no one . 
Marius thought he had been mistaken , that it was an illusion added by his mind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him . 
He advanced a step , in order to quit the distant recess where the barricade lay . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
repeated the voice . 
This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly ; he looked and saw nothing . 
`` At your feet , '' said the voice . 
He bent down , and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itself towards him . 
It was crawling along the pavement . 
It was this that had spoken to him . 
