It humiliates me to think that I am of the same age as that baldy . 
However , I criticise , but I do not insult . 
The universe is what it is . 
I speak here without evil intent and to ease my conscience . 
Receive , Eternal Father , the assurance of my distinguished consideration . 
Ah ! 
by all the saints of Olympus and by all the gods of paradise , I was not intended to be a Parisian , that is to say , to rebound forever , like a shuttlecock between two battledores , from the group of the loungers to the group of the roysterers . 
I was made to be a Turk , watching oriental houris all day long , executing those exquisite Egyptian dances , as sensuous as the dream of a chaste man , or a Beauceron peasant , or a Venetian gentleman surrounded by gentlewoman , or a petty German prince , furnishing the half of a foot-soldier to the Germanic confederation , and occupying his leisure with drying his breeches on his hedge , that is to say , his frontier . 
Those are the positions for which I was born ! 
Yes , I have said a Turk , and I will not retract . 
I do not understand how people can habitually take Turks in bad part ; Mohammed had his good points ; respect for the inventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques ! 
Let us not insult Mohammedanism , the only religion which is ornamented with a hen-roost ! 
Now , I insist on a drink . 
The earth is a great piece of stupidity . 
And it appears that they are going to fight , all those imbeciles , and to break each other 's profiles and to massacre each other in the heart of summer , in the month of June , when they might go off with a creature on their arm , to breathe the immense heaps of new-mown hay in the meadows ! 
Really , people do commit altogether too many follies . 
An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a bric-a-brac merchant 's suggests a reflection to my mind ; it is time to enlighten the human race . 
Yes , behold me sad again . 
That 's what comes of swallowing an oyster and a revolution the wrong way ! 
I am growing melancholy once more . 
Oh ! 
frightful old world . 
People strive , turn each other out , prostitute themselves , kill each other , and get used to it ! '' 
And Grantaire , after this fit of eloquence , had a fit of coughing , which was well earned . 
`` A propos of revolution , '' said Joly , `` it is decidedly abberent that Barius is in lub . '' 
`` Does any one know with whom ? '' 
demanded Laigle . 
`` Do . '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` Do ! 
I tell you . '' 
`` Marius ' love affairs ! '' 
exclaimed Grantaire . 
`` I can imagine it . 
Marius is a fog , and he must have found a vapor . 
Marius is of the race of poets . 
He who says poet , says fool , madman , Tymbraeus Apollo . 
Marius and his Marie , or his Marion , or his Maria , or his Mariette . 
They must make a queer pair of lovers . 
I know just what it is like . 
Ecstasies in which they forget to kiss . 
Pure on earth , but joined in heaven . 
They are souls possessed of senses . 
They lie among the stars . '' 
Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and , possibly , his second harangue , when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the stairs . 
It was a boy less than ten years of age , ragged , very small , yellow , with an odd phiz , a vivacious eye , an enormous amount of hair drenched with rain , and wearing a contented air . 
The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three , addressed himself to Laigle de Meaux . 
`` Are you Monsieur Bossuet ? '' 
`` That is my nickname , '' replied Laigle . 
`` What do you want with me ? '' 
