We know not . 
Who does know ? 
Himself , perhaps . 
However , Gavroche was well up in all the popular tunes in circulation , and he mingled with them his own chirpings . 
An observing urchin and a rogue , he made a potpourri of the voices of nature and the voices of Paris . 
He combined the repertory of the birds with the repertory of the workshops . 
He was acquainted with thieves , a tribe contiguous to his own . 
He had , it appears , been for three months apprenticed to a printer . 
He had one day executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian , one of the Forty . 
Gavroche was a gamin of letters . 
Moreover , Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously rainy night , it was to his own brothers that he had played the part of Providence . 
His brothers in the evening , his father in the morning ; that is what his night had been like . 
On quitting the Rue des Ballets at daybreak , he had returned in haste to the elephant , had artistically extracted from it the two brats , had shared with them some sort of breakfast which he had invented , and had then gone away , confiding them to that good mother , the street , who had brought him up , almost entirely . 
On leaving them , he had appointed to meet them at the same spot in the evening , and had left them this discourse by way of a farewell : `` I break a cane , otherwise expressed , I cut my stick , or , as they say at the court , I file off . 
If you do n't find papa and mamma , young ` uns , come back here this evening . 
I 'll scramble you up some supper , and I 'll give you a shakedown . '' 
The two children , picked up by some policeman and placed in the refuge , or stolen by some mountebank , or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris , did not return . 
The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of these lost traces . 
Gavroche did not see them again . 
Ten or twelve weeks had elapsed since that night . 
More than once he had scratched the back of his head and said : `` Where the devil are my two children ? '' 
In the meantime , he had arrived , pistol in hand , in the Rue du Pont-aux-Choux . 
He noticed that there was but one shop open in that street , and , a matter worthy of reflection , that was a pastry-cook 's shop . 
This presented a providential occasion to eat another apple-turnover before entering the unknown . 
Gavroche halted , fumbled in his fob , turned his pocket inside out , found nothing , not even a sou , and began to shout : `` Help ! '' 
It is hard to miss the last cake . 
Nevertheless , Gavroche pursued his way . 
Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis . 
While traversing the Rue du Parc-Royal , he felt called upon to make good the loss of the apple-turnover which had been impossible , and he indulged himself in the immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broad daylight . 
A little further on , on catching sight of a group of comfortable-looking persons , who seemed to be landed proprietors , he shrugged his shoulders and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as they passed : `` How fat those moneyed men are ! 
They 're drunk ! 
They just wallow in good dinners . 
Ask 'em what they do with their money . 
They do n't know . 
They eat it , that 's what they do ! 
As much as their bellies will hold . '' 
GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH The brandishing of a triggerless pistol , grasped in one 's hand in the open street , is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his fervor increasing with every moment . 
Amid the scraps of the Marseillaise which he was singing , he shouted : -- `` All goes well . 
I suffer a great deal in my left paw , I 'm all broken up with rheumatism , but I 'm satisfied , citizens . 
All that the bourgeois have to do is to bear themselves well , I 'll sneeze them out subversive couplets . 
What are the police spies ? 
Dogs . 
And I 'd just like to have one of them at the end of my pistol . 
I 'm just from the boulevard , my friends . 
It 's getting hot there , it 's getting into a little boil , it 's simmering . 
It 's time to skim the pot . 
Forward march , men ! 
Let an impure blood inundate the furrows ! 
I give my days to my country , I shall never see my concubine more , Nini , finished , yes , Nini ? 
But never mind ! 
