He chastely dropped his eyes before everything which was not the Republic . 
He was the marble lover of liberty . 
His speech was harshly inspired , and had the thrill of a hymn . 
He was subject to unexpected outbursts of soul . 
Woe to the love-affair which should have risked itself beside him ! 
If any grisette of the Place Cambrai or the Rue Saint-Jean-de-Beauvais , seeing that face of a youth escaped from college , that page 's mien , those long , golden lashes , those blue eyes , that hair billowing in the wind , those rosy cheeks , those fresh lips , those exquisite teeth , had conceived an appetite for that complete aurora , and had tried her beauty on Enjolras , an astounding and terrible glance would have promptly shown her the abyss , and would have taught her not to confound the mighty cherub of Ezekiel with the gallant Cherubino of Beaumarchais . 
By the side of Enjolras , who represented the logic of the Revolution , Combeferre represented its philosophy . 
Between the logic of the Revolution and its philosophy there exists this difference -- that its logic may end in war , whereas its philosophy can end only in peace . 
Combeferre complemented and rectified Enjolras . 
He was less lofty , but broader . 
He desired to pour into all minds the extensive principles of general ideas : he said : `` Revolution , but civilization '' ; and around the mountain peak he opened out a vast view of the blue sky . 
The Revolution was more adapted for breathing with Combeferre than with Enjolras . 
Enjolras expressed its divine right , and Combeferre its natural right . 
The first attached himself to Robespierre ; the second confined himself to Condorcet . 
Combeferre lived the life of all the rest of the world more than did Enjolras . 
If it had been granted to these two young men to attain to history , the one would have been the just , the other the wise man . 
Enjolras was the more virile , Combeferre the more humane . 
Homo and vir , that was the exact effect of their different shades . 
Combeferre was as gentle as Enjolras was severe , through natural whiteness . 
He loved the word citizen , but he preferred the word man . 
He would gladly have said : Hombre , like the Spanish . 
He read everything , went to the theatres , attended the courses of public lecturers , learned the polarization of light from Arago , grew enthusiastic over a lesson in which Geoffrey Sainte-Hilaire explained the double function of the external carotid artery , and the internal , the one which makes the face , and the one which makes the brain ; he kept up with what was going on , followed science step by step , compared Saint-Simon with Fourier , deciphered hieroglyphics , broke the pebble which he found and reasoned on geology , drew from memory a silkworm moth , pointed out the faulty French in the Dictionary of the Academy , studied Puysegur and Deleuze , affirmed nothing , not even miracles ; denied nothing , not even ghosts ; turned over the files of the Moniteur , reflected . 
He declared that the future lies in the hand of the schoolmaster , and busied himself with educational questions . 
He desired that society should labor without relaxation at the elevation of the moral and intellectual level , at coining science , at putting ideas into circulation , at increasing the mind in youthful persons , and he feared lest the present poverty of method , the paltriness from a literary point of view confined to two or three centuries called classic , the tyrannical dogmatism of official pedants , scholastic prejudices and routines should end by converting our colleges into artificial oyster beds . 
He was learned , a purist , exact , a graduate of the Polytechnic , a close student , and at the same time , thoughtful `` even to chimaeras , '' so his friends said . 
He believed in all dreams , railroads , the suppression of suffering in chirurgical operations , the fixing of images in the dark chamber , the electric telegraph , the steering of balloons . 
Moreover , he was not much alarmed by the citadels erected against the human mind in every direction , by superstition , despotism , and prejudice . 
He was one of those who think that science will eventually turn the position . 
Enjolras was a chief , Combeferre was a guide . 
One would have liked to fight under the one and to march behind the other . 
It is not that Combeferre was not capable of fighting , he did not refuse a hand-to-hand combat with the obstacle , and to attack it by main force and explosively ; but it suited him better to bring the human race into accord with its destiny gradually , by means of education , the inculcation of axioms , the promulgation of positive laws ; and , between two lights , his preference was rather for illumination than for conflagration . 
A conflagration can create an aurora , no doubt , but why not await the dawn ? 
A volcano illuminates , but daybreak furnishes a still better illumination . 
Possibly , Combeferre preferred the whiteness of the beautiful to the blaze of the sublime . 
A light troubled by smoke , progress purchased at the expense of violence , only half satisfied this tender and serious spirit . 
The headlong precipitation of a people into the truth , a ' 93 , terrified him ; nevertheless , stagnation was still more repulsive to him , in it he detected putrefaction and death ; on the whole , he preferred scum to miasma , and he preferred the torrent to the cesspool , and the falls of Niagara to the lake of Montfaucon . 
In short , he desired neither halt nor haste . 
While his tumultuous friends , captivated by the absolute , adored and invoked splendid revolutionary adventures , Combeferre was inclined to let progress , good progress , take its own course ; he may have been cold , but he was pure ; methodical , but irreproachable ; phlegmatic , but imperturbable . 
Combeferre would have knelt and clasped his hands to enable the future to arrive in all its candor , and that nothing might disturb the immense and virtuous evolution of the races . 
The good must be innocent , he repeated incessantly . 
And in fact , if the grandeur of the Revolution consists in keeping the dazzling ideal fixedly in view , and of soaring thither athwart the lightnings , with fire and blood in its talons , the beauty of progress lies in being spotless ; and there exists between Washington , who represents the one , and Danton , who incarnates the other , that difference which separates the swan from the angel with the wings of an eagle . 
Jean Prouvaire was a still softer shade than Combeferre . 
His name was Jehan , owing to that petty momentary freak which mingled with the powerful and profound movement whence sprang the very essential study of the Middle Ages . 
Jean Prouvaire was in love ; he cultivated a pot of flowers , played on the flute , made verses , loved the people , pitied woman , wept over the child , confounded God and the future in the same confidence , and blamed the Revolution for having caused the fall of a royal head , that of Andre Chenier . 
His voice was ordinarily delicate , but suddenly grew manly . 
He was learned even to erudition , and almost an Orientalist . 
Above all , he was good ; and , a very simple thing to those who know how nearly goodness borders on grandeur , in the matter of poetry , he preferred the immense . 
He knew Italian , Latin , Greek , and Hebrew ; and these served him only for the perusal of four poets : Dante , Juvenal , AEschylus , and Isaiah . 
In French , he preferred Corneille to Racine , and Agrippa d'Aubigne to Corneille . 
He loved to saunter through fields of wild oats and corn-flowers , and busied himself with clouds nearly as much as with events . 
