murmured Marius , `` how beautiful you are ! 
I dare not look at you . 
It is all over with me when I contemplate you . 
You are a grace . 
I know not what is the matter with me . 
The hem of your gown , when the tip of your shoe peeps from beneath , upsets me . 
And then , what an enchanted gleam when you open your thought even but a little ! 
You talk astonishingly good sense . 
It seems to me at times that you are a dream . 
Speak , I listen , I admire . 
Oh Cosette ! 
how strange it is and how charming ! 
I am really beside myself . 
You are adorable , Mademoiselle . 
I study your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope . '' 
And Cosette answered : -- `` I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since this morning . '' 
Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue , which always turned with mutual consent upon love , as the little pith figures always turn on their peg . 
Cosette 's whole person was ingenuousness , ingenuity , transparency , whiteness , candor , radiance . 
It might have been said of Cosette that she was clear . 
She produced on those who saw her the sensation of April and dawn . 
There was dew in her eyes . 
Cosette was a condensation of the auroral light in the form of a woman . 
It was quite simple that Marius should admire her , since he adored her . 
But the truth is , that this little school-girl , fresh from the convent , talked with exquisite penetration and uttered , at times , all sorts of true and delicate sayings . 
Her prattle was conversation . 
She never made a mistake about anything , and she saw things justly . 
The woman feels and speaks with the tender instinct of the heart , which is infallible . 
No one understands so well as a woman , how to say things that are , at once , both sweet and deep . 
Sweetness and depth , they are the whole of woman ; in them lies the whole of heaven . 
In this full felicity , tears welled up to their eyes every instant . 
A crushed lady-bug , a feather fallen from a nest , a branch of hawthorn broken , aroused their pity , and their ecstasy , sweetly mingled with melancholy , seemed to ask nothing better than to weep . 
The most sovereign symptom of love is a tenderness that is , at times , almost unbearable . 
And , in addition to this , -- all these contradictions are the lightning play of love , -- they were fond of laughing , they laughed readily and with a delicious freedom , and so familiarly that they sometimes presented the air of two boys . 
Still , though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity , nature is always present and will not be forgotten . 
She is there with her brutal and sublime object ; and however great may be the innocence of souls , one feels in the most modest private interview , the adorable and mysterious shade which separates a couple of lovers from a pair of friends . 
They idolized each other . 
The permanent and the immutable are persistent . 
People live , they smile , they laugh , they make little grimaces with the tips of their lips , they interlace their fingers , they call each other thou , and that does not prevent eternity . 
Two lovers hide themselves in the evening , in the twilight , in the invisible , with the birds , with the roses ; they fascinate each other in the darkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes , they murmur , they whisper , and in the meantime , immense librations of the planets fill the infinite universe . 
THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS They existed vaguely , frightened at their happiness . 
They did not notice the cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that very month . 
They had confided in each other as far as possible , but this had not extended much further than their names . 
Marius had told Cosette that he was an orphan , that his name was Marius Pontmercy , that he was a lawyer , that he lived by writing things for publishers , that his father had been a colonel , that the latter had been a hero , and that he , Marius , was on bad terms with his grandfather who was rich . 
He had also hinted at being a baron , but this had produced no effect on Cosette . 
She did not know the meaning of the word . 
Marius was Marius . 
On her side , she had confided to him that she had been brought up at the Petit-Picpus convent , that her mother , like his own , was dead , that her father 's name was M. Fauchelevent , that he was very good , that he gave a great deal to the poor , but that he was poor himself , and that he denied himself everything though he denied her nothing . 
Strange to say , in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since he had been in the habit of seeing Cosette , the past , even the most recent past , had become so confused and distant to him , that what Cosette told him satisfied him completely . 
It did not even occur to him to tell her about the nocturnal adventure in the hovel , about Thenardier , about the burn , and about the strange attitude and singular flight of her father . 
Marius had momentarily forgotten all this ; in the evening he did not even know that there had been a morning , what he had done , where he had breakfasted , nor who had spoken to him ; he had songs in his ears which rendered him deaf to every other thought ; he only existed at the hours when he saw Cosette . 
