Paphos had been made over into Eden . 
It is impossible to say what element of repentance had rendered this retreat wholesome . 
This flower-girl now offered her blossom to the soul . 
This coquettish garden , formerly decidedly compromised , had returned to virginity and modesty . 
A justice assisted by a gardener , a goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lamoignon , and another goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lenotre , had turned it about , cut , ruffled , decked , moulded it to gallantry ; nature had taken possession of it once more , had filled it with shade , and had arranged it for love . 
There was , also , in this solitude , a heart which was quite ready . 
Love had only to show himself ; he had here a temple composed of verdure , grass , moss , the sight of birds , tender shadows , agitated branches , and a soul made of sweetness , of faith , of candor , of hope , of aspiration , and of illusion . 
Cosette had left the convent when she was still almost a child ; she was a little more than fourteen , and she was at the `` ungrateful age '' ; we have already said , that with the exception of her eyes , she was homely rather than pretty ; she had no ungraceful feature , but she was awkward , thin , timid and bold at once , a grown-up little girl , in short . 
Her education was finished , that is to say , she has been taught religion , and even and above all , devotion ; then `` history , '' that is to say the thing that bears that name in convents , geography , grammar , the participles , the kings of France , a little music , a little drawing , etc. ; but in all other respects she was utterly ignorant , which is a great charm and a great peril . 
The soul of a young girl should not be left in the dark ; later on , mirages that are too abrupt and too lively are formed there , as in a dark chamber . 
She should be gently and discreetly enlightened , rather with the reflection of realities than with their harsh and direct light . 
A useful and graciously austere half-light which dissipates puerile fears and obviates falls . 
There is nothing but the maternal instinct , that admirable intuition composed of the memories of the virgin and the experience of the woman , which knows how this half-light is to be created and of what it should consist . 
Nothing supplies the place of this instinct . 
All the nuns in the world are not worth as much as one mother in the formation of a young girl 's soul . 
Cosette had had no mother . 
She had only had many mothers , in the plural . 
As for Jean Valjean , he was , indeed , all tenderness , all solicitude ; but he was only an old man and he knew nothing at all . 
Now , in this work of education , in this grave matter of preparing a woman for life , what science is required to combat that vast ignorance which is called innocence ! 
Nothing prepares a young girl for passions like the convent . 
The convent turns the thoughts in the direction of the unknown . 
The heart , thus thrown back upon itself , works downward within itself , since it can not overflow , and grows deep , since it can not expand . 
Hence visions , suppositions , conjectures , outlines of romances , a desire for adventures , fantastic constructions , edifices built wholly in the inner obscurity of the mind , sombre and secret abodes where the passions immediately find a lodgement as soon as the open gate permits them to enter . 
The convent is a compression which , in order to triumph over the human heart , should last during the whole life . 
On quitting the convent , Cosette could have found nothing more sweet and more dangerous than the house in the Rue Plumet . 
It was the continuation of solitude with the beginning of liberty ; a garden that was closed , but a nature that was acrid , rich , voluptuous , and fragrant ; the same dreams as in the convent , but with glimpses of young men ; a grating , but one that opened on the street . 
Still , when she arrived there , we repeat , she was only a child . 
Jean Valjean gave this neglected garden over to her . 
`` Do what you like with it , '' he said to her . 
This amused Cosette ; she turned over all the clumps and all the stones , she hunted for `` beasts '' ; she played in it , while awaiting the time when she would dream in it ; she loved this garden for the insects that she found beneath her feet amid the grass , while awaiting the day when she would love it for the stars that she would see through the boughs above her head . 
And then , she loved her father , that is to say , Jean Valjean , with all her soul , with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman a beloved and charming companion to her . 
It will be remembered that M. Madeleine had been in the habit of reading a great deal . 
Jean Valjean had continued this practice ; he had come to converse well ; he possessed the secret riches and the eloquence of a true and humble mind which has spontaneously cultivated itself . 
He retained just enough sharpness to season his kindness ; his mind was rough and his heart was soft . 
During their conversations in the Luxembourg , he gave her explanations of everything , drawing on what he had read , and also on what he had suffered . 
As she listened to him , Cosette 's eyes wandered vaguely about . 
This simple man sufficed for Cosette 's thought , the same as the wild garden sufficed for her eyes . 
When she had had a good chase after the butterflies , she came panting up to him and said : `` Ah ! 
How I have run ! '' 
He kissed her brow . 
Cosette adored the goodman . 
She was always at his heels . 
Where Jean Valjean was , there happiness was . 
Jean Valjean lived neither in the pavilion nor the garden ; she took greater pleasure in the paved back courtyard , than in the enclosure filled with flowers , and in his little lodge furnished with straw-seated chairs than in the great drawing-room hung with tapestry , against which stood tufted easy-chairs . 
Jean Valjean sometimes said to her , smiling at his happiness in being importuned : `` Do go to your own quarters ! 
Leave me alone a little ! '' 
She gave him those charming and tender scoldings which are so graceful when they come from a daughter to her father . 
`` Father , I am very cold in your rooms ; why do n't you have a carpet here and a stove ? '' 
`` Dear child , there are so many people who are better than I and who have not even a roof over their heads . '' 
`` Then why is there a fire in my rooms , and everything that is needed ? '' 
