to you , my dearly beloved , my children , to you , my innocent creatures ! 
Is it nothing to hold one 's peace ? 
is it a simple matter to keep silence ? 
No , it is not simple . 
There is a silence which lies . 
And my lie , and my fraud and my indignity , and my cowardice and my treason and my crime , I should have drained drop by drop , I should have spit it out , then swallowed it again , I should have finished at midnight and have begun again at midday , and my ` good morning ' would have lied , and my ` good night ' would have lied , and I should have slept on it , I should have eaten it , with my bread , and I should have looked Cosette in the face , and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile of the damned soul , and I should have been an abominable villain ! 
Why should I do it ? 
in order to be happy . 
In order to be happy . 
Have I the right to be happy ? 
I stand outside of life , Sir . '' 
Jean Valjean paused . 
Marius listened . 
Such chains of ideas and of anguishes can not be interrupted . 
Jean Valjean lowered his voice once more , but it was no longer a dull voice -- it was a sinister voice . 
`` You ask why I speak ? 
I am neither denounced , nor pursued , nor tracked , you say . 
Yes ! 
I am denounced ! 
yes ! 
I am tracked ! 
By whom ? 
By myself . 
It is I who bar the passage to myself , and I drag myself , and I push myself , and I arrest myself , and I execute myself , and when one holds oneself , one is firmly held . '' 
And , seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and extending it towards Marius : `` Do you see that fist ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Do n't you think that it holds that collar in such a wise as not to release it ? 
Well ! 
conscience is another grasp ! 
If one desires to be happy , sir , one must never understand duty ; for , as soon as one has comprehended it , it is implacable . 
One would say that it punished you for comprehending it ; but no , it rewards you ; for it places you in a hell , where you feel God beside you . 
One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is at peace with himself . '' 
And , with a poignant accent , he added : `` Monsieur Pontmercy , this is not common sense , I am an honest man . 
It is by degrading myself in your eyes that I elevate myself in my own . 
This has happened to me once before , but it was less painful then ; it was a mere nothing . 
Yes , an honest man . 
I should not be so if , through my fault , you had continued to esteem me ; now that you despise me , I am so . 
I have that fatality hanging over me that , not being able to ever have anything but stolen consideration , that consideration humiliates me , and crushes me inwardly , and , in order that I may respect myself , it is necessary that I should be despised . 
Then I straighten up again . 
I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience . 
I know well that that is most improbable . 
But what would you have me do about it ? 
it is the fact . 
I have entered into engagements with myself ; I keep them . 
There are encounters which bind us , there are chances which involve us in duties . 
You see , Monsieur Pontmercy , various things have happened to me in the course of my life . '' 
Again Jean Valjean paused , swallowing his saliva with an effort , as though his words had a bitter after-taste , and then he went on : `` When one has such a horror hanging over one , one has not the right to make others share it without their knowledge , one has not the right to make them slip over one 's own precipice without their perceiving it , one has not the right to let one 's red blouse drag upon them , one has no right to slyly encumber with one 's misery the happiness of others . 
It is hideous to approach those who are healthy , and to touch them in the dark with one 's ulcer . 
In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lent me his name , I have no right to use it ; he could give it to me , but I could not take it . 
A name is an I . 
