This death was an affliction . 
Like everything that is bitter , affliction may turn to revolt . 
This is what took place . 
On the preceding evening , and on the morning of the 5th of June , the day appointed for Lamarque 's burial , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which the procession was to touch at , assumed a formidable aspect . 
This tumultuous network of streets was filled with rumors . 
They armed themselves as best they might . 
Joiners carried off door-weights of their establishment `` to break down doors . '' 
One of them had made himself a dagger of a stocking-weaver 's hook by breaking off the hook and sharpening the stump . 
Another , who was in a fever `` to attack , '' slept wholly dressed for three days . 
A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade , who asked him : `` Whither are you going ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
well , I have no weapons . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` I 'm going to my timber-yard to get my compasses . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' said Lombier . 
A certain Jacqueline , an expeditious man , accosted some passing artisans : `` Come here , you ! '' 
He treated them to ten sous ' worth of wine and said : `` Have you work ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Go to Filspierre , between the Barriere Charonne and the Barriere Montreuil , and you will find work . '' 
At Filspierre 's they found cartridges and arms . 
Certain well-known leaders were going the rounds , that is to say , running from one house to another , to collect their men . 
At Barthelemy 's , near the Barriere du Trone , at Capel 's , near the Petit-Chapeau , the drinkers accosted each other with a grave air . 
They were heard to say : `` Have you your pistol ? '' 
`` Under my blouse . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
`` Under my shirt . '' 
In the Rue Traversiere , in front of the Bland workshop , and in the yard of the Maison-Brulee , in front of tool-maker Bernier 's , groups whispered together . 
Among them was observed a certain Mavot , who never remained more than a week in one shop , as the masters always discharged him `` because they were obliged to dispute with him every day . '' 
Mavot was killed on the following day at the barricade of the Rue Menilmontant . 
Pretot , who was destined to perish also in the struggle , seconded Mavot , and to the question : `` What is your object ? '' 
he replied : `` Insurrection . '' 
Workmen assembled at the corner of the Rue de Bercy , waited for a certain Lemarin , the revolutionary agent for the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly . 
On the 5th of June , accordingly , a day of mingled rain and sun , General Lamarque 's funeral procession traversed Paris with official military pomp , somewhat augmented through precaution . 
Two battalions , with draped drums and reversed arms , ten thousand National Guards , with their swords at their sides , escorted the coffin . 
The hearse was drawn by young men . 
The officers of the Invalides came immediately behind it , bearing laurel branches . 
Then came an innumerable , strange , agitated multitude , the sectionaries of the Friends of the People , the Law School , the Medical School , refugees of all nationalities , and Spanish , Italian , German , and Polish flags , tricolored horizontal banners , every possible sort of banner , children waving green boughs , stone-cutters and carpenters who were on strike at the moment , printers who were recognizable by their paper caps , marching two by two , three by three , uttering cries , nearly all of them brandishing sticks , some brandishing sabres , without order and yet with a single soul , now a tumultuous rout , again a column . 
Squads chose themselves leaders ; a man armed with a pair of pistols in full view , seemed to pass the host in review , and the files separated before him . 
On the side alleys of the boulevards , in the branches of the trees , on balconies , in windows , on the roofs , swarmed the heads of men , women , and children ; all eyes were filled with anxiety . 
An armed throng was passing , and a terrified throng looked on . 
The Government , on its side , was taking observations . 
It observed with its hand on its sword . 
Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen in the Place Louis XV . 
in their saddles , with their trumpets at their head , cartridge-boxes filled and muskets loaded , all in readiness to march ; in the Latin country and at the Jardin des Plantes , the Municipal Guard echelonned from street to street ; at the Halle-aux-Vins , a squadron of dragoons ; at the Greve half of the 12th Light Infantry , the other half being at the Bastille ; the 6th Dragoons at the Celestins ; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery . 
The remainder of the troops were confined to their barracks , without reckoning the regiments of the environs of Paris . 
Power being uneasy , held suspended over the menacing multitude twenty-four thousand soldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the banlieue . 
Divers reports were in circulation in the cortege . 
Legitimist tricks were hinted at ; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt , whom God had marked out for death at that very moment when the populace were designating him for the Empire . 
