The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the central prisons . 
Brevet was a person sixty years of age , who had a sort of business man 's face , and the air of a rascal . 
The two sometimes go together . 
In prison , whither fresh misdeeds had led him , he had become something in the nature of a turnkey . 
He was a man of whom his superiors said , `` He tries to make himself of use . '' 
The chaplains bore good testimony as to his religious habits . 
It must not be forgotten that this passed under the Restoration . 
`` Brevet , '' said the President , `` you have undergone an ignominious sentence , and you can not take an oath . '' 
Brevet dropped his eyes . 
`` Nevertheless , '' continued the President , `` even in the man whom the law has degraded , there may remain , when the divine mercy permits it , a sentiment of honor and of equity . 
It is to this sentiment that I appeal at this decisive hour . 
If it still exists in you , -- and I hope it does , -- reflect before replying to me : consider on the one hand , this man , whom a word from you may ruin ; on the other hand , justice , which a word from you may enlighten . 
The instant is solemn ; there is still time to retract if you think you have been mistaken . 
Rise , prisoner . 
Brevet , take a good look at the accused , recall your souvenirs , and tell us on your soul and conscience , if you persist in recognizing this man as your former companion in the galleys , Jean Valjean ? '' 
Brevet looked at the prisoner , then turned towards the court . 
`` Yes , Mr. President , I was the first to recognize him , and I stick to it ; that man is Jean Valjean , who entered at Toulon in 1796 , and left in 1815 . 
I left a year later . 
He has the air of a brute now ; but it must be because age has brutalized him ; he was sly at the galleys : I recognize him positively . '' 
`` Take your seat , '' said the President . 
`` Prisoner , remain standing . '' 
Chenildieu was brought in , a prisoner for life , as was indicated by his red cassock and his green cap . 
He was serving out his sentence at the galleys of Toulon , whence he had been brought for this case . 
He was a small man of about fifty , brisk , wrinkled , frail , yellow , brazen-faced , feverish , who had a sort of sickly feebleness about all his limbs and his whole person , and an immense force in his glance . 
His companions in the galleys had nicknamed him I-deny-God -LRB- Je-nie Dieu , Chenildieu -RRB- . 
The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had used to Brevet . 
At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy which deprived him of the right to take an oath , Chenildieu raised his head and looked the crowd in the face . 
The President invited him to reflection , and asked him as he had asked Brevet , if he persisted in recognition of the prisoner . 
Chenildieu burst out laughing . 
`` Pardieu , as if I did n't recognize him ! 
We were attached to the same chain for five years . 
So you are sulking , old fellow ? '' 
`` Go take your seat , '' said the President . 
The usher brought in Cochepaille . 
He was another convict for life , who had come from the galleys , and was dressed in red , like Chenildieu , was a peasant from Lourdes , and a half-bear of the Pyrenees . 
He had guarded the flocks among the mountains , and from a shepherd he had slipped into a brigand . 
Cochepaille was no less savage and seemed even more stupid than the prisoner . 
He was one of those wretched men whom nature has sketched out for wild beasts , and on whom society puts the finishing touches as convicts in the galleys . 
The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words , and asked him , as he had asked the other two , if he persisted , without hesitation or trouble , in recognizing the man who was standing before him . 
`` He is Jean Valjean , '' said Cochepaille . 
`` He was even called Jean-the-Screw , because he was so strong . '' 
Each of these affirmations from these three men , evidently sincere and in good faith , had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury for the prisoner , -- a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that a fresh declaration was added to the proceeding . 
The prisoner had listened to them , with that astounded face which was , according to the accusation , his principal means of defence ; at the first , the gendarmes , his neighbors , had heard him mutter between his teeth : `` Ah , well , he 's a nice one ! '' 
after the second , he said , a little louder , with an air that was almost that of satisfaction , `` Good ! '' 
at the third , he cried , `` Famous ! '' 
The President addressed him : -- `` Have you heard , prisoner ? 
What have you to say ? '' 
He replied : -- `` I say , ` Famous ! ' '' 
An uproar broke out among the audience , and was communicated to the jury ; it was evident that the man was lost . 
`` Ushers , '' said the President , `` enforce silence ! 
