Moreover , as it is indispensable that the Revolution should be everywhere in this century , this feudal salon was , as we have said , dominated by a bourgeois . 
M. Gillenormand reigned there . 
There lay the essence and quintessence of the Parisian white society . 
There reputations , even Royalist reputations , were held in quarantine . 
There is always a trace of anarchy in renown . 
Chateaubriand , had he entered there , would have produced the effect of Pere Duchene . 
Some of the scoffed-at did , nevertheless , penetrate thither on sufferance . 
Comte Beug *** was received there , subject to correction . 
The `` noble '' salons of the present day no longer resemble those salons . 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain reeks of the fagot even now . 
The Royalists of to-day are demagogues , let us record it to their credit . 
At Madame de T. 's the society was superior , taste was exquisite and haughty , under the cover of a great show of politeness . 
Manners there admitted of all sorts of involuntary refinements which were the old regime itself , buried but still alive . 
Some of these habits , especially in the matter of language , seem eccentric . 
Persons but superficially acquainted with them would have taken for provincial that which was only antique . 
A woman was called Madame la Generale . 
Madame la Colonelle was not entirely disused . 
The charming Madame de Leon , in memory , no doubt , of the Duchesses de Longueville and de Chevreuse , preferred this appellation to her title of Princesse . 
The Marquise de Crequy was also called Madame la Colonelle . 
It was this little high society which invented at the Tuileries the refinement of speaking to the King in private as the King , in the third person , and never as Your Majesty , the designation of Your Majesty having been `` soiled by the usurper . '' 
Men and deeds were brought to judgment there . 
They jeered at the age , which released them from the necessity of understanding it . 
They abetted each other in amazement . 
They communicated to each other that modicum of light which they possessed . 
Methuselah bestowed information on Epimenides . 
The deaf man made the blind man acquainted with the course of things . 
They declared that the time which had elasped since Coblentz had not existed . 
In the same manner that Louis XVIII . 
was by the grace of God , in the five and twentieth year of his reign , the emigrants were , by rights , in the five and twentieth year of their adolescence . 
All was harmonious ; nothing was too much alive ; speech hardly amounted to a breath ; the newspapers , agreeing with the salons , seemed a papyrus . 
There were some young people , but they were rather dead . 
The liveries in the antechamber were antiquated . 
These utterly obsolete personages were served by domestics of the same stamp . 
They all had the air of having lived a long time ago , and of obstinately resisting the sepulchre . 
Nearly the whole dictionary consisted of Conserver , Conservation , Conservateur ; to be in good odor , -- that was the point . 
There are , in fact , aromatics in the opinions of these venerable groups , and their ideas smelled of it . 
It was a mummified society . 
The masters were embalmed , the servants were stuffed with straw . 
A worthy old marquise , an emigree and ruined , who had but a solitary maid , continued to say : `` My people . '' 
What did they do in Madame de T. 's salon ? 
They were ultra . 
To be ultra ; this word , although what it represents may not have disappeared , has no longer any meaning at the present day . 
Let us explain it . 
To be ultra is to go beyond . 
It is to attack the sceptre in the name of the throne , and the mitre in the name of the attar ; it is to ill-treat the thing which one is dragging , it is to kick over the traces ; it is to cavil at the fagot on the score of the amount of cooking received by heretics ; it is to reproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry ; it is to insult through excess of respect ; it is to discover that the Pope is not sufficiently papish , that the King is not sufficiently royal , and that the night has too much light ; it is to be discontented with alabaster , with snow , with the swan and the lily in the name of whiteness ; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of becoming their enemy ; it is to be so strongly for , as to be against . 
The ultra spirit especially characterizes the first phase of the Restoration . 
Nothing in history resembles that quarter of an hour which begins in 1814 and terminates about 1820 , with the advent of M. de Villele , the practical man of the Right . 
These six years were an extraordinary moment ; at one and the same time brilliant and gloomy , smiling and sombre , illuminated as by the radiance of dawn and entirely covered , at the same time , with the shadows of the great catastrophes which still filled the horizon and were slowly sinking into the past . 
There existed in that light and that shadow , a complete little new and old world , comic and sad , juvenile and senile , which was rubbing its eyes ; nothing resembles an awakening like a return ; a group which regarded France with ill-temper , and which France regarded with irony ; good old owls of marquises by the streetful , who had returned , and of ghosts , the `` former '' subjects of amazement at everything , brave and noble gentlemen who smiled at being in France but wept also , delighted to behold their country once more , in despair at not finding their monarchy ; the nobility of the Crusades treating the nobility of the Empire , that is to say , the nobility of the sword , with scorn ; historic races who had lost the sense of history ; the sons of the companions of Charlemagne disdaining the companions of Napoleon . 
The swords , as we have just remarked , returned the insult ; the sword of Fontenoy was laughable and nothing but a scrap of rusty iron ; the sword of Marengo was odious and was only a sabre . 
