Man is not a circle with a single centre ; he is an ellipse with a double focus . 
Facts form one of these , and ideas the other . 
Slang is nothing but a dressing-room where the tongue having some bad action to perform , disguises itself . 
There it clothes itself in word-masks , in metaphor-rags . 
In this guise it becomes horrible . 
One finds it difficult to recognize . 
Is it really the French tongue , the great human tongue ? 
Behold it ready to step upon the stage and to retort upon crime , and prepared for all the employments of the repertory of evil . 
It no longer walks , it hobbles ; it limps on the crutch of the Court of Miracles , a crutch metamorphosable into a club ; it is called vagrancy ; every sort of spectre , its dressers , have painted its face , it crawls and rears , the double gait of the reptile . 
Henceforth , it is apt at all roles , it is made suspicious by the counterfeiter , covered with verdigris by the forger , blacked by the soot of the incendiary ; and the murderer applies its rouge . 
When one listens , by the side of honest men , at the portals of society , one overhears the dialogues of those who are on the outside . 
One distinguishes questions and replies . 
One perceives , without understanding it , a hideous murmur , sounding almost like human accents , but more nearly resembling a howl than an articulate word . 
It is slang . 
The words are misshapen and stamped with an indescribable and fantastic bestiality . 
One thinks one hears hydras talking . 
It is unintelligible in the dark . 
It gnashes and whispers , completing the gloom with mystery . 
It is black in misfortune , it is blacker still in crime ; these two blacknesses amalgamated , compose slang . 
Obscurity in the atmosphere , obscurity in acts , obscurity in voices . 
Terrible , toad-like tongue which goes and comes , leaps , crawls , slobbers , and stirs about in monstrous wise in that immense gray fog composed of rain and night , of hunger , of vice , of falsehood , of injustice , of nudity , of suffocation , and of winter , the high noonday of the miserable . 
Let us have compassion on the chastised . 
Alas ! 
Who are we ourselves ? 
Who am I who now address you ? 
Who are you who are listening to me ? 
And are you very sure that we have done nothing before we were born ? 
The earth is not devoid of resemblance to a jail . 
Who knows whether man is not a recaptured offender against divine justice ? 
Look closely at life . 
It is so made , that everywhere we feel the sense of punishment . 
Are you what is called a happy man ? 
Well ! 
you are sad every day . 
Each day has its own great grief or its little care . 
Yesterday you were trembling for a health that is dear to you , to-day you fear for your own ; to-morrow it will be anxiety about money , the day after to-morrow the diatribe of a slanderer , the day after that , the misfortune of some friend ; then the prevailing weather , then something that has been broken or lost , then a pleasure with which your conscience and your vertebral column reproach you ; again , the course of public affairs . 
This without reckoning in the pains of the heart . 
And so it goes on . 
One cloud is dispelled , another forms . 
There is hardly one day out of a hundred which is wholly joyous and sunny . 
And you belong to that small class who are happy ! 
As for the rest of mankind , stagnating night rests upon them . 
Thoughtful minds make but little use of the phrase : the fortunate and the unfortunate . 
In this world , evidently the vestibule of another , there are no fortunate . 
The real human division is this : the luminous and the shady . 
To diminish the number of the shady , to augment the number of the luminous , -- that is the object . 
That is why we cry : Education ! 
science ! 
To teach reading , means to light the fire ; every syllable spelled out sparkles . 
However , he who says light does not , necessarily , say joy . 
