According to Marius ' opinion , if he accepted , his position would become both better and worse at the same time , he acquired comfort , and lost his dignity ; it was a fine and complete unhappiness converted into a repulsive and ridiculous state of torture : something like the case of a blind man who should recover the sight of one eye . 
He refused . 
Marius dwelt in solitude . 
Owing to his taste for remaining outside of everything , and through having been too much alarmed , he had not entered decidedly into the group presided over by Enjolras . 
They had remained good friends ; they were ready to assist each other on occasion in every possible way ; but nothing more . 
Marius had two friends : one young , Courfeyrac ; and one old , M. Mabeuf . 
He inclined more to the old man . 
In the first place , he owed to him the revolution which had taken place within him ; to him he was indebted for having known and loved his father . 
`` He operated on me for a cataract , '' he said . 
The churchwarden had certainly played a decisive part . 
It was not , however , that M. Mabeuf had been anything but the calm and impassive agent of Providence in this connection . 
He had enlightened Marius by chance and without being aware of the fact , as does a candle which some one brings ; he had been the candle and not the some one . 
As for Marius ' inward political revolution , M. Mabeuf was totally incapable of comprehending it , of willing or of directing it . 
As we shall see M. Mabeuf again , later on , a few words will not be superfluous . 
M. MABEUF On the day when M. Mabeuf said to Marius : `` Certainly I approve of political opinions , '' he expressed the real state of his mind . 
All political opinions were matters of indifference to him , and he approved them all , without distinction , provided they left him in peace , as the Greeks called the Furies `` the beautiful , the good , the charming , '' the Eumenides . 
M. Mabeuf 's political opinion consisted in a passionate love for plants , and , above all , for books . 
Like all the rest of the world , he possessed the termination in ist , without which no one could exist at that time , but he was neither a Royalist , a Bonapartist , a Chartist , an Orleanist , nor an Anarchist ; he was a bouquinist , a collector of old books . 
He did not understand how men could busy themselves with hating each other because of silly stuff like the charter , democracy , legitimacy , monarchy , the republic , etc. , when there were in the world all sorts of mosses , grasses , and shrubs which they might be looking at , and heaps of folios , and even of 32mos , which they might turn over . 
He took good care not to become useless ; having books did not prevent his reading , being a botanist did not prevent his being a gardener . 
When he made Pontmercy 's acquaintance , this sympathy had existed between the colonel and himself -- that what the colonel did for flowers , he did for fruits . 
M. Mabeuf had succeeded in producing seedling pears as savory as the pears of St. Germain ; it is from one of his combinations , apparently , that the October Mirabelle , now celebrated and no less perfumed than the summer Mirabelle , owes its origin . 
He went to mass rather from gentleness than from piety , and because , as he loved the faces of men , but hated their noise , he found them assembled and silent only in church . 
Feeling that he must be something in the State , he had chosen the career of warden . 
However , he had never succeeded in loving any woman as much as a tulip bulb , nor any man as much as an Elzevir . 
He had long passed sixty , when , one day , some one asked him : `` Have you never been married ? '' 
`` I have forgotten , '' said he . 
When it sometimes happened to him -- and to whom does it not happen ? 
-- to say : `` Oh ! 
if I were only rich ! '' 
it was not when ogling a pretty girl , as was the case with Father Gillenormand , but when contemplating an old book . 
He lived alone with an old housekeeper . 
He was somewhat gouty , and when he was asleep , his aged fingers , stiffened with rheumatism , lay crooked up in the folds of his sheets . 
He had composed and published a Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz , with colored plates , a work which enjoyed a tolerable measure of esteem and which sold well . 
People rang his bell , in the Rue Mesieres , two or three times a day , to ask for it . 
He drew as much as two thousand francs a year from it ; this constituted nearly the whole of his fortune . 
Although poor , he had had the talent to form for himself , by dint of patience , privations , and time , a precious collection of rare copies of every sort . 
He never went out without a book under his arm , and he often returned with two . 
The sole decoration of the four rooms on the ground floor , which composed his lodgings , consisted of framed herbariums , and engravings of the old masters . 
The sight of a sword or a gun chilled his blood . 
He had never approached a cannon in his life , even at the Invalides . 
He had a passable stomach , a brother who was a cure , perfectly white hair , no teeth , either in his mouth or his mind , a trembling in every limb , a Picard accent , an infantile laugh , the air of an old sheep , and he was easily frightened . 
Add to this , that he had no other friendship , no other acquaintance among the living , than an old bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques , named Royal . 
His dream was to naturalize indigo in France . 
His servant was also a sort of innocent . 
The poor good old woman was a spinster . 
Sultan , her cat , which might have mewed Allegri 's miserere in the Sixtine Chapel , had filled her heart and sufficed for the quantity of passion which existed in her . 
None of her dreams had ever proceeded as far as man . 
She had never been able to get further than her cat . 
Like him , she had a mustache . 
