It was her mother who confided her to me ; I can only resign her to her mother . 
You will say to me , ` But her mother is dead . ' 
Good ; in that case I can only give the child up to the person who shall bring me a writing , signed by her mother , to the effect that I am to hand the child over to the person therein mentioned ; that is clear . '' 
The man , without making any reply , fumbled in his pocket , and Thenardier beheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearance once more . 
The tavern-keeper shivered with joy . 
`` Good ! '' 
thought he ; `` let us hold firm ; he is going to bribe me ! '' 
Before opening the pocket-book , the traveller cast a glance about him : the spot was absolutely deserted ; there was not a soul either in the woods or in the valley . 
The man opened his pocket-book once more and drew from it , not the handful of bills which Thenardier expected , but a simple little paper , which he unfolded and presented fully open to the inn-keeper , saying : -- `` You are right ; read ! '' 
Thenardier took the paper and read : -- `` M. SUR M. , March 25 , 1823 . 
`` MONSIEUR THENARDIER : -- You will deliver Cosette to this person . 
You will be paid for all the little things . 
I have the honor to salute you with respect , FANTINE . '' 
`` You know that signature ? '' 
resumed the man . 
It certainly was Fantine 's signature ; Thenardier recognized it . 
There was no reply to make ; he experienced two violent vexations , the vexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for , and the vexation of being beaten ; the man added : -- `` You may keep this paper as your receipt . '' 
Thenardier retreated in tolerably good order . 
`` This signature is fairly well imitated , '' he growled between his teeth ; `` however , let it go ! '' 
Then he essayed a desperate effort . 
`` It is well , sir , '' he said , `` since you are the person , but I must be paid for all those little things . 
A great deal is owing to me . '' 
The man rose to his feet , filliping the dust from his thread-bare sleeve : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier , in January last , the mother reckoned that she owed you one hundred and twenty francs . 
In February , you sent her a bill of five hundred francs ; you received three hundred francs at the end of February , and three hundred francs at the beginning of March . 
Since then nine months have elapsed , at fifteen francs a month , the price agreed upon , which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs . 
You had received one hundred francs too much ; that makes thirty-five still owing you . 
I have just given you fifteen hundred francs . '' 
Thenardier 's sensations were those of the wolf at the moment when he feels himself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap . 
`` Who is this devil of a man ? '' 
he thought . 
He did what the wolf does : he shook himself . 
Audacity had succeeded with him once . 
`` Monsieur-I-don ` t-know-your-name , '' he said resolutely , and this time casting aside all respectful ceremony , `` I shall take back Cosette if you do not give me a thousand crowns . '' 
The stranger said tranquilly : -- `` Come , Cosette . '' 
He took Cosette by his left hand , and with his right he picked up his cudgel , which was lying on the ground . 
Thenardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude of the spot . 
The man plunged into the forest with the child , leaving the inn-keeper motionless and speechless . 
While they were walking away , Thenardier scrutinized his huge shoulders , which were a little rounded , and his great fists . 
Then , bringing his eyes back to his own person , they fell upon his feeble arms and his thin hands . 
`` I really must have been exceedingly stupid not to have thought to bring my gun , '' he said to himself , `` since I was going hunting ! '' 
However , the inn-keeper did not give up . 
`` I want to know where he is going , '' said he , and he set out to follow them at a distance . 
Two things were left on his hands , an irony in the shape of the paper signed Fantine , and a consolation , the fifteen hundred francs . 
The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy . 
He walked slowly , with drooping head , in an attitude of reflection and sadness . 
The winter had thinned out the forest , so that Thenardier did not lose them from sight , although he kept at a good distance . 
The man turned round from time to time , and looked to see if he was being followed . 
All at once he caught sight of Thenardier . 
He plunged suddenly into the brushwood with Cosette , where they could both hide themselves . 
`` The deuce ! '' 
