There is congealment in despair . 
The alarm bells and a vague and stormy uproar were audible . 
In the midst of all these convulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt , the clock of Saint-Paul struck eleven , gravely and without haste ; for the tocsin is man ; the hour is God . 
The passage of the hour produced no effect on Jean Valjean ; Jean Valjean did not stir . 
Still , at about that moment , a brusque report burst forth in the direction of the Halles , a second yet more violent followed ; it was probably that attack on the barricade in the Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen repulsed by Marius . 
At this double discharge , whose fury seemed augmented by the stupor of the night , Jean Valjean started ; he rose , turning towards the quarter whence the noise proceeded ; then he fell back upon the post again , folded his arms , and his head slowly sank on his bosom again . 
He resumed his gloomy dialogue with himself . 
All at once , he raised his eyes ; some one was walking in the street , he heard steps near him . 
He looked , and by the light of the lanterns , in the direction of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives , he perceived a young , livid , and beaming face . 
Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue l'Homme Arme . 
Gavroche was staring into the air , apparently in search of something . 
He saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him . 
Gavroche after staring into the air , stared below ; he raised himself on tiptoe , and felt of the doors and windows of the ground floor ; they were all shut , bolted , and padlocked . 
After having authenticated the fronts of five or six barricaded houses in this manner , the urchin shrugged his shoulders , and took himself to task in these terms : -- `` Pardi ! '' 
Then he began to stare into the air again . 
Jean Valjean , who , an instant previously , in his then state of mind , would not have spoken to or even answered any one , felt irresistibly impelled to accost that child . 
`` What is the matter with you , my little fellow ? '' 
he said . 
`` The matter with me is that I am hungry , '' replied Gavroche frankly . 
And he added : `` Little fellow yourself . '' 
Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece . 
But Gavroche , who was of the wagtail species , and who skipped vivaciously from one gesture to another , had just picked up a stone . 
He had caught sight of the lantern . 
`` See here , '' said he , `` you still have your lanterns here . 
You are disobeying the regulations , my friend . 
This is disorderly . 
Smash that for me . '' 
And he flung the stone at the lantern , whose broken glass fell with such a clatter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains in the opposite house cried : `` There is ` Ninety-three ' come again . '' 
The lantern oscillated violently , and went out . 
The street had suddenly become black . 
`` That 's right , old street , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` put on your night-cap . '' 
And turning to Jean Valjean : -- `` What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the end of the street ? 
It 's the Archives , is n't it ? 
I must crumble up those big stupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them . '' 
Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche . 
`` Poor creature , '' he said in a low tone , and speaking to himself , `` he is hungry . '' 
And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand . 
Gavroche raised his face , astonished at the size of this sou ; he stared at it in the darkness , and the whiteness of the big sou dazzled him . 
He knew five-franc pieces by hearsay ; their reputation was agreeable to him ; he was delighted to see one close to . 
He said : -- `` Let us contemplate the tiger . '' 
He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy ; then , turning to Jean Valjean , he held out the coin to him , and said majestically to him : -- `` Bourgeois , I prefer to smash lanterns . 
Take back your ferocious beast . 
You ca n't bribe me . 
That has got five claws ; but it does n't scratch me . '' 
`` Have you a mother ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche replied : -- `` More than you have , perhaps . '' 
`` Well , '' returned Jean Valjean , `` keep the money for your mother ! '' 
Gavroche was touched . 
Moreover , he had just noticed that the man who was addressing him had no hat , and this inspired him with confidence . 
