He gazed with terror on this beauty , which was blossoming out ever more triumphant and superb beside him , beneath his very eyes , on the innocent and formidable brow of that child , from the depths of her homeliness , of his old age , of his misery , of his reprobation . 
He said to himself : `` How beautiful she is ! 
What is to become of me ? '' 
There , moreover , lay the difference between his tenderness and the tenderness of a mother . 
What he beheld with anguish , a mother would have gazed upon with joy . 
The first symptoms were not long in making their appearance . 
On the very morrow of the day on which she had said to herself : `` Decidedly I am beautiful ! '' 
Cosette began to pay attention to her toilet . 
She recalled the remark of that passer-by : `` Pretty , but badly dressed , '' the breath of an oracle which had passed beside her and had vanished , after depositing in her heart one of the two germs which are destined , later on , to fill the whole life of woman , coquetry . 
Love is the other . 
With faith in her beauty , the whole feminine soul expanded within her . 
She conceived a horror for her merinos , and shame for her plush hat . 
Her father had never refused her anything . 
She at once acquired the whole science of the bonnet , the gown , the mantle , the boot , the cuff , the stuff which is in fashion , the color which is becoming , that science which makes of the Parisian woman something so charming , so deep , and so dangerous . 
The words heady woman were invented for the Parisienne . 
In less than a month , little Cosette , in that Thebaid of the Rue de Babylone , was not only one of the prettiest , but one of the `` best dressed '' women in Paris , which means a great deal more . 
She would have liked to encounter her `` passer-by , '' to see what he would say , and to `` teach him a lesson ! '' 
The truth is , that she was ravishing in every respect , and that she distinguished the difference between a bonnet from Gerard and one from Herbaut in the most marvellous way . 
Jean Valjean watched these ravages with anxiety . 
He who felt that he could never do anything but crawl , walk at the most , beheld wings sprouting on Cosette . 
Moreover , from the mere inspection of Cosette 's toilet , a woman would have recognized the fact that she had no mother . 
Certain little proprieties , certain special conventionalities , were not observed by Cosette . 
A mother , for instance , would have told her that a young girl does not dress in damask . 
The first day that Cosette went out in her black damask gown and mantle , and her white crape bonnet , she took Jean Valjean 's arm , gay , radiant , rosy , proud , dazzling . 
`` Father , '' she said , `` how do you like me in this guise ? '' 
Jean Valjean replied in a voice which resembled the bitter voice of an envious man : `` Charming ! '' 
He was the same as usual during their walk . 
On their return home , he asked Cosette : -- `` Wo n't you put on that other gown and bonnet again , -- you know the ones I mean ? '' 
This took place in Cosette 's chamber . 
Cosette turned towards the wardrobe where her cast-off schoolgirl 's clothes were hanging . 
`` That disguise ! '' 
said she . 
`` Father , what do you want me to do with it ? 
Oh no , the idea ! 
I shall never put on those horrors again . 
With that machine on my head , I have the air of Madame Mad-dog . '' 
Jean Valjean heaved a deep sigh . 
From that moment forth , he noticed that Cosette , who had always heretofore asked to remain at home , saying : `` Father , I enjoy myself more here with you , '' now was always asking to go out . 
In fact , what is the use of having a handsome face and a delicious costume if one does not display them ? 
He also noticed that Cosette had no longer the same taste for the back garden . 
Now she preferred the garden , and did not dislike to promenade back and forth in front of the railed fence . 
Jean Valjean , who was shy , never set foot in the garden . 
He kept to his back yard , like a dog . 
Cosette , in gaining the knowledge that she was beautiful , lost the grace of ignoring it . 
An exquisite grace , for beauty enhanced by ingenuousness is ineffable , and nothing is so adorable as a dazzling and innocent creature who walks along , holding in her hand the key to paradise without being conscious of it . 
But what she had lost in ingenuous grace , she gained in pensive and serious charm . 
Her whole person , permeated with the joy of youth , of innocence , and of beauty , breathed forth a splendid melancholy . 
It was at this epoch that Marius , after the lapse of six months , saw her once more at the Luxembourg . 
THE BATTLE BEGUN Cosette in her shadow , like Marius in his , was all ready to take fire . 
Destiny , with its mysterious and fatal patience , slowly drew together these two beings , all charged and all languishing with the stormy electricity of passion , these two souls which were laden with love as two clouds are laden with lightning , and which were bound to overflow and mingle in a look like the clouds in a flash of fire . 
