Was this an accomplished fact ? 
Did the acceptance of that man form a part of the marriage now consummated ? 
Was there nothing to be done ? 
Had Marius wedded the convict as well ? 
In vain may one be crowned with light and joy , in vain may one taste the grand purple hour of life , happy love , such shocks would force even the archangel in his ecstasy , even the demigod in his glory , to shudder . 
As is always the case in changes of view of this nature , Marius asked himself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
Had he been wanting in divination ? 
Had he been wanting in prudence ? 
Had he involuntarily dulled his wits ? 
A little , perhaps . 
Had he entered upon this love affair , which had ended in his marriage to Cosette , without taking sufficient precautions to throw light upon the surroundings ? 
He admitted , -- it is thus , by a series of successive admissions of ourselves in regard to ourselves , that life amends us , little by little , -- he admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature , a sort of internal cloud peculiar to many organizations , and which , in paroxysms of passion and sorrow , dilates as the temperature of the soul changes , and invades the entire man , to such a degree as to render him nothing more than a conscience bathed in a mist . 
We have more than once indicated this characteristic element of Marius ' individuality . 
He recalled that , in the intoxication of his love , in the Rue Plumet , during those six or seven ecstatic weeks , he had not even spoke to Cosette of that drama in the Gorbeau hovel , where the victim had taken up such a singular line of silence during the struggle and the ensuing flight . 
How had it happened that he had not mentioned this to Cosette ? 
Yet it was so near and so terrible ! 
How had it come to pass that he had not even named the Thenardiers , and , particularly , on the day when he had encountered Eponine ? 
He now found it almost difficult to explain his silence of that time . 
Nevertheless , he could account for it . 
He recalled his benumbed state , his intoxication with Cosette , love absorbing everything , that catching away of each other into the ideal , and perhaps also , like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled with this violent and charming state of the soul , a vague , dull instinct impelling him to conceal and abolish in his memory that redoubtable adventure , contact with which he dreaded , in which he did not wish to play any part , his agency in which he had kept secret , and in which he could be neither narrator nor witness without being an accuser . 
Moreover , these few weeks had been a flash of lightning ; there had been no time for anything except love . 
In short , having weighed everything , turned everything over in his mind , examined everything , whatever might have been the consequences if he had told Cosette about the Gorbeau ambush , even if he had discovered that Jean Valjean was a convict , would that have changed him , Marius ? 
Would that have changed her , Cosette ? 
Would he have drawn back ? 
Would he have adored her any the less ? 
Would he have refrained from marrying her ? 
No . 
Then there was nothing to regret , nothing with which he need reproach himself . 
All was well . 
There is a deity for those drunken men who are called lovers . 
Marius blind , had followed the path which he would have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight . 
Love had bandaged his eyes , in order to lead him whither ? 
To paradise . 
But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernal accompaniment . 
Marius ' ancient estrangement towards this man , towards this Fauchelevent who had turned into Jean Valjean , was at present mingled with horror . 
In this horror , let us state , there was some pity , and even a certain surprise . 
This thief , this thief guilty of a second offence , had restored that deposit . 
And what a deposit ! 
Six hundred thousand francs . 
He alone was in the secret of that deposit . 
He might have kept it all , he had restored it all . 
Moreover , he had himself revealed his situation . 
Nothing forced him to this . 
If any one learned who he was , it was through himself . 
In this avowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation , there was acceptance of peril . 
For a condemned man , a mask is not a mask , it is a shelter . 
A false name is security , and he had rejected that false name . 
He , the galley-slave , might have hidden himself forever in an honest family ; he had withstood this temptation . 
And with what motive ? 
Through a conscientious scruple . 
