Here was one of those men who command amazement in desperate circumstances . 
Extreme as was the crisis , inevitable as was the catastrophe , there was nothing here of the agony of the drowning man , who opens his horror-filled eyes under the water . 
Thenardier rose in an unpretending manner , went to the fireplace , shoved aside the screen , which he leaned against the neighboring pallet , and thus unmasked the brazier full of glowing coals , in which the prisoner could plainly see the chisel white-hot and spotted here and there with tiny scarlet stars . 
Then Thenardier returned to his seat beside M. Leblanc . 
`` I continue , '' said he . 
`` We can come to an understanding . 
Let us arrange this matter in an amicable way . 
I was wrong to lose my temper just now , I do n't know what I was thinking of , I went a great deal too far , I said extravagant things . 
For example , because you are a millionnaire , I told you that I exacted money , a lot of money , a deal of money . 
That would not be reasonable . 
Mon Dieu , in spite of your riches , you have expenses of your own -- who has not ? 
I do n't want to ruin you , I am not a greedy fellow , after all . 
I am not one of those people who , because they have the advantage of the position , profit by the fact to make themselves ridiculous . 
Why , I 'm taking things into consideration and making a sacrifice on my side . 
I only want two hundred thousand francs . '' 
M. Leblanc uttered not a word . 
Thenardier went on : -- `` You see that I put not a little water in my wine ; I 'm very moderate . 
I do n't know the state of your fortune , but I do know that you do n't stick at money , and a benevolent man like yourself can certainly give two hundred thousand francs to the father of a family who is out of luck . 
Certainly , you are reasonable , too ; you have n't imagined that I should take all the trouble I have to-day and organized this affair this evening , which has been labor well bestowed , in the opinion of these gentlemen , merely to wind up by asking you for enough to go and drink red wine at fifteen sous and eat veal at Desnoyer 's . 
Two hundred thousand francs -- it 's surely worth all that . 
This trifle once out of your pocket , I guarantee you that that 's the end of the matter , and that you have no further demands to fear . 
You will say to me : ` But I have n't two hundred thousand francs about me . ' 
Oh ! 
I 'm not extortionate . 
I do n't demand that . 
I only ask one thing of you . 
Have the goodness to write what I am about to dictate to you . '' 
Here Thenardier paused ; then he added , emphasizing his words , and casting a smile in the direction of the brazier : -- `` I warn you that I shall not admit that you do n't know how to write . '' 
A grand inquisitor might have envied that smile . 
Thenardier pushed the table close to M. Leblanc , and took an inkstand , a pen , and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open , and in which gleamed the long blade of the knife . 
He placed the sheet of paper before M. Leblanc . 
`` Write , '' said he . 
The prisoner spoke at last . 
`` How do you expect me to write ? 
I am bound . '' 
`` That 's true , excuse me ! '' 
ejaculated Thenardier , `` you are quite right . '' 
And turning to Bigrenaille : -- `` Untie the gentleman 's right arm . '' 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , executed Thenardier 's order . 
When the prisoner 's right arm was free , Thenardier dipped the pen in the ink and presented it to him . 
`` Understand thoroughly , sir , that you are in our power , at our discretion , that no human power can get you out of this , and that we shall be really grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeable extremities . 
I know neither your name , nor your address , but I warn you , that you will remain bound until the person charged with carrying the letter which you are about to write shall have returned . 
Now , be so good as to write . '' 
`` What ? '' 
demanded the prisoner . 
`` I will dictate . '' 
M. Leblanc took the pen . 
Thenardier began to dictate : -- `` My daughter -- '' The prisoner shuddered , and raised his eyes to Thenardier . 
`` Put down ` My dear daughter ' -- '' said Thenardier . 
M. Leblanc obeyed . 
