before thee , there was never a creature worthy of the name . 
Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus , or to eat it like Eve ; beauty begins with thee . 
I have just referred to Eve ; it is thou who hast created her . 
Thou deservest the letters-patent of the beautiful woman . 
O Favourite , I cease to address you as ` thou , ' because I pass from poetry to prose . 
You were speaking of my name a little while ago . 
That touched me ; but let us , whoever we may be , distrust names . 
They may delude us . 
I am called Felix , and I am not happy . 
Words are liars . 
Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford us . 
It would be a mistake to write to Liege -LSB- 2 -RSB- for corks , and to Pau for gloves . 
Miss Dahlia , were I in your place , I would call myself Rosa . 
A flower should smell sweet , and woman should have wit . 
I say nothing of Fantine ; she is a dreamer , a musing , thoughtful , pensive person ; she is a phantom possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun , who has strayed into the life of a grisette , but who takes refuge in illusions , and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure without very well knowing what she sees or what she is doing , and who , with her eyes fixed on heaven , wanders in a garden where there are more birds than are in existence . 
O Fantine , know this : I , Tholomyes , I am all illusion ; but she does not even hear me , that blond maid of Chimeras ! 
as for the rest , everything about her is freshness , suavity , youth , sweet morning light . 
O Fantine , maid worthy of being called Marguerite or Pearl , you are a woman from the beauteous Orient . 
Ladies , a second piece of advice : do not marry ; marriage is a graft ; it takes well or ill ; avoid that risk . 
But bah ! 
what am I saying ? 
I am wasting my words . 
Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage , and all that we wise men can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds . 
Well , so be it ; but , my beauties , remember this , you eat too much sugar . 
You have but one fault , O woman , and that is nibbling sugar . 
O nibbling sex , your pretty little white teeth adore sugar . 
Now , heed me well , sugar is a salt . 
All salts are withering . 
Sugar is the most desiccating of all salts ; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins ; hence the coagulation , and then the solidification of the blood ; hence tubercles in the lungs , hence death . 
That is why diabetes borders on consumption . 
Then , do not crunch sugar , and you will live . 
I turn to the men : gentlemen , make conquest , rob each other of your well-beloved without remorse . 
Chassez across . 
In love there are no friends . 
Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is open . 
No quarter , war to the death ! 
a pretty woman is a casus belli ; a pretty woman is flagrant misdemeanor . 
All the invasions of history have been determined by petticoats . 
Woman is man 's right . 
Romulus carried off the Sabines ; William carried off the Saxon women ; Caesar carried off the Roman women . 
The man who is not loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses of other men ; and for my own part , to all those unfortunate men who are widowers , I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army of Italy : `` Soldiers , you are in need of everything ; the enemy has it . '' 
-LSB- 2 -RSB- Liege : a cork-tree . 
Pau : a jest on peau , skin . 
Tholomyes paused . 
`` Take breath , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
At the same moment Blachevelle , supported by Listolier and Fameuil , struck up to a plaintive air , one of those studio songs composed of the first words which come to hand , rhymed richly and not at all , as destitute of sense as the gesture of the tree and the sound of the wind , which have their birth in the vapor of pipes , and are dissipated and take their flight with them . 
This is the couplet by which the group replied to Tholomyes ' harangue : -- `` The father turkey-cocks so grave Some money to an agent gave , That master good Clermont-Tonnerre Might be made pope on Saint Johns ' day fair . 
But this good Clermont could not be Made pope , because no priest was he ; And then their agent , whose wrath burned , With all their money back returned . '' 
This was not calculated to calm Tholomyes ' improvisation ; he emptied his glass , filled , refilled it , and began again : -- `` Down with wisdom ! 
Forget all that I have said . 
