How ? 
When ? 
No one knew , but it was certain and inevitable . 
In this place which had been marked out for the struggle , the Government and the insurrection , the National Guard , and popular societies , the bourgeois and the uprising , groping their way , were about to come into contact . 
The necessity was the same for both . 
The only possible issue thenceforth was to emerge thence killed or conquerors . 
A situation so extreme , an obscurity so powerful , that the most timid felt themselves seized with resolution , and the most daring with terror . 
Moreover , on both sides , the fury , the rage , and the determination were equal . 
For the one party , to advance meant death , and no one dreamed of retreating ; for the other , to remain meant death , and no one dreamed of flight . 
It was indispensable that all should be ended on the following day , that triumph should rest either here or there , that the insurrection should prove itself a revolution or a skirmish . 
The Government understood this as well as the parties ; the most insignificant bourgeois felt it . 
Hence a thought of anguish which mingled with the impenetrable gloom of this quarter where all was at the point of being decided ; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence a catastrophe was on the point of emerging . 
Here only one sound was audible , a sound as heart-rending as the death rattle , as menacing as a malediction , the tocsin of Saint-Merry . 
Nothing could be more blood-curdling than the clamor of that wild and desperate bell , wailing amid the shadows . 
As it often happens , nature seemed to have fallen into accord with what men were about to do . 
Nothing disturbed the harmony of the whole effect . 
The stars had disappeared , heavy clouds filled the horizon with their melancholy folds . 
A black sky rested on these dead streets , as though an immense winding-sheet were being outspread over this immense tomb . 
While a battle that was still wholly political was in preparation in the same locality which had already witnessed so many revolutionary events , while youth , the secret associations , the schools , in the name of principles , and the middle classes , in the name of interests , were approaching preparatory to dashing themselves together , clasping and throwing each other , while each one hastened and invited the last and decisive hour of the crisis , far away and quite outside of this fatal quarter , in the most profound depths of the unfathomable cavities of that wretched old Paris which disappears under the splendor of happy and opulent Paris , the sombre voice of the people could be heard giving utterance to a dull roar . 
A fearful and sacred voice which is composed of the roar of the brute and of the word of God , which terrifies the weak and which warns the wise , which comes both from below like the voice of the lion , and from on high like the voice of the thunder . 
THE EXTREME EDGE Marius had reached the Halles . 
There everything was still calmer , more obscure and more motionless than in the neighboring streets . 
One would have said that the glacial peace of the sepulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spread over the heavens . 
Nevertheless , a red glow brought out against this black background the lofty roofs of the houses which barred the Rue de la Chanvrerie on the Saint-Eustache side . 
It was the reflection of the torch which was burning in the Corinthe barricade . 
Marius directed his steps towards that red light . 
It had drawn him to the Marche-aux-Poirees , and he caught a glimpse of the dark mouth of the Rue des Precheurs . 
He entered it . 
The insurgents ' sentinel , who was guarding the other end , did not see him . 
He felt that he was very close to that which he had come in search of , and he walked on tiptoe . 
In this manner he reached the elbow of that short section of the Rue Mondetour which was , as the reader will remember , the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with the outside world . 
At the corner of the last house , on his left , he thrust his head forward , and looked into the fragment of the Rue Mondetour . 
A little beyond the angle of the lane and the Rue de la Chanvrerie which cast a broad curtain of shadow , in which he was himself engulfed , he perceived some light on the pavement , a bit of the wine-shop , and beyond , a flickering lamp within a sort of shapeless wall , and men crouching down with guns on their knees . 
All this was ten fathoms distant from him . 
It was the interior of the barricade . 
The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest of the wine-shop , the large barricade , and the flag from him . 
Marius had but a step more to take . 
Then the unhappy young man seated himself on a post , folded his arms , and fell to thinking about his father . 
He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy , who had been so proud a soldier , who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic , and had touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon , who had beheld Genoa , Alexandria , Milan , Turin , Madrid , Vienna , Dresden , Berlin , Moscow , who had left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that same blood , which he , Marius , had in his veins , who had grown gray before his time in discipline and command , who had lived with his sword-belt buckled , his epaulets falling on his breast , his cockade blackened with powder , his brow furrowed with his helmet , in barracks , in camp , in the bivouac , in ambulances , and who , at the expiration of twenty years , had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek , a smiling countenance , tranquil , admirable , pure as a child , having done everything for France and nothing against her . 
He said to himself that his day had also come now , that his hour had struck , that following his father , he too was about to show himself brave , intrepid , bold , to run to meet the bullets , to offer his breast to bayonets , to shed his blood , to seek the enemy , to seek death , that he was about to wage war in his turn and descend to the field of battle , and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend was the street , and that the war in which he was about to engage was civil war ! 
He beheld civil war laid open like a gulf before him , and into this he was about to fall . 
Then he shuddered . 
He thought of his father 's sword , which his grandfather had sold to a second-hand dealer , and which he had so mournfully regretted . 
He said to himself that that chaste and valiant sword had done well to escape from him , and to depart in wrath into the gloom ; that if it had thus fled , it was because it was intelligent and because it had foreseen the future ; that it had had a presentiment of this rebellion , the war of the gutters , the war of the pavements , fusillades through cellar-windows , blows given and received in the rear ; it was because , coming from Marengo and Friedland , it did not wish to go to the Rue de la Chanvrerie ; it was because , after what it had done with the father , it did not wish to do this for the son ! 
He told himself that if that sword were there , if after taking possession of it at his father 's pillow , he had dared to take it and carry it off for this combat of darkness between Frenchmen in the streets , it would assuredly have scorched his hands and burst out aflame before his eyes , like the sword of the angel ! 
He told himself that it was fortunate that it was not there and that it had disappeared , that that was well , that that was just , that his grandfather had been the true guardian of his father 's glory , and that it was far better that the colonel 's sword should be sold at auction , sold to the old-clothes man , thrown among the old junk , than that it should , to-day , wound the side of his country . 
And then he fell to weeping bitterly . 
This was horrible . 
But what was he to do ? 
Live without Cosette he could not . 
