Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own ; injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the prefect . 
He was really in doubt . 
Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark . 
Sadness , uneasiness , anxiety , depression , this fresh misfortune of being forced to flee by night , to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette and himself , the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace of the child -- all this , without his being aware of it , had altered Jean Valjean 's walk , and impressed on his bearing such senility , that the police themselves , incarnate in the person of Javert , might , and did in fact , make a mistake . 
The impossibility of approaching too close , his costume of an emigre preceptor , the declaration of Thenardier which made a grandfather of him , and , finally , the belief in his death in prison , added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in Javert 's mind . 
For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his papers ; but if the man was not Jean Valjean , and if this man was not a good , honest old fellow living on his income , he was probably some merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web of Parisian misdeeds , some chief of a dangerous band , who gave alms to conceal his other talents , which was an old dodge . 
He had trusty fellows , accomplices ' retreats in case of emergencies , in which he would , no doubt , take refuge . 
All these turns which he was making through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man . 
To arrest him too hastily would be `` to kill the hen that laid the golden eggs . '' 
Where was the inconvenience in waiting ? 
Javert was very sure that he would not escape . 
Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind , putting to himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage . 
It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise , that , thanks to the brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop , he decidedly recognized Jean Valjean . 
There are in this world two beings who give a profound start , -- the mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey . 
Javert gave that profound start . 
As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean , the formidable convict , he perceived that there were only three of them , and he asked for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise . 
One puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel . 
This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his agents came near causing him to lose the trail . 
He speedily divined , however , that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between his pursuers and himself . 
He bent his head and reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the right scent . 
Javert , with his powerful rectitude of instinct , went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz . 
A word with the toll-keeper furnished him with the information which he required : `` Have you seen a man with a little girl ? '' 
`` I made him pay two sous , '' replied the toll-keeper . 
Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated spot on the other side of the water , leading Cosette by the hand . 
He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine ; he remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap , and of the sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
He made sure of his back burrows , as huntsmen say ; he hastily despatched one of his agents , by a roundabout way , to guard that issue . 
A patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him , he made a requisition on it , and caused it to accompany him . 
In such games soldiers are aces . 
Moreover , the principle is , that in order to get the best of a wild boar , one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs . 
These combinations having been effected , feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind alley Genrot on the right , his agent on the left , and himself , Javert , in the rear , he took a pinch of snuff . 
Then he began the game . 
He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment ; he allowed his man to go on ahead , knowing that he had him safe , but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as possible , happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing him free , gloating over him with his gaze , with that voluptuousness of the spider which allows the fly to flutter , and of the cat which lets the mouse run . 
Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality , -- the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers . 
What a delight this strangling is ! 
Javert was enjoying himself . 
The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted . 
He was sure of success ; all he had to do now was to close his hand . 
Accompanied as he was , the very idea of resistance was impossible , however vigorous , energetic , and desperate Jean Valjean might be . 
Javert advanced slowly , sounding , searching on his way all the nooks of the street like so many pockets of thieves . 
When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there . 
His exasperation can be imagined . 
He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus ; that agent , who had remained imperturbably at his post , had not seen the man pass . 
It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns ; that is to say , he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels , and then the oldest huntsmen know not what to say . 
Duvivier , Ligniville , and Desprez halt short . 
In a discomfiture of this sort , Artonge exclaims , `` It was not a stag , but a sorcerer . '' 
Javert would have liked to utter the same cry . 
His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage . 
It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia , that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India , that Caesar made mistakes in the war in Africa , that Cyrus was at fault in the war in Scythia , and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean Valjean . 
He was wrong , perhaps , in hesitating in his recognition of the exconvict . 
The first glance should have sufficed him . 
