Some combatants , having discovered a few crusts of rather mouldy bread , in a drawer , were eagerly devouring them . 
Marius was disturbed with regard to what his father was about to say to him . 
THE VULTURE BECOME PREY We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades . 
Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets should be omitted . 
Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we have just mentioned , the barricade , for those who are inside it , remains , none the less , a vision . 
There is something of the apocalypse in civil war , all the mists of the unknown are commingled with fierce flashes , revolutions are sphinxes , and any one who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traversed a dream . 
The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointed out in the case of Marius , and we shall see the consequences ; they are both more and less than life . 
On emerging from a barricade , one no longer knows what one has seen there . 
One has been terrible , but one knows it not . 
One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which had human faces ; one 's head has been in the light of the future . 
There were corpses lying prone there , and phantoms standing erect . 
The hours were colossal and seemed hours of eternity . 
One has lived in death . 
Shadows have passed by . 
What were they ? 
One has beheld hands on which there was blood ; there was a deafening horror ; there was also a frightful silence ; there were open mouths which shouted , and other open mouths which held their peace ; one was in the midst of smoke , of night , perhaps . 
One fancied that one had touched the sinister ooze of unknown depths ; one stares at something red on one 's finger nails . 
One no longer remembers anything . 
Let us return to the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
All at once , between two discharges , the distant sound of a clock striking the hour became audible . 
`` It is midday , '' said Combeferre . 
The twelve strokes had not finished striking when Enjolras sprang to his feet , and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thundering shout : `` Carry stones up into the houses ; line the windowsills and the roofs with them . 
Half the men to their guns , the other half to the paving-stones . 
There is not a minute to be lost . '' 
A squad of sappers and miners , axe on shoulder , had just made their appearance in battle array at the end of the street . 
This could only be the head of a column ; and of what column ? 
The attacking column , evidently ; the sappers charged with the demolition of the barricade must always precede the soldiers who are to scale it . 
They were , evidently , on the brink of that moment which M. Clermont-Tonnerre , in 1822 , called `` the tug of war . '' 
Enjolras ' order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiar to ships and barricades , the only two scenes of combat where escape is impossible . 
In less than a minute , two thirds of the stones which Enjolras had had piled up at the door of Corinthe had been carried up to the first floor and the attic , and before a second minute had elapsed , these stones , artistically set one upon the other , walled up the sash-window on the first floor and the windows in the roof to half their height . 
A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly , the principal architect , allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels . 
This armament of the windows could be effected all the more easily since the firing of grape-shot had ceased . 
The two cannons were now discharging ball against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there , and , if possible , a breach for the assault . 
When the stones destined to the final defence were in place , Enjolras had the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay , carried to the first floor . 
`` Who is to drink that ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
`` They , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then they barricaded the window below , and held in readiness the iron cross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night . 
The fortress was complete . 
The barricade was the rampart , the wine-shop was the dungeon . 
With the stones which remained they stopped up the outlet . 
As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing of their ammunition , and as the assailants know this , the assailants combine their arrangements with a sort of irritating leisure , expose themselves to fire prematurely , though in appearance more than in reality , and take their ease . 
The preparations for attack are always made with a certain methodical deliberation ; after which , the lightning strikes . 
This deliberation permitted Enjolras to take a review of everything and to perfect everything . 
He felt that , since such men were to die , their death ought to be a masterpiece . 
He said to Marius : `` We are the two leaders . 
I will give the last orders inside . 
Do you remain outside and observe . '' 
Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade . 
Enjolras had the door of the kitchen , which was the ambulance , as the reader will remember , nailed up . 
