The life of the moment has its rights , we admit , but permanent life has its rights also . 
Alas ! 
the fact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall . 
This can be seen in history more frequently than is desirable : A nation is great , it tastes the ideal , then it bites the mire , and finds it good ; and if it be asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff , it replies : `` Because I love statesmen . '' 
One word more before returning to our subject , the conflict . 
A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing else than a convulsion towards the ideal . 
Progress trammelled is sickly , and is subject to these tragic epilepsies . 
With that malady of progress , civil war , we have been obliged to come in contact in our passage . 
This is one of the fatal phases , at once act and entr ` acte of that drama whose pivot is a social condemnation , and whose veritable title is Progress . 
Progress ! 
The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought ; and , at the point of this drama which we have now reached , the idea which it contains having still more than one trial to undergo , it is , perhaps , permitted to us , if not to lift the veil from it , to at least allow its light to shine through . 
The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is , from one end to the other , as a whole and in detail , whatever may be its intermittences , exceptions and faults , the march from evil to good , from the unjust to the just , from night to day , from appetite to conscience , from rottenness to life , from hell to heaven , from nothingness to God . 
Point of departure : matter ; point of arrival : the soul . 
The hydra at the beginning , the angel at the end . 
THE HEROES All at once , the drum beat the charge . 
The attack was a hurricane . 
On the evening before , in the darkness , the barricade had been approached silently , as by a boa . 
Now , in broad daylight , in that widening street , surprise was decidedly impossible , rude force had , moreover , been unmasked , the cannon had begun the roar , the army hurled itself on the barricade . 
Fury now became skill . 
A powerful detachment of infantry of the line , broken at regular intervals , by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot , and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen , debauched into the street at a run , with drums beating , trumpets braying , bayonets levelled , the sappers at their head , and , imperturbable under the projectiles , charged straight for the barricade with the weight of a brazen beam against a wall . 
The wall held firm . 
The insurgents fired impetuously . 
The barricade once scaled had a mane of lightning flashes . 
The assault was so furious , that for one moment , it was inundated with assailants ; but it shook off the soldiers as the lion shakes off the dogs , and it was only covered with besiegers as the cliff is covered with foam , to re-appear , a moment later , beetling , black and formidable . 
The column , forced to retreat , remained massed in the street , unprotected but terrible , and replied to the redoubt with a terrible discharge of musketry . 
Any one who has seen fireworks will recall the sheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet . 
Let the reader picture to himself this bouquet , no longer vertical but horizontal , bearing a bullet , buck-shot or a biscaien at the tip of each one of its jets of flame , and picking off dead men one after another from its clusters of lightning . 
The barricade was underneath it . 
On both sides , the resolution was equal . 
The bravery exhibited there was almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity which began by the sacrifice of self . 
This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave . 
The troop wished to make an end of it , insurrection was desirous of fighting . 
The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and in the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy . 
In this fray , each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour . 
The street was strewn with corpses . 
The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the other . 
Enjolras , who carried the whole barricade in his head , reserved and sheltered himself ; three soldiers fell , one after the other , under his embrasure , without having even seen him ; Marius fought unprotected . 
He made himself a target . 
He stood with more than half his body above the breastworks . 
There is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious man who takes the bit in his teeth ; there is no man more terrible in action than a dreamer . 
Marius was formidable and pensive . 
In battle he was as in a dream . 
One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in firing a gun . 
The insurgents ' cartridges were giving out ; but not their sarcasms . 
In this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood , they laughed . 
Courfeyrac was bare-headed . 
`` What have you done with your hat ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
Courfeyrac replied : `` They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls . '' 
Or they uttered haughty comments . 
