She turned towards him ; she was making a visible effort to be calm and `` very good , '' as she expressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy , in order that , seeing her so peaceable , they might make no difficulty about bringing Cosette to her . 
But while she controlled herself she could not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine . 
`` Did you have a pleasant trip , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Oh ! 
how good you were to go and get her for me ! 
Only tell me how she is . 
Did she stand the journey well ? 
Alas ! 
she will not recognize me . 
She must have forgotten me by this time , poor darling ! 
Children have no memories . 
They are like birds . 
A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow , and thinks of nothing any longer . 
And did she have white linen ? 
Did those Thenardiers keep her clean ? 
How have they fed her ? 
Oh ! 
if you only knew how I have suffered , putting such questions as that to myself during all the time of my wretchedness . 
Now , it is all past . 
I am happy . 
Oh , how I should like to see her ! 
Do you think her pretty , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Is not my daughter beautiful ? 
You must have been very cold in that diligence ! 
Could she not be brought for just one little instant ? 
She might be taken away directly afterwards . 
Tell me ; you are the master ; it could be so if you chose ! '' 
He took her hand . 
`` Cosette is beautiful , '' he said , `` Cosette is well . 
You shall see her soon ; but calm yourself ; you are talking with too much vivacity , and you are throwing your arms out from under the clothes , and that makes you cough . '' 
In fact , fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word . 
Fantine did not murmur ; she feared that she had injured by her too passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of inspiring , and she began to talk of indifferent things . 
`` Montfermeil is quite pretty , is it not ? 
People go there on pleasure parties in summer . 
Are the Thenardiers prosperous ? 
There are not many travellers in their parts . 
That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop . '' 
M. Madeleine was still holding her hand , and gazing at her with anxiety ; it was evident that he had come to tell her things before which his mind now hesitated . 
The doctor , having finished his visit , retired . 
Sister Simplice remained alone with them . 
But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed : -- `` I hear her ! 
mon Dieu , I hear her ! '' 
She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her , held her breath , and began to listen with rapture . 
There was a child playing in the yard -- the child of the portress or of some work-woman . 
It was one of those accidents which are always occurring , and which seem to form a part of the mysterious stage-setting of mournful scenes . 
The child -- a little girl -- was going and coming , running to warm herself , laughing , singing at the top of her voice . 
Alas ! 
in what are the plays of children not intermingled . 
It was this little girl whom Fantine heard singing . 
`` Oh ! '' 
