This was the sole luxury which the Bishop permitted . 
He said , `` That takes nothing from the poor . '' 
It must be confessed , however , that he still retained from his former possessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle , which Madame Magloire contemplated every day with delight , as they glistened splendidly upon the coarse linen cloth . 
And since we are now painting the Bishop of D -- as he was in reality , we must add that he had said more than once , `` I find it difficult to renounce eating from silver dishes . '' 
To this silverware must be added two large candlesticks of massive silver , which he had inherited from a great-aunt . 
These candlesticks held two wax candles , and usually figured on the Bishop 's chimney-piece . 
When he had any one to dinner , Madame Magloire lighted the two candles and set the candlesticks on the table . 
In the Bishop 's own chamber , at the head of his bed , there was a small cupboard , in which Madame Magloire locked up the six silver knives and forks and the big spoon every night . 
But it is necessary to add , that the key was never removed . 
The garden , which had been rather spoiled by the ugly buildings which we have mentioned , was composed of four alleys in cross-form , radiating from a tank . 
Another walk made the circuit of the garden , and skirted the white wall which enclosed it . 
These alleys left behind them four square plots rimmed with box . 
In three of these , Madame Magloire cultivated vegetables ; in the fourth , the Bishop had planted some flowers ; here and there stood a few fruit-trees . 
Madame Magloire had once remarked , with a sort of gentle malice : `` Monseigneur , you who turn everything to account , have , nevertheless , one useless plot . 
It would be better to grow salads there than bouquets . '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' retorted the Bishop , `` you are mistaken . 
The beautiful is as useful as the useful . '' 
He added after a pause , `` More so , perhaps . '' 
This plot , consisting of three or four beds , occupied the Bishop almost as much as did his books . 
He liked to pass an hour or two there , trimming , hoeing , and making holes here and there in the earth , into which he dropped seeds . 
He was not as hostile to insects as a gardener could have wished to see him . 
Moreover , he made no pretensions to botany ; he ignored groups and consistency ; he made not the slightest effort to decide between Tournefort and the natural method ; he took part neither with the buds against the cotyledons , nor with Jussieu against Linnaeus . 
He did not study plants ; he loved flowers . 
He respected learned men greatly ; he respected the ignorant still more ; and , without ever failing in these two respects , he watered his flower-beds every summer evening with a tin watering-pot painted green . 
The house had not a single door which could be locked . 
The door of the dining-room , which , as we have said , opened directly on the cathedral square , had formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts like the door of a prison . 
The Bishop had had all this ironwork removed , and this door was never fastened , either by night or by day , with anything except the latch . 
All that the first passerby had to do at any hour , was to give it a push . 
At first , the two women had been very much tried by this door , which was never fastened , but Monsieur de D -- had said to them , `` Have bolts put on your rooms , if that will please you . '' 
They had ended by sharing his confidence , or by at least acting as though they shared it . 
Madame Magloire alone had frights from time to time . 
As for the Bishop , his thought can be found explained , or at least indicated , in the three lines which he wrote on the margin of a Bible , `` This is the shade of difference : the door of the physician should never be shut , the door of the priest should always be open . '' 
On another book , entitled Philosophy of the Medical Science , he had written this other note : `` Am not I a physician like them ? 
I also have my patients , and then , too , I have some whom I call my unfortunates . '' 
Again he wrote : `` Do not inquire the name of him who asks a shelter of you . 
The very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one who needs shelter . '' 
It chanced that a worthy cure , I know not whether it was the cure of Couloubroux or the cure of Pompierry , took it into his head to ask him one day , probably at the instigation of Madame Magloire , whether Monsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion , to a certain extent , in leaving his door unfastened day and night , at the mercy of any one who should choose to enter , and whether , in short , he did not fear lest some misfortune might occur in a house so little guarded . 
The Bishop touched his shoulder , with gentle gravity , and said to him , `` Nisi Dominus custodierit domum , in vanum vigilant qui custodiunt eam , '' Unless the Lord guard the house , in vain do they watch who guard it . 
Then he spoke of something else . 
He was fond of saying , `` There is a bravery of the priest as well as the bravery of a colonel of dragoons , -- only , '' he added , `` ours must be tranquil . '' 
CRAVATTE It is here that a fact falls naturally into place , which we must not omit , because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of a man the Bishop of D -- was . 
After the destruction of the band of Gaspard Bes , who had infested the gorges of Ollioules , one of his lieutenants , Cravatte , took refuge in the mountains . 
He concealed himself for some time with his bandits , the remnant of Gaspard Bes 's troop , in the county of Nice ; then he made his way to Piedmont , and suddenly reappeared in France , in the vicinity of Barcelonette . 
He was first seen at Jauziers , then at Tuiles . 
He hid himself in the caverns of the Joug-de-l'Aigle , and thence he descended towards the hamlets and villages through the ravines of Ubaye and Ubayette . 
He even pushed as far as Embrun , entered the cathedral one night , and despoiled the sacristy . 
His highway robberies laid waste the country-side . 
The gendarmes were set on his track , but in vain . 
He always escaped ; sometimes he resisted by main force . 
He was a bold wretch . 
