His determination once taken , he awaited an opportunity . 
It was not long in presenting itself . 
Old Fauchelevent died . 
Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and told her that , having come into a little inheritance at the death of his brother , which permitted him henceforth to live without working , he should leave the service of the convent and take his daughter with him ; but that , as it was not just that Cosette , since she had not taken the vows , should have received her education gratuitously , he humbly begged the Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should offer to the community , as indemnity , for the five years which Cosette had spent there , the sum of five thousand francs . 
It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Perpetual Adoration . 
On leaving the convent , he took in his own arms the little valise the key to which he still wore on his person , and would permit no porter to touch it . 
This puzzled Cosette , because of the odor of embalming which proceeded from it . 
Let us state at once , that this trunk never quitted him more . 
He always had it in his chamber . 
It was the first and only thing sometimes , that he carried off in his moving when he moved about . 
Cosette laughed at it , and called this valise his inseparable , saying : `` I am jealous of it . '' 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not reappear in the open air without profound anxiety . 
He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet , and hid himself from sight there . 
Henceforth he was in the possession of the name : -- Ultime Fauchelevent . 
At the same time he hired two other apartments in Paris , in order that he might attract less attention than if he were to remain always in the same quarter , and so that he could , at need , take himself off at the slightest disquietude which should assail him , and in short , so that he might not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had so miraculously escaped from Javert . 
These two apartments were very pitiable , poor in appearance , and in two quarters which were far remote from each other , the one in the Rue de l'Ouest , the other in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
He went from time to time , now to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , now to the Rue de l'Ouest , to pass a month or six weeks , without taking Toussaint . 
He had himself served by the porters , and gave himself out as a gentleman from the suburbs , living on his funds , and having a little temporary resting-place in town . 
This lofty virtue had three domiciles in Paris for the sake of escaping from the police . 
JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD However , properly speaking , he lived in the Rue Plumet , and he had arranged his existence there in the following fashion : -- Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion ; she had the big sleeping-room with the painted pier-glasses , the boudoir with the gilded fillets , the justice 's drawing-room furnished with tapestries and vast arm-chairs ; she had the garden . 
Jean Valjean had a canopied bed of antique damask in three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchased in the Rue du Figuier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher 's , put into Cosette 's chamber , and , in order to redeem the severity of these magnificent old things , he had amalgamated with this bric-a-brac all the gay and graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to young girls , an etagere , a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books , an inkstand , a blotting-book , paper , a work-table incrusted with mother of pearl , a silver-gilt dressing-case , a toilet service in Japanese porcelain . 
Long damask curtains with a red foundation and three colors , like those on the bed , hung at the windows of the first floor . 
On the ground floor , the curtains were of tapestry . 
All winter long , Cosette 's little house was heated from top to bottom . 
Jean Valjean inhabited the sort of porter 's lodge which was situated at the end of the back courtyard , with a mattress on a folding-bed , a white wood table , two straw chairs , an earthenware water-jug , a few old volumes on a shelf , his beloved valise in one corner , and never any fire . 
He dined with Cosette , and he had a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use . 
When Toussaint came , he had said to her : `` It is the young lady who is the mistress of this house . '' 
-- `` And you , monsieur ? '' 
Toussaint replied in amazement . 
-- `` I am a much better thing than the master , I am the father . '' 
Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent , and she regulated their expenditure , which was very modest . 
Every day , Jean Valjean put his arm through Cosette 's and took her for a walk . 
He led her to the Luxembourg , to the least frequented walk , and every Sunday he took her to mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas , because that was a long way off . 
As it was a very poor quarter , he bestowed alms largely there , and the poor people surrounded him in church , which had drawn down upon him Thenardier 's epistle : `` To the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . '' 
He was fond of taking Cosette to visit the poor and the sick . 
No stranger ever entered the house in the Rue Plumet . 
Toussaint brought their provisions , and Jean Valjean went himself for water to a fountain near by on the boulevard . 
Their wood and wine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-work which lay near the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served the chief-justice as a grotto ; for at the epoch of follies and `` Little Houses '' no love was without a grotto . 
In the door opening on the Rue de Babylone , there was a box destined for the reception of letters and papers ; only , as the three inhabitants of the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters , the entire usefulness of that box , formerly the go-between of a love affair , and the confidant of a love-lorn lawyer , was now limited to the tax-collector 's notices , and the summons of the guard . 
For M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman , belonged to the national guard ; he had not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of 1831 . 
The municipal information collected at that time had even reached the convent of the Petit-Picpus , a sort of impenetrable and holy cloud , whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise , and , consequently , worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the townhall . 
Three or four times a year , Jean Valjean donned his uniform and mounted guard ; he did this willingly , however ; it was a correct disguise which mixed him with every one , and yet left him solitary . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his sixtieth birthday , the age of legal exemption ; but he did not appear to be over fifty ; moreover , he had no desire to escape his sergeant-major nor to quibble with Comte de Lobau ; he possessed no civil status , he was concealing his name , he was concealing his identity , so he concealed his age , he concealed everything ; and , as we have just said , he willingly did his duty as a national guard ; the sum of his ambition lay in resembling any other man who paid his taxes . 
This man had for his ideal , within , the angel , without , the bourgeois . 
Let us note one detail , however ; when Jean Valjean went out with Cosette , he dressed as the reader has already seen , and had the air of a retired officer . 
When he went out alone , which was generally at night , he was always dressed in a workingman 's trousers and blouse , and wore a cap which concealed his face . 
Was this precaution or humility ? 
Both . 
Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical side of her destiny , and hardly noticed her father 's peculiarities . 
As for Toussaint , she venerated Jean Valjean , and thought everything he did right . 
