-- The Emperor made me a Baron on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my blood , my son shall take it and bear it . 
That he will be worthy of it is a matter of course . '' 
Below , the colonel had added : `` At that same battle of Waterloo , a sergeant saved my life . 
The man 's name was Thenardier . 
I think that he has recently been keeping a little inn , in a village in the neighborhood of Paris , at Chelles or Montfermeil . 
If my son meets him , he will do all the good he can to Thenardier . '' 
Marius took this paper and preserved it , not out of duty to his father , but because of that vague respect for death which is always imperious in the heart of man . 
Nothing remained of the colonel . 
M. Gillenormand had his sword and uniform sold to an old-clothes dealer . 
The neighbors devastated the garden and pillaged the rare flowers . 
The other plants turned to nettles and weeds , and died . 
Marius remained only forty-eight hours at Vernon . 
After the interment he returned to Paris , and applied himself again to his law studies , with no more thought of his father than if the latter had never lived . 
In two days the colonel was buried , and in three forgotten . 
Marius wore crape on his hat . 
That was all . 
THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS , IN ORDER TO BECOME A REVOLUTIONIST Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood . 
One Sunday , when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice , at that same chapel of the Virgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad , he placed himself behind a pillar , being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual on that occasion , and knelt down , without paying any special heed , upon a chair of Utrecht velvet , on the back of which was inscribed this name : Monsieur Mabeuf , warden . 
Mass had hardly begun when an old man presented himself and said to Marius : -- `` This is my place , sir . '' 
Marius stepped aside promptly , and the old man took possession of his chair . 
The mass concluded , Marius still stood thoughtfully a few paces distant ; the old man approached him again and said : -- `` I beg your pardon , sir , for having disturbed you a while ago , and for again disturbing you at this moment ; you must have thought me intrusive , and I will explain myself . '' 
`` There is no need of that , Sir , '' said Marius . 
`` Yes ! '' 
went on the old man , `` I do not wish you to have a bad opinion of me . 
You see , I am attached to this place . 
It seems to me that the mass is better from here . 
Why ? 
I will tell you . 
It is from this place , that I have watched a poor , brave father come regularly , every two or three months , for the last ten years , since he had no other opportunity and no other way of seeing his child , because he was prevented by family arrangements . 
He came at the hour when he knew that his son would be brought to mass . 
The little one never suspected that his father was there . 
Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father , poor innocent ! 
The father kept behind a pillar , so that he might not be seen . 
He gazed at his child and he wept . 
He adored that little fellow , poor man ! 
I could see that . 
This spot has become sanctified in my sight , and I have contracted a habit of coming hither to listen to the mass . 
I prefer it to the stall to which I have a right , in my capacity of warden . 
I knew that unhappy gentleman a little , too . 
He had a father-in-law , a wealthy aunt , relatives , I do n't know exactly what all , who threatened to disinherit the child if he , the father , saw him . 
He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happy some day . 
He was separated from him because of political opinions . 
Certainly , I approve of political opinions , but there are people who do not know where to stop . 
Mon Dieu ! 
a man is not a monster because he was at Waterloo ; a father is not separated from his child for such a reason as that . 
He was one of Bonaparte 's colonels . 
He is dead , I believe . 
He lived at Vernon , where I have a brother who is a cure , and his name was something like Pontmarie or Montpercy . 
He had a fine sword-cut , on my honor . '' 
