Go away ! '' 
The man dropped his head , picked up the knapsack which he had deposited on the ground , and took his departure . 
He chose the principal street . 
He walked straight on at a venture , keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man . 
He did not turn round a single time . 
Had he done so , he would have seen the host of the Cross of Colbas standing on his threshold , surrounded by all the guests of his inn , and all the passers-by in the street , talking vivaciously , and pointing him out with his finger ; and , from the glances of terror and distrust cast by the group , he might have divined that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town . 
He saw nothing of all this . 
People who are crushed do not look behind them . 
They know but too well the evil fate which follows them . 
Thus he proceeded for some time , walking on without ceasing , traversing at random streets of which he knew nothing , forgetful of his fatigue , as is often the case when a man is sad . 
All at once he felt the pangs of hunger sharply . 
Night was drawing near . 
He glanced about him , to see whether he could not discover some shelter . 
The fine hostelry was closed to him ; he was seeking some very humble public house , some hovel , however lowly . 
Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets ; a pine branch suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky of the twilight . 
He proceeded thither . 
It proved to be , in fact , a public house . 
The public house which is in the Rue de Chaffaut . 
The wayfarer halted for a moment , and peeped through the window into the interior of the low-studded room of the public house , illuminated by a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth . 
Some men were engaged in drinking there . 
The landlord was warming himself . 
An iron pot , suspended from a crane , bubbled over the flame . 
The entrance to this public house , which is also a sort of an inn , is by two doors . 
One opens on the street , the other upon a small yard filled with manure . 
The traveller dare not enter by the street door . 
He slipped into the yard , halted again , then raised the latch timidly and opened the door . 
`` Who goes there ? '' 
said the master . 
`` Some one who wants supper and bed . '' 
`` Good . 
We furnish supper and bed here . '' 
He entered . 
All the men who were drinking turned round . 
The lamp illuminated him on one side , the firelight on the other . 
They examined him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack . 
The host said to him , `` There is the fire . 
The supper is cooking in the pot . 
Come and warm yourself , comrade . '' 
He approached and seated himself near the hearth . 
He stretched out his feet , which were exhausted with fatigue , to the fire ; a fine odor was emitted by the pot . 
All that could be distinguished of his face , beneath his cap , which was well pulled down , assumed a vague appearance of comfort , mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitual suffering bestows . 
It was , moreover , a firm , energetic , and melancholy profile . 
This physiognomy was strangely composed ; it began by seeming humble , and ended by seeming severe . 
The eye shone beneath its lashes like a fire beneath brushwood . 
One of the men seated at the table , however , was a fishmonger who , before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut , had been to stable his horse at Labarre 's . 
It chanced that he had that very morning encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras d'Asse and -- I have forgotten the name . 
I think it was Escoublon . 
Now , when he met him , the man , who then seemed already extremely weary , had requested him to take him on his crupper ; to which the fishmonger had made no reply except by redoubling his gait . 
This fishmonger had been a member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin Labarre , and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the morning to the people at the Cross of Colbas . 
From where he sat he made an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper . 
