Here , again , there was a magical word which it was necessary to know . 
If one did not know it , the voice ceased , the wall became silent once more , as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other side of it . 
If one knew the password , the voice resumed , `` Enter on the right . '' 
One then perceived on the right , facing the window , a glass door surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray . 
On raising the latch and crossing the threshold , one experienced precisely the same impression as when one enters at the theatre into a grated baignoire , before the grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted . 
One was , in fact , in a sort of theatre-box , narrow , furnished with two old chairs , and a much-frayed straw matting , sparely illuminated by the vague light from the glass door ; a regular box , with its front just of a height to lean upon , bearing a tablet of black wood . 
This box was grated , only the grating of it was not of gilded wood , as at the opera ; it was a monstrous lattice of iron bars , hideously interlaced and riveted to the wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists . 
The first minutes passed ; when one 's eyes began to grow used to this cellar-like half-twilight , one tried to pass the grating , but got no further than six inches beyond it . 
There he encountered a barrier of black shutters , re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood painted a gingerbread yellow . 
These shutters were divided into long , narrow slats , and they masked the entire length of the grating . 
They were always closed . 
At the expiration of a few moments one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters , and saying : -- `` I am here . 
What do you wish with me ? '' 
It was a beloved , sometimes an adored , voice . 
No one was visible . 
Hardly the sound of a breath was audible . 
It seemed as though it were a spirit which had been evoked , that was speaking to you across the walls of the tomb . 
If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions , the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you ; the evoked spirit became an apparition . 
Behind the grating , behind the shutter , one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight , a head , of which only the mouth and the chin were visible ; the rest was covered with a black veil . 
One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe , and a form that was barely defined , covered with a black shroud . 
That head spoke with you , but did not look at you and never smiled at you . 
The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that you saw her in the white , and she saw you in the black . 
This light was symbolical . 
Nevertheless , your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was made in that place shut off from all glances . 
A profound vagueness enveloped that form clad in mourning . 
Your eyes searched that vagueness , and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition . 
At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could see nothing . 
What you beheld was night , emptiness , shadows , a wintry mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb , a sort of terrible peace , a silence from which you could gather nothing , not even sighs , a gloom in which you could distinguish nothing , not even phantoms . 
What you beheld was the interior of a cloister . 
It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called the Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration . 
The box in which you stood was the parlor . 
The first voice which had addressed you was that of the portress who always sat motionless and silent , on the other side of the wall , near the square opening , screened by the iron grating and the plate with its thousand holes , as by a double visor . 
The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that the parlor , which had a window on the side of the world , had none on the side of the convent . 
Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacred place . 
Nevertheless , there was something beyond that shadow ; there was a light ; there was life in the midst of that death . 
Although this was the most strictly walled of all convents , we shall endeavor to make our way into it , and to take the reader in , and to say , without transgressing the proper bounds , things which story-tellers have never seen , and have , therefore , never described . 
THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA This convent , which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the Rue Petit-Picpus , was a community of Bernardines of the obedience of Martin Verga . 
These Bernardines were attached , in consequence , not to Clairvaux , like the Bernardine monks , but to Citeaux , like the Benedictine monks . 
In other words , they were the subjects , not of Saint Bernard , but of Saint Benoit . 
Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that Martin Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines , with Salamanca for the head of the order , and Alcala as the branch establishment . 
This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic countries of Europe . 
There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one order on another . 
To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoit , which is here in question : there are attached to this order , without counting the obedience of Martin Verga , four congregations , -- two in Italy , Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua ; two in France , Cluny and Saint-Maur ; and nine orders , -- Vallombrosa , Granmont , the Celestins , the Camaldules , the Carthusians , the Humilies , the Olivateurs , the Silvestrins , and lastly , Citeaux ; for Citeaux itself , a trunk for other orders , is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoit . 
Citeaux dates from Saint Robert , Abbe de Molesme , in the diocese of Langres , in 1098 . 
Now it was in 529 that the devil , having retired to the desert of Subiaco -- he was old -- had he turned hermit ? 
-- was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo , where he dwelt , by Saint-Benoit , then aged seventeen . 
After the rule of the Carmelites , who go barefoot , wear a bit of willow on their throats , and never sit down , the harshest rule is that of the Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
They are clothed in black , with a guimpe , which , in accordance with the express command of Saint-Benoit , mounts to the chin . 
A robe of serge with large sleeves , a large woollen veil , the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square on the breast , the band which descends over their brow to their eyes , -- this is their dress . 
All is black except the band , which is white . 
