We flee in the arms of Lafitte and on the wings of Caillard . 
The Toulouse diligence tears us from the abyss , and the abyss is you , O our little beauties ! 
We return to society , to duty , to respectability , at full trot , at the rate of three leagues an hour . 
It is necessary for the good of the country that we should be , like the rest of the world , prefects , fathers of families , rural police , and councillors of state . 
Venerate us . 
We are sacrificing ourselves . 
Mourn for us in haste , and replace us with speed . 
If this letter lacerates you , do the same by it . 
Adieu . 
`` For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy . 
We bear you no grudge for that . 
`` Signed : BLACHEVELLE . 
FAMUEIL . 
LISTOLIER . 
FELIX THOLOMYES . 
`` Postscriptum . 
The dinner is paid for . '' 
The four young women looked at each other . 
Favourite was the first to break the silence . 
`` Well ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` it 's a very pretty farce , all the same . '' 
`` It is very droll , '' said Zephine . 
`` That must have been Blachevelle 's idea , '' resumed Favourite . 
`` It makes me in love with him . 
No sooner is he gone than he is loved . 
This is an adventure , indeed . '' 
`` No , '' said Dahlia ; `` it was one of Tholomyes ' ideas . 
That is evident . 
`` In that case , '' retorted Favourite , `` death to Blachevelle , and long live Tholomyes ! '' 
`` Long live Tholomyes ! '' 
exclaimed Dahlia and Zephine . 
And they burst out laughing . 
Fantine laughed with the rest . 
An hour later , when she had returned to her room , she wept . 
It was her first love affair , as we have said ; she had given herself to this Tholomyes as to a husband , and the poor girl had a child . 
ONE MOTHER MEETS ANOTHER MOTHER There was , at Montfermeil , near Paris , during the first quarter of this century , a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists . 
This cook-shop was kept by some people named Thenardier , husband and wife . 
It was situated in Boulanger Lane . 
Over the door there was a board nailed flat against the wall . 
Upon this board was painted something which resembled a man carrying another man on his back , the latter wearing the big gilt epaulettes of a general , with large silver stars ; red spots represented blood ; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke , and probably represented a battle . 
Below ran this inscription : AT THE SIGN OF SERGEANT OF WATERLOO -LRB- Au Sargent de Waterloo -RRB- . 
Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of a hostelry . 
Nevertheless , the vehicle , or , to speak more accurately , the fragment of a vehicle , which encumbered the street in front of the cook-shop of the Sergeant of Waterloo , one evening in the spring of 1818 , would certainly have attracted , by its mass , the attention of any painter who had passed that way . 
It was the fore-carriage of one of those trucks which are used in wooded tracts of country , and which serve to transport thick planks and the trunks of trees . 
This fore-carriage was composed of a massive iron axle-tree with a pivot , into which was fitted a heavy shaft , and which was supported by two huge wheels . 
The whole thing was compact , overwhelming , and misshapen . 
It seemed like the gun-carriage of an enormous cannon . 
The ruts of the road had bestowed on the wheels , the fellies , the hub , the axle , and the shaft , a layer of mud , a hideous yellowish daubing hue , tolerably like that with which people are fond of ornamenting cathedrals . 
The wood was disappearing under mud , and the iron beneath rust . 
Under the axle-tree hung , like drapery , a huge chain , worthy of some Goliath of a convict . 
