In the meantime a serious incident occurred . 
Carve as we will the mysterious block of which our life is made , the black vein of destiny constantly reappears in it . 
HOW JEAN MAY BECOME CHAMP One morning M. Madeleine was in his study , occupied in arranging in advance some pressing matters connected with the mayor 's office , in case he should decide to take the trip to Montfermeil , when he was informed that Police Inspector Javert was desirous of speaking with him . 
Madeleine could not refrain from a disagreeable impression on hearing this name . 
Javert had avoided him more than ever since the affair of the police-station , and M. Madeleine had not seen him . 
`` Admit him , '' he said . 
Javert entered . 
M. Madeleine had retained his seat near the fire , pen in hand , his eyes fixed on the docket which he was turning over and annotating , and which contained the trials of the commission on highways for the infraction of police regulations . 
He did not disturb himself on Javert 's account . 
He could not help thinking of poor Fantine , and it suited him to be glacial in his manner . 
Javert bestowed a respectful salute on the mayor , whose back was turned to him . 
The mayor did not look at him , but went on annotating this docket . 
Javert advanced two or three paces into the study , and halted , without breaking the silence . 
If any physiognomist who had been familiar with Javert , and who had made a lengthy study of this savage in the service of civilization , this singular composite of the Roman , the Spartan , the monk , and the corporal , this spy who was incapable of a lie , this unspotted police agent -- if any physiognomist had known his secret and long-cherished aversion for M. Madeleine , his conflict with the mayor on the subject of Fantine , and had examined Javert at that moment , he would have said to himself , `` What has taken place ? '' 
It was evident to any one acquainted with that clear , upright , sincere , honest , austere , and ferocious conscience , that Javert had but just gone through some great interior struggle . 
Javert had nothing in his soul which he had not also in his countenance . 
Like violent people in general , he was subject to abrupt changes of opinion . 
His physiognomy had never been more peculiar and startling . 
On entering he bowed to M. Madeleine with a look in which there was neither rancor , anger , nor distrust ; he halted a few paces in the rear of the mayor 's arm-chair , and there he stood , perfectly erect , in an attitude almost of discipline , with the cold , ingenuous roughness of a man who has never been gentle and who has always been patient ; he waited without uttering a word , without making a movement , in genuine humility and tranquil resignation , calm , serious , hat in hand , with eyes cast down , and an expression which was half-way between that of a soldier in the presence of his officer and a criminal in the presence of his judge , until it should please the mayor to turn round . 
All the sentiments as well as all the memories which one might have attributed to him had disappeared . 
That face , as impenetrable and simple as granite , no longer bore any trace of anything but a melancholy depression . 
His whole person breathed lowliness and firmness and an indescribable courageous despondency . 
At last the mayor laid down his pen and turned half round . 
`` Well ! 
What is it ? 
What is the matter , Javert ? '' 
Javert remained silent for an instant as though collecting his ideas , then raised his voice with a sort of sad solemnity , which did not , however , preclude simplicity . 
`` This is the matter , Mr. Mayor ; a culpable act has been committed . '' 
`` What act ? '' 
`` An inferior agent of the authorities has failed in respect , and in the gravest manner , towards a magistrate . 
I have come to bring the fact to your knowledge , as it is my duty to do . '' 
`` Who is the agent ? '' 
asked M. Madeleine . 
`` I , '' said Javert . 
`` You ? '' 
`` I. '' `` And who is the magistrate who has reason to complain of the agent ? '' 
`` You , Mr. Mayor . '' 
M. Madeleine sat erect in his arm-chair . 
Javert went on , with a severe air and his eyes still cast down . 
`` Mr. Mayor , I have come to request you to instigate the authorities to dismiss me . '' 
M. Madeleine opened his mouth in amazement . 
Javert interrupted him : -- `` You will say that I might have handed in my resignation , but that does not suffice . 
Handing in one 's resignation is honorable . 
I have failed in my duty ; I ought to be punished ; I must be turned out . '' 
And after a pause he added : -- `` Mr. Mayor , you were severe with me the other day , and unjustly . 
Be so to-day , with justice . '' 
`` Come , now ! 
Why ? '' 
exclaimed M. Madeleine . 
`` What nonsense is this ? 
