he repeated imperiously . 
There was no reply . 
All was over . 
No one in the garden ; no one in the house . 
Marius fixed his despairing eyes on that dismal house , which was as black and as silent as a tomb and far more empty . 
He gazed at the stone seat on which he had passed so many adorable hours with Cosette . 
Then he seated himself on the flight of steps , his heart filled with sweetness and resolution , he blessed his love in the depths of his thought , and he said to himself that , since Cosette was gone , all that there was left for him was to die . 
All at once he heard a voice which seemed to proceed from the street , and which was calling to him through the trees : -- `` Mr. Marius ! '' 
He started to his feet . 
`` Hey ? '' 
said he . 
`` Mr. Marius , are you there ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Mr. Marius , '' went on the voice , `` your friends are waiting for you at the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie . '' 
This voice was not wholly unfamiliar to him . 
It resembled the hoarse , rough voice of Eponine . 
Marius hastened to the gate , thrust aside the movable bar , passed his head through the aperture , and saw some one who appeared to him to be a young man , disappearing at a run into the gloom . 
M. MABEUF Jean Valjean 's purse was of no use to M. Mabeuf . 
M. Mabeuf , in his venerable , infantile austerity , had not accepted the gift of the stars ; he had not admitted that a star could coin itself into louis d'or . 
He had not divined that what had fallen from heaven had come from Gavroche . 
He had taken the purse to the police commissioner of the quarter , as a lost article placed by the finder at the disposal of claimants . 
The purse was actually lost . 
It is unnecessary to say that no one claimed it , and that it did not succor M. Mabeuf . 
Moreover , M. Mabeuf had continued his downward course . 
His experiments on indigo had been no more successful in the Jardin des Plantes than in his garden at Austerlitz . 
The year before he had owed his housekeeper 's wages ; now , as we have seen , he owed three quarters of his rent . 
The pawnshop had sold the plates of his Flora after the expiration of thirteen months . 
Some coppersmith had made stewpans of them . 
His copper plates gone , and being unable to complete even the incomplete copies of his Flora which were in his possession , he had disposed of the text , at a miserable price , as waste paper , to a second-hand bookseller . 
Nothing now remained to him of his life 's work . 
He set to work to eat up the money for these copies . 
When he saw that this wretched resource was becoming exhausted , he gave up his garden and allowed it to run to waste . 
Before this , a long time before , he had given up his two eggs and the morsel of beef which he ate from time to time . 
He dined on bread and potatoes . 
He had sold the last of his furniture , then all duplicates of his bedding , his clothing and his blankets , then his herbariums and prints ; but he still retained his most precious books , many of which were of the greatest rarity , among others , Les Quadrins Historiques de la Bible , edition of 1560 ; La Concordance des Bibles , by Pierre de Besse ; Les Marguerites de la Marguerite , of Jean de La Haye , with a dedication to the Queen of Navarre ; the book de la Charge et Dignite de l'Ambassadeur , by the Sieur de Villiers Hotman ; a Florilegium Rabbinicum of 1644 ; a Tibullus of 1567 , with this magnificent inscription : Venetiis , in aedibus Manutianis ; and lastly , a Diogenes Laertius , printed at Lyons in 1644 , which contained the famous variant of the manuscript 411 , thirteenth century , of the Vatican , and those of the two manuscripts of Venice , 393 and 394 , consulted with such fruitful results by Henri Estienne , and all the passages in Doric dialect which are only found in the celebrated manuscript of the twelfth century belonging to the Naples Library . 
M. Mabeuf never had any fire in his chamber , and went to bed at sundown , in order not to consume any candles . 
It seemed as though he had no longer any neighbors : people avoided him when he went out ; he perceived the fact . 
The wretchedness of a child interests a mother , the wretchedness of a young man interests a young girl , the wretchedness of an old man interests no one . 
It is , of all distresses , the coldest . 
Still , Father Mabeuf had not entirely lost his childlike serenity . 
His eyes acquired some vivacity when they rested on his books , and he smiled when he gazed at the Diogenes Laertius , which was a unique copy . 
His bookcase with glass doors was the only piece of furniture which he had kept beyond what was strictly indispensable . 
One day , Mother Plutarque said to him : -- `` I have no money to buy any dinner . '' 
What she called dinner was a loaf of bread and four or five potatoes . 
`` On credit ? '' 
suggested M. Mabeuf . 
`` You know well that people refuse me . '' 
M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase , took a long look at all his books , one after another , as a father obliged to decimate his children would gaze upon them before making a choice , then seized one hastily , put it in under his arm and went out . 
He returned two hours later , without anything under his arm , laid thirty sous on the table , and said : -- `` You will get something for dinner . '' 
From that moment forth , Mother Plutarque saw a sombre veil , which was never more lifted , descend over the old man 's candid face . 
