Here , he became dismayed , he did not wish to dig down , he did not wish to penetrate deeply ; he did not wish to sound himself . 
He had promised , he had allowed himself to be drawn into a promise ; Jean Valjean held his promise ; one must keep one 's word even to a convict , above all to a convict . 
Still , his first duty was to Cosette . 
In short , he was carried away by the repugnance which dominated him . 
Marius turned over all this confusion of ideas in his mind , passing from one to the other , and moved by all of them . 
Hence arose a profound trouble . 
It was not easy for him to hide this trouble from Cosette , but love is a talent , and Marius succeeded in doing it . 
However , without any apparent object , he questioned Cosette , who was as candid as a dove is white and who suspected nothing ; he talked of her childhood and her youth , and he became more and more convinced that that convict had been everything good , paternal and respectable that a man can be towards Cosette . 
All that Marius had caught a glimpse of and had surmised was real . 
That sinister nettle had loved and protected that lily . 
THE LOWER CHAMBER On the following day , at nightfall , Jean Valjean knocked at the carriage gate of the Gillenormand house . 
It was Basque who received him . 
Basque was in the courtyard at the appointed hour , as though he had received his orders . 
It sometimes happens that one says to a servant : `` You will watch for Mr. So and So , when he arrives . '' 
Basque addressed Jean Valjean without waiting for the latter to approach him : `` Monsieur le Baron has charged me to inquire whether monsieur desires to go upstairs or to remain below ? '' 
`` I will remain below , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
Basque , who was perfectly respectful , opened the door of the waiting-room and said : `` I will go and inform Madame . '' 
The room which Jean Valjean entered was a damp , vaulted room on the ground floor , which served as a cellar on occasion , which opened on the street , was paved with red squares and was badly lighted by a grated window . 
This chamber was not one of those which are harassed by the feather-duster , the pope 's head brush , and the broom . 
The dust rested tranquilly there . 
Persecution of the spiders was not organized there . 
A fine web , which spread far and wide , and was very black and ornamented with dead flies , formed a wheel on one of the window-panes . 
The room , which was small and low-ceiled , was furnished with a heap of empty bottles piled up in one corner . 
The wall , which was daubed with an ochre yellow wash , was scaling off in large flakes . 
At one end there was a chimney-piece painted in black with a narrow shelf . 
A fire was burning there ; which indicated that Jean Valjean 's reply : `` I will remain below , '' had been foreseen . 
Two arm-chairs were placed at the two corners of the fireplace . 
Between the chairs an old bedside rug , which displayed more foundation thread than wool , had been spread by way of a carpet . 
The chamber was lighted by the fire on the hearth and the twilight falling through the window . 
Jean Valjean was fatigued . 
For days he had neither eaten nor slept . 
He threw himself into one of the arm-chairs . 
Basque returned , set a lighted candle on the chimney-piece and retired . 
Jean Valjean , his head drooping and his chin resting on his breast , perceived neither Basque nor the candle . 
All at once , he drew himself up with a start . 
Cosette was standing beside him . 
He had not seen her enter , but he had felt that she was there . 
He turned round . 
He gazed at her . 
She was adorably lovely . 
But what he was contemplating with that profound gaze was not her beauty but her soul . 
`` Well , '' exclaimed Cosette , `` father , I knew that you were peculiar , but I never should have expected this . 
What an idea ! 
Marius told me that you wish me to receive you here . '' 
`` Yes , it is my wish . '' 
`` I expected that reply . 
Good . 
I warn you that I am going to make a scene for you . 
Let us begin at the beginning . 
Embrace me , father . '' 
