`` Pontmercy , '' suggested Marius , turning pale . 
`` Precisely , Pontmercy . 
Did you know him ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , `` he was my father . '' 
The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
you are the child ! 
Yes , that 's true , he must be a man by this time . 
Well ! 
poor child , you may say that you had a father who loved you dearly ! '' 
Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to his lodgings . 
On the following day , he said to M. Gillenormand : -- `` I have arranged a hunting-party with some friends . 
Will you permit me to be absent for three days ? '' 
`` Four ! '' 
replied his grandfather . 
`` Go and amuse yourself . '' 
And he said to his daughter in a low tone , and with a wink , `` Some love affair ! '' 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on . 
Marius was absent for three days , then he returned to Paris , went straight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files of the Moniteur . 
He read the Moniteur , he read all the histories of the Republic and the Empire , the Memorial de Sainte-Helene , all the memoirs , all the newspapers , the bulletins , the proclamations ; he devoured everything . 
The first time that he came across his father 's name in the bulletins of the grand army , he had a fever for a week . 
He went to see the generals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served , among others , Comte H. Church-warden Mabeuf , whom he went to see again , told him about the life at Vernon , the colonel 's retreat , his flowers , his solitude . 
Marius came to a full knowledge of that rare , sweet , and sublime man , that species of lion-lamb who had been his father . 
In the meanwhile , occupied as he was with this study which absorbed all his moments as well as his thoughts , he hardly saw the Gillenormands at all . 
He made his appearance at meals ; then they searched for him , and he was not to be found . 
Father Gillenormand smiled . 
`` Bah ! 
bah ! 
He is just of the age for the girls ! '' 
Sometimes the old man added : `` The deuce ! 
I thought it was only an affair of gallantry , It seems that it is an affair of passion ! '' 
It was a passion , in fact . 
Marius was on the high road to adoring his father . 
At the same time , his ideas underwent an extraordinary change . 
The phases of this change were numerous and successive . 
As this is the history of many minds of our day , we think it will prove useful to follow these phases step by step and to indicate them all . 
That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him . 
The first effect was to dazzle him . 
Up to that time , the Republic , the Empire , had been to him only monstrous words . 
The Republic , a guillotine in the twilight ; the Empire , a sword in the night . 
He had just taken a look at it , and where he had expected to find only a chaos of shadows , he had beheld , with a sort of unprecedented surprise , mingled with fear and joy , stars sparkling , Mirabeau , Vergniaud , Saint-Just , Robespierre , Camille , Desmoulins , Danton , and a sun arise , Napoleon . 
He did not know where he stood . 
He recoiled , blinded by the brilliant lights . 
Little by little , when his astonishment had passed off , he grew accustomed to this radiance , he contemplated these deeds without dizziness , he examined these personages without terror ; the Revolution and the Empire presented themselves luminously , in perspective , before his mind 's eye ; he beheld each of these groups of events and of men summed up in two tremendous facts : the Republic in the sovereignty of civil right restored to the masses , the Empire in the sovereignty of the French idea imposed on Europe ; he beheld the grand figure of the people emerge from the Revolution , and the grand figure of France spring forth from the Empire . 
He asserted in his conscience , that all this had been good . 
What his dazzled state neglected in this , his first far too synthetic estimation , we do not think it necessary to point out here . 
It is the state of a mind on the march that we are recording . 
Progress is not accomplished in one stage . 
That stated , once for all , in connection with what precedes as well as with what is to follow , we continue . 
He then perceived that , up to that moment , he had comprehended his country no more than he had comprehended his father . 
He had not known either the one or the other , and a sort of voluntary night had obscured his eyes . 
