Nevertheless , it remains a riot . 
Why ? 
It is because , right at bottom , it was wrong in form . 
Shy although in the right , violent although strong , it struck at random ; it walked like a blind elephant ; it left behind it the corpses of old men , of women , and of children ; it wished the blood of inoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why . 
The nourishment of the people is a good object ; to massacre them is a bad means . 
All armed protests , even the most legitimate , even that of the 10th of August , even that of July 14th , begin with the same troubles . 
Before the right gets set free , there is foam and tumult . 
In the beginning , the insurrection is a riot , just as a river is a torrent . 
Ordinarily it ends in that ocean : revolution . 
Sometimes , however , coming from those lofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon , justice , wisdom , reason , right , formed of the pure snow of the ideal , after a long fall from rock to rock , after having reflected the sky in its transparency and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph , insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire , as the Rhine is in a swamp . 
All this is of the past , the future is another thing . 
Universal suffrage has this admirable property , that it dissolves riot in its inception , and , by giving the vote to insurrection , it deprives it of its arms . 
The disappearance of wars , of street wars as well as of wars on the frontiers , such is the inevitable progression . 
Whatever To-day may be , To-morrow will be peace . 
However , insurrection , riot , and points of difference between the former and the latter , -- the bourgeois , properly speaking , knows nothing of such shades . 
In his mind , all is sedition , rebellion pure and simple , the revolt of the dog against his master , an attempt to bite whom must be punished by the chain and the kennel , barking , snapping , until such day as the head of the dog , suddenly enlarged , is outlined vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion . 
Then the bourgeois shouts : `` Long live the people ! '' 
This explanation given , what does the movement of June , 1832 , signify , so far as history is concerned ? 
Is it a revolt ? 
Is it an insurrection ? 
It may happen to us , in placing this formidable event on the stage , to say revolt now and then , but merely to distinguish superficial facts , and always preserving the distinction between revolt , the form , and insurrection , the foundation . 
This movement of 1832 had , in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy extinction , so much grandeur , that even those who see in it only an uprising , never refer to it otherwise than with respect . 
For them , it is like a relic of 1830 . 
Excited imaginations , say they , are not to be calmed in a day . 
A revolution can not be cut off short . 
It must needs undergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest , like a mountain sinking into the plain . 
There are no Alps without their Jura , nor Pyrenees without the Asturias . 
This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of Parisians calls `` the epoch of the riots , '' is certainly a characteristic hour amid the stormy hours of this century . 
A last word , before we enter on the recital . 
The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and living reality , which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time and space . 
There , nevertheless , we insist upon it , is life , palpitation , human tremor . 
Petty details , as we think we have already said , are , so to speak , the foliage of great events , and are lost in the distance of history . 
The epoch , surnamed `` of the riots , '' abounds in details of this nature . 
Judicial inquiries have not revealed , and perhaps have not sounded the depths , for another reason than history . 
We shall therefore bring to light , among the known and published peculiarities , things which have not heretofore been known , about facts over which have passed the forgetfulness of some , and the death of others . 
The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have disappeared ; beginning with the very next day they held their peace ; but of what we shall relate , we shall be able to say : `` We have seen this . '' 
We alter a few names , for history relates and does not inform against , but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine . 
In accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing , we shall show only one side and one episode , and certainly , the least known at that , of the two days , the 5th and the 6th of June , 1832 , but we shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse , beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift , of the real form of this frightful public adventure . 
A BURIAL ; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN In the spring of 1832 , although the cholera had been chilling all minds for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable and gloomy pacification , Paris had already long been ripe for commotion . 
As we have said , the great city resembles a piece of artillery ; when it is loaded , it suffices for a spark to fall , and the shot is discharged . 
In June , 1832 , the spark was the death of General Lamarque . 
Lamarque was a man of renown and of action . 
He had had in succession , under the Empire and under the Restoration , the sorts of bravery requisite for the two epochs , the bravery of the battle-field and the bravery of the tribune . 
He was as eloquent as he had been valiant ; a sword was discernible in his speech . 
Like Foy , his predecessor , after upholding the command , he upheld liberty ; he sat between the left and the extreme left , beloved of the people because he accepted the chances of the future , beloved of the populace because he had served the Emperor well ; he was , in company with Comtes Gerard and Drouet , one of Napoleon 's marshals in petto . 
The treaties of 1815 removed him as a personal offence . 
He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which pleased the multitude ; and , for seventeen years , he majestically preserved the sadness of Waterloo , paying hardly any attention to intervening events . 
In his death agony , at his last hour , he clasped to his breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers of the Hundred Days . 
Napoleon had died uttering the word army , Lamarque uttering the word country . 
His death , which was expected , was dreaded by the people as a loss , and by the government as an occasion . 
