Hoc erat in fatis . 
That day the perspective of the human race underwent a change . 
Waterloo is the hinge of the nineteenth century . 
The disappearance of the great man was necessary to the advent of the great century . 
Some one , a person to whom one replies not , took the responsibility on himself . 
The panic of heroes can be explained . 
In the battle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud , there is something of the meteor . 
God has passed by . 
At nightfall , in a meadow near Genappe , Bernard and Bertrand seized by the skirt of his coat and detained a man , haggard , pensive , sinister , gloomy , who , dragged to that point by the current of the rout , had just dismounted , had passed the bridle of his horse over his arm , and with wild eye was returning alone to Waterloo . 
It was Napoleon , the immense somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled , essaying once more to advance . 
THE LAST SQUARE Several squares of the Guard , motionless amid this stream of the defeat , as rocks in running water , held their own until night . 
Night came , death also ; they awaited that double shadow , and , invincible , allowed themselves to be enveloped therein . 
Each regiment , isolated from the rest , and having no bond with the army , now shattered in every part , died alone . 
They had taken up position for this final action , some on the heights of Rossomme , others on the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
There , abandoned , vanquished , terrible , those gloomy squares endured their death-throes in formidable fashion . 
Ulm , Wagram , Jena , Friedland , died with them . 
At twilight , towards nine o'clock in the evening , one of them was left at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
In that fatal valley , at the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended , now inundated by the masses of the English , under the converging fires of the victorious hostile cavalry , under a frightful density of projectiles , this square fought on . 
It was commanded by an obscure officer named Cambronne . 
At each discharge , the square diminished and replied . 
It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade , continually contracting its four walls . 
The fugitives pausing breathless for a moment in the distance , listened in the darkness to that gloomy and ever-decreasing thunder . 
When this legion had been reduced to a handful , when nothing was left of their flag but a rag , when their guns , the bullets all gone , were no longer anything but clubs , when the heap of corpses was larger than the group of survivors , there reigned among the conquerors , around those men dying so sublimely , a sort of sacred terror , and the English artillery , taking breath , became silent . 
This furnished a sort of respite . 
These combatants had around them something in the nature of a swarm of spectres , silhouettes of men on horseback , the black profiles of cannon , the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages , the colossal death 's - head , which the heroes saw constantly through the smoke , in the depths of the battle , advanced upon them and gazed at them . 
Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being loaded ; the matches all lighted , like the eyes of tigers at night , formed a circle round their heads ; all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons , and then , with emotion , holding the supreme moment suspended above these men , an English general , Colville according to some , Maitland according to others , shouted to them , `` Surrender , brave Frenchmen ! '' 
Cambronne replied , '' ----- . '' 
-LCB- EDITOR 'S COMMENTARY : Another edition of this book has the word `` Merde ! '' 
in lieu of the ----- above . -RCB- 
CAMBRONNE If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended , one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made . 
This would enjoin us from consigning something sublime to History . 
At our own risk and peril , let us violate this injunction . 
Now , then , among those giants there was one Titan , -- Cambronne . 
To make that reply and then perish , what could be grander ? 
For being willing to die is the same as to die ; and it was not this man 's fault if he survived after he was shot . 
The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon , who was put to flight ; nor Wellington , giving way at four o'clock , in despair at five ; nor Blucher , who took no part in the engagement . 
The winner of Waterloo was Cambronne . 
To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is to conquer ! 
Thus to answer the Catastrophe , thus to speak to Fate , to give this pedestal to the future lion , to hurl such a challenge to the midnight rainstorm , to the treacherous wall of Hougomont , to the sunken road of Ohain , to Grouchy 's delay , to Blucher 's arrival , to be Irony itself in the tomb , to act so as to stand upright though fallen , to drown in two syllables the European coalition , to offer kings privies which the Caesars once knew , to make the lowest of words the most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France , insolently to end Waterloo with Mardigras , to finish Leonidas with Rabellais , to set the crown on this victory by a word impossible to speak , to lose the field and preserve history , to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage , -- this is immense ! 
It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl ! 
It reaches the grandeur of AEschylus ! 
Cambronne 's reply produces the effect of a violent break . 
'T is like the breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn . 
'T is the overflow of agony bursting forth . 
Who conquered ? 
Wellington ? 
No ! 
Had it not been for Blucher , he was lost . 
Was it Blucher ? 
No ! 
