Here is the note : -- `` Oh , you who are ! 
`` Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful ; the Maccabees call you the Creator ; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty ; Baruch calls you Immensity ; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth ; John calls you Light ; the Books of Kings call you Lord ; Exodus calls you Providence ; Leviticus , Sanctity ; Esdras , Justice ; the creation calls you God ; man calls you Father ; but Solomon calls you Compassion , and that is the most beautiful of all your names . '' 
Toward nine o'clock in the evening the two women retired and betook themselves to their chambers on the first floor , leaving him alone until morning on the ground floor . 
It is necessary that we should , in this place , give an exact idea of the dwelling of the Bishop of D -- WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM The house in which he lived consisted , as we have said , of a ground floor , and one story above ; three rooms on the ground floor , three chambers on the first , and an attic above . 
Behind the house was a garden , a quarter of an acre in extent . 
The two women occupied the first floor ; the Bishop was lodged below . 
The first room , opening on the street , served him as dining-room , the second was his bedroom , and the third his oratory . 
There was no exit possible from this oratory , except by passing through the bedroom , nor from the bedroom , without passing through the dining-room . 
At the end of the suite , in the oratory , there was a detached alcove with a bed , for use in cases of hospitality . 
The Bishop offered this bed to country curates whom business or the requirements of their parishes brought to D -- The pharmacy of the hospital , a small building which had been added to the house , and abutted on the garden , had been transformed into a kitchen and cellar . 
In addition to this , there was in the garden a stable , which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital , and in which the Bishop kept two cows . 
No matter what the quantity of milk they gave , he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sick people in the hospital . 
`` I am paying my tithes , '' he said . 
His bedroom was tolerably large , and rather difficult to warm in bad weather . 
As wood is extremely dear at D -- , he hit upon the idea of having a compartment of boards constructed in the cow-shed . 
Here he passed his evenings during seasons of severe cold : he called it his winter salon . 
In this winter salon , as in the dining-room , there was no other furniture than a square table in white wood , and four straw-seated chairs . 
In addition to this the dining-room was ornamented with an antique sideboard , painted pink , in water colors . 
Out of a similar sideboard , properly draped with white napery and imitation lace , the Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory . 
His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D -- had more than once assessed themselves to raise the money for a new altar for Monseigneur 's oratory ; on each occasion he had taken the money and had given it to the poor . 
`` The most beautiful of altars , '' he said , `` is the soul of an unhappy creature consoled and thanking God . '' 
In his oratory there were two straw prie-Dieu , and there was an arm-chair , also in straw , in his bedroom . 
When , by chance , he received seven or eight persons at one time , the prefect , or the general , or the staff of the regiment in garrison , or several pupils from the little seminary , the chairs had to be fetched from the winter salon in the stable , the prie-Dieu from the oratory , and the arm-chair from the bedroom : in this way as many as eleven chairs could be collected for the visitors . 
A room was dismantled for each new guest . 
It sometimes happened that there were twelve in the party ; the Bishop then relieved the embarrassment of the situation by standing in front of the chimney if it was winter , or by strolling in the garden if it was summer . 
There was still another chair in the detached alcove , but the straw was half gone from it , and it had but three legs , so that it was of service only when propped against the wall . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine had also in her own room a very large easy-chair of wood , which had formerly been gilded , and which was covered with flowered pekin ; but they had been obliged to hoist this bergere up to the first story through the window , as the staircase was too narrow ; it could not , therefore , be reckoned among the possibilities in the way of furniture . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine 's ambition had been to be able to purchase a set of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet , stamped with a rose pattern , and with mahogany in swan 's neck style , with a sofa . 
But this would have cost five hundred francs at least , and in view of the fact that she had only been able to lay by forty-two francs and ten sous for this purpose in the course of five years , she had ended by renouncing the idea . 
However , who is there who has attained his ideal ? 
Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop 's bedchamber . 
A glazed door opened on the garden ; opposite this was the bed , -- a hospital bed of iron , with a canopy of green serge ; in the shadow of the bed , behind a curtain , were the utensils of the toilet , which still betrayed the elegant habits of the man of the world : there were two doors , one near the chimney , opening into the oratory ; the other near the bookcase , opening into the dining-room . 
The bookcase was a large cupboard with glass doors filled with books ; the chimney was of wood painted to represent marble , and habitually without fire . 
In the chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron , ornamented above with two garlanded vases , and flutings which had formerly been silvered with silver leaf , which was a sort of episcopal luxury ; above the chimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper , with the silver worn off , fixed on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden frame from which the gilding had fallen ; near the glass door a large table with an inkstand , loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes ; before the table an arm-chair of straw ; in front of the bed a prie-Dieu , borrowed from the oratory . 
Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side of the bed . 
Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth at the side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented , one the Abbe of Chaliot , bishop of Saint Claude ; the other , the Abbe Tourteau , vicar-general of Agde , abbe of Grand-Champ , order of Citeaux , diocese of Chartres . 
When the Bishop succeeded to this apartment , after the hospital patients , he had found these portraits there , and had left them . 
They were priests , and probably donors -- two reasons for respecting them . 
All that he knew about these two persons was , that they had been appointed by the king , the one to his bishopric , the other to his benefice , on the same day , the 27th of April , 1785 . 
Madame Magloire having taken the pictures down to dust , the Bishop had discovered these particulars written in whitish ink on a little square of paper , yellowed by time , and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbe of Grand-Champ with four wafers . 
At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse woollen stuff , which finally became so old , that , in order to avoid the expense of a new one , Madame Magloire was forced to take a large seam in the very middle of it . 
This seam took the form of a cross . 
The Bishop often called attention to it : `` How delightful that is ! '' 
he said . 
All the rooms in the house , without exception , those on the ground floor as well as those on the first floor , were white-washed , which is a fashion in barracks and hospitals . 
However , in their latter years , Madame Magloire discovered beneath the paper which had been washed over , paintings , ornamenting the apartment of Mademoiselle Baptistine , as we shall see further on . 
Before becoming a hospital , this house had been the ancient parliament house of the Bourgeois . 
Hence this decoration . 
The chambers were paved in red bricks , which were washed every week , with straw mats in front of all the beds . 
Altogether , this dwelling , which was attended to by the two women , was exquisitely clean from top to bottom . 
