His step had suddenly become firm ; artisans had offered him their arms ; he had refused with a sign of the head . 
He advanced nearly to the front rank of the column , with the movement of a man who is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping . 
`` What a fierce old fellow ! '' 
muttered the students . 
The rumor spread through the troop that he was a former member of the Convention , -- an old regicide . 
The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie . 
Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of him a sort of trumpet . 
He sang : `` Voici la lune qui paratt , Quand irons-nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tou tou tou Pour Chatou . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Pour avoir bu de grand matin La rosee a meme le thym , Deux moineaux etaient en ribotte . 
Zi zi zi Pour Passy . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Et ces deux pauvres petits loups , Comme deux grives estaient souls ; Une tigre en riait dans sa grotte . 
Don don don Pour Meudon . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` L'un jurait et l'autre sacrait . 
Quand irons nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tin tin tin Pour Pantin . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . '' 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- They directed their course towards Saint-Merry . 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- Here is the morn appearing . 
When shall we go to the forest , Charlot asked Charlotte . 
Tou , tou , tou , for Chatou , I have but one God , one King , one half-farthing , and one boot . 
And these two poor little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme very early in the morning . 
And these two poor little things were as drunk as thrushes in a vineyard ; a tiger laughed at them in his cave . 
The one cursed , the other swore . 
When shall we go to the forest ? 
Charlot asked Charlotte . 
RECRUITS The band augmented every moment . 
Near the Rue des Billettes , a man of lofty stature , whose hair was turning gray , and whose bold and daring mien was remarked by Courfeyrac , Enjolras , and Combeferre , but whom none of them knew , joined them . 
Gavroche , who was occupied in singing , whistling , humming , running on ahead and pounding on the shutters of the shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol ; paid no attention to this man . 
It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie , they passed in front of Courfeyrac 's door . 
`` This happens just right , '' said Courfeyrac , `` I have forgotten my purse , and I have lost my hat . '' 
He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed . 
He seized an old hat and his purse . 
He also seized a large square coffer , of the dimensions of a large valise , which was concealed under his soiled linen . 
As he descended again at a run , the portress hailed him : -- `` Monsieur de Courfeyrac ! '' 
`` What 's your name , portress ? '' 
The portress stood bewildered . 
`` Why , you know perfectly well , I 'm the concierge ; my name is Mother Veuvain . '' 
`` Well , if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again , I shall call you Mother de Veuvain . 
Now speak , what 's the matter ? 
What do you want ? '' 
`` There is some one who wants to speak with you . '' 
`` Who is it ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` Where is he ? '' 
