`` At Saint-Lazare . '' 
`` Well ! 
And my sisters ? '' 
`` At the Madelonettes . '' 
The lad scratched his head behind his ear , stared at Ma'am Bougon , and said : -- `` Ah ! '' 
Then he executed a pirouette on his heel ; a moment later , the old woman , who had remained on the door-step , heard him singing in his clear , young voice , as he plunged under the black elm-trees , in the wintry wind : -- `` Le roi Coupdesabot -LSB- 31 -RSB- S'en allait a la chasse , A la chasse aux corbeaux , Monte sur deux echasses . 
Quand on passait dessous , On lui payait deux sous . '' 
-LSB- 31 -RSB- King Bootkick went a-hunting after crows , mounted on two stilts . 
When one passed beneath them , one paid him two sous . 
-LSB- The end of Volume III . 
`` Marius '' -RSB- SAINT-DENIS . 
THE IDYL IN THE RUE PLUMET AND THE EPIC IN THE RUE SAINT-DENIS BOOK FIRST . 
-- A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY WELL CUT 1831 and 1832 , the two years which are immediately connected with the Revolution of July , form one of the most peculiar and striking moments of history . 
These two years rise like two mountains midway between those which precede and those which follow them . 
They have a revolutionary grandeur . 
Precipices are to be distinguished there . 
The social masses , the very assizes of civilization , the solid group of superposed and adhering interests , the century-old profiles of the ancient French formation , appear and disappear in them every instant , athwart the storm clouds of systems , of passions , and of theories . 
These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movement and resistance . 
At intervals , truth , that daylight of the human soul , can be descried shining there . 
This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to be sufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal lines even at the present day . 
We shall make the attempt . 
The Restoration had been one of those intermediate phases , hard to define , in which there is fatigue , buzzing , murmurs , sleep , tumult , and which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a halting-place . 
These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to convert them to profit . 
In the beginning , the nation asks nothing but repose ; it thirsts for but one thing , peace ; it has but one ambition , to be small . 
Which is the translation of remaining tranquil . 
Of great events , great hazards , great adventures , great men , thank God , we have seen enough , we have them heaped higher than our heads . 
We would exchange Caesar for Prusias , and Napoleon for the King of Yvetot . 
`` What a good little king was he ! '' 
We have marched since daybreak , we have reached the evening of a long and toilsome day ; we have made our first change with Mirabeau , the second with Robespierre , the third with Bonaparte ; we are worn out . 
Each one demands a bed . 
Devotion which is weary , heroism which has grown old , ambitions which are sated , fortunes which are made , seek , demand , implore , solicit , what ? 
A shelter . 
They have it . 
They take possession of peace , of tranquillity , of leisure ; behold , they are content . 
But , at the same time certain facts arise , compel recognition , and knock at the door in their turn . 
These facts are the products of revolutions and wars , they are , they exist , they have the right to install themselves in society , and they do install themselves therein ; and most of the time , facts are the stewards of the household and fouriers -LSB- 32 -RSB- who do nothing but prepare lodgings for principles . 
-LSB- 32 -RSB- In olden times , fouriers were the officials who preceded the Court and allotted the lodgings . 
This , then , is what appears to philosophical politicians : -- At the same time that weary men demand repose , accomplished facts demand guarantees . 
Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is to men . 
This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector ; this is what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire . 
These guarantees are a necessity of the times . 
They must be accorded . 
Princes `` grant '' them , but in reality , it is the force of things which gives them . 
A profound truth , and one useful to know , which the Stuarts did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a glimpse of in 1814 . 
The predestined family , which returned to France when Napoleon fell , had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed , and that what it had bestowed it could take back again ; that the House of Bourbon possessed the right divine , that France possessed nothing , and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII . 
was merely a branch of the right divine , was detached by the House of Bourbon and graciously given to the people until such day as it should please the King to reassume it . 
Still , the House of Bourbon should have felt , from the displeasure created by the gift , that it did not come from it . 
This house was churlish to the nineteenth century . 
It put on an ill-tempered look at every development of the nation . 
To make use of a trivial word , that is to say , of a popular and a true word , it looked glum . 
