A bigoted woman prating of a devout woman is more venomous than the asp and the cobra . 
It is a shame that I am ignorant , otherwise I would quote to you a mass of things ; but I know nothing . 
For instance , I have always been witty ; when I was a pupil of Gros , instead of daubing wretched little pictures , I passed my time in pilfering apples ; rapin -LSB- 24 -RSB- is the masculine of rapine . 
So much for myself ; as for the rest of you , you are worth no more than I am . 
I scoff at your perfections , excellencies , and qualities . 
Every good quality tends towards a defect ; economy borders on avarice , the generous man is next door to the prodigal , the brave man rubs elbows with the braggart ; he who says very pious says a trifle bigoted ; there are just as many vices in virtue as there are holes in Diogenes ' cloak . 
Whom do you admire , the slain or the slayer , Caesar or Brutus ? 
Generally men are in favor of the slayer . 
Long live Brutus , he has slain ! 
There lies the virtue . 
Virtue , granted , but madness also . 
There are queer spots on those great men . 
The Brutus who killed Caesar was in love with the statue of a little boy . 
This statue was from the hand of the Greek sculptor Strongylion , who also carved that figure of an Amazon known as the Beautiful Leg , Eucnemos , which Nero carried with him in his travels . 
This Strongylion left but two statues which placed Nero and Brutus in accord . 
Brutus was in love with the one , Nero with the other . 
All history is nothing but wearisome repetition . 
One century is the plagiarist of the other . 
The battle of Marengo copies the battle of Pydna ; the Tolbiac of Clovis and the Austerlitz of Napoleon are as like each other as two drops of water . 
I do n't attach much importance to victory . 
Nothing is so stupid as to conquer ; true glory lies in convincing . 
But try to prove something ! 
If you are content with success , what mediocrity , and with conquering , what wretchedness ! 
Alas , vanity and cowardice everywhere . 
Everything obeys success , even grammar . 
Si volet usus , says Horace . 
Therefore I disdain the human race . 
Shall we descend to the party at all ? 
Do you wish me to begin admiring the peoples ? 
What people , if you please ? 
Shall it be Greece ? 
The Athenians , those Parisians of days gone by , slew Phocion , as we might say Coligny , and fawned upon tyrants to such an extent that Anacephorus said of Pisistratus : `` His urine attracts the bees . '' 
The most prominent man in Greece for fifty years was that grammarian Philetas , who was so small and so thin that he was obliged to load his shoes with lead in order not to be blown away by the wind . 
There stood on the great square in Corinth a statue carved by Silanion and catalogued by Pliny ; this statue represented Episthates . 
What did Episthates do ? 
He invented a trip . 
That sums up Greece and glory . 
Let us pass on to others . 
Shall I admire England ? 
Shall I admire France ? 
France ? 
Why ? 
Because of Paris ? 
I have just told you my opinion of Athens . 
England ? 
Why ? 
Because of London ? 
I hate Carthage . 
And then , London , the metropolis of luxury , is the headquarters of wretchedness . 
There are a hundred deaths a year of hunger in the parish of Charing-Cross alone . 
