Moreover , the rigmarole and the orthography completed the revelation . 
The certificate of origin was complete . 
Marius ' emotion was profound . 
After a start of surprise , he underwent a feeling of happiness . 
If he could now but find that other man of whom he was in search , the man who had saved him , Marius , there would be nothing left for him to desire . 
He opened the drawer of his secretary , took out several bank-notes , put them in his pocket , closed the secretary again , and rang the bell . 
Basque half opened the door . 
`` Show the man in , '' said Marius . 
Basque announced : `` Monsieur Thenard . '' 
A man entered . 
A fresh surprise for Marius . 
The man who entered was an utter stranger to him . 
This man , who was old , moreover , had a thick nose , his chin swathed in a cravat , green spectacles with a double screen of green taffeta over his eyes , and his hair was plastered and flattened down on his brow on a level with his eyebrows like the wigs of English coachmen in `` high life . '' 
His hair was gray . 
He was dressed in black from head to foot , in garments that were very threadbare but clean ; a bunch of seals depending from his fob suggested the idea of a watch . 
He held in his hand an old hat ! 
He walked in a bent attitude , and the curve in his spine augmented the profundity of his bow . 
The first thing that struck the observer was , that this personage 's coat , which was too ample although carefully buttoned , had not been made for him . 
Here a short digression becomes necessary . 
There was in Paris at that epoch , in a low-lived old lodging in the Rue Beautreillis , near the Arsenal , an ingenious Jew whose profession was to change villains into honest men . 
Not for too long , which might have proved embarrassing for the villain . 
The change was on sight , for a day or two , at the rate of thirty sous a day , by means of a costume which resembled the honesty of the world in general as nearly as possible . 
This costumer was called `` the Changer '' ; the pickpockets of Paris had given him this name and knew him by no other . 
He had a tolerably complete wardrobe . 
The rags with which he tricked out people were almost probable . 
He had specialties and categories ; on each nail of his shop hung a social status , threadbare and worn ; here the suit of a magistrate , there the outfit of a Cure , beyond the outfit of a banker , in one corner the costume of a retired military man , elsewhere the habiliments of a man of letters , and further on the dress of a statesman . 
This creature was the costumer of the immense drama which knavery plays in Paris . 
His lair was the green-room whence theft emerged , and into which roguery retreated . 
A tattered knave arrived at this dressing-room , deposited his thirty sous and selected , according to the part which he wished to play , the costume which suited him , and on descending the stairs once more , the knave was a somebody . 
On the following day , the clothes were faithfully returned , and the Changer , who trusted the thieves with everything , was never robbed . 
There was one inconvenience about these clothes , they `` did not fit '' ; not having been made for those who wore them , they were too tight for one , too loose for another and did not adjust themselves to any one . 
Every pickpocket who exceeded or fell short of the human average was ill at his ease in the Changer 's costumes . 
It was necessary that one should not be either too fat or too lean . 
The changer had foreseen only ordinary men . 
He had taken the measure of the species from the first rascal who came to hand , who is neither stout nor thin , neither tall nor short . 
Hence adaptations which were sometimes difficult and from which the Changer 's clients extricated themselves as best they might . 
So much the worse for the exceptions ! 
The suit of the statesman , for instance , black from head to foot , and consequently proper , would have been too large for Pitt and too small for Castelcicala . 
The costume of a statesman was designated as follows in the Changer 's catalogue ; we copy : `` A coat of black cloth , trowsers of black wool , a silk waistcoat , boots and linen . '' 
On the margin there stood : ex-ambassador , and a note which we also copy : `` In a separate box , a neatly frizzed peruke , green glasses , seals , and two small quills an inch long , wrapped in cotton . '' 
All this belonged to the statesman , the ex-ambassador . 
This whole costume was , if we may so express ourselves , debilitated ; the seams were white , a vague button-hole yawned at one of the elbows ; moreover , one of the coat buttons was missing on the breast ; but this was only detail ; as the hand of the statesman should always be thrust into his coat and laid upon his heart , its function was to conceal the absent button . 
If Marius had been familiar with the occult institutions of Paris , he would instantly have recognized upon the back of the visitor whom Basque had just shown in , the statesman 's suit borrowed from the pick-me-down-that shop of the Changer . 
Marius ' disappointment on beholding another man than the one whom he expected to see turned to the newcomer 's disadvantage . 
He surveyed him from head to foot , while that personage made exaggerated bows , and demanded in a curt tone : `` What do you want ? '' 
The man replied with an amiable grin of which the caressing smile of a crocodile will furnish some idea : `` It seems to me impossible that I should not have already had the honor of seeing Monsieur le Baron in society . 
I think I actually did meet monsieur personally , several years ago , at the house of Madame la Princesse Bagration and in the drawing-rooms of his Lordship the Vicomte Dambray , peer of France . '' 
It is always a good bit of tactics in knavery to pretend to recognize some one whom one does not know . 
Marius paid attention to the manner of this man 's speech . 
He spied on his accent and gesture , but his disappointment increased ; the pronunciation was nasal and absolutely unlike the dry , shrill tone which he had expected . 
