The cuirassiers replied by crushing them . 
Their great horses reared , strode across the ranks , leaped over the bayonets and fell , gigantic , in the midst of these four living wells . 
The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers ; the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares . 
Files of men disappeared , ground to dust under the horses . 
The bayonets plunged into the bellies of these centaurs ; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably never been seen anywhere else . 
The squares , wasted by this mad cavalry , closed up their ranks without flinching . 
Inexhaustible in the matter of grape-shot , they created explosions in their assailants ' midst . 
The form of this combat was monstrous . 
These squares were no longer battalions , they were craters ; those cuirassiers were no longer cavalry , they were a tempest . 
Each square was a volcano attacked by a cloud ; lava contended with lightning . 
The square on the extreme right , the most exposed of all , being in the air , was almost annihilated at the very first shock . 
lt was formed of the 75th regiment of Highlanders . 
The bagpipe-player in the centre dropped his melancholy eyes , filled with the reflections of the forests and the lakes , in profound inattention , while men were being exterminated around him , and seated on a drum , with his pibroch under his arm , played the Highland airs . 
These Scotchmen died thinking of Ben Lothian , as did the Greeks recalling Argos . 
The sword of a cuirassier , which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it , put an end to the song by killing the singer . 
The cuirassiers , relatively few in number , and still further diminished by the catastrophe of the ravine , had almost the whole English army against them , but they multiplied themselves so that each man of them was equal to ten . 
Nevertheless , some Hanoverian battalions yielded . 
Wellington perceived it , and thought of his cavalry . 
Had Napoleon at that same moment thought of his infantry , he would have won the battle . 
This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake . 
All at once , the cuirassiers , who had been the assailants , found themselves assailed . 
The English cavalry was at their back . 
Before them two squares , behind them Somerset ; Somerset meant fourteen hundred dragoons of the guard . 
On the right , Somerset had Dornberg with the German light-horse , and on his left , Trip with the Belgian carabineers ; the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front , before and in the rear , by infantry and cavalry , had to face all sides . 
What mattered it to them ? 
They were a whirlwind . 
Their valor was something indescribable . 
In addition to this , they had behind them the battery , which was still thundering . 
It was necessary that it should be so , or they could never have been wounded in the back . 
One of their cuirasses , pierced on the shoulder by a ball from a biscayan , -LSB- 9 -RSB- is in the collection of the Waterloo Museum . 
-LSB- 9 -RSB- A heavy rifled gun . 
For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed . 
It was no longer a hand-to-hand conflict ; it was a shadow , a fury , a dizzy transport of souls and courage , a hurricane of lightning swords . 
In an instant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only eight hundred . 
Fuller , their lieutenant-colonel , fell dead . 
Ney rushed up with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's light-horse . 
The plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured , recaptured , captured again . 
The cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry ; or , to put it more exactly , the whole of that formidable rout collared each other without releasing the other . 
The squares still held firm . 
There were a dozen assaults . 
Ney had four horses killed under him . 
Half the cuirassiers remained on the plateau . 
This conflict lasted two hours . 
The English army was profoundly shaken . 
There is no doubt that , had they not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the hollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and decided the victory . 
This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton , who had seen Talavera and Badajoz . 
Wellington , three-quarters vanquished , admired heroically . 
He said in an undertone , `` Sublime ! '' 
The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen , took or spiked sixty pieces of ordnance , and captured from the English regiments six flags , which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the Guard bore to the Emperor , in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance . 
Wellington 's situation had grown worse . 
