Here questions exfoliated , so to speak , into innumerable enigmas , abysses yawned at the bottoms of abysses , and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without becoming dizzy . 
What was this man-precipice ? 
The old symbols of Genesis are eternal ; in human society , such as it now exists , and until a broader day shall effect a change in it , there will always be two men , the one superior , the other subterranean ; the one which is according to good is Abel ; the other which is according to evil is Cain . 
What was this tender Cain ? 
What was this ruffian religiously absorbed in the adoration of a virgin , watching over her , rearing her , guarding her , dignifying her , and enveloping her , impure as he was himself , with purity ? 
What was that cess-pool which had venerated that innocence to such a point as not to leave upon it a single spot ? 
What was this Jean Valjean educating Cosette ? 
What was this figure of the shadows which had for its only object the preservation of the rising of a star from every shadow and from every cloud ? 
That was Jean Valjean 's secret ; that was also God 's secret . 
In the presence of this double secret , Marius recoiled . 
The one , in some sort , reassured him as to the other . 
God was as visible in this affair as was Jean Valjean . 
God has his instruments . 
He makes use of the tool which he wills . 
He is not responsible to men . 
Do we know how God sets about the work ? 
Jean Valjean had labored over Cosette . 
He had , to some extent , made that soul . 
That was incontestable . 
Well , what then ? 
The workman was horrible ; but the work was admirable . 
God produces his miracles as seems good to him . 
He had constructed that charming Cosette , and he had employed Jean Valjean . 
It had pleased him to choose this strange collaborator for himself . 
What account have we to demand of him ? 
Is this the first time that the dung-heap has aided the spring to create the rose ? 
Marius made himself these replies , and declared to himself that they were good . 
He had not dared to press Jean Valjean on all the points which we have just indicated , but he did not confess to himself that he did not dare to do it . 
He adored Cosette , he possessed Cosette , Cosette was splendidly pure . 
That was sufficient for him . 
What enlightenment did he need ? 
Cosette was a light . 
Does light require enlightenment ? 
He had everything ; what more could he desire ? 
All , -- is not that enough ? 
Jean Valjean 's personal affairs did not concern him . 
And bending over the fatal shadow of that man , he clung fast , convulsively , to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch : `` I am nothing to Cosette . 
Ten years ago I did not know that she was in existence . '' 
Jean Valjean was a passer-by . 
He had said so himself . 
Well , he had passed . 
Whatever he was , his part was finished . 
Henceforth , there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence to Cosette . 
Cosette had sought the azure in a person like herself , in her lover , her husband , her celestial male . 
Cosette , as she took her flight , winged and transfigured , left behind her on the earth her hideous and empty chrysalis , Jean Valjean . 
In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved , he always returned to a certain horror for Jean Valjean . 
A sacred horror , perhaps , for , as we have just pointed out , he felt a quid divinum in that man . 
But do what he would , and seek what extenuation he would , he was certainly forced to fall back upon this : the man was a convict ; that is to say , a being who has not even a place in the social ladder , since he is lower than the very lowest rung . 
After the very last of men comes the convict . 
The convict is no longer , so to speak , in the semblance of the living . 
