An order of nolle prosequi , founded on his well authenticated state of intoxication on the evening of the ambush , had set him at liberty . 
He had taken to his heels . 
He had returned to his road from Gagny to Lagny , to make , under administrative supervision , broken stone for the good of the state , with downcast mien , in a very pensive mood , his ardor for theft somewhat cooled ; but he was addicted none the less tenderly to the wine which had recently saved him . 
As for the lively emotion which he had experienced a short time after his return to his road-mender 's turf-thatched cot , here it is : One morning , Boulatruelle , while on his way as was his wont , to his work , and possibly also to his ambush , a little before daybreak caught sight , through the branches of the trees , of a man , whose back alone he saw , but the shape of whose shoulders , as it seemed to him at that distance and in the early dusk , was not entirely unfamiliar to him . 
Boulatruelle , although intoxicated , had a correct and lucid memory , a defensive arm that is indispensable to any one who is at all in conflict with legal order . 
`` Where the deuce have I seen something like that man yonder ? '' 
he said to himself . 
But he could make himself no answer , except that the man resembled some one of whom his memory preserved a confused trace . 
However , apart from the identity which he could not manage to catch , Boulatruelle put things together and made calculations . 
This man did not belong in the country-side . 
He had just arrived there . 
On foot , evidently . 
No public conveyance passes through Montfermeil at that hour . 
He had walked all night . 
Whence came he ? 
Not from a very great distance ; for he had neither haversack , nor bundle . 
From Paris , no doubt . 
Why was he in these woods ? 
why was he there at such an hour ? 
what had he come there for ? 
Boulatruelle thought of the treasure . 
By dint of ransacking his memory , he recalled in a vague way that he had already , many years before , had a similar alarm in connection with a man who produced on him the effect that he might well be this very individual . 
`` By the deuce , '' said Boulatruelle , `` I 'll find him again . 
I 'll discover the parish of that parishioner . 
This prowler of Patron-Minette has a reason , and I 'll know it . 
People ca n't have secrets in my forest if I do n't have a finger in the pie . '' 
He took his pick-axe which was very sharply pointed . 
`` There now , '' he grumbled , `` is something that will search the earth and a man . '' 
And , as one knots one thread to another thread , he took up the line of march at his best pace in the direction which the man must follow , and set out across the thickets . 
When he had compassed a hundred strides , the day , which was already beginning to break , came to his assistance . 
Footprints stamped in the sand , weeds trodden down here and there , heather crushed , young branches in the brushwood bent and in the act of straightening themselves up again with the graceful deliberation of the arms of a pretty woman who stretches herself when she wakes , pointed out to him a sort of track . 
He followed it , then lost it . 
Time was flying . 
He plunged deeper into the woods and came to a sort of eminence . 
An early huntsman who was passing in the distance along a path , whistling the air of Guillery , suggested to him the idea of climbing a tree . 
Old as he was , he was agile . 
There stood close at hand a beech-tree of great size , worthy of Tityrus and of Boulatruelle . 
Boulatruelle ascended the beech as high as he was able . 
The idea was a good one . 
On scrutinizing the solitary waste on the side where the forest is thoroughly entangled and wild , Boulatruelle suddenly caught sight of his man . 
Hardly had he got his eye upon him when he lost sight of him . 
The man entered , or rather , glided into , an open glade , at a considerable distance , masked by large trees , but with which Boulatruelle was perfectly familiar , on account of having noticed , near a large pile of porous stones , an ailing chestnut-tree bandaged with a sheet of zinc nailed directly upon the bark . 
This glade was the one which was formerly called the Blaru-bottom . 
The heap of stones , destined for no one knows what employment , which was visible there thirty years ago , is doubtless still there . 
Nothing equals a heap of stones in longevity , unless it is a board fence . 
They are temporary expedients . 
What a reason for lasting ! 
Boulatruelle , with the rapidity of joy , dropped rather than descended from the tree . 
The lair was unearthed , the question now was to seize the beast . 
That famous treasure of his dreams was probably there . 
