The real governed by the true , that is the goal . 
Civilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe , and , later on , at the centre of continents , in a grand parliament of the intelligence . 
Something similar has already been seen . 
The amphictyons had two sittings a year , one at Delphos the seat of the gods , the other at Thermopylae , the place of heroes . 
Europe will have her amphictyons ; the globe will have its amphictyons . 
France bears this sublime future in her breast . 
This is the gestation of the nineteenth century . 
That which Greece sketched out is worthy of being finished by France . 
Listen to me , you , Feuilly , valiant artisan , man of the people . 
I revere you . 
Yes , you clearly behold the future , yes , you are right . 
You had neither father nor mother , Feuilly ; you adopted humanity for your mother and right for your father . 
You are about to die , that is to say to triumph , here . 
Citizens , whatever happens to-day , through our defeat as well as through our victory , it is a revolution that we are about to create . 
As conflagrations light up a whole city , so revolutions illuminate the whole human race . 
And what is the revolution that we shall cause ? 
I have just told you , the Revolution of the True . 
From a political point of view , there is but a single principle ; the sovereignty of man over himself . 
This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty . 
Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined , the state begins . 
But in that association there is no abdication . 
Each sovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself , for the purpose of forming the common right . 
This quantity is the same for all of us . 
This identity of concession which each makes to all , is called Equality . 
Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on the right of each . 
This protection of all over each is called Fraternity . 
The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is called society . 
This intersection being a junction , this point is a knot . 
Hence what is called the social bond . 
Some say social contract ; which is the same thing , the word contract being etymologically formed with the idea of a bond . 
Let us come to an understanding about equality ; for , if liberty is the summit , equality is the base . 
Equality , citizens , is not wholly a surface vegetation , a society of great blades of grass and tiny oaks ; a proximity of jealousies which render each other null and void ; legally speaking , it is all aptitudes possessed of the same opportunity ; politically , it is all votes possessed of the same weight ; religiously , it is all consciences possessed of the same right . 
Equality has an organ : gratuitous and obligatory instruction . 
The right to the alphabet , that is where the beginning must be made . 
The primary school imposed on all , the secondary school offered to all , that is the law . 
From an identical school , an identical society will spring . 
Yes , instruction ! 
light ! 
light ! 
everything comes from light , and to it everything returns . 
Citizens , the nineteenth century is great , but the twentieth century will be happy . 
Then , there will be nothing more like the history of old , we shall no longer , as to-day , have to fear a conquest , an invasion , a usurpation , a rivalry of nations , arms in hand , an interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings , on a birth in hereditary tyrannies , a partition of peoples by a congress , a dismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty , a combat of two religions meeting face to face , like two bucks in the dark , on the bridge of the infinite ; we shall no longer have to fear famine , farming out , prostitution arising from distress , misery from the failure of work and the scaffold and the sword , and battles and the ruffianism of chance in the forest of events . 
One might almost say : There will be no more events . 
We shall be happy . 
The human race will accomplish its law , as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law ; harmony will be re-established between the soul and the star ; the soul will gravitate around the truth , as the planet around the light . 
Friends , the present hour in which I am addressing you , is a gloomy hour ; but these are terrible purchases of the future . 
A revolution is a toll . 
Oh ! 
the human race will be delivered , raised up , consoled ! 
We affirm it on this barrier . 
