This last barricade , which was very narrow , was constructed only of casks and paving-stones . 
There were about fifty workers on it ; thirty were armed with guns ; for , on their way , they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer 's shop . 
Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than this troop . 
One had a round-jacket , a cavalry sabre , and two holster-pistols , another was in his shirt-sleeves , with a round hat , and a powder-horn slung at his side , a third wore a plastron of nine sheets of gray paper and was armed with a saddler 's awl . 
There was one who was shouting : `` Let us exterminate them to the last man and die at the point of our bayonet . '' 
This man had no bayonet . 
Another spread out over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman , the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription in red worsted : Public Order . 
There were a great many guns bearing the numbers of the legions , few hats , no cravats , many bare arms , some pikes . 
Add to this , all ages , all sorts of faces , small , pale young men , and bronzed longshoremen . 
All were in haste ; and as they helped each other , they discussed the possible chances . 
That they would receive succor about three o'clock in the morning -- that they were sure of one regiment , that Paris would rise . 
Terrible sayings with which was mingled a sort of cordial joviality . 
One would have pronounced them brothers , but they did not know each other 's names . 
Great perils have this fine characteristic , that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers . 
A fire had been lighted in the kitchen , and there they were engaged in moulding into bullets , pewter mugs , spoons , forks , and all the brass table-ware of the establishment . 
In the midst of it all , they drank . 
Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables with glasses of wine . 
In the billiard-hall , Mame Hucheloup , Matelote , and Gibelotte , variously modified by terror , which had stupefied one , rendered another breathless , and roused the third , were tearing up old dish-cloths and making lint ; three insurgents were assisting them , three bushy-haired , jolly blades with beards and moustaches , who plucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble . 
The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Enjolras had observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue des Billettes , was at work on the smaller barricade and was making himself useful there . 
Gavroche was working on the larger one . 
As for the young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings , and who had inquired for M. Marius , he had disappeared at about the time when the omnibus had been overturned . 
Gavroche , completely carried away and radiant , had undertaken to get everything in readiness . 
He went , came , mounted , descended , re-mounted , whistled , and sparkled . 
He seemed to be there for the encouragement of all . 
Had he any incentive ? 
Yes , certainly , his poverty ; had he wings ? 
yes , certainly , his joy . 
Gavroche was a whirlwind . 
He was constantly visible , he was incessantly audible . 
He filled the air , as he was everywhere at once . 
He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity ; no halt was possible with him . 
The enormous barricade felt him on its haunches . 
He troubled the loungers , he excited the idle , he reanimated the weary , he grew impatient over the thoughtful , he inspired gayety in some , and breath in others , wrath in others , movement in all , now pricking a student , now biting an artisan ; he alighted , paused , flew off again , hovered over the tumult , and the effort , sprang from one party to another , murmuring and humming , and harassed the whole company ; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach . 
Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his little lungs . 
`` Courage ! 
more paving-stones ! 
more casks ! 
more machines ! 
Where are you now ? 
A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with ! 
Your barricade is very small . 
It must be carried up . 
Put everything on it , fling everything there , stick it all in . 
Break down the house . 
A barricade is Mother Gibou 's tea . 
Hullo , here 's a glass door . '' 
This elicited an exclamation from the workers . 
`` A glass door ? 
what do you expect us to do with a glass door , tubercle ? '' 
`` Hercules yourselves ! '' 
