These loopholes were separated from each other by equal spaces . 
The street was deserted as far as the eye could reach . 
All windows and doors were closed . 
In the background rose this barrier , which made a blind thoroughfare of the street , a motionless and tranquil wall ; no one was visible , nothing was audible ; not a cry , not a sound , not a breath . 
A sepulchre . 
The dazzling sun of June inundated this terrible thing with light . 
It was the barricade of the Faubourg of the Temple . 
As soon as one arrived on the spot , and caught sight of it , it was impossible , even for the boldest , not to become thoughtful before this mysterious apparition . 
It was adjusted , jointed , imbricated , rectilinear , symmetrical and funereal . 
Science and gloom met there . 
One felt that the chief of this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre . 
One looked at it and spoke low . 
From time to time , if some soldier , an officer or representative of the people , chanced to traverse the deserted highway , a faint , sharp whistle was heard , and the passer-by fell dead or wounded , or , if he escaped the bullet , sometimes a biscaien was seen to ensconce itself in some closed shutter , in the interstice between two blocks of stone , or in the plaster of a wall . 
For the men in the barricade had made themselves two small cannons out of two cast-iron lengths of gas-pipe , plugged up at one end with tow and fire-clay . 
There was no waste of useless powder . 
Nearly every shot told . 
There were corpses here and there , and pools of blood on the pavement . 
I remember a white butterfly which went and came in the street . 
Summer does not abdicate . 
In the neighborhood , the spaces beneath the portes cocheres were encumbered with wounded . 
One felt oneself aimed at by some person whom one did not see , and one understood that guns were levelled at the whole length of the street . 
Massed behind the sort of sloping ridge which the vaulted canal forms at the entrance to the Faubourg du Temple , the soldiers of the attacking column , gravely and thoughtfully , watched this dismal redoubt , this immobility , this passivity , whence sprang death . 
Some crawled flat on their faces as far as the crest of the curve of the bridge , taking care that their shakos did not project beyond it . 
The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with a shudder . 
-- `` How that is built ! '' 
he said to a Representative . 
`` Not one paving-stone projects beyond its neighbor . 
It is made of porcelain . '' 
-- At that moment , a bullet broke the cross on his breast , and he fell . 
`` The cowards ! '' 
people said . 
`` Let them show themselves . 
Let us see them ! 
They dare not ! 
They are hiding ! '' 
The barricade of the Faubourg du Temple , defended by eighty men , attacked by ten thousand , held out for three days . 
On the fourth , they did as at Zaatcha , as at Constantine , they pierced the houses , they came over the roofs , the barricade was taken . 
Not one of the eighty cowards thought of flight , all were killed there with the exception of the leader , Barthelemy , of whom we shall speak presently . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was the tumult of thunders ; the barricade of the Temple was silence . 
The difference between these two redoubts was the difference between the formidable and the sinister . 
One seemed a maw ; the other a mask . 
Admitting that the gigantic and gloomy insurrection of June was composed of a wrath and of an enigma , one divined in the first barricade the dragon , and behind the second the sphinx . 
These two fortresses had been erected by two men named , the one , Cournet , the other , Barthelemy . 
Cournet made the Saint-Antoine barricade ; Barthelemy the barricade of the Temple . 
Each was the image of the man who had built it . 
Cournet was a man of lofty stature ; he had broad shoulders , a red face , a crushing fist , a bold heart , a loyal soul , a sincere and terrible eye . 
Intrepid , energetic , irascible , stormy ; the most cordial of men , the most formidable of combatants . 
War , strife , conflict , were the very air he breathed and put him in a good humor . 
He had been an officer in the navy , and , from his gestures and his voice , one divined that he sprang from the ocean , and that he came from the tempest ; he carried the hurricane on into battle . 
With the exception of the genius , there was in Cournet something of Danton , as , with the exception of the divinity , there was in Danton something of Hercules . 
