The first detail that struck the observer was , that the door could never have been anything but the door of a hovel , while the window , if it had been carved out of dressed stone instead of being in rough masonry , might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion . 
The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughly bound together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs . 
It opened directly on a steep staircase of lofty steps , muddy , chalky , plaster-stained , dusty steps , of the same width as itself , which could be seen from the street , running straight up like a ladder and disappearing in the darkness between two walls . 
The top of the shapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrow scantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed , which served both as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed . 
On the inside of the door the figures 52 had been traced with a couple of strokes of a brush dipped in ink , and above the scantling the same hand had daubed the number 50 , so that one hesitated . 
Where was one ? 
Above the door it said , `` Number 50 '' ; the inside replied , `` no , Number 52 . '' 
No one knows what dust-colored figures were suspended like draperies from the triangular opening . 
The window was large , sufficiently elevated , garnished with Venetian blinds , and with a frame in large square panes ; only these large panes were suffering from various wounds , which were both concealed and betrayed by an ingenious paper bandage . 
And the blinds , dislocated and unpasted , threatened passers-by rather than screened the occupants . 
The horizontal slats were missing here and there and had been naively replaced with boards nailed on perpendicularly ; so that what began as a blind ended as a shutter . 
This door with an unclean , and this window with an honest though dilapidated air , thus beheld on the same house , produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking side by side , with different miens beneath the same rags , the one having always been a mendicant , and the other having once been a gentleman . 
The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed which had been converted into a house . 
This edifice had , for its intestinal tube , a long corridor , on which opened to right and left sorts of compartments of varied dimensions which were inhabitable under stress of circumstances , and rather more like stalls than cells . 
These chambers received their light from the vague waste grounds in the neighborhood . 
All this was dark , disagreeable , wan , melancholy , sepulchral ; traversed according as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door , by cold rays or by icy winds . 
An interesting and picturesque peculiarity of this sort of dwelling is the enormous size of the spiders . 
To the left of the entrance door , on the boulevard side , at about the height of a man from the ground , a small window which had been walled up formed a square niche full of stones which the children had thrown there as they passed by . 
A portion of this building has recently been demolished . 
From what still remains of it one can form a judgment as to what it was in former days . 
As a whole , it was not over a hundred years old . 
A hundred years is youth in a church and age in a house . 
It seems as though man 's lodging partook of his ephemeral character , and God 's house of his eternity . 
The postmen called the house Number 50-52 ; but it was known in the neighborhood as the Gorbeau house . 
Let us explain whence this appellation was derived . 
Collectors of petty details , who become herbalists of anecdotes , and prick slippery dates into their memories with a pin , know that there was in Paris , during the last century , about 1770 , two attorneys at the Chatelet named , one Corbeau -LRB- Raven -RRB- , the other Renard -LRB- Fox -RRB- . 
The two names had been forestalled by La Fontaine . 
The opportunity was too fine for the lawyers ; they made the most of it . 
A parody was immediately put in circulation in the galleries of the court-house , in verses that limped a little : -- Maitre Corbeau , sur un dossier perche , -LSB- 13 -RSB- Tenait dans son bee une saisie executoire ; Maitre Renard , par l'odeur alleche , Lui fit a peu pres cette histoire : He ! 
bonjour . 
Etc. -LSB- 13 -RSB- Lawyer Corbeau , perched on a docket , held in his beak a writ of execution ; Lawyer Renard , attracted by the smell , addressed him nearly as follows , etc. . 
The two honest practitioners , embarrassed by the jests , and finding the bearing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter which followed them , resolved to get rid of their names , and hit upon the expedient of applying to the king . 
Their petition was presented to Louis XV . 
on the same day when the Papal Nuncio , on the one hand , and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon on the other , both devoutly kneeling , were each engaged in putting on , in his Majesty 's presence , a slipper on the bare feet of Madame du Barry , who had just got out of bed . 
The king , who was laughing , continued to laugh , passed gayly from the two bishops to the two lawyers , and bestowed on these limbs of the law their former names , or nearly so . 
By the kings command , Maitre Corbeau was permitted to add a tail to his initial letter and to call himself Gorbeau . 
Maitre Renard was less lucky ; all he obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R , and to call himself Prenard ; so that the second name bore almost as much resemblance as the first . 
Now , according to local tradition , this Maitre Gorbeau had been the proprietor of the building numbered 50-52 on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
He was even the author of the monumental window . 
Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house . 
Opposite this house , among the trees of the boulevard , rose a great elm which was three-quarters dead ; almost directly facing it opens the Rue de la Barriere des Gobelins , a street then without houses , unpaved , planted with unhealthy trees , which was green or muddy according to the season , and which ended squarely in the exterior wall of Paris . 
An odor of copperas issued in puffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory . 
The barrier was close at hand . 
In 1823 the city wall was still in existence . 
This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind . 
It was the road to Bicetre . 
It was through it that , under the Empire and the Restoration , prisoners condemned to death re-entered Paris on the day of their execution . 
It was there , that , about 1829 , was committed that mysterious assassination , called `` The assassination of the Fontainebleau barrier , '' whose authors justice was never able to discover ; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated , a frightful enigma which has never been unriddled . 
Take a few steps , and you come upon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe , where Ulbach stabbed the goat-girl of Ivry to the sound of thunder , as in the melodramas . 
A few paces more , and you arrive at the abominable pollarded elms of the Barriere Saint-Jacques , that expedient of the philanthropist to conceal the scaffold , that miserable and shameful Place de Grove of a shop-keeping and bourgeois society , which recoiled before the death penalty , neither daring to abolish it with grandeur , nor to uphold it with authority . 
