He looked . 
The interior of the Jondrette apartment presented a curious aspect , and Marius found an explanation of the singular light which he had noticed . 
A candle was burning in a candlestick covered with verdigris , but that was not what really lighted the chamber . 
The hovel was completely illuminated , as it were , by the reflection from a rather large sheet-iron brazier standing in the fireplace , and filled with burning charcoal , the brazier prepared by the Jondrette woman that morning . 
The charcoal was glowing hot and the brazier was red ; a blue flame flickered over it , and helped him to make out the form of the chisel purchased by Jondrette in the Rue Pierre-Lombard , where it had been thrust into the brazier to heat . 
In one corner , near the door , and as though prepared for some definite use , two heaps were visible , which appeared to be , the one a heap of old iron , the other a heap of ropes . 
All this would have caused the mind of a person who knew nothing of what was in preparation , to waver between a very sinister and a very simple idea . 
The lair thus lighted up more resembled a forge than a mouth of hell , but Jondrette , in this light , had rather the air of a demon than of a smith . 
The heat of the brazier was so great , that the candle on the table was melting on the side next the chafing-dish , and was drooping over . 
An old dark-lantern of copper , worthy of Diogenes turned Cartouche , stood on the chimney-piece . 
The brazier , placed in the fireplace itself , beside the nearly extinct brands , sent its vapors up the chimney , and gave out no odor . 
The moon , entering through the four panes of the window , cast its whiteness into the crimson and flaming garret ; and to the poetic spirit of Marius , who was dreamy even in the moment of action , it was like a thought of heaven mingled with the misshapen reveries of earth . 
A breath of air which made its way in through the open pane , helped to dissipate the smell of the charcoal and to conceal the presence of the brazier . 
The Jondrette lair was , if the reader recalls what we have said of the Gorbeau building , admirably chosen to serve as the theatre of a violent and sombre deed , and as the envelope for a crime . 
It was the most retired chamber in the most isolated house on the most deserted boulevard in Paris . 
If the system of ambush and traps had not already existed , they would have been invented there . 
The whole thickness of a house and a multitude of uninhabited rooms separated this den from the boulevard , and the only window that existed opened on waste lands enclosed with walls and palisades . 
Jondrette had lighted his pipe , seated himself on the seatless chair , and was engaged in smoking . 
His wife was talking to him in a low tone . 
If Marius had been Courfeyrac , that is to say , one of those men who laugh on every occasion in life , he would have burst with laughter when his gaze fell on the Jondrette woman . 
She had on a black bonnet with plumes not unlike the hats of the heralds-at-arms at the coronation of Charles X. , an immense tartan shawl over her knitted petticoat , and the man 's shoes which her daughter had scorned in the morning . 
It was this toilette which had extracted from Jondrette the exclamation : `` Good ! 
You have dressed up . 
You have done well . 
You must inspire confidence ! '' 
As for Jondrette , he had not taken off the new surtout , which was too large for him , and which M. Leblanc had given him , and his costume continued to present that contrast of coat and trousers which constituted the ideal of a poet in Courfeyrac 's eyes . 
All at once , Jondrette lifted up his voice : -- `` By the way ! 
Now that I think of it . 
In this weather , he will come in a carriage . 
Light the lantern , take it and go down stairs . 
You will stand behind the lower door . 
The very moment that you hear the carriage stop , you will open the door , instantly , he will come up , you will light the staircase and the corridor , and when he enters here , you will go down stairs again as speedily as possible , you will pay the coachman , and dismiss the fiacre . 
`` And the money ? '' 
inquired the woman . 
Jondrette fumbled in his trousers pocket and handed her five francs . 
`` What 's this ? '' 
she exclaimed . 
Jondrette replied with dignity : -- `` That is the monarch which our neighbor gave us this morning . '' 
And he added : -- `` Do you know what ? 
Two chairs will be needed here . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` To sit on . '' 
Marius felt a cold chill pass through his limbs at hearing this mild answer from Jondrette . 
`` Pardieu ! 
I 'll go and get one of our neighbor 's . '' 
And with a rapid movement , she opened the door of the den , and went out into the corridor . 
Marius absolutely had not the time to descend from the commode , reach his bed , and conceal himself beneath it . 
`` Take the candle , '' cried Jondrette . 
`` No , '' said she , `` it would embarrass me , I have the two chairs to carry . 
There is moonlight . '' 
