If Wellington had not begun , Blucher could not have finished . 
This Cambronne , this man spending his last hour , this unknown soldier , this infinitesimal of war , realizes that here is a falsehood , a falsehood in a catastrophe , and so doubly agonizing ; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of it , he is offered this mockery , -- life ! 
How could he restrain himself ? 
Yonder are all the kings of Europe , the general 's flushed with victory , the Jupiter 's darting thunderbolts ; they have a hundred thousand victorious soldiers , and back of the hundred thousand a million ; their cannon stand with yawning mouths , the match is lighted ; they grind down under their heels the Imperial guards , and the grand army ; they have just crushed Napoleon , and only Cambronne remains , -- only this earthworm is left to protest . 
He will protest . 
Then he seeks for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword . 
His mouth froths , and the froth is the word . 
In face of this mean and mighty victory , in face of this victory which counts none victorious , this desperate soldier stands erect . 
He grants its overwhelming immensity , but he establishes its triviality ; and he does more than spit upon it . 
Borne down by numbers , by superior force , by brute matter , he finds in his soul an expression : `` Excrement ! '' 
We repeat it , -- to use that word , to do thus , to invent such an expression , is to be the conqueror ! 
The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on that unknown man . 
Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget invents the `` Marseillaise , '' under the visitation of a breath from on high . 
An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes sweeping over these men , and they shake , and one of them sings the song supreme , and the other utters the frightful cry . 
This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in the name of the Empire , -- that would be a trifle : he hurls it at the past in the name of the Revolution . 
It is heard , and Cambronne is recognized as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans . 
Danton seems to be speaking ! 
Kleber seems to be bellowing ! 
At that word from Cambronne , the English voice responded , `` Fire ! '' 
The batteries flamed , the hill trembled , from all those brazen mouths belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot ; a vast volume of smoke , vaguely white in the light of the rising moon , rolled out , and when the smoke dispersed , there was no longer anything there . 
That formidable remnant had been annihilated ; the Guard was dead . 
The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone , and hardly was there discernible , here and there , even a quiver in the bodies ; it was thus that the French legions , greater than the Roman legions , expired on Mont-Saint-Jean , on the soil watered with rain and blood , amid the gloomy grain , on the spot where nowadays Joseph , who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles , passes whistling , and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o'clock in the morning . 
QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE ? 
The battle of Waterloo is an enigma . 
It is as obscure to those who won it as to those who lost it . 
For Napoleon it was a panic ; -LSB- 10 -RSB- Blucher sees nothing in it but fire ; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it . 
Look at the reports . 
The bulletins are confused , the commentaries involved . 
Some stammer , others lisp . 
Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments ; Muffling cuts it up into three changes ; Charras alone , though we hold another judgment than his on some points , seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance . 
All the other historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled , and in this dazzled state they fumble about . 
It was a day of lightning brilliancy ; in fact , a crumbling of the military monarchy which , to the vast stupefaction of kings , drew all the kingdoms after it -- the fall of force , the defeat of war . 
-LSB- 10 -RSB- `` A battle terminated , a day finished , false measures repaired , greater successes assured for the morrow , -- all was lost by a moment of panic , terror . '' 
-- Napoleon , Dictees de Sainte Helene . 
In this event , stamped with superhuman necessity , the part played by men amounts to nothing . 
If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blucher , do we thereby deprive England and Germany of anything ? 
No . 
Neither that illustrious England nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo . 
Thank Heaven , nations are great , independently of the lugubrious feats of the sword . 
Neither England , nor Germany , nor France is contained in a scabbard . 
At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords , above Blucher , Germany has Schiller ; above Wellington , England has Byron . 
A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century , and in that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance . 
They are majestic because they think . 
The elevation of level which they contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them ; it proceeds from themselves and not from an accident . 
The aggrandizement which they have brought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source . 
It is only barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory . 
That is the temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm . 
Civilized people , especially in our day , are neither elevated nor abased by the good or bad fortune of a captain . 
Their specific gravity in the human species results from something more than a combat . 
Their honor , thank God ! 
