Haste was even requisite . 
It occurred to Jean Valjean that the grating which he had caught sight of under the flag-stones might also catch the eye of the soldiery , and that everything hung upon this chance . 
They also might descend into that well and search it . 
There was not a minute to be lost . 
He had deposited Marius on the ground , he picked him up again , -- that is the real word for it , -- placed him on his shoulders once more , and set out . 
He plunged resolutely into the gloom . 
The truth is , that they were less safe than Jean Valjean fancied . 
Perils of another sort and no less serious were awaiting them , perchance . 
After the lightning-charged whirlwind of the combat , the cavern of miasmas and traps ; after chaos , the sewer . 
Jean Valjean had fallen from one circle of hell into another . 
When he had advanced fifty paces , he was obliged to halt . 
A problem presented itself . 
The passage terminated in another gut which he encountered across his path . 
There two ways presented themselves . 
Which should he take ? 
Ought he to turn to the left or to the right ? 
How was he to find his bearings in that black labyrinth ? 
This labyrinth , to which we have already called the reader 's attention , has a clue , which is its slope . 
To follow to the slope is to arrive at the river . 
This Jean Valjean instantly comprehended . 
He said to himself that he was probably in the sewer des Halles ; that if he were to choose the path to the left and follow the slope , he would arrive , in less than a quarter of an hour , at some mouth on the Seine between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf , that is to say , he would make his appearance in broad daylight on the most densely peopled spot in Paris . 
Perhaps he would come out on some man-hole at the intersection of streets . 
Amazement of the passers-by at beholding two bleeding men emerge from the earth at their feet . 
Arrival of the police , a call to arms of the neighboring post of guards . 
Thus they would be seized before they had even got out . 
It would be better to plunge into that labyrinth , to confide themselves to that black gloom , and to trust to Providence for the outcome . 
He ascended the incline , and turned to the right . 
When he had turned the angle of the gallery , the distant glimmer of an air-hole disappeared , the curtain of obscurity fell upon him once more , and he became blind again . 
Nevertheless , he advanced as rapidly as possible . 
Marius ' two arms were passed round his neck , and the former 's feet dragged behind him . 
He held both these arms with one hand , and groped along the wall with the other . 
Marius ' cheek touched his , and clung there , bleeding . 
He felt a warm stream which came from Marius trickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes . 
But a humid warmth near his ear , which the mouth of the wounded man touched , indicated respiration , and consequently , life . 
The passage along which Jean Valjean was now proceeding was not so narrow as the first . 
Jean Valjean walked through it with considerable difficulty . 
The rain of the preceding day had not , as yet , entirely run off , and it created a little torrent in the centre of the bottom , and he was forced to hug the wall in order not to have his feet in the water . 
Thus he proceeded in the gloom . 
He resembled the beings of the night groping in the invisible and lost beneath the earth in veins of shadow . 
Still , little by little , whether it was that the distant air-holes emitted a little wavering light in this opaque gloom , or whether his eyes had become accustomed to the obscurity , some vague vision returned to him , and he began once more to gain a confused idea , now of the wall which he touched , now of the vault beneath which he was passing . 
The pupil dilates in the dark , and the soul dilates in misfortune and ends by finding God there . 
It was not easy to direct his course . 
The line of the sewer re-echoes , so to speak , the line of the streets which lie above it . 
There were then in Paris two thousand two hundred streets . 
Let the reader imagine himself beneath that forest of gloomy branches which is called the sewer . 
The system of sewers existing at that epoch , placed end to end , would have given a length of eleven leagues . 
We have said above , that the actual net-work , thanks to the special activity of the last thirty years , was no less than sixty leagues in extent . 
Jean Valjean began by committing a blunder . 
He thought that he was beneath the Rue Saint-Denis , and it was a pity that it was not so . 
Under the Rue Saint-Denis there is an old stone sewer which dates from Louis XIII . 
