It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicable dream , and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in the middle of the night , erect , shivering , holding back all in vain , on the very brink of the abyss . 
He distinctly perceived in the darkness a stranger , a man unknown to him , whom destiny had mistaken for him , and whom she was thrusting into the gulf in his stead ; in order that the gulf might close once more , it was necessary that some one , himself or that other man , should fall into it : he had only let things take their course . 
The light became complete , and he acknowledged this to himself : That his place was empty in the galleys ; that do what he would , it was still awaiting him ; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back to it ; that this vacant place would await him , and draw him on until he filled it ; that this was inevitable and fatal ; and then he said to himself , `` that , at this moment , be had a substitute ; that it appeared that a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck , and that , as regards himself , being present in the galleys in the person of that Champmathieu , present in society under the name of M. Madeleine , he had nothing more to fear , provided that he did not prevent men from sealing over the head of that Champmathieu this stone of infamy which , like the stone of the sepulchre , falls once , never to rise again . '' 
All this was so strange and so violent , that there suddenly took place in him that indescribable movement , which no man feels more than two or three times in the course of his life , a sort of convulsion of the conscience which stirs up all that there is doubtful in the heart , which is composed of irony , of joy , and of despair , and which may be called an outburst of inward laughter . 
He hastily relighted his candle . 
`` Well , what then ? '' 
he said to himself ; `` what am I afraid of ? 
What is there in all that for me to think about ? 
I am safe ; all is over . 
I had but one partly open door through which my past might invade my life , and behold that door is walled up forever ! 
That Javert , who has been annoying me so long ; that terrible instinct which seemed to have divined me , which had divined me -- good God ! 
and which followed me everywhere ; that frightful hunting-dog , always making a point at me , is thrown off the scent , engaged elsewhere , absolutely turned from the trail : henceforth he is satisfied ; he will leave me in peace ; he has his Jean Valjean . 
Who knows ? 
it is even probable that he will wish to leave town ! 
And all this has been brought about without any aid from me , and I count for nothing in it ! 
Ah ! 
but where is the misfortune in this ? 
Upon my honor , people would think , to see me , that some catastrophe had happened to me ! 
After all , if it does bring harm to some one , that is not my fault in the least : it is Providence which has done it all ; it is because it wishes it so to be , evidently . 
Have I the right to disarrange what it has arranged ? 
What do I ask now ? 
Why should I meddle ? 
It does not concern me ; what ! 
I am not satisfied : but what more do I want ? 
The goal to which I have aspired for so many years , the dream of my nights , the object of my prayers to Heaven , -- security , -- I have now attained ; it is God who wills it ; I can do nothing against the will of God , and why does God will it ? 
In order that I may continue what I have begun , that I may do good , that I may one day be a grand and encouraging example , that it may be said at last , that a little happiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone , and to that virtue to which I have returned . 
Really , I do not understand why I was afraid , a little while ago , to enter the house of that good cure , and to ask his advice ; this is evidently what he would have said to me : It is settled ; let things take their course ; let the good God do as he likes ! '' 
Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience , bending over what may be called his own abyss ; he rose from his chair , and began to pace the room : `` Come , '' said he , `` let us think no more about it ; my resolve is taken ! '' 
but he felt no joy . 
Quite the reverse . 
One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one can the sea from returning to the shore : the sailor calls it the tide ; the guilty man calls it remorse ; God upheaves the soul as he does the ocean . 
After the expiration of a few moments , do what he would , he resumed the gloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened , saying that which he would have preferred to ignore , and listened to that which he would have preferred not to hear , yielding to that mysterious power which said to him : `` Think ! '' 
as it said to another condemned man , two thousand years ago , `` March on ! '' 
Before proceeding further , and in order to make ourselves fully understood , let us insist upon one necessary observation . 
It is certain that people do talk to themselves ; there is no living being who has not done it . 
It may even be said that the word is never a more magnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to conscience within a man , and when it returns from conscience to thought ; it is in this sense only that the words so often employed in this chapter , he said , he exclaimed , must be understood ; one speaks to one 's self , talks to one 's self , exclaims to one 's self without breaking the external silence ; there is a great tumult ; everything about us talks except the mouth . 
The realities of the soul are none the less realities because they are not visible and palpable . 
So he asked himself where he stood . 
He interrogated himself upon that `` settled resolve . '' 
He confessed to himself that all that he had just arranged in his mind was monstrous , that `` to let things take their course , to let the good God do as he liked , '' was simply horrible ; to allow this error of fate and of men to be carried out , not to hinder it , to lend himself to it through his silence , to do nothing , in short , was to do everything ! 
that this was hypocritical baseness in the last degree ! 
that it was a base , cowardly , sneaking , abject , hideous crime ! 
For the first time in eight years , the wretched man had just tasted the bitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action . 
He spit it out with disgust . 
He continued to question himself . 
He asked himself severely what he had meant by this , `` My object is attained ! '' 
He declared to himself that his life really had an object ; but what object ? 
To conceal his name ? 
To deceive the police ? 
Was it for so petty a thing that he had done all that he had done ? 
