Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others . 
Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to intelligent towns . 
For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have just explained our views , Paris has beneath it another Paris ; a Paris of sewers ; which has its streets , its cross-roads , its squares , its blind-alleys , its arteries , and its circulation , which is of mire and minus the human form . 
For nothing must be flattered , not even a great people ; where there is everything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity ; and , if Paris contains Athens , the city of light , Tyre , the city of might , Sparta , the city of virtue , Nineveh , the city of marvels , it also contains Lutetia , the city of mud . 
However , the stamp of its power is there also , and the Titanic sink of Paris realizes , among monuments , that strange ideal realized in humanity by some men like Macchiavelli , Bacon and Mirabeau , grandiose vileness . 
The sub-soil of Paris , if the eye could penetrate its surface , would present the aspect of a colossal madrepore . 
A sponge has no more partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six leagues round about , on which rests the great and ancient city . 
Not to mention its catacombs , which are a separate cellar , not to mention the inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes , without reckoning the vast tubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in the pillar fountains , the sewers alone form a tremendous , shadowy net-work under the two banks ; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding thread . 
There appears , in the humid mist , the rat which seems the product to which Paris has given birth . 
ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover , the subterranean net-work of sewers , from a bird 's eye view , will outline on the banks a species of large branch grafted on the river . 
On the right bank , the belt sewer will form the trunk of this branch , the secondary ducts will form the branches , and those without exit the twigs . 
This figure is but a summary one and half exact , the right angle , which is the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications , being very rare in vegetation . 
A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by supposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet , as intricate as a thicket , against a background of shadows , and the misshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparent confusion , and as at haphazard , now by their angles , again by their extremities . 
Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages , in the Lower Empire and in the Orient of old . 
The masses regarded these beds of decomposition , these monstrous cradles of death , with a fear that was almost religious . 
The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to giddiness than the lions ' ditch of Babylon . 
Teglath-Phalasar , according to the rabbinical books , swore by the sink of Nineveh . 
It was from the sewer of Munster that John of Leyden produced his false moon , and it was from the cess-pool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme , Mokanna , the veiled prophet of Khorassan , caused his false sun to emerge . 
The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers . 
The Germoniae -LSB- 58 -RSB- narrated Rome . 
The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and formidable thing . 
It has been a sepulchre , it has served as an asylum . 
Crime , intelligence , social protest , liberty of conscience , thought , theft , all that human laws persecute or have persecuted , is hidden in that hole ; the maillotins in the fourteenth century , the tire-laine of the fifteenth , the Huguenots in the sixteenth , Morin 's illuminated in the seventeenth , the chauffeurs -LSB- brigands -RSB- in the eighteenth . 
A hundred years ago , the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence , the pickpocket in danger slipped thither ; the forest had its cave , Paris had its sewer . 
Vagrancy , that Gallic picareria , accepted the sewer as the adjunct of the Cour des Miracles , and at evening , it returned thither , fierce and sly , through the Maubuee outlet , as into a bed-chamber . 
-LSB- 58 -RSB- Steps on the Aventine Hill , leading to the Tiber , to which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be thrown into the Tiber . 
It was quite natural , that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset , -LSB- Empty-Pocket -RSB- or the Rue Coupe-Gorge -LSB- Cut-Throat -RSB- , for the scene of their daily labor , should have for their domicile by night the culvert of the Chemin-Vert , or the catch basin of Hurepoix . 
Hence a throng of souvenirs . 
All sorts of phantoms haunt these long , solitary corridors ; everywhere is putrescence and miasma ; here and there are breathing-holes , where Villon within converses with Rabelais without . 
The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of all attempts . 
Political economy therein spies a detritus , social philosophy there beholds a residuum . 
The sewer is the conscience of the city . 
Everything there converges and confronts everything else . 
In that livid spot there are shades , but there are no longer any secrets . 
Each thing bears its true form , or at least , its definitive form . 
The mass of filth has this in its favor , that it is not a liar . 
Ingenuousness has taken refuge there . 
The mask of Basil is to be found there , but one beholds its cardboard and its strings and the inside as well as the outside , and it is accentuated by honest mud . 
Scapin 's false nose is its next-door neighbor . 
All the uncleannesses of civilization , once past their use , fall into this trench of truth , where the immense social sliding ends . 
They are there engulfed , but they display themselves there . 
This mixture is a confession . 
There , no more false appearances , no plastering over is possible , filth removes its shirt , absolute denudation puts to the rout all illusions and mirages , there is nothing more except what really exists , presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end . 
There , the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness , a basket-handle tells a tale of domesticity ; there the core of an apple which has entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more ; the effigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris , Caiphas ' spittle meets Falstaff 's puking , the louis-d'or which comes from the gaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope 's end of the suicide . 
a livid foetus rolls along , enveloped in the spangles which danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday , a cap which has pronounced judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly Margoton 's petticoat ; it is more than fraternization , it is equivalent to addressing each other as thou . 
All which was formerly rouged , is washed free . 
The last veil is torn away . 
A sewer is a cynic . 
It tells everything . 
The sincerity of foulness pleases us , and rests the soul . 
