Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques , which was , as it were , predestined , and which has always been horrible , probably the most mournful spot on that mournful boulevard , seven and thirty years ago , was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive , where stood the building Number 50-52 . 
Bourgeois houses only began to spring up there twenty-five years later . 
The place was unpleasant . 
In addition to the gloomy thoughts which assailed one there , one was conscious of being between the Salpetriere , a glimpse of whose dome could be seen , and Bicetre , whose outskirts one was fairly touching ; that is to say , between the madness of women and the madness of men . 
As far as the eye could see , one could perceive nothing but the abattoirs , the city wall , and the fronts of a few factories , resembling barracks or monasteries ; everywhere about stood hovels , rubbish , ancient walls blackened like cerecloths , new white walls like winding-sheets ; everywhere parallel rows of trees , buildings erected on a line , flat constructions , long , cold rows , and the melancholy sadness of right angles . 
Not an unevenness of the ground , not a caprice in the architecture , not a fold . 
The ensemble was glacial , regular , hideous . 
Nothing oppresses the heart like symmetry . 
It is because symmetry is ennui , and ennui is at the very foundation of grief . 
Despair yawns . 
Something more terrible than a hell where one suffers may be imagined , and that is a hell where one is bored . 
If such a hell existed , that bit of the Boulevard de l'Hopital might have formed the entrance to it . 
Nevertheless , at nightfall , at the moment when the daylight is vanishing , especially in winter , at the hour when the twilight breeze tears from the elms their last russet leaves , when the darkness is deep and starless , or when the moon and the wind are making openings in the clouds and losing themselves in the shadows , this boulevard suddenly becomes frightful . 
The black lines sink inwards and are lost in the shades , like morsels of the infinite . 
The passer-by can not refrain from recalling the innumerable traditions of the place which are connected with the gibbet . 
The solitude of this spot , where so many crimes have been committed , had something terrible about it . 
One almost had a presentiment of meeting with traps in that darkness ; all the confused forms of the darkness seemed suspicious , and the long , hollow square , of which one caught a glimpse between each tree , seemed graves : by day it was ugly ; in the evening melancholy ; by night it was sinister . 
In summer , at twilight , one saw , here and there , a few old women seated at the foot of the elm , on benches mouldy with rain . 
These good old women were fond of begging . 
However , this quarter , which had a superannuated rather than an antique air , was tending even then to transformation . 
Even at that time any one who was desirous of seeing it had to make haste . 
Each day some detail of the whole effect was disappearing . 
For the last twenty years the station of the Orleans railway has stood beside the old faubourg and distracted it , as it does to-day . 
Wherever it is placed on the borders of a capital , a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birth of a city . 
It seems as though , around these great centres of the movements of a people , the earth , full of germs , trembled and yawned , to engulf the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to spring forth , at the rattle of these powerful machines , at the breath of these monstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire . 
The old houses crumble and new ones rise . 
Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpetriere , the ancient , narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor and the Jardin des Plantes tremble , as they are violently traversed three or four times each day by those currents of coach fiacres and omnibuses which , in a given time , crowd back the houses to the right and the left ; for there are things which are odd when said that are rigorously exact ; and just as it is true to say that in large cities the sun makes the southern fronts of houses to vegetate and grow , it is certain that the frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets . 
The symptoms of a new life are evident . 
In this old provincial quarter , in the wildest nooks , the pavement shows itself , the sidewalks begin to crawl and to grow longer , even where there are as yet no pedestrians . 
One morning , -- a memorable morning in July , 1845 , -- black pots of bitumen were seen smoking there ; on that day it might be said that civilization had arrived in the Rue de l'Ourcine , and that Paris had entered the suburb of Saint-Marceau . 
A NEST FOR OWL AND A WARBLER It was in front of this Gorbeau house that Jean Valjean halted . 
Like wild birds , he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , drew out a sort of a pass-key , opened the door , entered , closed it again carefully , and ascended the staircase , still carrying Cosette . 
At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key , with which he opened another door . 
The chamber which he entered , and which he closed again instantly , was a kind of moderately spacious attic , furnished with a mattress laid on the floor , a table , and several chairs ; a stove in which a fire was burning , and whose embers were visible , stood in one corner . 
A lantern on the boulevard cast a vague light into this poor room . 
At the extreme end there was a dressing-room with a folding bed ; Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and laid her down there without waking her . 
He struck a match and lighted a candle . 
All this was prepared beforehand on the table , and , as he had done on the previous evening , he began to scrutinize Cosette 's face with a gaze full of ecstasy , in which the expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted to aberration . 
The little girl , with that tranquil confidence which belongs only to extreme strength and extreme weakness , had fallen asleep without knowing with whom she was , and continued to sleep without knowing where she was . 
Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child 's hand . 
Nine months before he had kissed the hand of the mother , who had also just fallen asleep . 
The same sad , piercing , religious sentiment filled his heart . 
He knelt beside Cosette 's bed . 
lt was broad daylight , and the child still slept . 
A wan ray of the December sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon the ceiling in long threads of light and shade . 
All at once a heavily laden carrier 's cart , which was passing along the boulevard , shook the frail bed , like a clap of thunder , and made it quiver from top to bottom . 
`` Yes , madame ! '' 
cried Cosette , waking with a start , `` here I am ! 
here I am ! '' 
