She heard some one breathing close to her bed ; she drew aside the curtain and saw M. Madeleine standing there and looking at something over her head . 
His gaze was full of pity , anguish , and supplication . 
She followed its direction , and saw that it was fixed on a crucifix which was nailed to the wall . 
Thenceforth , M. Madeleine was transfigured in Fantine 's eyes . 
He seemed to her to be clothed in light . 
He was absorbed in a sort of prayer . 
She gazed at him for a long time without daring to interrupt him . 
At last she said timidly : -- `` What are you doing ? '' 
M. Madeleine had been there for an hour . 
He had been waiting for Fantine to awake . 
He took her hand , felt of her pulse , and replied : -- `` How do you feel ? '' 
`` Well , I have slept , '' she replied ; `` I think that I am better , It is nothing . '' 
He answered , responding to the first question which she had put to him as though he had just heard it : -- `` I was praying to the martyr there on high . '' 
And he added in his own mind , `` For the martyr here below . '' 
M. Madeleine had passed the night and the morning in making inquiries . 
He knew all now . 
He knew Fantine 's history in all its heart-rending details . 
He went on : -- `` You have suffered much , poor mother . 
Oh ! 
do not complain ; you now have the dowry of the elect . 
It is thus that men are transformed into angels . 
It is not their fault they do not know how to go to work otherwise . 
You see this hell from which you have just emerged is the first form of heaven . 
It was necessary to begin there . '' 
He sighed deeply . 
But she smiled on him with that sublime smile in which two teeth were lacking . 
That same night , Javert wrote a letter . 
The next morning be posted it himself at the office of M. sur M . 
It was addressed to Paris , and the superscription ran : To Monsieur Chabouillet , Secretary of Monsieur le Prefet of Police . 
As the affair in the station-house had been bruited about , the post-mistress and some other persons who saw the letter before it was sent off , and who recognized Javert 's handwriting on the cover , thought that he was sending in his resignation . 
M.Madeleine made haste to write to the Thenardiers . 
Fantine owed them one hundred and twenty francs . 
He sent them three hundred francs , telling them to pay themselves from that sum , and to fetch the child instantly to M. sur M. , where her sick mother required her presence . 
This dazzled Thenardier . 
`` The devil ! '' 
said the man to his wife ; `` do n't let 's allow the child to go . 
This lark is going to turn into a milch cow . 
I see through it . 
Some ninny has taken a fancy to the mother . '' 
He replied with a very well drawn-up bill for five hundred and some odd francs . 
In this memorandum two indisputable items figured up over three hundred francs , -- one for the doctor , the other for the apothecary who had attended and physicked Eponine and Azelma through two long illnesses . 
Cosette , as we have already said , had not been ill . 
It was only a question of a trifling substitution of names . 
At the foot of the memorandum Thenardier wrote , Received on account , three hundred francs . 
M. Madeleine immediately sent three hundred francs more , and wrote , `` Make haste to bring Cosette . '' 
`` Christi ! '' 
said Thenardier , `` let 's not give up the child . '' 
In the meantime , Fantine did not recover . 
She still remained in the infirmary . 
The sisters had at first only received and nursed `` that woman '' with repugnance . 
