The cavities of night , things grown haggard , taciturn profiles which vanish when one advances , obscure dishevelments , irritated tufts , livid pools , the lugubrious reflected in the funereal , the sepulchral immensity of silence , unknown but possible beings , bendings of mysterious branches , alarming torsos of trees , long handfuls of quivering plants , -- against all this one has no protection . 
There is no hardihood which does not shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish . 
One is conscious of something hideous , as though one 's soul were becoming amalgamated with the darkness . 
This penetration of the shadows is indescribably sinister in the case of a child . 
Forests are apocalypses , and the beating of the wings of a tiny soul produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault . 
Without understanding her sensations , Cosette was conscious that she was seized upon by that black enormity of nature ; it was no longer terror alone which was gaining possession of her ; it was something more terrible even than terror ; she shivered . 
There are no words to express the strangeness of that shiver which chilled her to the very bottom of her heart ; her eye grew wild ; she thought she felt that she should not be able to refrain from returning there at the same hour on the morrow . 
Then , by a sort of instinct , she began to count aloud , one , two , three , four , and so on up to ten , in order to escape from that singular state which she did not understand , but which terrified her , and , when she had finished , she began again ; this restored her to a true perception of the things about her . 
Her hands , which she had wet in drawing the water , felt cold ; she rose ; her terror , a natural and unconquerable terror , had returned : she had but one thought now , -- to flee at full speed through the forest , across the fields to the houses , to the windows , to the lighted candles . 
Her glance fell upon the water which stood before her ; such was the fright which the Thenardier inspired in her , that she dared not flee without that bucket of water : she seized the handle with both hands ; she could hardly lift the pail . 
In this manner she advanced a dozen paces , but the bucket was full ; it was heavy ; she was forced to set it on the ground once more . 
She took breath for an instant , then lifted the handle of the bucket again , and resumed her march , proceeding a little further this time , but again she was obliged to pause . 
After some seconds of repose she set out again . 
She walked bent forward , with drooping head , like an old woman ; the weight of the bucket strained and stiffened her thin arms . 
The iron handle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and tiny hands ; she was forced to halt from time to time , and each time that she did so , the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs . 
This took place in the depths of a forest , at night , in winter , far from all human sight ; she was a child of eight : no one but God saw that sad thing at the moment . 
And her mother , no doubt , alas ! 
For there are things that make the dead open their eyes in their graves . 
She panted with a sort of painful rattle ; sobs contracted her throat , but she dared not weep , so afraid was she of the Thenardier , even at a distance : it was her custom to imagine the Thenardier always present . 
However , she could not make much headway in that manner , and she went on very slowly . 
In spite of diminishing the length of her stops , and of walking as long as possible between them , she reflected with anguish that it would take her more than an hour to return to Montfermeil in this manner , and that the Thenardier would beat her . 
This anguish was mingled with her terror at being alone in the woods at night ; she was worn out with fatigue , and had not yet emerged from the forest . 
On arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she was acquainted , made a last halt , longer than the rest , in order that she might get well rested ; then she summoned up all her strength , picked up her bucket again , and courageously resumed her march , but the poor little desperate creature could not refrain from crying , `` O my God ! 
my God ! '' 
At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longer weighed anything at all : a hand , which seemed to her enormous , had just seized the handle , and lifted it vigorously . 
She raised her head . 
A large black form , straight and erect , was walking beside her through the darkness ; it was a man who had come up behind her , and whose approach she had not heard . 
This man , without uttering a word , had seized the handle of the bucket which she was carrying . 
There are instincts for all the encounters of life . 
The child was not afraid . 
WHICH POSSIBLY PROVES BOULATRUELLE 'S INTELLIGENCE On the afternoon of that same Christmas Day , 1823 , a man had walked for rather a long time in the most deserted part of the Boulevard de l'Hopital in Paris . 
This man had the air of a person who is seeking lodgings , and he seemed to halt , by preference , at the most modest houses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
We shall see further on that this man had , in fact , hired a chamber in that isolated quarter . 
This man , in his attire , as in all his person , realized the type of what may be called the well-bred mendicant , -- extreme wretchedness combined with extreme cleanliness . 
This is a very rare mixture which inspires intelligent hearts with that double respect which one feels for the man who is very poor , and for the man who is very worthy . 
He wore a very old and very well brushed round hat ; a coarse coat , worn perfectly threadbare , of an ochre yellow , a color that was not in the least eccentric at that epoch ; a large waistcoat with pockets of a venerable cut ; black breeches , worn gray at the knee , stockings of black worsted ; and thick shoes with copper buckles . 
He would have been pronounced a preceptor in some good family , returned from the emigration . 
He would have been taken for more than sixty years of age , from his perfectly white hair , his wrinkled brow , his livid lips , and his countenance , where everything breathed depression and weariness of life . 
Judging from his firm tread , from the singular vigor which stamped all his movements , he would have hardly been thought fifty . 
The wrinkles on his brow were well placed , and would have disposed in his favor any one who observed him attentively . 
His lip contracted with a strange fold which seemed severe , and which was humble . 
There was in the depth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity . 
In his left hand he carried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief ; in his right he leaned on a sort of a cudgel , cut from some hedge . 
This stick had been carefully trimmed , and had an air that was not too threatening ; the most had been made of its knots , and it had received a coral-like head , made from red wax : it was a cudgel , and it seemed to be a cane . 
There are but few passers-by on that boulevard , particularly in the winter . 
The man seemed to avoid them rather than to seek them , but this without any affectation . 
At that epoch , King Louis XVIII . 
went nearly every day to Choisy-le-Roi : it was one of his favorite excursions . 
Towards two o'clock , almost invariably , the royal carriage and cavalcade was seen to pass at full speed along the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of the quarter who said , `` It is two o'clock ; there he is returning to the Tuileries . '' 
