She lived on them . 
In them she drowned what brains she possessed . 
This had given her , when very young , and even a little later , a sort of pensive attitude towards her husband , a scamp of a certain depth , a ruffian lettered to the extent of the grammar , coarse and fine at one and the same time , but , so far as sentimentalism was concerned , given to the perusal of Pigault-Lebrun , and `` in what concerns the sex , '' as he said in his jargon -- a downright , unmitigated lout . 
His wife was twelve or fifteen years younger than he was . 
Later on , when her hair , arranged in a romantically drooping fashion , began to grow gray , when the Magaera began to be developed from the Pamela , the female Thenardier was nothing but a coarse , vicious woman , who had dabbled in stupid romances . 
Now , one can not read nonsense with impunity . 
The result was that her eldest daughter was named Eponine ; as for the younger , the poor little thing came near being called Gulnare ; I know not to what diversion , effected by a romance of Ducray-Dumenil , she owed the fact that she merely bore the name of Azelma . 
However , we will remark by the way , everything was not ridiculous and superficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding , and which may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names . 
By the side of this romantic element which we have just indicated there is the social symptom . 
It is not rare for the neatherd 's boy nowadays to bear the name of Arthur , Alfred , or Alphonse , and for the vicomte -- if there are still any vicomtes -- to be called Thomas , Pierre , or Jacques . 
This displacement , which places the `` elegant '' name on the plebeian and the rustic name on the aristocrat , is nothing else than an eddy of equality . 
The irresistible penetration of the new inspiration is there as everywhere else . 
Beneath this apparent discord there is a great and a profound thing , -- the French Revolution . 
THE LARK It is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper . 
The cook-shop was in a bad way . 
Thanks to the traveller 's fifty-seven francs , Thenardier had been able to avoid a protest and to honor his signature . 
On the following month they were again in need of money . 
The woman took Cosette 's outfit to Paris , and pawned it at the pawnbroker 's for sixty francs . 
As soon as that sum was spent , the Thenardiers grew accustomed to look on the little girl merely as a child whom they were caring for out of charity ; and they treated her accordingly . 
As she had no longer any clothes , they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and chemises of the Thenardier brats ; that is to say , in rags . 
They fed her on what all the rest had left -- a little better than the dog , a little worse than the cat . 
Moreover , the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions ; Cosette ate with them under the table , from a wooden bowl similar to theirs . 
The mother , who had established herself , as we shall see later on , at M. sur M. , wrote , or , more correctly , caused to be written , a letter every month , that she might have news of her child . 
The Thenardiers replied invariably , `` Cosette is doing wonderfully well . '' 
At the expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francs for the seventh month , and continued her remittances with tolerable regularity from month to month . 
The year was not completed when Thenardier said : `` A fine favor she is doing us , in sooth ! 
What does she expect us to do with her seven francs ? '' 
and he wrote to demand twelve francs . 
The mother , whom they had persuaded into the belief that her child was happy , `` and was coming on well , '' submitted , and forwarded the twelve francs . 
Certain natures can not love on the one hand without hating on the other . 
Mother Thenardier loved her two daughters passionately , which caused her to hate the stranger . 
It is sad to think that the love of a mother can possess villainous aspects . 
Little as was the space occupied by Cosette , it seemed to her as though it were taken from her own , and that that little child diminished the air which her daughters breathed . 
This woman , like many women of her sort , had a load of caresses and a burden of blows and injuries to dispense each day . 
If she had not had Cosette , it is certain that her daughters , idolized as they were , would have received the whole of it ; but the stranger did them the service to divert the blows to herself . 
Her daughters received nothing but caresses . 
Cosette could not make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy shower of violent blows and unmerited chastisement . 
The sweet , feeble being , who should not have understood anything of this world or of God , incessantly punished , scolded , ill-used , beaten , and seeing beside her two little creatures like herself , who lived in a ray of dawn ! 
Madame Thenardier was vicious with Cosette . 
Eponine and Azelma were vicious . 
Children at that age are only copies of their mother . 
The size is smaller ; that is all . 
A year passed ; then another . 
People in the village said : -- `` Those Thenardiers are good people . 
They are not rich , and yet they are bringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands ! '' 
They thought that Cosette 's mother had forgotten her . 
In the meanwhile , Thenardier , having learned , it is impossible to say by what obscure means , that the child was probably a bastard , and that the mother could not acknowledge it , exacted fifteen francs a month , saying that `` the creature '' was growing and `` eating , '' and threatening to send her away . 
`` Let her not bother me , '' he exclaimed , `` or I 'll fire her brat right into the middle of her secrets . 
I must have an increase . '' 
The mother paid the fifteen francs . 
