`` Ever since yesterday , you have made me rage , all of you . 
I am greatly vexed . 
I do n't understand . 
You do not defend me against Marius . 
Marius will not uphold me against you . 
I am all alone . 
I arrange a chamber prettily . 
If I could have put the good God there I would have done it . 
My chamber is left on my hands . 
My lodger sends me into bankruptcy . 
I order a nice little dinner of Nicolette . 
We will have nothing to do with your dinner , Madame . 
And my father Fauchelevent wants me to call him ` Monsieur Jean , ' and to receive him in a frightful , old , ugly cellar , where the walls have beards , and where the crystal consists of empty bottles , and the curtains are of spiders ' webs ! 
You are singular , I admit , that is your style , but people who get married are granted a truce . 
You ought not to have begun being singular again instantly . 
So you are going to be perfectly contented in your abominable Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
I was very desperate indeed there , that I was . 
What have you against me ? 
You cause me a great deal of grief . 
Fi ! '' 
And , becoming suddenly serious , she gazed intently at Jean Valjean and added : `` Are you angry with me because I am happy ? '' 
Ingenuousness sometimes unconsciously penetrates deep . 
This question , which was simple for Cosette , was profound for Jean Valjean . 
Cosette had meant to scratch , and she lacerated . 
Jean Valjean turned pale . 
He remained for a moment without replying , then , with an inexpressible intonation , and speaking to himself , he murmured : `` Her happiness was the object of my life . 
Now God may sign my dismissal . 
Cosette , thou art happy ; my day is over . '' 
`` Ah , you have said thou to me ! '' 
exclaimed Cosette . 
And she sprang to his neck . 
Jean Valjean , in bewilderment , strained her wildly to his breast . 
It almost seemed to him as though he were taking her back . 
`` Thanks , father ! '' 
said Cosette . 
This enthusiastic impulse was on the point of becoming poignant for Jean Valjean . 
He gently removed Cosette 's arms , and took his hat . 
`` Well ? '' 
said Cosette . 
`` I leave you , Madame , they are waiting for you . '' 
And , from the threshold , he added : `` I have said thou to you . 
Tell your husband that this shall not happen again . 
Pardon me . '' 
Jean Valjean quitted the room , leaving Cosette stupefied at this enigmatical farewell . 
ANOTHER STEP BACKWARDS On the following day , at the same hour , Jean Valjean came . 
Cosette asked him no questions , was no longer astonished , no longer exclaimed that she was cold , no longer spoke of the drawing-room , she avoided saying either `` father '' or `` Monsieur Jean . '' 
She allowed herself to be addressed as you . 
She allowed herself to be called Madame . 
Only , her joy had undergone a certain diminution . 
She would have been sad , if sadness had been possible to her . 
