This knob , which was round and of polished brass , shone like a terrible star for him . 
He gazed at it as a lamb might gaze into the eye of a tiger . 
He could not take his eyes from it . 
From time to time he advanced a step and approached the door . 
Had he listened , he would have heard the sound of the adjoining hall like a sort of confused murmur ; but he did not listen , and he did not hear . 
Suddenly , without himself knowing how it happened , he found himself near the door ; he grasped the knob convulsively ; the door opened . 
He was in the court-room . 
A PLACE WHERE CONVICTIONS ARE IN PROCESS OF FORMATION He advanced a pace , closed the door mechanically behind him , and remained standing , contemplating what he saw . 
It was a vast and badly lighted apartment , now full of uproar , now full of silence , where all the apparatus of a criminal case , with its petty and mournful gravity in the midst of the throng , was in process of development . 
At the one end of the hall , the one where he was , were judges , with abstracted air , in threadbare robes , who were gnawing their nails or closing their eyelids ; at the other end , a ragged crowd ; lawyers in all sorts of attitudes ; soldiers with hard but honest faces ; ancient , spotted woodwork , a dirty ceiling , tables covered with serge that was yellow rather than green ; doors blackened by handmarks ; tap-room lamps which emitted more smoke than light , suspended from nails in the wainscot ; on the tables candles in brass candlesticks ; darkness , ugliness , sadness ; and from all this there was disengaged an austere and august impression , for one there felt that grand human thing which is called the law , and that grand divine thing which is called justice . 
No one in all that throng paid any attention to him ; all glances were directed towards a single point , a wooden bench placed against a small door , in the stretch of wall on the President 's left ; on this bench , illuminated by several candles , sat a man between two gendarmes . 
This man was the man . 
He did not seek him ; he saw him ; his eyes went thither naturally , as though they had known beforehand where that figure was . 
He thought he was looking at himself , grown old ; not absolutely the same in face , of course , but exactly similar in attitude and aspect , with his bristling hair , with that wild and uneasy eye , with that blouse , just as it was on the day when he entered D -- , full of hatred , concealing his soul in that hideous mass of frightful thoughts which he had spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison . 
He said to himself with a shudder , `` Good God ! 
shall I become like that again ? '' 
This creature seemed to be at least sixty ; there was something indescribably coarse , stupid , and frightened about him . 
At the sound made by the opening door , people had drawn aside to make way for him ; the President had turned his head , and , understanding that the personage who had just entered was the mayor of M. sur M. , he had bowed to him ; the attorney-general , who had seen M. Madeleine at M. sur M. , whither the duties of his office had called him more than once , recognized him and saluted him also : he had hardly perceived it ; he was the victim of a sort of hallucination ; he was watching . 
Judges , clerks , gendarmes , a throng of cruelly curious heads , all these he had already beheld once , in days gone by , twenty-seven years before ; he had encountered those fatal things once more ; there they were ; they moved ; they existed ; it was no longer an effort of his memory , a mirage of his thought ; they were real gendarmes and real judges , a real crowd , and real men of flesh and blood : it was all over ; he beheld the monstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him , with all that there is formidable in reality . 
All this was yawning before him . 
He was horrified by it ; he shut his eyes , and exclaimed in the deepest recesses of his soul , `` Never ! '' 
And by a tragic play of destiny which made all his ideas tremble , and rendered him nearly mad , it was another self of his that was there ! 
all called that man who was being tried Jean Valjean . 
Under his very eyes , unheard-of vision , he had a sort of representation of the most horrible moment of his life , enacted by his spectre . 
Everything was there ; the apparatus was the same , the hour of the night , the faces of the judges , of soldiers , and of spectators ; all were the same , only above the President 's head there hung a crucifix , something which the courts had lacked at the time of his condemnation : God had been absent when he had been judged . 
There was a chair behind him ; he dropped into it , terrified at the thought that he might be seen ; when he was seated , he took advantage of a pile of cardboard boxes , which stood on the judge 's desk , to conceal his face from the whole room ; he could now see without being seen ; he had fully regained consciousness of the reality of things ; gradually he recovered ; he attained that phase of composure where it is possible to listen . 
M. Bamatabois was one of the jurors . 
He looked for Javert , but did not see him ; the seat of the witnesses was hidden from him by the clerk 's table , and then , as we have just said , the hall was sparely lighted . 
At the moment of this entrance , the defendant 's lawyer had just finished his plea . 
The attention of all was excited to the highest pitch ; the affair had lasted for three hours : for three hours that crowd had been watching a strange man , a miserable specimen of humanity , either profoundly stupid or profoundly subtle , gradually bending beneath the weight of a terrible likeness . 
This man , as the reader already knows , was a vagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden with ripe apples , broken in the orchard of a neighbor , called the Pierron orchard . 
Who was this man ? 
an examination had been made ; witnesses had been heard , and they were unanimous ; light had abounded throughout the entire debate ; the accusation said : `` We have in our grasp not only a marauder , a stealer of fruit ; we have here , in our hands , a bandit , an old offender who has broken his ban , an ex-convict , a miscreant of the most dangerous description , a malefactor named Jean Valjean , whom justice has long been in search of , and who , eight years ago , on emerging from the galleys at Toulon , committed a highway robbery , accompanied by violence , on the person of a child , a Savoyard named Little Gervais ; a crime provided for by article 383 of the Penal Code , the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter , when his identity shall have been judicially established . 
He has just committed a fresh theft ; it is a case of a second offence ; condemn him for the fresh deed ; later on he will be judged for the old crime . '' 
In the face of this accusation , in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses , the accused appeared to be astonished more than anything else ; he made signs and gestures which were meant to convey No , or else he stared at the ceiling : he spoke with difficulty , replied with embarrassment , but his whole person , from head to foot , was a denial ; he was an idiot in the presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him , and like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fast upon him ; nevertheless , it was a question of the most menacing future for him ; the likeness increased every moment , and the entire crowd surveyed , with more anxiety than he did himself , that sentence freighted with calamity , which descended ever closer over his head ; there was even a glimpse of a possibility afforded ; besides the galleys , a possible death penalty , in case his identity were established , and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter in condemnation . 
Who was this man ? 
what was the nature of his apathy ? 
was it imbecility or craft ? 
Did he understand too well , or did he not understand at all ? 
these were questions which divided the crowd , and seemed to divide the jury ; there was something both terrible and puzzling in this case : the drama was not only melancholy ; it was also obscure . 
The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well , in that provincial tongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar , and which was formerly employed by all advocates , at Paris as well as at Romorantin or at Montbrison , and which to-day , having become classic , is no longer spoken except by the official orators of magistracy , to whom it is suited on account of its grave sonorousness and its majestic stride ; a tongue in which a husband is called a consort , and a woman a spouse ; Paris , the centre of art and civilization ; the king , the monarch ; Monseigneur the Bishop , a sainted pontiff ; the district-attorney , the eloquent interpreter of public prosecution ; the arguments , the accents which we have just listened to ; the age of Louis XIV. , the grand age ; a theatre , the temple of Melpomene ; the reigning family , the august blood of our kings ; a concert , a musical solemnity ; the General Commandant of the province , the illustrious warrior , who , etc. ; the pupils in the seminary , these tender levities ; errors imputed to newspapers , the imposture which distills its venom through the columns of those organs ; etc. . 
The lawyer had , accordingly , begun with an explanation as to the theft of the apples , -- an awkward matter couched in fine style ; but Benigne Bossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in the midst of a funeral oration , and he extricated himself from the situation in stately fashion . 
The lawyer established the fact that the theft of the apples had not been circumstantially proved . 
His client , whom he , in his character of counsel , persisted in calling Champmathieu , had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that branch by any one . 
He had been taken with that branch -LRB- which the lawyer preferred to call a bough -RRB- in his possession ; but he said that he had found it broken off and lying on the ground , and had picked it up . 
Where was there any proof to the contrary ? 
No doubt that branch had been broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall , then thrown away by the alarmed marauder ; there was no doubt that there had been a thief in the case . 
But what proof was there that that thief had been Champmathieu ? 
One thing only . 
His character as an ex-convict . 
