A little of Egypt and Bohemia in the lower regions suited the upper spheres , and compassed the aims of the powerful . 
The hatred of instruction for the children of the people was a dogma . 
What is the use of `` half-lights '' ? 
Such was the countersign . 
Now , the erring child is the corollary of the ignorant child . 
Besides this , the monarchy sometimes was in need of children , and in that case it skimmed the streets . 
Under Louis XIV. , not to go any further back , the king rightly desired to create a fleet . 
The idea was a good one . 
But let us consider the means . 
There can be no fleet , if , beside the sailing ship , that plaything of the winds , and for the purpose of towing it , in case of necessity , there is not the vessel which goes where it pleases , either by means of oars or of steam ; the galleys were then to the marine what steamers are to-day . 
Therefore , galleys were necessary ; but the galley is moved only by the galley-slave ; hence , galley-slaves were required . 
Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the parliaments make as many convicts as possible . 
The magistracy showed a great deal of complaisance in the matter . 
A man kept his hat on in the presence of a procession -- it was a Huguenot attitude ; he was sent to the galleys . 
A child was encountered in the streets ; provided that he was fifteen years of age and did not know where he was to sleep , he was sent to the galleys . 
Grand reign ; grand century . 
Under Louis XV . 
children disappeared in Paris ; the police carried them off , for what mysterious purpose no one knew . 
People whispered with terror monstrous conjectures as to the king 's baths of purple . 
Barbier speaks ingenuously of these things . 
It sometimes happened that the exempts of the guard , when they ran short of children , took those who had fathers . 
The fathers , in despair , attacked the exempts . 
In that case , the parliament intervened and had some one hung . 
Who ? 
The exempts ? 
No , the fathers . 
THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF INDIA The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste . 
One might almost say : Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so . 
This word gamin was printed for the first time , and reached popular speech through the literary tongue , in 1834 . 
It is in a little work entitled Claude Gueux that this word made its appearance . 
The horror was lively . 
The word passed into circulation . 
The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for each other are very various . 
We have known and associated with one who was greatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall from the top of the tower of Notre-Dame ; another , because he had succeeded in making his way into the rear courtyard where the statues of the dome of the Invalides had been temporarily deposited , and had `` prigged '' some lead from them ; a third , because he had seen a diligence tip over ; still another , because he `` knew '' a soldier who came near putting out the eye of a citizen . 
This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin , a profound epiphonema , which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending , -- Dieu de Dieu ! 
What ill-luck I do have ! 
to think that I have never yet seen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window ! 
-LRB- I have pronounced I ` ave and fifth pronounced fift ' . -RRB- 
Surely , this saying of a peasant is a fine one : `` Father So-and-So , your wife has died of her malady ; why did you not send for the doctor ? '' 
`` What would you have , sir , we poor folks die of ourselves . '' 
But if the peasant 's whole passivity lies in this saying , the whole of the free-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is , assuredly , contained in this other saying . 
A man condemned to death is listening to his confessor in the tumbrel . 
The child of Paris exclaims : `` He is talking to his black cap ! 
Oh , the sneak ! '' 
A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin . 
To be strong-minded is an important item . 
To be present at executions constitutes a duty . 
He shows himself at the guillotine , and he laughs . 
He calls it by all sorts of pet names : The End of the Soup , The Growler , The Mother in the Blue -LRB- the sky -RRB- , The Last Mouthful , etc. , etc. . 
In order not to lose anything of the affair , he scales the walls , he hoists himself to balconies , he ascends trees , he suspends himself to gratings , he clings fast to chimneys . 
