The ideal is frightful to behold , thus lost in the depths , small , isolated , imperceptible , brilliant , but surrounded by those great , black menaces , monstrously heaped around it ; yet no more in danger than a star in the maw of the clouds . 
FULL LIGHT The reader has probably understood that Eponine , having recognized through the gate , the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had sent her , had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet , and had then conducted Marius thither , and that , after many days spent in ecstasy before that gate , Marius , drawn on by that force which draws the iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is built the house of her whom he loves , had finally entered Cosette 's garden as Romeo entered the garden of Juliet . 
This had even proved easier for him than for Romeo ; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall , Marius had only to use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which vacillated in its rusty recess , after the fashion of old people 's teeth . 
Marius was slender and readily passed through . 
As there was never any one in the street , and as Marius never entered the garden except at night , he ran no risk of being seen . 
Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed these two souls , Marius was there every evening . 
If , at that period of her existence , Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least unscrupulous or debauched , she would have been lost ; for there are generous natures which yield themselves , and Cosette was one of them . 
One of woman 's magnanimities is to yield . 
Love , at the height where it is absolute , is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindness of modesty . 
But what dangers you run , O noble souls ! 
Often you give the heart , and we take the body . 
Your heart remains with you , you gaze upon it in the gloom with a shudder . 
Love has no middle course ; it either ruins or it saves . 
All human destiny lies in this dilemma . 
This dilemma , ruin , or safety , is set forth no more inexorably by any fatality than by love . 
Love is life , if it is not death . 
Cradle ; also coffin . 
The same sentiment says `` yes '' and `` no '' in the human heart . 
Of all the things that God has made , the human heart is the one which sheds the most light , alas ! 
and the most darkness . 
God willed that Cosette 's love should encounter one of the loves which save . 
Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832 , there were there , in every night , in that poor , neglected garden , beneath that thicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day , two beings composed of all chastity , all innocence , overflowing with all the felicity of heaven , nearer to the archangels than to mankind , pure , honest , intoxicated , radiant , who shone for each other amid the shadows . 
It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown , and to Marius that Cosette had a nimbus . 
They touched each other , they gazed at each other , they clasped each other 's hands , they pressed close to each other ; but there was a distance which they did not pass . 
Not that they respected it ; they did not know of its existence . 
Marius was conscious of a barrier , Cosette 's innocence ; and Cosette of a support , Marius ' loyalty . 
The first kiss had also been the last . 
Marius , since that time , had not gone further than to touch Cosette 's hand , or her kerchief , or a lock of her hair , with his lips . 
For him , Cosette was a perfume and not a woman . 
He inhaled her . 
She refused nothing , and he asked nothing . 
Cosette was happy , and Marius was satisfied . 
They lived in this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one soul by another soul . 
It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden souls in the ideal . 
Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau . 
At that hour of love , an hour when voluptuousness is absolutely mute , beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy , Marius , the pure and seraphic Marius , would rather have gone to a woman of the town than have raised Cosette 's robe to the height of her ankle . 
Once , in the moonlight , Cosette stooped to pick up something on the ground , her bodice fell apart and permitted a glimpse of the beginning of her throat . 
Marius turned away his eyes . 
What took place between these two beings ? 
Nothing . 
They adored each other . 
At night , when they were there , that garden seemed a living and a sacred spot . 
All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense ; and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers . 
The wanton and vigorous vegetation quivered , full of strength and intoxication , around these two innocents , and they uttered words of love which set the trees to trembling . 
What words were these ? 
Breaths . 
Nothing more . 
These breaths sufficed to trouble and to touch all nature round about . 
Magic power which we should find it difficult to understand were we to read in a book these conversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smoke wreaths by the breeze beneath the leaves . 
Take from those murmurs of two lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and which accompanies them like a lyre , and what remains is nothing more than a shade ; you say : `` What ! 
