To be buried in the vault under the altar of the chapel , not to go to profane earth ; to remain there in death where she prayed while living ; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion . 
She asked it of us ; that is to say , commanded us . '' 
`` But it is forbidden . '' 
`` Forbidden by men , enjoined by God . '' 
`` What if it became known ? '' 
`` We have confidence in you . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I am a stone in your walls . '' 
`` The chapter assembled . 
The vocal mothers , whom I have just consulted again , and who are now deliberating , have decided that Mother Crucifixion shall be buried , according to her wish , in her own coffin , under our altar . 
Think , Father Fauvent , if she were to work miracles here ! 
What a glory of God for the community ! 
And miracles issue from tombs . '' 
`` But , reverend Mother , if the agent of the sanitary commission -- '' `` Saint Benoit II. , in the matter of sepulture , resisted Constantine Pogonatus . '' 
`` But the commissary of police -- '' `` Chonodemaire , one of the seven German kings who entered among the Gauls under the Empire of Constantius , expressly recognized the right of nuns to be buried in religion , that is to say , beneath the altar . '' 
`` But the inspector from the Prefecture -- '' `` The world is nothing in the presence of the cross . 
Martin , the eleventh general of the Carthusians , gave to his order this device : Stat crux dum volvitur orbis . '' 
`` Amen , '' said Fauchelevent , who imperturbably extricated himself in this manner from the dilemma , whenever he heard Latin . 
Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long . 
On the day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison , bearing in his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in , he halted in front of the first tree which he came to , harangued it and made very great efforts to convince it . 
The prioress , who was usually subjected to the barrier of silence , and whose reservoir was overfull , rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away : -- `` I have on my right Benoit and on my left Bernard . 
Who was Bernard ? 
The first abbot of Clairvaux . 
Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that is blest because it gave him birth . 
His father was named Tecelin , and his mother Alethe . 
He began at Citeaux , to end in Clairvaux ; he was ordained abbot by the bishop of Chalon-sur-Saone , Guillaume de Champeaux ; he had seven hundred novices , and founded a hundred and sixty monasteries ; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of Sens in 1140 , and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple , and another sort of erring spirits who were called the Apostolics ; he confounded Arnauld de Brescia , darted lightning at the monk Raoul , the murderer of the Jews , dominated the council of Reims in 1148 , caused the condemnation of Gilbert de Porea , Bishop of Poitiers , caused the condemnation of Eon de l'Etoile , arranged the disputes of princes , enlightened King Louis the Young , advised Pope Eugene III. , regulated the Temple , preached the crusade , performed two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime , and as many as thirty-nine in one day . 
Who was Benoit ? 
He was the patriarch of Mont-Cassin ; he was the second founder of the Saintete Claustrale , he was the Basil of the West . 
His order has produced forty popes , two hundred cardinals , fifty patriarchs , sixteen hundred archbishops , four thousand six hundred bishops , four emperors , twelve empresses , forty-six kings , forty-one queens , three thousand six hundred canonized saints , and has been in existence for fourteen hundred years . 
On one side Saint Bernard , on the other the agent of the sanitary department ! 
On one side Saint Benoit , on the other the inspector of public ways ! 
The state , the road commissioners , the public undertaker , regulations , the administration , what do we know of all that ? 
There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see how we are treated . 
We have not even the right to give our dust to Jesus Christ ! 
Your sanitary department is a revolutionary invention . 
God subordinated to the commissary of police ; such is the age . 
Silence , Fauvent ! '' 
Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath . 
The prioress continued : -- `` No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture . 
Only fanatics and those in error deny it . 
We live in times of terrible confusion . 
We do not know that which it is necessary to know , and we know that which we should ignore . 
We are ignorant and impious . 
In this age there exist people who do not distinguish between the very great Saint Bernard and the Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics , a certain good ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century . 
Others are so blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI . 
to the cross of Jesus Christ . 
Louis XVI . 
was merely a king . 
Let us beware of God ! 
There is no longer just nor unjust . 
