They were talking as they ran . 
The taller said in a very low voice : -- `` The bobbies have come . 
They came near nabbing me at the half-circle . '' 
The other answered : `` I saw them . 
I bolted , bolted , bolted ! '' 
Through this repulsive slang , Marius understood that gendarmes or the police had come near apprehending these two children , and that the latter had escaped . 
They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him , and there created , for a few minutes , in the gloom , a sort of vague white spot , then disappeared . 
Marius had halted for a moment . 
He was about to pursue his way , when his eye lighted on a little grayish package lying on the ground at his feet . 
He stooped and picked it up . 
It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers . 
`` Good , '' he said to himself , `` those unhappy girls dropped it . '' 
He retraced his steps , he called , he did not find them ; he reflected that they must already be far away , put the package in his pocket , and went off to dine . 
On the way , he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard , a child 's coffin , covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs , and illuminated by a candle . 
The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind . 
`` Poor mothers ! '' 
he thought . 
`` There is one thing sadder than to see one 's children die ; it is to see them leading an evil life . '' 
Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from his thoughts , and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations . 
He fell to thinking once more of his six months of love and happiness in the open air and the broad daylight , beneath the beautiful trees of Luxembourg . 
`` How gloomy my life has become ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Young girls are always appearing to me , only formerly they were angels and now they are ghouls . '' 
QUADRIFRONS That evening , as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed , his hand came in contact , in the pocket of his coat , with the packet which he had picked up on the boulevard . 
He had forgotten it . 
He thought that it would be well to open it , and that this package might possibly contain the address of the young girls , if it really belonged to them , and , in any case , the information necessary to a restitution to the person who had lost it . 
He opened the envelope . 
It was not sealed and contained four letters , also unsealed . 
They bore addresses . 
All four exhaled a horrible odor of tobacco . 
The first was addressed : `` To Madame , Madame la Marquise de Grucheray , the place opposite the Chamber of Deputies , No . 
-- '' Marius said to himself , that he should probably find in it the information which he sought , and that , moreover , the letter being open , it was probable that it could be read without impropriety . 
It was conceived as follows : -- Madame la Marquise : The virtue of clemency and piety is that which most closely unites sosiety . 
Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look of compassion on this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachment to the sacred cause of legitimacy , who has given with his blood , consecrated his fortune , evverything , to defend that cause , and to-day finds himself in the greatest missery . 
He doubts not that your honorable person will grant succor to preserve an existence exteremely painful for a military man of education and honor full of wounds , counts in advance on the humanity which animates you and on the interest which Madame la Marquise bears to a nation so unfortunate . 
Their prayer will not be in vain , and their gratitude will preserve theirs charming souvenir . 
My respectful sentiments , with which I have the honor to be Madame , Don Alvares , Spanish Captain of Cavalry , a royalist who has take refuge in France , who finds himself on travells for his country , and the resources are lacking him to continue his travells . 
No address was joined to the signature . 
Marius hoped to find the address in the second letter , whose superscription read : A Madame , Madame la Comtesse de Montvernet , Rue Cassette , No. 9 . 
This is what Marius read in it : -- Madame la Comtesse : It is an unhappy mother of a family of six children the last of which is only eight months old . 
I sick since my last confinement , abandoned by my husband five months ago , haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance . 
In the hope of Madame la Comtesse , she has the honor to be , Madame , with profound respect , Mistress Balizard . 
Marius turned to the third letter , which was a petition like the preceding ; he read : -- Monsieur Pabourgeot , Elector , wholesale stocking merchant , Rue Saint-Denis on the corner of the Rue aux Fers . 
I permit myself to address you this letter to beg you to grant me the pretious favor of your simpaties and to interest yourself in a man of letters who has just sent a drama to the Theatre-Francais . 
The subject is historical , and the action takes place in Auvergne in the time of the Empire ; the style , I think , is natural , laconic , and may have some merit . 
There are couplets to be sung in four places . 
The comic , the serious , the unexpected , are mingled in a variety of characters , and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the intrigue which proceeds misteriously , and ends , after striking altarations , in the midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes . 
My principal object is to satisfi the desire which progressively animates the man of our century , that is to say , the fashion , that capritious and bizarre weathervane which changes at almost every new wind . 
In spite of these qualities I have reason to fear that jealousy , the egotism of priviliged authors , may obtaine my exclusion from the theatre , for I am not ignorant of the mortifications with which new-comers are treated . 
Monsiuer Pabourgeot , your just reputation as an enlightened protector of men of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter who will explain our indigant situation to you , lacking bread and fire in this wynter season . 
