growled Thenardier , pocketing the five hundred francs along with the thousand . 
`` Yes , assassin ! 
You there saved the life of a Colonel ... '' `` Of a General , '' said Thenardier , elevating his head . 
`` Of a Colonel ! '' 
repeated Marius in a rage . 
`` I would n't give a ha ` penny for a general . 
And you come here to commit infamies ! 
I tell you that you have committed all crimes . 
Go ! 
disappear ! 
Only be happy , that is all that I desire . 
Ah ! 
monster ! 
here are three thousand francs more . 
Take them . 
You will depart to-morrow , for America , with your daughter ; for your wife is dead , you abominable liar . 
I shall watch over your departure , you ruffian , and at that moment I will count out to you twenty thousand francs . 
Go get yourself hung elsewhere ! '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron ! '' 
replied Thenardier , bowing to the very earth , `` eternal gratitude . '' 
And Thenardier left the room , understanding nothing , stupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacks of gold , and with that thunder which had burst forth over his head in bank-bills . 
Struck by lightning he was , but he was also content ; and he would have been greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off such lightning as that . 
Let us finish with this man at once . 
Two days after the events which we are at this moment narrating , he set out , thanks to Marius ' care , for America under a false name , with his daughter Azelma , furnished with a draft on New York for twenty thousand francs . 
The moral wretchedness of Thenardier , the bourgeois who had missed his vocation , was irremediable . 
He was in America what he had been in Europe . 
Contact with an evil man sometimes suffices to corrupt a good action and to cause evil things to spring from it . 
With Marius ' money , Thenardier set up as a slave-dealer . 
As soon as Thenardier had left the house , Marius rushed to the garden , where Cosette was still walking . 
`` Cosette ! 
Cosette ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Come ! 
come quick ! 
Let us go . 
Basque , a carriage ! 
Cosette , come . 
Ah ! 
My God ! 
It was he who saved my life ! 
Let us not lose a minute ! 
Put on your shawl . '' 
Cosette thought him mad and obeyed . 
He could not breathe , he laid his hand on his heart to restrain its throbbing . 
He paced back and forth with huge strides , he embraced Cosette : `` Ah ! 
Cosette ! 
I am an unhappy wretch ! '' 
said he . 
Marius was bewildered . 
He began to catch a glimpse in Jean Valjean of some indescribably lofty and melancholy figure . 
