The tavern-keeper went to him . 
They exchanged a few words in a low tone . 
The man had again become absorbed in his reflections . 
The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace , laid his hand abruptly on the shoulder of the man , and said to him : -- `` You are going to get out of here . '' 
The stranger turned round and replied gently , `` Ah ! 
You know ? 
-- '' `` Yes . '' 
`` I was sent away from the other inn . '' 
`` And you are to be turned out of this one . '' 
`` Where would you have me go ? '' 
`` Elsewhere . '' 
The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed . 
As he went out , some children who had followed him from the Cross of Colbas , and who seemed to be lying in wait for him , threw stones at him . 
He retraced his steps in anger , and threatened them with his stick : the children dispersed like a flock of birds . 
He passed before the prison . 
At the door hung an iron chain attached to a bell . 
He rang . 
The wicket opened . 
`` Turnkey , '' said he , removing his cap politely , `` will you have the kindness to admit me , and give me a lodging for the night ? '' 
A voice replied : -- `` The prison is not an inn . 
Get yourself arrested , and you will be admitted . '' 
The wicket closed again . 
He entered a little street in which there were many gardens . 
Some of them are enclosed only by hedges , which lends a cheerful aspect to the street . 
In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a small house of a single story , the window of which was lighted up . 
He peered through the pane as he had done at the public house . 
Within was a large whitewashed room , with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff , and a cradle in one corner , a few wooden chairs , and a double-barrelled gun hanging on the wall . 
A table was spread in the centre of the room . 
A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen , the pewter jug shining like silver , and filled with wine , and the brown , smoking soup-tureen . 
At this table sat a man of about forty , with a merry and open countenance , who was dandling a little child on his knees . 
Close by a very young woman was nursing another child . 
The father was laughing , the child was laughing , the mother was smiling . 
The stranger paused a moment in revery before this tender and calming spectacle . 
What was taking place within him ? 
He alone could have told . 
It is probable that he thought that this joyous house would be hospitable , and that , in a place where he beheld so much happiness , he would find perhaps a little pity . 
He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock . 
They did not hear him . 
He tapped again . 
He heard the woman say , `` It seems to me , husband , that some one is knocking . '' 
`` No , '' replied the husband . 
He tapped a third time . 
The husband rose , took the lamp , and went to the door , which he opened . 
He was a man of lofty stature , half peasant , half artisan . 
He wore a huge leather apron , which reached to his left shoulder , and which a hammer , a red handkerchief , a powder-horn , and all sorts of objects which were upheld by the girdle , as in a pocket , caused to bulge out . 
He carried his head thrown backwards ; his shirt , widely opened and turned back , displayed his bull neck , white and bare . 
He had thick eyelashes , enormous black whiskers , prominent eyes , the lower part of his face like a snout ; and besides all this , that air of being on his own ground , which is indescribable . 
`` Pardon me , sir , '' said the wayfarer , `` Could you , in consideration of payment , give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder in the garden , in which to sleep ? 
Tell me ; can you ? 
For money ? '' 
