said Le Cabuc , dropping the butt end of his gun to the pavement . 
He had hardly uttered this word , when he felt a hand laid on his shoulder with the weight of an eagle 's talon , and he heard a voice saying to him : -- `` On your knees . '' 
The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras ' cold , white face . 
Enjolras held a pistol in his hand . 
He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge . 
He had seized Cabuc 's collar , blouse , shirt , and suspender with his left hand . 
`` On your knees ! '' 
he repeated . 
And , with an imperious motion , the frail young man of twenty years bent the thickset and sturdy porter like a reed , and brought him to his knees in the mire . 
Le Cabuc attempted to resist , but he seemed to have been seized by a superhuman hand . 
Enjolras , pale , with bare neck and dishevelled hair , and his woman 's face , had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis . 
His dilated nostrils , his downcast eyes , gave to his implacable Greek profile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which , as the ancient world viewed the matter , befit Justice . 
The whole barricade hastened up , then all ranged themselves in a circle at a distance , feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the presence of the thing which they were about to behold . 
Le Cabuc , vanquished , no longer tried to struggle , and trembled in every limb . 
Enjolras released him and drew out his watch . 
`` Collect yourself , '' said he . 
`` Think or pray . 
You have one minute . '' 
`` Mercy ! '' 
murmured the murderer ; then he dropped his head and stammered a few inarticulate oaths . 
Enjolras never took his eyes off of him : he allowed a minute to pass , then he replaced his watch in his fob . 
That done , he grasped Le Cabuc by the hair , as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and shrieked , and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear . 
Many of those intrepid men , who had so tranquilly entered upon the most terrible of adventures , turned aside their heads . 
An explosion was heard , the assassin fell to the pavement face downwards . 
Enjolras straightened himself up , and cast a convinced and severe glance around him . 
Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said : -- `` Throw that outside . '' 
Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch , which was still agitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled , and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondetour . 
Enjolras was thoughtful . 
It is impossible to say what grandiose shadows slowly spread over his redoubtable serenity . 
All at once he raised his voice . 
A silence fell upon them . 
`` Citizens , '' said Enjolras , `` what that man did is frightful , what I have done is horrible . 
He killed , therefore I killed him . 
I had to do it , because insurrection must have its discipline . 
Assassination is even more of a crime here than elsewhere ; we are under the eyes of the Revolution , we are the priests of the Republic , we are the victims of duty , and must not be possible to slander our combat . 
I have , therefore , tried that man , and condemned him to death . 
As for myself , constrained as I am to do what I have done , and yet abhorring it , I have judged myself also , and you shall soon see to what I have condemned myself . '' 
Those who listened to him shuddered . 
`` We will share thy fate , '' cried Combeferre . 
`` So be it , '' replied Enjolras . 
`` One word more . 
In executing this man , I have obeyed necessity ; but necessity is a monster of the old world , necessity 's name is Fatality . 
Now , the law of progress is , that monsters shall disappear before the angels , and that Fatality shall vanish before Fraternity . 
It is a bad moment to pronounce the word love . 
No matter , I do pronounce it . 
And I glorify it . 
Love , the future is thine . 
Death , I make use of thee , but I hate thee . 
Citizens , in the future there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts ; neither ferocious ignorance , nor bloody retaliation . 
As there will be no more Satan , there will be no more Michael . 
