There exist there immense numbers of unknown beings , among whom swarm types of the strangest , from the porter of la Rapee to the knacker of Montfaucon . 
Fex urbis , exclaims Cicero ; mob , adds Burke , indignantly ; rabble , multitude , populace . 
These are words and quickly uttered . 
But so be it . 
What does it matter ? 
What is it to me if they do go barefoot ! 
They do not know how to read ; so much the worse . 
Would you abandon them for that ? 
Would you turn their distress into a malediction ? 
Can not the light penetrate these masses ? 
Let us return to that cry : Light ! 
and let us obstinately persist therein ! 
Light ! 
Light ! 
Who knows whether these opacities will not become transparent ? 
Are not revolutions transfigurations ? 
Come , philosophers , teach , enlighten , light up , think aloud , speak aloud , hasten joyously to the great sun , fraternize with the public place , announce the good news , spend your alphabets lavishly , proclaim rights , sing the Marseillaises , sow enthusiasms , tear green boughs from the oaks . 
Make a whirlwind of the idea . 
This crowd may be rendered sublime . 
Let us learn how to make use of that vast conflagration of principles and virtues , which sparkles , bursts forth and quivers at certain hours . 
These bare feet , these bare arms , these rags , these ignorances , these abjectnesses , these darknesses , may be employed in the conquest of the ideal . 
Gaze past the people , and you will perceive truth . 
Let that vile sand which you trample under foot be cast into the furnace , let it melt and seethe there , it will become a splendid crystal , and it is thanks to it that Galileo and Newton will discover stars . 
LITTLE GAVROCHE Eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part of this story , people noticed on the Boulevard du Temple , and in the regions of the Chateau-d'Eau , a little boy eleven or twelve years of age , who would have realized with tolerable accuracy that ideal of the gamin sketched out above , if , with the laugh of his age on his lips , he had not had a heart absolutely sombre and empty . 
This child was well muffled up in a pair of man 's trousers , but he did not get them from his father , and a woman 's chemise , but he did not get it from his mother . 
Some people or other had clothed him in rags out of charity . 
Still , he had a father and a mother . 
But his father did not think of him , and his mother did not love him . 
He was one of those children most deserving of pity , among all , one of those who have father and mother , and who are orphans nevertheless . 
This child never felt so well as when he was in the street . 
The pavements were less hard to him than his mother 's heart . 
His parents had despatched him into life with a kick . 
He simply took flight . 
He was a boisterous , pallid , nimble , wide-awake , jeering , lad , with a vivacious but sickly air . 
He went and came , sang , played at hopscotch , scraped the gutters , stole a little , but , like cats and sparrows , gayly laughed when he was called a rogue , and got angry when called a thief . 
He had no shelter , no bread , no fire , no love ; but he was merry because he was free . 
When these poor creatures grow to be men , the millstones of the social order meet them and crush them , but so long as they are children , they escape because of their smallness . 
The tiniest hole saves them . 
Nevertheless , abandoned as this child was , it sometimes happened , every two or three months , that he said , `` Come , I 'll go and see mamma ! '' 
Then he quitted the boulevard , the Cirque , the Porte Saint-Martin , descended to the quays , crossed the bridges , reached the suburbs , arrived at the Salpetriere , and came to a halt , where ? 
Precisely at that double number 50-52 with which the reader is acquainted -- at the Gorbeau hovel . 
At that epoch , the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternally decorated with the placard : `` Chambers to let , '' chanced to be , a rare thing , inhabited by numerous individuals who , however , as is always the case in Paris , had no connection with each other . 
All belonged to that indigent class which begins to separate from the lowest of petty bourgeoisie in straitened circumstances , and which extends from misery to misery into the lowest depths of society down to those two beings in whom all the material things of civilization end , the sewer-man who sweeps up the mud , and the ragpicker who collects scraps . 
The `` principal lodger '' of Jean Valjean 's day was dead and had been replaced by another exactly like her . 
I know not what philosopher has said : `` Old women are never lacking . '' 
This new old woman was named Madame Bourgon , and had nothing remarkable about her life except a dynasty of three paroquets , who had reigned in succession over her soul . 
The most miserable of those who inhabited the hovel were a family of four persons , consisting of father , mother , and two daughters , already well grown , all four of whom were lodged in the same attic , one of the cells which we have already mentioned . 
At first sight , this family presented no very special feature except its extreme destitution ; the father , when he hired the chamber , had stated that his name was Jondrette . 
Some time after his moving in , which had borne a singular resemblance to the entrance of nothing at all , to borrow the memorable expression of the principal tenant , this Jondrette had said to the woman , who , like her predecessor , was at the same time portress and stair-sweeper : `` Mother So-and-So , if any one should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian , or even a Spaniard , perchance , it is I. '' This family was that of the merry barefoot boy . 
He arrived there and found distress , and , what is still sadder , no smile ; a cold hearth and cold hearts . 
