The writing had been printed off on the blotter . 
The mirror reflected the writing . 
The result was , what is called in geometry , the symmetrical image ; so that the writing , reversed on the blotter , was righted in the mirror and presented its natural appearance ; and Jean Valjean had beneath his eyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening . 
It was simple and withering . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror . 
He read the four lines again , but he did not believe them . 
They produced on him the effect of appearing in a flash of lightning . 
It was a hallucination , it was impossible . 
It was not so . 
Little by little , his perceptions became more precise ; he looked at Cosette 's blotting-book , and the consciousness of the reality returned to him . 
He caught up the blotter and said : `` It comes from there . '' 
He feverishly examined the four lines imprinted on the blotter , the reversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl , and he saw no sense in it . 
Then he said to himself : `` But this signifies nothing ; there is nothing written here . '' 
And he drew a long breath with inexpressible relief . 
Who has not experienced those foolish joys in horrible instants ? 
The soul does not surrender to despair until it has exhausted all illusions . 
He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight , almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the dupe . 
All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again , and again he beheld the vision . 
There were the four lines outlined with inexorable clearness . 
This time it was no mirage . 
The recurrence of a vision is a reality ; it was palpable , it was the writing restored in the mirror . 
He understood . 
Jean Valjean tottered , dropped the blotter , and fell into the old arm-chair beside the buffet , with drooping head , and glassy eyes , in utter bewilderment . 
He told himself that it was plain , that the light of the world had been eclipsed forever , and that Cosette had written that to some one . 
Then he heard his soul , which had become terrible once more , give vent to a dull roar in the gloom . 
Try then the effect of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage ! 
Strange and sad to say , at that very moment , Marius had not yet received Cosette 's letter ; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean Valjean before delivering it to Marius . 
Up to that day , Jean Valjean had not been vanquished by trial . 
He had been subjected to fearful proofs ; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him ; the ferocity of fate , armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn , had taken him for her prey and had raged against him . 
He had accepted every extremity when it had been necessary ; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a reformed man , had yielded up his liberty , risked his head , lost everything , suffered everything , and he had remained disinterested and stoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent from himself like a martyr . 
His conscience inured to every assault of destiny , might have appeared to be forever impregnable . 
Well , any one who had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concede that it weakened at that moment . 
It was because , of all the tortures which he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to which destiny had doomed him , this was the most terrible . 
Never had such pincers seized him hitherto . 
He felt the mysterious stirring of all his latent sensibilities . 
He felt the plucking at the strange chord . 
Alas ! 
the supreme trial , let us say rather , the only trial , is the loss of the beloved being . 
Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as a father ; but we have already remarked , above , that into this paternity the widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love ; he loved Cosette as his daughter , and he loved her as his mother , and he loved her as his sister ; and , as he had never had either a woman to love or a wife , as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest , that sentiment also , the most impossible to lose , was mingled with the rest , vague , ignorant , pure with the purity of blindness , unconscious , celestial , angelic , divine ; less like a sentiment than like an instinct , less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible but real attraction ; and love , properly speaking , was , in his immense tenderness for Cosette , like the thread of gold in the mountain , concealed and virgin . 
Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already indicated . 
No marriage was possible between them ; not even that of souls ; and yet , it is certain that their destinies were wedded . 
With the exception of Cosette , that is to say , with the exception of a childhood , Jean Valjean had never , in the whole of his long life , known anything of that which may be loved . 
The passions and loves which succeed each other had not produced in him those successive green growths , tender green or dark green , which can be seen in foliage which passes through the winter and in men who pass fifty . 
In short , and we have insisted on it more than once , all this interior fusion , all this whole , of which the sum total was a lofty virtue , ended in rendering Jean Valjean a father to Cosette . 
A strange father , forged from the grandfather , the son , the brother , and the husband , that existed in Jean Valjean ; a father in whom there was included even a mother ; a father who loved Cosette and adored her , and who held that child as his light , his home , his family , his country , his paradise . 
Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come , that she was escaping from him , that she was slipping from his hands , that she was gliding from him , like a cloud , like water , when he had before his eyes this crushing proof : `` another is the goal of her heart , another is the wish of her life ; there is a dearest one , I am no longer anything but her father , I no longer exist '' ; when he could no longer doubt , when he said to himself : `` She is going away from me ! '' 
the grief which he felt surpassed the bounds of possibility . 
To have done all that he had done for the purpose of ending like this ! 
And the very idea of being nothing ! 
Then , as we have just said , a quiver of revolt ran through him from head to foot . 
