to summon the gendarmes and say to them : `` This man is yours ! '' 
then to go off , leaving that condemned man there , to ignore the rest and not to meddle further in the matter . 
This man is forever a prisoner of the law ; the law may do with him what it will . 
What could be more just ? 
Javert had said all this to himself ; he had wished to pass beyond , to act , to apprehend the man , and then , as at present , he had not been able to do it ; and every time that his arm had been raised convulsively towards Jean Valjean 's collar , his hand had fallen back again , as beneath an enormous weight , and in the depths of his thought he had heard a voice , a strange voice crying to him : -- `` It is well . 
Deliver up your savior . 
Then have the basin of Pontius Pilate brought and wash your claws . '' 
Then his reflections reverted to himself and beside Jean Valjean glorified he beheld himself , Javert , degraded . 
A convict was his benefactor ! 
But then , why had he permitted that man to leave him alive ? 
He had the right to be killed in that barricade . 
He should have asserted that right . 
It would have been better to summon the other insurgents to his succor against Jean Valjean , to get himself shot by force . 
His supreme anguish was the loss of certainty . 
He felt that he had been uprooted . 
The code was no longer anything more than a stump in his hand . 
He had to deal with scruples of an unknown species . 
There had taken place within him a sentimental revelation entirely distinct from legal affirmation , his only standard of measurement hitherto . 
To remain in his former uprightness did not suffice . 
A whole order of unexpected facts had cropped up and subjugated him . 
A whole new world was dawning on his soul : kindness accepted and repaid , devotion , mercy , indulgence , violences committed by pity on austerity , respect for persons , no more definitive condemnation , no more conviction , the possibility of a tear in the eye of the law , no one knows what justice according to God , running in inverse sense to justice according to men . 
He perceived amid the shadows the terrible rising of an unknown moral sun ; it horrified and dazzled him . 
An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle . 
He said to himself that it was true that there were exceptional cases , that authority might be put out of countenance , that the rule might be inadequate in the presence of a fact , that everything could not be framed within the text of the code , that the unforeseen compelled obedience , that the virtue of a convict might set a snare for the virtue of the functionary , that destiny did indulge in such ambushes , and he reflected with despair that he himself had not even been fortified against a surprise . 
He was forced to acknowledge that goodness did exist . 
This convict had been good . 
And he himself , unprecedented circumstance , had just been good also . 
So he was becoming depraved . 
He found that he was a coward . 
He conceived a horror of himself . 
Javert 's ideal , was not to be human , to be grand , to be sublime ; it was to be irreproachable . 
Now , he had just failed in this . 
How had he come to such a pass ? 
How had all this happened ? 
He could not have told himself . 
He clasped his head in both hands , but in spite of all that he could do , he could not contrive to explain it to himself . 
He had certainly always entertained the intention of restoring Jean Valjean to the law of which Jean Valjean was the captive , and of which he , Javert , was the slave . 
Not for a single instant while he held him in his grasp had he confessed to himself that he entertained the idea of releasing him . 
It was , in some sort , without his consciousness , that his hand had relaxed and had let him go free . 
All sorts of interrogation points flashed before his eyes . 
He put questions to himself , and made replies to himself , and his replies frightened him . 
He asked himself : `` What has that convict done , that desperate fellow , whom I have pursued even to persecution , and who has had me under his foot , and who could have avenged himself , and who owed it both to his rancor and to his safety , in leaving me my life , in showing mercy upon me ? 
His duty ? 
No . 
Something more . 
And I in showing mercy upon him in my turn -- what have I done ? 
My duty ? 
No . 
Something more . 
So there is something beyond duty ? '' 
