It is less disagreeable to be an honest man . 
Now go , and ponder on what I have said to you . 
By the way , what did you want of me ? 
My purse ? 
Here it is . '' 
And the old man , releasing Montparnasse , put his purse in the latter 's hand ; Montparnasse weighed it for a moment , after which he allowed it to slide gently into the back pocket of his coat , with the same mechanical precaution as though he had stolen it . 
All this having been said and done , the goodman turned his back and tranquilly resumed his stroll . 
`` The blockhead ! '' 
muttered Montparnasse . 
Who was this goodman ? 
The reader has , no doubt , already divined . 
Montparnasse watched him with amazement , as he disappeared in the dusk . 
This contemplation was fatal to him . 
While the old man was walking away , Gavroche drew near . 
Gavroche had assured himself , with a sidelong glance , that Father Mabeuf was still sitting on his bench , probably sound asleep . 
Then the gamin emerged from his thicket , and began to crawl after Montparnasse in the dark , as the latter stood there motionless . 
In this manner he came up to Montparnasse without being seen or heard , gently insinuated his hand into the back pocket of that frock-coat of fine black cloth , seized the purse , withdrew his hand , and having recourse once more to his crawling , he slipped away like an adder through the shadows . 
Montparnasse , who had no reason to be on his guard , and who was engaged in thought for the first time in his life , perceived nothing . 
When Gavroche had once more attained the point where Father Mabeuf was , he flung the purse over the hedge , and fled as fast as his legs would carry him . 
The purse fell on Father Mabeuf 's foot . 
This commotion roused him . 
He bent over and picked up the purse . 
He did not understand in the least , and opened it . 
The purse had two compartments ; in one of them there was some small change ; in the other lay six napoleons . 
M. Mabeuf , in great alarm , referred the matter to his housekeeper . 
`` That has fallen from heaven , '' said Mother Plutarque . 
SOLITUDE AND THE BARRACKS COMBINED Cosette 's grief , which had been so poignant and lively four or five months previously , had , without her being conscious of the fact , entered upon its convalescence . 
Nature , spring , youth , love for her father , the gayety of the birds and flowers , caused something almost resembling forgetfulness to filter gradually , drop by drop , into that soul , which was so virgin and so young . 
Was the fire wholly extinct there ? 
Or was it merely that layers of ashes had formed ? 
The truth is , that she hardly felt the painful and burning spot any longer . 
One day she suddenly thought of Marius : `` Why ! '' 
said she , `` I no longer think of him . '' 
That same week , she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers , with a wasp-like waist , a delicious uniform , the cheeks of a young girl , a sword under his arm , waxed mustaches , and a glazed schapka , passing the gate . 
Moreover , he had light hair , prominent blue eyes , a round face , was vain , insolent and good-looking ; quite the reverse of Marius . 
He had a cigar in his mouth . 
Cosette thought that this officer doubtless belonged to the regiment in barracks in the Rue de Babylone . 
On the following day , she saw him pass again . 
She took note of the hour . 
From that time forth , was it chance ? 
she saw him pass nearly every day . 
The officer 's comrades perceived that there was , in that `` badly kept '' garden , behind that malicious rococo fence , a very pretty creature , who was almost always there when the handsome lieutenant , -- who is not unknown to the reader , and whose name was Theodule Gillenormand , -- passed by . 
`` See here ! '' 
they said to him , `` there 's a little creature there who is making eyes at you , look . '' 
`` Have I the time , '' replied the lancer , `` to look at all the girls who look at me ? '' 
This was at the precise moment when Marius was descending heavily towards agony , and was saying : `` If I could but see her before I die ! '' 
-- Had his wish been realized , had he beheld Cosette at that moment gazing at the lancer , he would not have been able to utter a word , and he would have expired with grief . 
Whose fault was it ? 
No one 's . 
Marius possessed one of those temperaments which bury themselves in sorrow and there abide ; Cosette was one of those persons who plunge into sorrow and emerge from it again . 
