He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old building ; he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de Pontoise . 
He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin . 
Advice is certainly useful ; it is a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogs who deserve confidence ; but the hunter can not be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict . 
Javert , by taking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail , alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart , and so made him run . 
Above all , he was wrong in that after he had picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz , he played that formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a thread . 
He thought himself stronger than he was , and believed that he could play at the game of the mouse and the lion . 
At the same time , he reckoned himself as too weak , when he judged it necessary to obtain reinforcement . 
Fatal precaution , waste of precious time ! 
Javert committed all these blunders , and none the less was one of the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed . 
He was , in the full force of the term , what is called in venery a knowing dog . 
But what is there that is perfect ? 
Great strategists have their eclipses . 
The greatest follies are often composed , like the largest ropes , of a multitude of strands . 
Take the cable thread by thread , take all the petty determining motives separately , and you can break them one after the other , and you say , `` That is all there is of it ! '' 
Braid them , twist them together ; the result is enormous : it is Attila hesitating between Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west ; it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua ; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube . 
However that may be , even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean had escaped him , Javert did not lose his head . 
Sure that the convict who had broken his ban could not be far off , he established sentinels , he organized traps and ambuscades , and beat the quarter all that night . 
The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut . 
A precious sign which , however , led him astray , since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land . 
Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction . 
The fact is , that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot , he would probably have done so and have been lost . 
Javert explored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a needle . 
At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook , and returned to the Prefecture of Police , as much ashamed as a police spy who had been captured by a robber might have been . 
NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS Nothing , half a century ago , more resembled every other carriage gate than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus . 
This entrance , which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion , permitted a view of two things , neither of which have anything very funereal about them , -- a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines , and the face of a lounging porter . 
Above the wall , at the bottom of the court , tall trees were visible . 
When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard , when a glass of wine cheered up the porter , it was difficult to pass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling impression of it . 
Nevertheless , it was a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse . 
The threshold smiled ; the house prayed and wept . 
If one succeeded in passing the porter , which was not easy , -- which was even nearly impossible for every one , for there was an open sesame ! 
which it was necessary to know , -- if , the porter once passed , one entered a little vestibule on the right , on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it at a time , if one did not allow one 's self to be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow , with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase , if one ventured to ascend it , one crossed a first landing , then a second , and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable persistency . 
Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows . 
The corridor took a turn and became dark . 
If one doubled this cape , one arrived a few paces further on , in front of a door which was all the more mysterious because it was not fastened . 
If one opened it , one found one 's self in a little chamber about six feet square , tiled , well-scrubbed , clean , cold , and hung with nankin paper with green flowers , at fifteen sous the roll . 
A white , dull light fell from a large window , with tiny panes , on the left , which usurped the whole width of the room . 
One gazed about , but saw no one ; one listened , one heard neither a footstep nor a human murmur . 
The walls were bare , the chamber was not furnished ; there was not even a chair . 
One looked again , and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular hole , about a foot square , with a grating of interlacing iron bars , black , knotted , solid , which formed squares -- I had almost said meshes -- of less than an inch and a half in diagonal length . 
The little green flowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars , without being startled or thrown into confusion by their funereal contact . 
Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole , this grating would have prevented it . 
It did not allow the passage of the body , but it did allow the passage of the eyes ; that is to say , of the mind . 
This seems to have occurred to them , for it had been re-enforced by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear , and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a strainer . 
At the bottom of this plate , an aperture had been pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box . 
A bit of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening . 
If the tape was pulled , a bell rang , and one heard a voice very near at hand , which made one start . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
the voice demanded . 
It was a woman 's voice , a gentle voice , so gentle that it was mournful . 
