Often when we think we are knotting one thread , we are tying quite another . 
APPARITION TO FATHER MABEUF Marius no longer went to see any one , but he sometimes encountered Father Mabeuf by chance . 
While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be called the cellar stairs , and which lead to places without light , where the happy can be heard walking overhead , M. Mabeuf was descending on his side . 
The Flora of Cauteretz no longer sold at all . 
The experiments on indigo had not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz , which had a bad exposure . 
M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a few plants which love shade and dampness . 
Nevertheless , he did not become discouraged . 
He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes , with a good exposure , to make his trials with indigo `` at his own expense . '' 
For this purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the Flora . 
He had reduced his breakfast to two eggs , and he left one of these for his old servant , to whom he had paid no wages for the last fifteen months . 
And often his breakfast was his only meal . 
He no longer smiled with his infantile smile , he had grown morose and no longer received visitors . 
Marius did well not to dream of going thither . 
Sometimes , at the hour when M. Mabeuf was on his way to the Jardin des Plantes , the old man and the young man passed each other on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
They did not speak , and only exchanged a melancholy sign of the head . 
A heart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when misery looses bonds ! 
Two men who have been friends become two chance passers-by . 
Royal the bookseller was dead . 
M. Mabeuf no longer knew his books , his garden , or his indigo : these were the three forms which happiness , pleasure , and hope had assumed for him . 
This sufficed him for his living . 
He said to himself : `` When I shall have made my balls of blueing , I shall be rich , I will withdraw my copperplates from the pawn-shop , I will put my Flora in vogue again with trickery , plenty of money and advertisements in the newspapers and I will buy , I know well where , a copy of Pierre de Medine 's Art de Naviguer , with wood-cuts , edition of 1655 . '' 
In the meantime , he toiled all day over his plot of indigo , and at night he returned home to water his garden , and to read his books . 
At that epoch , M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years of age . 
One evening he had a singular apparition . 
He had returned home while it was still broad daylight . 
Mother Plutarque , whose health was declining , was ill and in bed . 
He had dined on a bone , on which a little meat lingered , and a bit of bread that he had found on the kitchen table , and had seated himself on an overturned stone post , which took the place of a bench in his garden . 
Near this bench there rose , after the fashion in orchard-gardens , a sort of large chest , of beams and planks , much dilapidated , a rabbit-hutch on the ground floor , a fruit-closet on the first . 
There was nothing in the hutch , but there were a few apples in the fruit-closet , -- the remains of the winter 's provision . 
M. Mabeuf had set himself to turning over and reading , with the aid of his glasses , two books of which he was passionately fond and in which , a serious thing at his age , he was interested . 
His natural timidity rendered him accessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certain degree . 
The first of these books was the famous treatise of President Delancre , De l'inconstance des Demons ; the other was a quarto by Mutor de la Rubaudiere , Sur les Diables de Vauvert et les Gobelins de la Bievre . 
This last-mentioned old volume interested him all the more , because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by goblins in former times . 
The twilight had begun to whiten what was on high and to blacken all below . 
As he read , over the top of the book which he held in his hand , Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants , and among others a magnificent rhododendron which was one of his consolations ; four days of heat , wind , and sun without a drop of rain , had passed ; the stalks were bending , the buds drooping , the leaves falling ; all this needed water , the rhododendron was particularly sad . 
Father Mabeuf was one of those persons for whom plants have souls . 
The old man had toiled all day over his indigo plot , he was worn out with fatigue , but he rose , laid his books on the bench , and walked , all bent over and with tottering footsteps , to the well , but when he had grasped the chain , he could not even draw it sufficiently to unhook it . 
Then he turned round and cast a glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded with stars . 
The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of man beneath an indescribably mournful and eternal joy . 
The night promised to be as arid as the day had been . 
`` Stars everywhere ! '' 
thought the old man ; `` not the tiniest cloud ! 
Not a drop of water ! '' 
And his head , which had been upraised for a moment , fell back upon his breast . 
He raised it again , and once more looked at the sky , murmuring : -- `` A tear of dew ! 
A little pity ! '' 
He tried again to unhook the chain of the well , and could not . 
At that moment , he heard a voice saying : -- `` Father Mabeuf , would you like to have me water your garden for you ? '' 
At the same time , a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible in the hedge , and he beheld emerging from the shrubbery a sort of tall , slender girl , who drew herself up in front of him and stared boldly at him . 
She had less the air of a human being than of a form which had just blossomed forth from the twilight . 
