No . 
Do they love ? 
No . 
Do they live ? 
No . 
Their nerves have turned to bone ; their bones have turned to stone . 
Their veil is of woven night . 
Their breath under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration of death . 
The abbess , a spectre , sanctifies them and terrifies them . 
The immaculate one is there , and very fierce . 
Such are the ancient monasteries of Spain . 
Liars of terrible devotion , caverns of virgins , ferocious places . 
Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself . 
The Spanish convent was , above all others , the Catholic convent . 
There was a flavor of the Orient about it . 
The archbishop , the kislar-aga of heaven , locked up and kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved for God . 
The nun was the odalisque , the priest was the eunuch . 
The fervent were chosen in dreams and possessed Christ . 
At night , the beautiful , nude young man descended from the cross and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one . 
Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana , who had the crucified for her sultan , from all living distraction . 
A glance on the outer world was infidelity . 
The in pace replaced the leather sack . 
That which was cast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West . 
In both quarters , women wrung their hands ; the waves for the first , the grave for the last ; here the drowned , there the buried . 
Monstrous parallel . 
To-day the upholders of the past , unable to deny these things , have adopted the expedient of smiling at them . 
There has come into fashion a strange and easy manner of suppressing the revelations of history , of invalidating the commentaries of philosophy , of eliding all embarrassing facts and all gloomy questions . 
A matter for declamations , say the clever . 
Declamations , repeat the foolish . 
Jean-Jacques a declaimer ; Diderot a declaimer ; Voltaire on Calas , Labarre , and Sirven , declaimers . 
I know not who has recently discovered that Tacitus was a declaimer , that Nero was a victim , and that pity is decidedly due to `` that poor Holofernes . '' 
Facts , however , are awkward things to disconcert , and they are obstinate . 
The author of this book has seen , with his own eyes , eight leagues distant from Brussels , -- there are relics of the Middle Ages there which are attainable for everybody , -- at the Abbey of Villers , the hole of the oubliettes , in the middle of the field which was formerly the courtyard of the cloister , and on the banks of the Thil , four stone dungeons , half under ground , half under the water . 
They were in pace . 
Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door , a vault , and a grated opening which , on the outside , is two feet above the level of the river , and on the inside , six feet above the level of the ground . 
Four feet of river flow past along the outside wall . 
The ground is always soaked . 
The occupant of the in pace had this wet soil for his bed . 
In one of these dungeons , there is a fragment of an iron necklet riveted to the wall ; in another , there can be seen a square box made of four slabs of granite , too short for a person to lie down in , too low for him to stand upright in . 
A human being was put inside , with a coverlid of stone on top . 
This exists . 
It can be seen . 
It can be touched . 
These in pace , these dungeons , these iron hinges , these necklets , that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river 's current , that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb , with this difference , that the dead man here was a living being , that soil which is but mud , that vault hole , those oozing walls , -- what declaimers ! 
ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST Monasticism , such as it existed in Spain , and such as it still exists in Thibet , is a sort of phthisis for civilization . 
It stops life short . 
It simply depopulates . 
Claustration , castration . 
It has been the scourge of Europe . 
Add to this the violence so often done to the conscience , the forced vocations , feudalism bolstered up by the cloister , the right of the first-born pouring the excess of the family into monasticism , the ferocities of which we have just spoken , the in pace , the closed mouths , the walled-up brains , so many unfortunate minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows , the taking of the habit , the interment of living souls . 
