This latter can say , like Julia Alpinula : `` Hic jaceo . 
Vixi annos viginti et tres . '' 
It is in consequence of this decay that the convent gave up the education of girls . 
We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house without entering it , and without introducing the minds which accompany us , and which are listening to our tale , to the profit of some , perchance , of the melancholy history of Jean Valjean . 
We have penetrated into this community , full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day . 
It is the closed garden , hortus conclusus . 
We have spoken of this singular place in detail , but with respect , in so far , at least , as detail and respect are compatible . 
We do not understand all , but we insult nothing . 
We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre , who wound up by anointing the executioner , and from the sneer of Voltaire , who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross . 
An illogical act on Voltaire 's part , we may remark , by the way ; for Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas ; and even for those who deny superhuman incarnations , what does the crucifix represent ? 
The assassinated sage . 
In this nineteenth century , the religious idea is undergoing a crisis . 
People are unlearning certain things , and they do well , provided that , while unlearning them they learn this : There is no vacuum in the human heart . 
Certain demolitions take place , and it is well that they do , but on condition that they are followed by reconstructions . 
In the meantime , let us study things which are no more . 
It is necessary to know them , if only for the purpose of avoiding them . 
The counterfeits of the past assume false names , and gladly call themselves the future . 
This spectre , this past , is given to falsifying its own passport . 
Let us inform ourselves of the trap . 
Let us be on our guard . 
The past has a visage , superstition , and a mask , hypocrisy . 
Let us denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask . 
As for convents , they present a complex problem , -- a question of civilization , which condemns them ; a question of liberty , which protects them . 
THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA This book is a drama , whose leading personage is the Infinite . 
Man is the second . 
Such being the case , and a convent having happened to be on our road , it has been our duty to enter it . 
Why ? 
Because the convent , which is common to the Orient as well as to the Occident , to antiquity as well as to modern times , to paganism , to Buddhism , to Mahometanism , as well as to Christianity , is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite . 
This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain ideas ; nevertheless , while absolutely maintaining our reserves , our restrictions , and even our indignations , we must say that every time we encounter man in the Infinite , either well or ill understood , we feel ourselves overpowered with respect . 
There is , in the synagogue , in the mosque , in the pagoda , in the wigwam , a hideous side which we execrate , and a sublime side , which we adore . 
What a contemplation for the mind , and what endless food for thought , is the reverberation of God upon the human wall ! 
THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT From the point of view of history , of reason , and of truth , monasticism is condemned . 
Monasteries , when they abound in a nation , are clogs in its circulation , cumbrous establishments , centres of idleness where centres of labor should exist . 
Monastic communities are to the great social community what the mistletoe is to the oak , what the wart is to the human body . 
Their prosperity and their fatness mean the impoverishment of the country . 
The monastic regime , good at the beginning of civilization , useful in the reduction of the brutal by the spiritual , is bad when peoples have reached their manhood . 
Moreover , when it becomes relaxed , and when it enters into its period of disorder , it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity , because it still continues to set the example . 
Claustration has had its day . 
Cloisters , useful in the early education of modern civilization , have embarrassed its growth , and are injurious to its development . 
So far as institution and formation with relation to man are concerned , monasteries , which were good in the tenth century , questionable in the fifteenth , are detestable in the nineteenth . 
The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton two wonderful nations , Italy and Spain ; the one the light , the other the splendor of Europe for centuries ; and , at the present day , these two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce , thanks to the healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone . 
The convent -- the ancient female convent in particular , such as it still presents itself on the threshold of this century , in Italy , in Austria , in Spain -- is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages . 
The cloister , that cloister , is the point of intersection of horrors . 
The Catholic cloister , properly speaking , is wholly filled with the black radiance of death . 
The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all . 
There rise , in obscurity , beneath vaults filled with gloom , beneath domes vague with shadow , massive altars of Babel , as high as cathedrals ; there immense white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark ; there are extended , all nude on the ebony , great Christs of ivory ; more than bleeding , -- bloody ; hideous and magnificent , with their elbows displaying the bones , their knee-pans showing their integuments , their wounds showing their flesh , crowned with silver thorns , nailed with nails of gold , with blood drops of rubies on their brows , and diamond tears in their eyes . 
The diamonds and rubies seem wet , and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep , their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges , their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles , their knees excoriated with prayer ; women who think themselves wives , spectres who think themselves seraphim . 
Do these women think ? 
No . 
Have they any will ? 
