This is what it was , in fact . 
The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt , and had there rebounded from the wall ; and this terrible rebound had produced two dead and three wounded . 
If this were continued , the barricade was no longer tenable . 
The grape-shot made its way in . 
A murmur of consternation arose . 
`` Let us prevent the second discharge , '' said Enjolras . 
And , lowering his rifle , he took aim at the captain of the gun , who , at that moment , was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying and definitely fixing its pointing . 
The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery , very young , blond , with a very gentle face , and the intelligent air peculiar to that predestined and redoubtable weapon which , by dint of perfecting itself in horror , must end in killing war . 
Combeferre , who was standing beside Enjolras , scrutinized this young man . 
`` What a pity ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` What hideous things these butcheries are ! 
Come , when there are no more kings , there will be no more war . 
Enjolras , you are taking aim at that sergeant , you are not looking at him . 
Fancy , he is a charming young man ; he is intrepid ; it is evident that he is thoughtful ; those young artillery-men are very well educated ; he has a father , a mother , a family ; he is probably in love ; he is not more than five and twenty at the most ; he might be your brother . '' 
`` He is , '' said Enjolras . 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` he is mine too . 
Well , let us not kill him . '' 
`` Let me alone . 
It must be done . '' 
And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras ' marble cheek . 
At the same moment , he pressed the trigger of his rifle . 
The flame leaped forth . 
The artillery-man turned round twice , his arms extended in front of him , his head uplifted , as though for breath , then he fell with his side on the gun , and lay there motionless . 
They could see his back , from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood . 
The ball had traversed his breast from side to side . 
He was dead . 
He had to be carried away and replaced by another . 
Several minutes were thus gained , in fact . 
EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THAT INFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796 Opinions were exchanged in the barricade . 
The firing from the gun was about to begin again . 
Against that grape-shot , they could not hold out a quarter of an hour longer . 
It was absolutely necessary to deaden the blows . 
Enjolras issued this command : `` We must place a mattress there . '' 
`` We have none , '' said Combeferre , `` the wounded are lying on them . '' 
Jean Valjean , who was seated apart on a stone post , at the corner of the tavern , with his gun between his knees , had , up to that moment , taken no part in anything that was going on . 
He did not appear to hear the combatants saying around him : `` Here is a gun that is doing nothing . '' 
At the order issued by Enjolras , he rose . 
It will be remembered that , on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , an old woman , foreseeing the bullets , had placed her mattress in front of her window . 
This window , an attic window , was on the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade . 
The mattress , placed cross-wise , supported at the bottom on two poles for drying linen , was upheld at the top by two ropes , which , at that distance , looked like two threads , and which were attached to two nails planted in the window frames . 
These ropes were distinctly visible , like hairs , against the sky . 
`` Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Enjolras , who had just re-loaded his , handed it to him . 
Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired . 
One of the mattress ropes was cut . 
The mattress now hung by one thread only . 
Jean Valjean fired the second charge . 
The second rope lashed the panes of the attic window . 
