At this word `` villain , '' the female Thenardier sprang from the bed , Thenardier grasped his chair as though he were about to crush it in his hands . 
`` Do n't you stir ! '' 
he shouted to his wife ; and , turning to M. Leblanc : -- `` Villain ! 
Yes , I know that you call us that , you rich gentlemen ! 
Stop ! 
it 's true that I became bankrupt , that I am in hiding , that I have no bread , that I have not a single sou , that I am a villain ! 
It 's three days since I have had anything to eat , so I 'm a villain ! 
Ah ! 
you folks warm your feet , you have Sakoski boots , you have wadded great-coats , like archbishops , you lodge on the first floor in houses that have porters , you eat truffles , you eat asparagus at forty francs the bunch in the month of January , and green peas , you gorge yourselves , and when you want to know whether it is cold , you look in the papers to see what the engineer Chevalier 's thermometer says about it . 
We , it is we who are thermometers . 
We do n't need to go out and look on the quay at the corner of the Tour de l'Horologe , to find out the number of degrees of cold ; we feel our blood congealing in our veins , and the ice forming round our hearts , and we say : ` There is no God ! ' 
And you come to our caverns , yes our caverns , for the purpose of calling us villains ! 
But we 'll devour you ! 
But we 'll devour you , poor little things ! 
Just see here , Mister millionnaire : I have been a solid man , I have held a license , I have been an elector , I am a bourgeois , that I am ! 
And it 's quite possible that you are not ! '' 
Here Thenardier took a step towards the men who stood near the door , and added with a shudder : -- `` When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a cobbler ! '' 
Then addressing M. Leblanc with a fresh outburst of frenzy : -- `` And listen to this also , Mister philanthropist ! 
I 'm not a suspicious character , not a bit of it ! 
I 'm not a man whose name nobody knows , and who comes and abducts children from houses ! 
I 'm an old French soldier , I ought to have been decorated ! 
I was at Waterloo , so I was ! 
And in the battle I saved a general called the Comte of I do n't know what . 
He told me his name , but his beastly voice was so weak that I did n't hear . 
All I caught was Merci -LSB- thanks -RSB- . 
I 'd rather have had his name than his thanks . 
That would have helped me to find him again . 
The picture that you see here , and which was painted by David at Bruqueselles , -- do you know what it represents ? 
It represents me . 
David wished to immortalize that feat of prowess . 
I have that general on my back , and I am carrying him through the grape-shot . 
There 's the history of it ! 
That general never did a single thing for me ; he was no better than the rest ! 
But none the less , I saved his life at the risk of my own , and I have the certificate of the fact in my pocket ! 
I am a soldier of Waterloo , by all the furies ! 
And now that I have had the goodness to tell you all this , let 's have an end of it . 
I want money , I want a deal of money , I must have an enormous lot of money , or I 'll exterminate you , by the thunder of the good God ! '' 
Marius had regained some measure of control over his anguish , and was listening . 
The last possibility of doubt had just vanished . 
It certainly was the Thenardier of the will . 
Marius shuddered at that reproach of ingratitude directed against his father , and which he was on the point of so fatally justifying . 
His perplexity was redoubled . 
Moreover , there was in all these words of Thenardier , in his accent , in his gesture , in his glance which darted flames at every word , there was , in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything , in that mixture of braggadocio and abjectness , of pride and pettiness , of rage and folly , in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments , in that immodesty of a malicious man tasting the voluptuous delights of violence , in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul , in that conflagration of all sufferings combined with all hatreds , something which was as hideous as evil , and as heart-rending as the truth . 
The picture of the master , the painting by David which he had proposed that M. Leblanc should purchase , was nothing else , as the reader has divined , than the sign of his tavern painted , as it will be remembered , by himself , the only relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck at Montfermeil . 
As he had ceased to intercept Marius ' visual ray , Marius could examine this thing , and in the daub , he actually did recognize a battle , a background of smoke , and a man carrying another man . 
It was the group composed of Pontmercy and Thenardier ; the sergeant the rescuer , the colonel rescued . 
Marius was like a drunken man ; this picture restored his father to life in some sort ; it was no longer the signboard of the wine-shop at Montfermeil , it was a resurrection ; a tomb had yawned , a phantom had risen there . 
Marius heard his heart beating in his temples , he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears , his bleeding father , vaguely depicted on that sinister panel terrified him , and it seemed to him that the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him . 
When Thenardier had recovered his breath , he turned his bloodshot eyes on M. Leblanc , and said to him in a low , curt voice : -- `` What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you ? '' 
M. Leblanc held his peace . 
