How ? 
Not so badly . 
We will explain . 
Marius occupied in the Gorbeau house , for an annual sum of thirty francs , a den minus a fireplace , called a cabinet , which contained only the most indispensable articles of furniture . 
This furniture belonged to him . 
He gave three francs a month to the old principal tenant to come and sweep his hole , and to bring him a little hot water every morning , a fresh egg , and a penny roll . 
He breakfasted on this egg and roll . 
His breakfast varied in cost from two to four sous , according as eggs were dear or cheap . 
At six o'clock in the evening he descended the Rue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau 's , opposite Basset 's , the stamp-dealer 's , on the corner of the Rue des Mathurins . 
He ate no soup . 
He took a six-sou plate of meat , a half-portion of vegetables for three sous , and a three-sou dessert . 
For three sous he got as much bread as he wished . 
As for wine , he drank water . 
When he paid at the desk where Madam Rousseau , at that period still plump and rosy majestically presided , he gave a sou to the waiter , and Madam Rousseau gave him a smile . 
Then he went away . 
For sixteen sous he had a smile and a dinner . 
This Restaurant Rousseau , where so few bottles and so many water carafes were emptied , was a calming potion rather than a restaurant . 
It no longer exists . 
The proprietor had a fine nickname : he was called Rousseau the Aquatic . 
Thus , breakfast four sous , dinner sixteen sous ; his food cost him twenty sous a day ; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs a year . 
Add the thirty francs for rent , and the thirty-six francs to the old woman , plus a few trifling expenses ; for four hundred and fifty francs , Marius was fed , lodged , and waited on . 
His clothing cost him a hundred francs , his linen fifty francs , his washing fifty francs ; the whole did not exceed six hundred and fifty francs . 
He was rich . 
He sometimes lent ten francs to a friend . 
Courfeyrac had once been able to borrow sixty francs of him . 
As far as fire was concerned , as Marius had no fireplace , he had `` simplified matters . '' 
Marius always had two complete suits of clothes , the one old , `` for every day '' ; the other , brand new for special occasions . 
Both were black . 
He had but three shirts , one on his person , the second in the commode , and the third in the washerwoman 's hands . 
He renewed them as they wore out . 
They were always ragged , which caused him to button his coat to the chin . 
It had required years for Marius to attain to this flourishing condition . 
Hard years ; difficult , some of them , to traverse , others to climb . 
Marius had not failed for a single day . 
He had endured everything in the way of destitution ; he had done everything except contract debts . 
He did himself the justice to say that he had never owed any one a sou . 
A debt was , to him , the beginning of slavery . 
He even said to himself , that a creditor is worse than a master ; for the master possesses only your person , a creditor possesses your dignity and can administer to it a box on the ear . 
Rather than borrow , he went without food . 
He had passed many a day fasting . 
Feeling that all extremes meet , and that , if one is not on one 's guard , lowered fortunes may lead to baseness of soul , he kept a jealous watch on his pride . 
Such and such a formality or action , which , in any other situation would have appeared merely a deference to him , now seemed insipidity , and he nerved himself against it . 
His face wore a sort of severe flush . 
He was timid even to rudeness . 
During all these trials he had felt himself encouraged and even uplifted , at times , by a secret force that he possessed within himself . 
The soul aids the body , and at certain moments , raises it . 
It is the only bird which bears up its own cage . 
Besides his father 's name , another name was graven in Marius ' heart , the name of Thenardier . 
Marius , with his grave and enthusiastic nature , surrounded with a sort of aureole the man to whom , in his thoughts , he owed his father 's life , -- that intrepid sergeant who had saved the colonel amid the bullets and the cannon-balls of Waterloo . 
He never separated the memory of this man from the memory of his father , and he associated them in his veneration . 
