How many blushing choristers , how many youthful abbes bear on their heads Perrette 's pot of milk ! 
Who knows how easy it is for ambition to call itself vocation ? 
in good faith , perchance , and deceiving itself , devotee that it is . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu , poor , humble , retiring , was not accounted among the big mitres . 
This was plain from the complete absence of young priests about him . 
We have seen that he `` did not take '' in Paris . 
Not a single future dreamed of engrafting itself on this solitary old man . 
Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forth its foliage in his shadow . 
His canons and grand-vicars were good old men , rather vulgar like himself , walled up like him in this diocese , without exit to a cardinalship , and who resembled their bishop , with this difference , that they were finished and he was completed . 
The impossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well understood , that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix or of Auch , and went off in a great hurry . 
For , in short , we repeat it , men wish to be pushed . 
A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation is a dangerous neighbor ; he might communicate to you , by contagion , an incurable poverty , an anchylosis of the joints , which are useful in advancement , and in short , more renunciation than you desire ; and this infectious virtue is avoided . 
Hence the isolation of Monseigneur Bienvenu . 
We live in the midst of a gloomy society . 
Success ; that is the lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption . 
Be it said in passing , that success is a very hideous thing . 
Its false resemblance to merit deceives men . 
For the masses , success has almost the same profile as supremacy . 
Success , that Menaechmus of talent , has one dupe , -- history . 
Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it . 
In our day , a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service , wears the livery of success , and performs the service of its antechamber . 
Succeed : theory . 
Prosperity argues capacity . 
Win in the lottery , and behold ! 
you are a clever man . 
He who triumphs is venerated . 
Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth ! 
everything lies in that . 
Be lucky , and you will have all the rest ; be happy , and people will think you great . 
Outside of five or six immense exceptions , which compose the splendor of a century , contemporary admiration is nothing but short-sightedness . 
Gilding is gold . 
It does no harm to be the first arrival by pure chance , so long as you do arrive . 
The common herd is an old Narcissus who adores himself , and who applauds the vulgar herd . 
That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses , Aeschylus , Dante , Michael Angelo , or Napoleon , the multitude awards on the spot , and by acclamation , to whomsoever attains his object , in whatsoever it may consist . 
Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy : let a false Corneille compose Tiridate ; let a eunuch come to possess a harem ; let a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch ; let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the Sambre-and-Meuse , and construct for himself , out of this cardboard , sold as leather , four hundred thousand francs of income ; let a pork-packer espouse usury , and cause it to bring forth seven or eight millions , of which he is the father and of which it is the mother ; let a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl ; let the steward of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made minister of finances , -- and men call that Genius , just as they call the face of Mousqueton Beauty , and the mien of Claude Majesty . 
With the constellations of space they confound the stars of the abyss which are made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks . 
WHAT HE BELIEVED We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D -- on the score of orthodoxy . 
In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect . 
The conscience of the just man should be accepted on his word . 
Moreover , certain natures being given , we admit the possible development of all beauties of human virtue in a belief that differs from our own . 
What did he think of this dogma , or of that mystery ? 
These secrets of the inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb , where souls enter naked . 
The point on which we are certain is , that the difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his case . 
No decay is possible to the diamond . 
He believed to the extent of his powers . 
`` Credo in Patrem , '' he often exclaimed . 
Moreover , he drew from good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to the conscience , and which whispers to a man , `` Thou art with God ! '' 
The point which we consider it our duty to note is , that outside of and beyond his faith , as it were , the Bishop possessed an excess of love . 
In was in that quarter , quia multum amavit , -- because he loved much -- that he was regarded as vulnerable by `` serious men , '' `` grave persons '' and `` reasonable people '' ; favorite locutions of our sad world where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry . 
What was this excess of love ? 
