`` What does Monsieur wish ? '' 
`` Bread and cheese , '' said the man . 
`` Decidedly , he is a beggar '' thought Madame Thenardier . 
The drunken men were still singing their song , and the child under the table was singing hers . 
All at once , Cosette paused ; she had just turned round and caught sight of the little Thenardiers ' doll , which they had abandoned for the cat and had left on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table . 
Then she dropped the swaddled sword , which only half met her needs , and cast her eyes slowly round the room . 
Madame Thenardier was whispering to her husband and counting over some money ; Ponine and Zelma were playing with the cat ; the travellers were eating or drinking or singing ; not a glance was fixed on her . 
She had not a moment to lose ; she crept out from under the table on her hands and knees , made sure once more that no one was watching her ; then she slipped quickly up to the doll and seized it . 
An instant later she was in her place again , seated motionless , and only turned so as to cast a shadow on the doll which she held in her arms . 
The happiness of playing with a doll was so rare for her that it contained all the violence of voluptuousness . 
No one had seen her , except the traveller , who was slowly devouring his meagre supper . 
This joy lasted about a quarter of an hour . 
But with all the precautions that Cosette had taken she did not perceive that one of the doll 's legs stuck out and that the fire on the hearth lighted it up very vividly . 
That pink and shining foot , projecting from the shadow , suddenly struck the eye of Azelma , who said to Eponine , `` Look ! 
sister . '' 
The two little girls paused in stupefaction ; Cosette had dared to take their doll ! 
Eponine rose , and , without releasing the cat , she ran to her mother , and began to tug at her skirt . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
said her mother ; `` what do you want ? '' 
`` Mother , '' said the child , `` look there ! '' 
And she pointed to Cosette . 
Cosette , absorbed in the ecstasies of possession , no longer saw or heard anything . 
Madame Thenardier 's countenance assumed that peculiar expression which is composed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life , and which has caused this style of woman to be named megaeras . 
On this occasion , wounded pride exasperated her wrath still further . 
Cosette had overstepped all bounds ; Cosette had laid violent hands on the doll belonging to `` these young ladies . '' 
A czarina who should see a muzhik trying on her imperial son 's blue ribbon would wear no other face . 
She shrieked in a voice rendered hoarse with indignation : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
Cosette started as though the earth had trembled beneath her ; she turned round . 
`` Cosette ! '' 
repeated the Thenardier . 
Cosette took the doll and laid it gently on the floor with a sort of veneration , mingled with despair ; then , without taking her eyes from it , she clasped her hands , and , what is terrible to relate of a child of that age , she wrung them ; then -- not one of the emotions of the day , neither the trip to the forest , nor the weight of the bucket of water , nor the loss of the money , nor the sight of the whip , nor even the sad words which she had heard Madame Thenardier utter had been able to wring this from her -- she wept ; she burst out sobbing . 
Meanwhile , the traveller had risen to his feet . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
he said to the Thenardier . 
`` Do n't you see ? '' 
said the Thenardier , pointing to the corpus delicti which lay at Cosette 's feet . 
`` Well , what of it ? '' 
resumed the man . 
`` That beggar , '' replied the Thenardier , `` has permitted herself to touch the children 's doll ! '' 
`` All this noise for that ! '' 
said the man ; `` well , what if she did play with that doll ? '' 
`` She touched it with her dirty hands ! '' 
pursued the Thenardier , `` with her frightful hands ! '' 
Here Cosette redoubled her sobs . 
`` Will you stop your noise ? '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
The man went straight to the street door , opened it , and stepped out . 
As soon as he had gone , the Thenardier profited by his absence to give Cosette a hearty kick under the table , which made the child utter loud cries . 
The door opened again , the man re-appeared ; he carried in both hands the fabulous doll which we have mentioned , and which all the village brats had been staring at ever since the morning , and he set it upright in front of Cosette , saying : -- `` Here ; this is for you . '' 
It must be supposed that in the course of the hour and more which he had spent there he had taken confused notice through his revery of that toy shop , lighted up by fire-pots and candles so splendidly that it was visible like an illumination through the window of the drinking-shop . 
