When he cried , ` Sinite parvulos , ' he made no distinction between the little children . 
It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod . 
Innocence , Monsieur , is its own crown . 
Innocence has no need to be a highness . 
It is as august in rags as in fleurs de lys . '' 
`` That is true , '' said the Bishop in a low voice . 
`` I persist , '' continued the conventionary G -- `` You have mentioned Louis XVII . 
to me . 
Let us come to an understanding . 
Shall we weep for all the innocent , all martyrs , all children , the lowly as well as the exalted ? 
I agree to that . 
But in that case , as I have told you , we must go back further than ' 93 , and our tears must begin before Louis XVII . 
I will weep with you over the children of kings , provided that you will weep with me over the children of the people . '' 
`` I weep for all , '' said the Bishop . 
`` Equally ! '' 
exclaimed conventionary G -- ; `` and if the balance must incline , let it be on the side of the people . 
They have been suffering longer . '' 
Another silence ensued . 
The conventionary was the first to break it . 
He raised himself on one elbow , took a bit of his cheek between his thumb and his forefinger , as one does mechanically when one interrogates and judges , and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of the death agony . 
It was almost an explosion . 
`` Yes , sir , the people have been suffering a long while . 
And hold ! 
that is not all , either ; why have you just questioned me and talked to me about Louis XVII . ? 
I know you not . 
Ever since I have been in these parts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone , never setting foot outside , and seeing no one but that child who helps me . 
Your name has reached me in a confused manner , it is true , and very badly pronounced , I must admit ; but that signifies nothing : clever men have so many ways of imposing on that honest goodman , the people . 
By the way , I did not hear the sound of your carriage ; you have left it yonder , behind the coppice at the fork of the roads , no doubt . 
I do not know you , I tell you . 
You have told me that you are the Bishop ; but that affords me no information as to your moral personality . 
In short , I repeat my question . 
Who are you ? 
You are a bishop ; that is to say , a prince of the church , one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings and revenues , who have vast prebends , -- the bishopric of D -- fifteen thousand francs settled income , ten thousand in perquisites ; total , twenty-five thousand francs , -- who have kitchens , who have liveries , who make good cheer , who eat moor-hens on Friday , who strut about , a lackey before , a lackey behind , in a gala coach , and who have palaces , and who roll in their carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot ! 
You are a prelate , -- revenues , palace , horses , servants , good table , all the sensualities of life ; you have this like the rest , and like the rest , you enjoy it ; it is well ; but this says either too much or too little ; this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me . 
To whom do I speak ? 
Who are you ? '' 
The Bishop hung his head and replied , `` Vermis sum -- I am a worm . '' 
`` A worm of the earth in a carriage ? '' 
growled the conventionary . 
It was the conventionary 's turn to be arrogant , and the Bishop 's to be humble . 
The Bishop resumed mildly : -- `` So be it , sir . 
But explain to me how my carriage , which is a few paces off behind the trees yonder , how my good table and the moor-hens which I eat on Friday , how my twenty-five thousand francs income , how my palace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty , and that '93 was not inexorable . 
The conventionary passed his hand across his brow , as though to sweep away a cloud . 
`` Before replying to you , '' he said , `` I beseech you to pardon me . 
I have just committed a wrong , sir . 
You are at my house , you are my guest , I owe you courtesy . 
You discuss my ideas , and it becomes me to confine myself to combating your arguments . 
Your riches and your pleasures are advantages which I hold over you in the debate ; but good taste dictates that I shall not make use of them . 
I promise you to make no use of them in the future . '' 
`` I thank you , '' said the Bishop . 
