He goes down stairs ; you will tear up your sheets , little by little you will make of them a rope , then you will climb out of your window , and you will suspend yourself by that thread over an abyss , and it will be night , amid storm , rain , and the hurricane , and if the rope is too short , but one way of descending will remain to you , to fall . 
To drop hap-hazard into the gulf , from an unknown height , on what ? 
On what is beneath , on the unknown . 
Or you will crawl up a chimney-flue , at the risk of burning ; or you will creep through a sewer-pipe , at the risk of drowning ; I do not speak of the holes that you will be obliged to mask , of the stones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times a day , of the plaster that you will have to hide in your straw pallet . 
A lock presents itself ; the bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by a locksmith . 
If you wish to pass out , you will be condemned to execute a terrible work of art ; you will take a large sou , you will cut it in two plates ; with what tools ? 
You will have to invent them . 
That is your business . 
Then you will hollow out the interior of these plates , taking great care of the outside , and you will make on the edges a thread , so that they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its cover . 
The top and bottom thus screwed together , nothing will be suspected . 
To the overseers it will be only a sou ; to you it will be a box . 
What will you put in this box ? 
A small bit of steel . 
A watch-spring , in which you will have cut teeth , and which will form a saw . 
With this saw , as long as a pin , and concealed in a sou , you will cut the bolt of the lock , you will sever bolts , the padlock of your chain , and the bar at your window , and the fetter on your leg . 
This masterpiece finished , this prodigy accomplished , all these miracles of art , address , skill , and patience executed , what will be your recompense if it becomes known that you are the author ? 
The dungeon . 
There is your future . 
What precipices are idleness and pleasure ! 
Do you know that to do nothing is a melancholy resolution ? 
To live in idleness on the property of society ! 
to be useless , that is to say , pernicious ! 
This leads straight to the depth of wretchedness . 
Woe to the man who desires to be a parasite ! 
He will become vermin ! 
Ah ! 
So it does not please you to work ? 
Ah ! 
You have but one thought , to drink well , to eat well , to sleep well . 
You will drink water , you will eat black bread , you will sleep on a plank with a fetter whose cold touch you will feel on your flesh all night long , riveted to your limbs . 
You will break those fetters , you will flee . 
That is well . 
You will crawl on your belly through the brushwood , and you will eat grass like the beasts of the forest . 
And you will be recaptured . 
And then you will pass years in a dungeon , riveted to a wall , groping for your jug that you may drink , gnawing at a horrible loaf of darkness which dogs would not touch , eating beans that the worms have eaten before you . 
You will be a wood-louse in a cellar . 
Ah ! 
Have pity on yourself , you miserable young child , who were sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago , and who have , no doubt , a mother still alive ! 
I conjure you , listen to me , I entreat you . 
You desire fine black cloth , varnished shoes , to have your hair curled and sweet-smelling oils on your locks , to please low women , to be handsome . 
You will be shaven clean , and you will wear a red blouse and wooden shoes . 
You want rings on your fingers , you will have an iron necklet on your neck . 
If you glance at a woman , you will receive a blow . 
And you will enter there at the age of twenty . 
And you will come out at fifty ! 
You will enter young , rosy , fresh , with brilliant eyes , and all your white teeth , and your handsome , youthful hair ; you will come out broken , bent , wrinkled , toothless , horrible , with white locks ! 
Ah ! 
my poor child , you are on the wrong road ; idleness is counselling you badly ; the hardest of all work is thieving . 
Believe me , do not undertake that painful profession of an idle man . 
It is not comfortable to become a rascal . 
