Grantaire rose to his feet with a start , stretched out his arms , rubbed his eyes , stared , yawned , and understood . 
A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is torn away . 
One beholds , at a single glance and as a whole , all that it has concealed . 
All suddenly presents itself to the memory ; and the drunkard who has known nothing of what has been taking place during the last twenty-four hours , has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly informed . 
Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity ; the obliteration of intoxication , a sort of steam which has obscured the brain , is dissipated , and makes way for the clear and sharply outlined importunity of realities . 
Relegated , as he was , to one corner , and sheltered behind the billiard-table , the soldiers whose eyes were fixed on Enjolras , had not even noticed Grantaire , and the sergeant was preparing to repeat his order : `` Take aim ! '' 
when all at once , they heard a strong voice shout beside them : `` Long live the Republic ! 
I 'm one of them . '' 
Grantaire had risen . 
The immense gleam of the whole combat which he had missed , and in which he had had no part , appeared in the brilliant glance of the transfigured drunken man . 
He repeated : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
crossed the room with a firm stride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras . 
`` Finish both of us at one blow , '' said he . 
And turning gently to Enjolras , he said to him : `` Do you permit it ? '' 
Enjolras pressed his hand with a smile . 
This smile was not ended when the report resounded . 
Enjolras , pierced by eight bullets , remained leaning against the wall , as though the balls had nailed him there . 
Only , his head was bowed . 
Grantaire fell at his feet , as though struck by a thunderbolt . 
A few moments later , the soldiers dislodged the last remaining insurgents , who had taken refuge at the top of the house . 
They fired into the attic through a wooden lattice . 
They fought under the very roof . 
They flung bodies , some of them still alive , out through the windows . 
Two light-infantrymen , who tried to lift the shattered omnibus , were slain by two shots fired from the attic . 
A man in a blouse was flung down from it , with a bayonet wound in the abdomen , and breathed his last on the ground . 
A soldier and an insurgent slipped together on the sloping slates of the roof , and , as they would not release each other , they fell , clasped in a ferocious embrace . 
A similar conflict went on in the cellar . 
Shouts , shots , a fierce trampling . 
Then silence . 
The barricade was captured . 
The soldiers began to search the houses round about , and to pursue the fugitives . 
PRISONER Marius was , in fact , a prisoner . 
The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt at the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to expose himself in it . 
Had it not been for him , no one , in that supreme phase of agony , would have thought of the wounded . 
Thanks to him , everywhere present in the carnage , like a providence , those who fell were picked up , transported to the tap-room , and cared for . 
In the intervals , he reappeared on the barricade . 
But nothing which could resemble a blow , an attack or even personal defence proceeded from his hands . 
He held his peace and lent succor . 
Moreover he had received only a few scratches . 
The bullets would have none of him . 
If suicide formed part of what he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre , to that spot , he had not succeeded . 
But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide , an irreligious act . 
Jean Valjean , in the thick cloud of the combat , did not appear to see Marius ; the truth is , that he never took his eyes from the latter . 
When a shot laid Marius low , Jean Valjean leaped forward with the agility of a tiger , fell upon him as on his prey , and bore him off . 
The whirlwind of the attack was , at that moment , so violently concentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop , that no one saw Jean Valjean sustaining the fainting Marius in his arms , traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind the angle of the Corinthe building . 
The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on the street ; it afforded shelter from the bullets , the grape-shot , and all eyes , and a few square feet of space . 
There is sometimes a chamber which does not burn in the midst of a conflagration , and in the midst of raging seas , beyond a promontory or at the extremity of a blind alley of shoals , a tranquil nook . 
It was in this sort of fold in the interior trapezium of the barricade , that Eponine had breathed her last . 
There Jean Valjean halted , let Marius slide to the ground , placed his back against the wall , and cast his eyes about him . 
