They call everything our ; thus : our veil , our chaplet ; if they were speaking of their chemise , they would say our chemise . 
Sometimes they grow attached to some petty object , -- to a book of hours , a relic , a medal that has been blessed . 
As soon as they become aware that they are growing attached to this object , they must give it up . 
They recall the words of Saint Therese , to whom a great lady said , as she was on the point of entering her order , `` Permit me , mother , to send for a Bible to which I am greatly attached . '' 
`` Ah , you are attached to something ! 
In that case , do not enter our order ! '' 
Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up , to have a place of her own , a chamber . 
They live with their cells open . 
When they meet , one says , `` Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
The other responds , `` Forever . '' 
The same ceremony when one taps at the other 's door . 
Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard to say hastily , `` Forever ! '' 
Like all practices , this becomes mechanical by force of habit ; and one sometimes says forever before the other has had time to say the rather long sentence , `` Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar . '' 
Among the Visitandines the one who enters says : `` Ave Maria , '' and the one whose cell is entered says , `` Gratia plena . '' 
It is their way of saying good day , which is in fact full of grace . 
At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the church bell of the convent . 
At this signal prioress , vocal mothers , professed nuns , lay-sisters , novices , postulants , interrupt what they are saying , what they are doing , or what they are thinking , and all say in unison if it is five o'clock , for instance , `` At five o'clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
If it is eight o'clock , `` At eight o'clock and at all hours ! '' 
and so on , according to the hour . 
This custom , the object of which is to break the thread of thought and to lead it back constantly to God , exists in many communities ; the formula alone varies . 
Thus at The Infant Jesus they say , `` At this hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart ! '' 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga , cloistered fifty years ago at Petit-Picpus , chant the offices to a solemn psalmody , a pure Gregorian chant , and always with full voice during the whole course of the office . 
Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause , and say in a low voice , `` Jesus-Marie-Joseph . '' 
For the office of the dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a depth . 
The effect produced is striking and tragic . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar for the burial of their community . 
The Government , as they say , does not permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they die . 
This is an affliction to them , and causes them consternation as an infraction of the rules . 
They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best , -- permission to be interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient Vaugirard cemetery , which was made of land which had formerly belonged to their community . 
On Fridays the nuns hear high mass , vespers , and all the offices , as on Sunday . 
They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals unknown to people of the world , of which the Church of France was so prodigal in the olden days , and of which it is still prodigal in Spain and Italy . 
Their stations in the chapel are interminable . 
As for the number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them : `` The prayers of the postulants are frightful , the prayers of the novices are still worse , and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse . '' 
Once a week the chapter assembles : the prioress presides ; the vocal mothers assist . 
Each sister kneels in turn on the stones , and confesses aloud , in the presence of all , the faults and sins which she has committed during the week . 
The vocal mothers consult after each confession and inflict the penance aloud . 
Besides this confession in a loud tone , for which all faults in the least serious are reserved , they have for their venial offences what they call the coulpe . 
To make one 's coulpe means to prostrate one 's self flat on one 's face during the office in front of the prioress until the latter , who is never called anything but our mother , notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of her stall that she can rise . 
The coulpe or peccavi , is made for a very small matter -- a broken glass , a torn veil , an involuntary delay of a few seconds at an office , a false note in church , etc. ; this suffices , and the coulpe is made . 
The coulpe is entirely spontaneous ; it is the culpable person herself -LRB- the word is etymologically in its place here -RRB- who judges herself and inflicts it on herself . 
On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone the offices before a large reading-desk with four places . 
One day one of the mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with Ecce , and instead of Ecce she uttered aloud the three notes do si sol ; for this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a coulpe which lasted during the whole service : what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter had laughed . 
When a nun is summoned to the parlor , even were it the prioress herself , she drops her veil , as will be remembered , so that only her mouth is visible . 
The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers . 
The others can see only their immediate family , and that very rarely . 
If , by chance , an outsider presents herself to see a nun , or one whom she has known and loved in the outer world , a regular series of negotiations is required . 
If it is a woman , the authorization may sometimes be granted ; the nun comes , and they talk to her through the shutters , which are opened only for a mother or sister . 
It is unnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men . 
Such is the rule of Saint-Benoit , aggravated by Martin Verga . 
These nuns are not gay , rosy , and fresh , as the daughters of other orders often are . 
