Cosette knew the way , through having gone over it many times in daylight . 
Strange to say , she did not get lost . 
A remnant of instinct guided her vaguely . 
But she did not turn her eyes either to right or to left , for fear of seeing things in the branches and in the brushwood . 
In this manner she reached the spring . 
It was a narrow , natural basin , hollowed out by the water in a clayey soil , about two feet deep , surrounded with moss and with those tall , crimped grasses which are called Henry IV . 
's frills , and paved with several large stones . 
A brook ran out of it , with a tranquil little noise . 
Cosette did not take time to breathe . 
It was very dark , but she was in the habit of coming to this spring . 
She felt with her left hand in the dark for a young oak which leaned over the spring , and which usually served to support her , found one of its branches , clung to it , bent down , and plunged the bucket in the water . 
She was in a state of such violent excitement that her strength was trebled . 
While thus bent over , she did not notice that the pocket of her apron had emptied itself into the spring . 
The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water . 
Cosette neither saw nor heard it fall . 
She drew out the bucket nearly full , and set it on the grass . 
That done , she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue . 
She would have liked to set out again at once , but the effort required to fill the bucket had been such that she found it impossible to take a step . 
She was forced to sit down . 
She dropped on the grass , and remained crouching there . 
She shut her eyes ; then she opened them again , without knowing why , but because she could not do otherwise . 
The agitated water in the bucket beside her was describing circles which resembled tin serpents . 
Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds , which were like masses of smoke . 
The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely over the child . 
Jupiter was setting in the depths . 
The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star , with which she was unfamiliar , and which terrified her . 
The planet was , in fact , very near the horizon and was traversing a dense layer of mist which imparted to it a horrible ruddy hue . 
The mist , gloomily empurpled , magnified the star . 
One would have called it a luminous wound . 
A cold wind was blowing from the plain . 
The forest was dark , not a leaf was moving ; there were none of the vague , fresh gleams of summertide . 
Great boughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise . 
Slender and misshapen bushes whistled in the clearings . 
The tall grasses undulated like eels under the north wind . 
The nettles seemed to twist long arms furnished with claws in search of prey . 
Some bits of dry heather , tossed by the breeze , flew rapidly by , and had the air of fleeing in terror before something which was coming after . 
On all sides there were lugubrious stretches . 
The darkness was bewildering . 
Man requires light . 
Whoever buries himself in the opposite of day feels his heart contract . 
When the eye sees black , the heart sees trouble . 
In an eclipse in the night , in the sooty opacity , there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts . 
No one walks alone in the forest at night without trembling . 
Shadows and trees -- two formidable densities . 
A chimerical reality appears in the indistinct depths . 
The inconceivable is outlined a few paces distant from you with a spectral clearness . 
One beholds floating , either in space or in one 's own brain , one knows not what vague and intangible thing , like the dreams of sleeping flowers . 
There are fierce attitudes on the horizon . 
One inhales the effluvia of the great black void . 
One is afraid to glance behind him , yet desirous of doing so . 
