No . 
Whence comes it ? 
From the pavements . 
Whence falls it ? 
From the clouds . 
Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot ; there of an improvisation . 
The first comer seizes a current of the throng and leads it whither he wills . 
A beginning full of terror , in which is mingled a sort of formidable gayety . 
First come clamors , the shops are closed , the displays of the merchants disappear ; then come isolated shots ; people flee ; blows from gun-stocks beat against portes cocheres , servants can be heard laughing in the courtyards of houses and saying : `` There 's going to be a row ! '' 
A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking place at twenty different spots in Paris at once . 
In the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie , twenty young men , bearded and with long hair , entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later , carrying a horizontal tricolored flag covered with crape , and having at their head three men armed , one with a sword , one with a gun , and the third with a pike . 
In the Rue des Nonaindieres , a very well-dressed bourgeois , who had a prominent belly , a sonorous voice , a bald head , a lofty brow , a black beard , and one of these stiff mustaches which will not lie flat , offered cartridges publicly to passers-by . 
In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre , men with bare arms carried about a black flag , on which could be read in white letters this inscription : `` Republic or Death ! '' 
In the Rue des Jeuneurs , Rue du Cadran , Rue Montorgueil , Rue Mandar , groups appeared waving flags on which could be distinguished in gold letters , the word section with a number . 
One of these flags was red and blue with an almost imperceptible stripe of white between . 
They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin , and three armorers ' shops , the first in the Rue Beaubourg , the second in the Rue Michel-le-Comte , the other in the Rue du Temple . 
In a few minutes , the thousand hands of the crowd had seized and carried off two hundred and thirty guns , nearly all double-barrelled , sixty-four swords , and eighty-three pistols . 
In order to provide more arms , one man took the gun , the other the bayonet . 
Opposite the Quai de la Greve , young men armed with muskets installed themselves in the houses of some women for the purpose of firing . 
One of them had a flint-lock . 
They rang , entered , and set about making cartridges . 
One of these women relates : `` I did not know what cartridges were ; it was my husband who told me . '' 
One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue des Vielles Haudriettes , and seized yataghans and Turkish arms . 
The body of a mason who had been killed by a gun-shot lay in the Rue de la Perle . 
And then on the right bank , the left bank , on the quays , on the boulevards , in the Latin country , in the quarter of the Halles , panting men , artisans , students , members of sections read proclamations and shouted : `` To arms ! '' 
broke street lanterns , unharnessed carriages , unpaved the streets , broke in the doors of houses , uprooted trees , rummaged cellars , rolled out hogsheads , heaped up paving-stones , rough slabs , furniture and planks , and made barricades . 
They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this . 
They entered the dwellings of women , they forced them to hand over the swords and guns of their absent husbands , and they wrote on the door , with whiting : `` The arms have been delivered '' ; some signed `` their names '' to receipts for the guns and swords and said : `` Send for them to-morrow at the Mayor 's office . '' 
They disarmed isolated sentinels and National Guardsmen in the streets on their way to the Townhall . 
They tore the epaulets from officers . 
In the Rue du Cimitiere-Saint-Nicholas , an officer of the National Guard , on being pursued by a crowd armed with clubs and foils , took refuge with difficulty in a house , whence he was only able to emerge at nightfall and in disguise . 
In the Quartier Saint-Jacques , the students swarmed out of their hotels and ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Cafe du Progress , or descended to the Cafe des Sept-Billards , in the Rue des Mathurins . 
There , in front of the door , young men mounted on the stone corner-posts , distributed arms . 
They plundered the timber-yard in the Rue Transnonain in order to obtain material for barricades . 
On a single point the inhabitants resisted , at the corner of the Rue Sainte-Avoye and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc , where they destroyed the barricade with their own hands . 
At a single point the insurgents yielded ; they abandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on a detachment of the National Guard , and fled through the Rue de la Corderie . 
The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag , a package of cartridges , and three hundred pistol-balls . 
The National Guardsmen tore up the flag , and carried off its tattered remains on the points of their bayonets . 
All that we are here relating slowly and successively took place simultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult , like a mass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder . 
In less than an hour , twenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in the quarter of the Halles alone . 
In the centre was that famous house No. 50 , which was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions , and which , flanked on the one hand by a barricade at Saint-Merry , and on the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuee , commanded three streets , the Rue des Arcis , the Rue Saint-Martin , and the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , which it faced . 
The barricades at right angles fell back , the one of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie , the other of the Rue Geoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye . 
Without reckoning innumerable barricades in twenty other quarters of Paris , in the Marais , at Mont-Sainte-Genevieve ; one in the Rue Menilmontant , where was visible a porte cochere torn from its hinges ; another near the little bridge of the Hotel-Dieu made with an `` ecossais , '' which had been unharnessed and overthrown , three hundred paces from the Prefecture of Police . 
At the barricade of the Rue des Menetriers , a well-dressed man distributed money to the workmen . 
At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat , a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to be the commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll of silver . 
`` Here , '' said he , `` this is to pay expenses , wine , et caetera . '' 
A light-haired young man , without a cravat , went from barricade to barricade , carrying pass-words . 
Another , with a naked sword , a blue police cap on his head , placed sentinels . 
In the interior , beyond the barricades , the wine-shops and porters ' lodges were converted into guard-houses . 
Otherwise the riot was conducted after the most scientific military tactics . 
