Why , that is very bad ! 
You have oppressions and palpitations of the heart ? 
That must not be ! 
You blush and turn pale , when a certain being clad in black appears at the end of a certain green walk ? 
But that is abominable ! '' 
She would not have understood , and she would have replied : `` What fault is there of mine in a matter in which I have no power and of which I know nothing ? '' 
It turned out that the love which presented itself was exactly suited to the state of her soul . 
It was a sort of admiration at a distance , a mute contemplation , the deification of a stranger . 
It was the apparition of youth to youth , the dream of nights become a reality yet remaining a dream , the longed-for phantom realized and made flesh at last , but having as yet , neither name , nor fault , nor spot , nor exigence , nor defect ; in a word , the distant lover who lingered in the ideal , a chimaera with a form . 
Any nearer and more palpable meeting would have alarmed Cosette at this first stage , when she was still half immersed in the exaggerated mists of the cloister . 
She had all the fears of children and all the fears of nuns combined . 
The spirit of the convent , with which she had been permeated for the space of five years , was still in the process of slow evaporation from her person , and made everything tremble around her . 
In this situation he was not a lover , he was not even an admirer , he was a vision . 
She set herself to adoring Marius as something charming , luminous , and impossible . 
As extreme innocence borders on extreme coquetry , she smiled at him with all frankness . 
Every day , she looked forward to the hour for their walk with impatience , she found Marius there , she felt herself unspeakably happy , and thought in all sincerity that she was expressing her whole thought when she said to Jean Valjean : -- `` What a delicious garden that Luxembourg is ! '' 
Marius and Cosette were in the dark as to one another . 
They did not address each other , they did not salute each other , they did not know each other ; they saw each other ; and like stars of heaven which are separated by millions of leagues , they lived by gazing at each other . 
It was thus that Cosette gradually became a woman and developed , beautiful and loving , with a consciousness of her beauty , and in ignorance of her love . 
She was a coquette to boot through her ignorance . 
TO ONE SADNESS OPPOSE A SADNESS AND A HALF All situations have their instincts . 
Old and eternal Mother Nature warned Jean Valjean in a dim way of the presence of Marius . 
Jean Valjean shuddered to the very bottom of his soul . 
Jean Valjean saw nothing , knew nothing , and yet he scanned with obstinate attention , the darkness in which he walked , as though he felt on one side of him something in process of construction , and on the other , something which was crumbling away . 
Marius , also warned , and , in accordance with the deep law of God , by that same Mother Nature , did all he could to keep out of sight of `` the father . '' 
Nevertheless , it came to pass that Jean Valjean sometimes espied him . 
Marius ' manners were no longer in the least natural . 
He exhibited ambiguous prudence and awkward daring . 
He no longer came quite close to them as formerly . 
He seated himself at a distance and pretended to be reading ; why did he pretend that ? 
Formerly he had come in his old coat , now he wore his new one every day ; Jean Valjean was not sure that he did not have his hair curled , his eyes were very queer , he wore gloves ; in short , Jean Valjean cordially detested this young man . 
Cosette allowed nothing to be divined . 
Without knowing just what was the matter with her she was convinced that there was something in it , and that it must be concealed . 
There was a coincidence between the taste for the toilet which had recently come to Cosette , and the habit of new clothes developed by that stranger which was very repugnant to Jean Valjean . 
It might be accidental , no doubt , certainly , but it was a menacing accident . 
He never opened his mouth to Cosette about this stranger . 
One day , however , he could not refrain from so doing , and , with that vague despair which suddenly casts the lead into the depths of its despair , he said to her : `` What a very pedantic air that young man has ! '' 
Cosette , but a year before only an indifferent little girl , would have replied : `` Why , no , he is charming . '' 
Ten years later , with the love of Marius in her heart , she would have answered : `` A pedant , and insufferable to the sight ! 
You are right ! '' 
-- At the moment in life and the heart which she had then attained , she contented herself with replying , with supreme calmness : `` That young man ! '' 
As though she now beheld him for the first time in her life . 
`` How stupid I am ! '' 
thought Jean Valjean . 
`` She had not noticed him . 
It is I who have pointed him out to her . '' 
Oh , simplicity of the old ! 
oh , the depth of children ! 
It is one of the laws of those fresh years of suffering and trouble , of those vivacious conflicts between a first love and the first obstacles , that the young girl does not allow herself to be caught in any trap whatever , and that the young man falls into every one . 
Jean Valjean had instituted an undeclared war against Marius , which Marius , with the sublime stupidity of his passion and his age , did not divine . 
