When evening arrived , as he was forced to set out again on the following day , he presented himself to the owner of the distillery and requested to be paid . 
The owner did not utter a word , but handed him fifteen sous . 
He objected . 
He was told , `` That is enough for thee . '' 
He persisted . 
The master looked him straight between the eyes , and said to him `` Beware of the prison . '' 
There , again , he considered that he had been robbed . 
Society , the State , by diminishing his hoard , had robbed him wholesale . 
Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail . 
Liberation is not deliverance . 
One gets free from the galleys , but not from the sentence . 
That is what happened to him at Grasse . 
We have seen in what manner he was received at D -- THE MAN AROUSED As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning , Jean Valjean awoke . 
What woke him was that his bed was too good . 
It was nearly twenty years since he had slept in a bed , and , although he had not undressed , the sensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers . 
He had slept more than four hours . 
His fatigue had passed away . 
He was accustomed not to devote many hours to repose . 
He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him ; then he closed them again , with the intention of going to sleep once more . 
When many varied sensations have agitated the day , when various matters preoccupy the mind , one falls asleep once , but not a second time . 
Sleep comes more easily than it returns . 
This is what happened to Jean Valjean . 
He could not get to sleep again , and he fell to thinking . 
He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one 's mind are troubled . 
There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain . 
His memories of the olden time and of the immediate present floated there pell-mell and mingled confusedly , losing their proper forms , becoming disproportionately large , then suddenly disappearing , as in a muddy and perturbed pool . 
Many thoughts occurred to him ; but there was one which kept constantly presenting itself afresh , and which drove away all others . 
We will mention this thought at once : he had observed the six sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire had placed on the table . 
Those six sets of silver haunted him . 
-- They were there . 
-- A few paces distant . 
-- Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one in which he then was , the old servant-woman had been in the act of placing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed . 
-- He had taken careful note of this cupboard . 
-- On the right , as you entered from the dining-room . 
-- They were solid . 
-- And old silver . 
-- From the ladle one could get at least two hundred francs . 
-- Double what he had earned in nineteen years . 
-- It is true that he would have earned more if `` the administration had not robbed him . '' 
His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was certainly mingled some struggle . 
Three o'clock struck . 
He opened his eyes again , drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture , stretched out his arm and felt of his knapsack , which he had thrown down on a corner of the alcove ; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed , and placed his feet on the floor , and thus found himself , almost without knowing it , seated on his bed . 
He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude , which would have been suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him thus in the dark , the only person awake in that house where all were sleeping . 
All of a sudden he stooped down , removed his shoes and placed them softly on the mat beside the bed ; then he resumed his thoughtful attitude , and became motionless once more . 
Throughout this hideous meditation , the thoughts which we have above indicated moved incessantly through his brain ; entered , withdrew , re-entered , and in a manner oppressed him ; and then he thought , also , without knowing why , and with the mechanical persistence of revery , of a convict named Brevet , whom he had known in the galleys , and whose trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton . 
The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind . 
He remained in this situation , and would have so remained indefinitely , even until daybreak , had not the clock struck one -- the half or quarter hour . 
It seemed to him that that stroke said to him , `` Come on ! '' 
He rose to his feet , hesitated still another moment , and listened ; all was quiet in the house ; then he walked straight ahead , with short steps , to the window , of which he caught a glimpse . 
The night was not very dark ; there was a full moon , across which coursed large clouds driven by the wind . 
