He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh , which was particularly dangerous . 
His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes . 
He had professional aphorisms , which he inserted into his wife 's mind . 
`` The duty of the inn-keeper , '' he said to her one day , violently , and in a low voice , `` is to sell to the first comer , stews , repose , light , fire , dirty sheets , a servant , lice , and a smile ; to stop passers-by , to empty small purses , and to honestly lighten heavy ones ; to shelter travelling families respectfully : to shave the man , to pluck the woman , to pick the child clean ; to quote the window open , the window shut , the chimney-corner , the arm-chair , the chair , the ottoman , the stool , the feather-bed , the mattress and the truss of straw ; to know how much the shadow uses up the mirror , and to put a price on it ; and , by five hundred thousand devils , to make the traveller pay for everything , even for the flies which his dog eats ! '' 
This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded -- a hideous and terrible team . 
While the husband pondered and combined , Madame Thenardier thought not of absent creditors , took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow , and lived in a fit of anger , all in a minute . 
Such were these two beings . 
Cosette was between them , subjected to their double pressure , like a creature who is at the same time being ground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers . 
The man and the woman each had a different method : Cosette was overwhelmed with blows -- this was the woman 's ; she went barefooted in winter -- that was the man 's doing . 
Cosette ran up stairs and down , washed , swept , rubbed , dusted , ran , fluttered about , panted , moved heavy articles , and weak as she was , did the coarse work . 
There was no mercy for her ; a fierce mistress and venomous master . 
The Thenardier hostelry was like a spider 's web , in which Cosette had been caught , and where she lay trembling . 
The ideal of oppression was realized by this sinister household . 
It was something like the fly serving the spiders . 
The poor child passively held her peace . 
What takes place within these souls when they have but just quitted God , find themselves thus , at the very dawn of life , very small and in the midst of men all naked ! 
MEN MUST HAVE WINE , AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER Four new travellers had arrived . 
Cosette was meditating sadly ; for , although she was only eight years old , she had already suffered so much that she reflected with the lugubrious air of an old woman . 
Her eye was black in consequence of a blow from Madame Thenardier 's fist , which caused the latter to remark from time to time , `` How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye ! '' 
Cosette was thinking that it was dark , very dark , that the pitchers and caraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must have been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern . 
She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thenardier establishment drank much water . 
Thirsty people were never lacking there ; but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug rather than to the pitcher . 
Any one who had asked for a glass of water among all those glasses of wine would have appeared a savage to all these men . 
But there came a moment when the child trembled ; Madame Thenardier raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove , then seized a glass and briskly approached the cistern . 
She turned the faucet ; the child had raised her head and was following all the woman 's movements . 
A thin stream of water trickled from the faucet , and half filled the glass . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` there is no more water ! '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The child did not breathe . 
`` Bah ! '' 
resumed Madame Thenardier , examining the half-filled glass , `` this will be enough . '' 
Cosette applied herself to her work once more , but for a quarter of an hour she felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big snow-flake . 
She counted the minutes that passed in this manner , and wished it were the next morning . 
From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street , and exclaimed , `` It 's as black as an oven ! '' 
or , `` One must needs be a cat to go about the streets without a lantern at this hour ! '' 
And Cosette trembled . 
All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered , and said in a harsh voice : -- `` My horse has not been watered . '' 
`` Yes , it has , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
`` I tell you that it has not , '' retorted the pedler . 
Cosette had emerged from under the table . 
`` Oh , yes , sir ! '' 
said she , `` the horse has had a drink ; he drank out of a bucket , a whole bucketful , and it was I who took the water to him , and I spoke to him . '' 
It was not true ; Cosette lied . 
`` There 's a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house , '' exclaimed the pedler . 
`` I tell you that he has not been watered , you little jade ! 
He has a way of blowing when he has had no water , which I know well . '' 
Cosette persisted , and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish , and which was hardly audible : -- `` And he drank heartily . '' 
`` Come , '' said the pedler , in a rage , `` this wo n't do at all , let my horse be watered , and let that be the end of it ! '' 
Cosette crept under the table again . 
`` In truth , that is fair ! '' 
