They felt chilled as by the breath of a death 's - head . 
They did not exchange a word . 
Only , M. Gillenormand said in a low voice and as though speaking to himself : -- `` It is the slasher 's handwriting . '' 
The aunt examined the paper , turned it about in all directions , then put it back in its case . 
At the same moment a little oblong packet , enveloped in blue paper , fell from one of the pockets of the great-coat . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand picked it up and unfolded the blue paper . 
It contained Marius ' hundred cards . 
She handed one of them to M. Gillenormand , who read : Le Baron Marius Pontmercy . 
The old man rang the bell . 
Nicolette came . 
M. Gillenormand took the ribbon , the case , and the coat , flung them all on the floor in the middle of the room , and said : -- `` Carry those duds away . '' 
A full hour passed in the most profound silence . 
The old man and the old spinster had seated themselves with their backs to each other , and were thinking , each on his own account , the same things , in all probability . 
At the expiration of this hour , Aunt Gillenormand said : -- `` A pretty state of things ! '' 
A few moments later , Marius made his appearance . 
He entered . 
Even before he had crossed the threshold , he saw his grandfather holding one of his own cards in his hand , and on catching sight of him , the latter exclaimed with his air of bourgeois and grinning superiority which was something crushing : -- `` Well ! 
well ! 
well ! 
well ! 
well ! 
so you are a baron now . 
I present you my compliments . 
What is the meaning of this ? '' 
Marius reddened slightly and replied : -- `` It means that I am the son of my father . '' 
M. Gillenormand ceased to laugh , and said harshly : -- `` I am your father . '' 
`` My father , '' retorted Marius , with downcast eyes and a severe air , `` was a humble and heroic man , who served the Republic and France gloriously , who was great in the greatest history that men have ever made , who lived in the bivouac for a quarter of a century , beneath grape-shot and bullets , in snow and mud by day , beneath rain at night , who captured two flags , who received twenty wounds , who died forgotten and abandoned , and who never committed but one mistake , which was to love too fondly two ingrates , his country and myself . '' 
This was more than M. Gillenormand could bear to hear . 
At the word republic , he rose , or , to speak more correctly , he sprang to his feet . 
Every word that Marius had just uttered produced on the visage of the old Royalist the effect of the puffs of air from a forge upon a blazing brand . 
From a dull hue he had turned red , from red , purple , and from purple , flame-colored . 
`` Marius ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Abominable child ! 
I do not know what your father was ! 
I do not wish to know ! 
I know nothing about that , and I do not know him ! 
But what I do know is , that there never was anything but scoundrels among those men ! 
They were all rascals , assassins , red-caps , thieves ! 
I say all ! 
I say all ! 
I know not one ! 
I say all ! 
Do you hear me , Marius ! 
See here , you are no more a baron than my slipper is ! 
They were all bandits in the service of Robespierre ! 
All who served B-u-o-naparte were brigands ! 
They were all traitors who betrayed , betrayed , betrayed their legitimate king ! 
All cowards who fled before the Prussians and the English at Waterloo ! 
That is what I do know ! 
