And he dismissed Javert with a wave of the hand . 
Javert did not withdraw . 
`` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor , '' said he . 
`` What is it now ? '' 
demanded M. Madeleine . 
`` Mr. Mayor , there is still something of which I must remind you . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I must be dismissed . '' 
M. Madeleine rose . 
`` Javert , you are a man of honor , and I esteem you . 
You exaggerate your fault . 
Moreover , this is an offence which concerns me . 
Javert , you deserve promotion instead of degradation . 
I wish you to retain your post . '' 
Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes , in whose depths his not very enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible , and said in a tranquil voice : -- `` Mr. Mayor , I can not grant you that . '' 
`` I repeat , '' replied M. Madeleine , `` that the matter concerns me . '' 
But Javert , heeding his own thought only , continued : -- `` So far as exaggeration is concerned , I am not exaggerating . 
This is the way I reason : I have suspected you unjustly . 
That is nothing . 
It is our right to cherish suspicion , although suspicion directed above ourselves is an abuse . 
But without proofs , in a fit of rage , with the object of wreaking my vengeance , I have denounced you as a convict , you , a respectable man , a mayor , a magistrate ! 
That is serious , very serious . 
I have insulted authority in your person , I , an agent of the authorities ! 
If one of my subordinates had done what I have done , I should have declared him unworthy of the service , and have expelled him . 
Well ? 
Stop , Mr. Mayor ; one word more . 
I have often been severe in the course of my life towards others . 
That is just . 
I have done well . 
Now , if I were not severe towards myself , all the justice that I have done would become injustice . 
Ought I to spare myself more than others ? 
No ! 
What ! 
I should be good for nothing but to chastise others , and not myself ! 
Why , I should be a blackguard ! 
Those who say , ` That blackguard of a Javert ! ' 
would be in the right . 
Mr. Mayor , I do not desire that you should treat me kindly ; your kindness roused sufficient bad blood in me when it was directed to others . 
I want none of it for myself . 
The kindness which consists in upholding a woman of the town against a citizen , the police agent against the mayor , the man who is down against the man who is up in the world , is what I call false kindness . 
That is the sort of kindness which disorganizes society . 
Good God ! 
it is very easy to be kind ; the difficulty lies in being just . 
Come ! 
if you had been what I thought you , I should not have been kind to you , not I ! 
You would have seen ! 
Mr. Mayor , I must treat myself as I would treat any other man . 
When I have subdued malefactors , when I have proceeded with vigor against rascals , I have often said to myself , ` If you flinch , if I ever catch you in fault , you may rest at your ease ! ' 
I have flinched , I have caught myself in a fault . 
So much the worse ! 
