Sumptuousness and splendor . 
A louis d'or has been stuck to a candle . 
There 's the epoch for you . 
My demand is that I may flee from it beyond the Sarmatians . 
Ah ! 
in 1787 , I predict that all was lost , from the day when I beheld the Duc de Rohan , Prince de Leon , Duc de Chabot , Duc de Montbazon , Marquis de Sonbise , Vicomte de Thouars , peer of France , go to Longchamps in a tapecu ! 
That has borne its fruits . 
In this century , men attend to business , they gamble on ` Change , they win money , they are stingy . 
People take care of their surfaces and varnish them ; every one is dressed as though just out of a band-box , washed , soaped , scraped , shaved , combed , waked , smoothed , rubbed , brushed , cleaned on the outside , irreproachable , polished as a pebble , discreet , neat , and at the same time , death of my life , in the depths of their consciences they have dung-heaps and cesspools that are enough to make a cow-herd who blows his nose in his fingers , recoil . 
I grant to this age the device : ` Dirty Cleanliness . ' 
Do n't be vexed , Marius , give me permission to speak ; I say no evil of the people as you see , I am always harping on your people , but do look favorably on my dealing a bit of a slap to the bourgeoisie . 
I belong to it . 
He who loves well lashes well . 
Thereupon , I say plainly , that now-a-days people marry , but that they no longer know how to marry . 
Ah ! 
it is true , I regret the grace of the ancient manners . 
I regret everything about them , their elegance , their chivalry , those courteous and delicate ways , that joyous luxury which every one possessed , music forming part of the wedding , a symphony above stairs , a beating of drums below stairs , the dances , the joyous faces round the table , the fine-spun gallant compliments , the songs , the fireworks , the frank laughter , the devil 's own row , the huge knots of ribbon . 
I regret the bride 's garter . 
The bride 's garter is cousin to the girdle of Venus . 
On what does the war of Troy turn ? 
On Helen 's garter , parbleu ! 
Why did they fight , why did Diomed the divine break over the head of Meriones that great brazen helmet of ten points ? 
why did Achilles and Hector hew each other up with vast blows of their lances ? 
Because Helen allowed Paris to take her garter . 
With Cosette 's garter , Homer would construct the Iliad . 
He would put in his poem , a loquacious old fellow , like me , and he would call him Nestor . 
My friends , in bygone days , in those amiable days of yore , people married wisely ; they had a good contract , and then they had a good carouse . 
As soon as Cujas had taken his departure , Gamacho entered . 
But , in sooth ! 
the stomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due , and which wants to have its wedding also . 
People supped well , and had at table a beautiful neighbor without a guimpe so that her throat was only moderately concealed . 
Oh ! 
the large laughing mouths , and how gay we were in those days ! 
youth was a bouquet ; every young man terminated in a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses ; whether he was a shepherd or a warrior ; and if , by chance , one was a captain of dragoons , one found means to call oneself Florian . 
People thought much of looking well . 
They embroidered and tinted themselves . 
A bourgeois had the air of a flower , a Marquis had the air of a precious stone . 
People had no straps to their boots , they had no boots . 
They were spruce , shining , waved , lustrous , fluttering , dainty , coquettish , which did not at all prevent their wearing swords by their sides . 
The humming-bird has beak and claws . 
That was the day of the Galland Indies . 
One of the sides of that century was delicate , the other was magnificent ; and by the green cabbages ! 
people amused themselves . 
To-day , people are serious . 
The bourgeois is avaricious , the bourgeoise is a prude ; your century is unfortunate . 
People would drive away the Graces as being too low in the neck . 
Alas ! 
beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness . 
Since the revolution , everything , including the ballet-dancers , has had its trousers ; a mountebank dancer must be grave ; your rigadoons are doctrinarian . 
It is necessary to be majestic . 
