Jean Valjean laid a host of ambushes for him ; he changed his hour , he changed his bench , he forgot his handkerchief , he came alone to the Luxembourg ; Marius dashed headlong into all these snares ; and to all the interrogation marks planted by Jean Valjean in his pathway , he ingenuously answered `` yes . '' 
But Cosette remained immured in her apparent unconcern and in her imperturbable tranquillity , so that Jean Valjean arrived at the following conclusion : `` That ninny is madly in love with Cosette , but Cosette does not even know that he exists . '' 
None the less did he bear in his heart a mournful tremor . 
The minute when Cosette would love might strike at any moment . 
Does not everything begin with indifference ? 
Only once did Cosette make a mistake and alarm him . 
He rose from his seat to depart , after a stay of three hours , and she said : `` What , already ? '' 
Jean Valjean had not discontinued his trips to the Luxembourg , as he did not wish to do anything out of the way , and as , above all things , he feared to arouse Cosette ; but during the hours which were so sweet to the lovers , while Cosette was sending her smile to the intoxicated Marius , who perceived nothing else now , and who now saw nothing in all the world but an adored and radiant face , Jean Valjean was fixing on Marius flashing and terrible eyes . 
He , who had finally come to believe himself incapable of a malevolent feeling , experienced moments when Marius was present , in which he thought he was becoming savage and ferocious once more , and he felt the old depths of his soul , which had formerly contained so much wrath , opening once more and rising up against that young man . 
It almost seemed to him that unknown craters were forming in his bosom . 
What ! 
he was there , that creature ! 
What was he there for ? 
He came creeping about , smelling out , examining , trying ! 
He came , saying : `` Hey ! 
Why not ? '' 
He came to prowl about his , Jean Valjean 's , life ! 
to prowl about his happiness , with the purpose of seizing it and bearing it away ! 
Jean Valjean added : `` Yes , that 's it ! 
What is he in search of ? 
An adventure ! 
What does he want ? 
A love affair ! 
A love affair ! 
And I ? 
What ! 
I have been first , the most wretched of men , and then the most unhappy , and I have traversed sixty years of life on my knees , I have suffered everything that man can suffer , I have grown old without having been young , I have lived without a family , without relatives , without friends , without life , without children , I have left my blood on every stone , on every bramble , on every mile-post , along every wall , I have been gentle , though others have been hard to me , and kind , although others have been malicious , I have become an honest man once more , in spite of everything , I have repented of the evil that I have done and have forgiven the evil that has been done to me , and at the moment when I receive my recompense , at the moment when it is all over , at the moment when I am just touching the goal , at the moment when I have what I desire , it is well , it is good , I have paid , I have earned it , all this is to take flight , all this will vanish , and I shall lose Cosette , and I shall lose my life , my joy , my soul , because it has pleased a great booby to come and lounge at the Luxembourg . '' 
Then his eyes were filled with a sad and extraordinary gleam . 
It was no longer a man gazing at a man ; it was no longer an enemy surveying an enemy . 
It was a dog scanning a thief . 
The reader knows the rest . 
Marius pursued his senseless course . 
One day he followed Cosette to the Rue de l'Ouest . 
Another day he spoke to the porter . 
The porter , on his side , spoke , and said to Jean Valjean : `` Monsieur , who is that curious young man who is asking for you ? '' 
On the morrow Jean Valjean bestowed on Marius that glance which Marius at last perceived . 
A week later , Jean Valjean had taken his departure . 
He swore to himself that he would never again set foot either in the Luxembourg or in the Rue de l'Ouest . 
He returned to the Rue Plumet . 
Cosette did not complain , she said nothing , she asked no questions , she did not seek to learn his reasons ; she had already reached the point where she was afraid of being divined , and of betraying herself . 
Jean Valjean had no experience of these miseries , the only miseries which are charming and the only ones with which he was not acquainted ; the consequence was that he did not understand the grave significance of Cosette 's silence . 
He merely noticed that she had grown sad , and he grew gloomy . 
On his side and on hers , inexperience had joined issue . 
Once he made a trial . 
He asked Cosette : -- `` Would you like to come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
A ray illuminated Cosette 's pale face . 
`` Yes , '' said she . 
They went thither . 
Three months had elapsed . 
Marius no longer went there . 
