If I did not know how good you are , I should be afraid of you . '' 
He still lived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , because he could not make up his mind to remove to a distance from the quarter where Cosette dwelt . 
At first , he only remained a few minutes with Cosette , and then went away . 
Little by little he acquired the habit of making his visits less brief . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of the authorization of the days which were lengthening , he arrived earlier and departed later . 
One day Cosette chanced to say `` father '' to him . 
A flash of joy illuminated Jean Valjean 's melancholy old countenance . 
He caught her up : `` Say Jean . '' 
-- `` Ah ! 
truly , '' she replied with a burst of laughter , `` Monsieur Jean . '' 
-- `` That is right , '' said he . 
And he turned aside so that she might not see him wipe his eyes . 
THEY RECALL THE GARDEN OF THE RUE PLUMET This was the last time . 
After that last flash of light , complete extinction ensued . 
No more familiarity , no more good-morning with a kiss , never more that word so profoundly sweet : `` My father ! '' 
He was at his own request and through his own complicity driven out of all his happinesses one after the other ; and he had this sorrow , that after having lost Cosette wholly in one day , he was afterwards obliged to lose her again in detail . 
The eye eventually becomes accustomed to the light of a cellar . 
In short , it sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day . 
His whole life was concentrated in that one hour . 
He seated himself close to her , he gazed at her in silence , or he talked to her of years gone by , of her childhood , of the convent , of her little friends of those bygone days . 
One afternoon , -- it was on one of those early days in April , already warm and fresh , the moment of the sun 's great gayety , the gardens which surrounded the windows of Marius and Cosette felt the emotion of waking , the hawthorn was on the point of budding , a jewelled garniture of gillyflowers spread over the ancient walls , snapdragons yawned through the crevices of the stones , amid the grass there was a charming beginning of daisies , and buttercups , the white butterflies of the year were making their first appearance , the wind , that minstrel of the eternal wedding , was trying in the trees the first notes of that grand , auroral symphony which the old poets called the springtide , -- Marius said to Cosette : -- `` We said that we would go back to take a look at our garden in the Rue Plumet . 
Let us go thither . 
We must not be ungrateful . '' 
-- And away they flitted , like two swallows towards the spring . 
This garden of the Rue Plumet produced on them the effect of the dawn . 
They already had behind them in life something which was like the springtime of their love . 
The house in the Rue Plumet being held on a lease , still belonged to Cosette . 
They went to that garden and that house . 
There they found themselves again , there they forgot themselves . 
That evening , at the usual hour , Jean Valjean came to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
-- `` Madame went out with Monsieur and has not yet returned , '' Basque said to him . 
He seated himself in silence , and waited an hour . 
Cosette did not return . 
He departed with drooping head . 
Cosette was so intoxicated with her walk to `` their garden , '' and so joyous at having `` lived a whole day in her past , '' that she talked of nothing else on the morrow . 
She did not notice that she had not seen Jean Valjean . 
`` In what way did you go thither ? '' 
Jean Valjean asked her . '' 
`` On foot . '' 
`` And how did you return ? '' 
`` In a hackney carriage . '' 
For some time , Jean Valjean had noticed the economical life led by the young people . 
He was troubled by it . 
Marius ' economy was severe , and that word had its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean . 
He hazarded a query : `` Why do you not have a carriage of your own ? 
A pretty coupe would only cost you five hundred francs a month . 
You are rich . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Cosette . 
`` It is like Toussaint , '' resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` She is gone . 
