He could not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him . 
He hardened himself against the angelic action and the gentle words of the old man . 
`` You have promised me to become an honest man . 
I buy your soul . 
I take it away from the spirit of perversity ; I give it to the good God . '' 
This recurred to his mind unceasingly . 
To this celestial kindness he opposed pride , which is the fortress of evil within us . 
He was indistinctly conscious that the pardon of this priest was the greatest assault and the most formidable attack which had moved him yet ; that his obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency ; that if he yielded , he should be obliged to renounce that hatred with which the actions of other men had filled his soul through so many years , and which pleased him ; that this time it was necessary to conquer or to be conquered ; and that a struggle , a colossal and final struggle , had been begun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man . 
In the presence of these lights , he proceeded like a man who is intoxicated . 
As he walked thus with haggard eyes , did he have a distinct perception of what might result to him from his adventure at D -- ? 
Did he understand all those mysterious murmurs which warn or importune the spirit at certain moments of life ? 
Did a voice whisper in his ear that he had just passed the solemn hour of his destiny ; that there no longer remained a middle course for him ; that if he were not henceforth the best of men , he would be the worst ; that it behooved him now , so to speak , to mount higher than the Bishop , or fall lower than the convict ; that if he wished to become good be must become an angel ; that if he wished to remain evil , he must become a monster ? 
Here , again , some questions must be put , which we have already put to ourselves elsewhere : did he catch some shadow of all this in his thought , in a confused way ? 
Misfortune certainly , as we have said , does form the education of the intelligence ; nevertheless , it is doubtful whether Jean Valjean was in a condition to disentangle all that we have here indicated . 
If these ideas occurred to him , he but caught glimpses of , rather than saw them , and they only succeeded in throwing him into an unutterable and almost painful state of emotion . 
On emerging from that black and deformed thing which is called the galleys , the Bishop had hurt his soul , as too vivid a light would have hurt his eyes on emerging from the dark . 
The future life , the possible life which offered itself to him henceforth , all pure and radiant , filled him with tremors and anxiety . 
He no longer knew where he really was . 
Like an owl , who should suddenly see the sun rise , the convict had been dazzled and blinded , as it were , by virtue . 
That which was certain , that which he did not doubt , was that he was no longer the same man , that everything about him was changed , that it was no longer in his power to make it as though the Bishop had not spoken to him and had not touched him . 
In this state of mind he had encountered little Gervais , and had robbed him of his forty sous . 
Why ? 
He certainly could not have explained it ; was this the last effect and the supreme effort , as it were , of the evil thoughts which he had brought away from the galleys , -- a remnant of impulse , a result of what is called in statics , acquired force ? 
It was that , and it was also , perhaps , even less than that . 
Let us say it simply , it was not he who stole ; it was not the man ; it was the beast , who , by habit and instinct , had simply placed his foot upon that money , while the intelligence was struggling amid so many novel and hitherto unheard-of thoughts besetting it . 
When intelligence re-awakened and beheld that action of the brute , Jean Valjean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror . 
It was because , -- strange phenomenon , and one which was possible only in the situation in which he found himself , -- in stealing the money from that child , he had done a thing of which he was no longer capable . 
However that may be , this last evil action had a decisive effect on him ; it abruptly traversed that chaos which he bore in his mind , and dispersed it , placed on one side the thick obscurity , and on the other the light , and acted on his soul , in the state in which it then was , as certain chemical reagents act upon a troubled mixture by precipitating one element and clarifying the other . 
First of all , even before examining himself and reflecting , all bewildered , like one who seeks to save himself , he tried to find the child in order to return his money to him ; then , when he recognized the fact that this was impossible , he halted in despair . 
At the moment when he exclaimed `` I am a wretch ! '' 
he had just perceived what he was , and he was already separated from himself to such a degree , that he seemed to himself to be no longer anything more than a phantom , and as if he had , there before him , in flesh and blood , the hideous galley-convict , Jean Valjean , cudgel in hand , his blouse on his hips , his knapsack filled with stolen objects on his back , with his resolute and gloomy visage , with his thoughts filled with abominable projects . 
Excess of unhappiness had , as we have remarked , made him in some sort a visionary . 
This , then , was in the nature of a vision . 
He actually saw that Jean Valjean , that sinister face , before him . 
He had almost reached the point of asking himself who that man was , and he was horrified by him . 
His brain was going through one of those violent and yet perfectly calm moments in which revery is so profound that it absorbs reality . 
One no longer beholds the object which one has before one , and one sees , as though apart from one 's self , the figures which one has in one 's own mind . 
Thus he contemplated himself , so to speak , face to face , and at the same time , athwart this hallucination , he perceived in a mysterious depth a sort of light which he at first took for a torch . 
On scrutinizing this light which appeared to his conscience with more attention , he recognized the fact that it possessed a human form and that this torch was the Bishop . 
His conscience weighed in turn these two men thus placed before it , -- the Bishop and Jean Valjean . 
Nothing less than the first was required to soften the second . 
By one of those singular effects , which are peculiar to this sort of ecstasies , in proportion as his revery continued , as the Bishop grew great and resplendent in his eyes , so did Jean Valjean grow less and vanish . 
After a certain time he was no longer anything more than a shade . 
All at once he disappeared . 
The Bishop alone remained ; he filled the whole soul of this wretched man with a magnificent radiance . 
Jean Valjean wept for a long time . 
He wept burning tears , he sobbed with more weakness than a woman , with more fright than a child . 
As he wept , daylight penetrated more and more clearly into his soul ; an extraordinary light ; a light at once ravishing and terrible . 
His past life , his first fault , his long expiation , his external brutishness , his internal hardness , his dismissal to liberty , rejoicing in manifold plans of vengeance , what had happened to him at the Bishop 's , the last thing that he had done , that theft of forty sous from a child , a crime all the more cowardly , and all the more monstrous since it had come after the Bishop 's pardon , -- all this recurred to his mind and appeared clearly to him , but with a clearness which he had never hitherto witnessed . 
He examined his life , and it seemed horrible to him ; his soul , and it seemed frightful to him . 
