The slashers have finished ; it was the turn of the thinkers . 
The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march . 
That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty . 
In short , and incontestably , that which triumphed at Waterloo ; that which smiled in Wellington 's rear ; that which brought him all the marshals ' staffs of Europe , including , it is said , the staff of a marshal of France ; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of bones to erect the knoll of the lion ; that which triumphantly inscribed on that pedestal the date `` June 18 , 1815 '' ; that which encouraged Blucher , as he put the flying army to the sword ; that which , from the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , hovered over France as over its prey , was the counter-revolution . 
It was the counter-revolution which murmured that infamous word `` dismemberment . '' 
On arriving in Paris , it beheld the crater close at hand ; it felt those ashes which scorched its feet , and it changed its mind ; it returned to the stammer of a charter . 
Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo . 
Of intentional liberty there is none . 
The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal , in the same manner as , by a corresponding phenomenon , Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle . 
A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT End of the dictatorship . 
A whole European system crumbled away . 
The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as it expired . 
Again we behold the abyss , as in the days of the barbarians ; only the barbarism of 1815 , which must be called by its pet name of the counter-revolution , was not long breathed , soon fell to panting , and halted short . 
The Empire was bewept , -- let us acknowledge the fact , -- and bewept by heroic eyes . 
If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre , the Empire had been glory in person . 
It had diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give a sombre light . 
We will say more ; an obscure light . 
Compared to the true daylight , it is night . 
This disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse . 
Louis XVIII . 
re-entered Paris . 
The circling dances of the 8th of July effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March . 
The Corsican became the antithesis of the Bearnese . 
The flag on the dome of the Tuileries was white . 
The exile reigned . 
Hartwell 's pine table took its place in front of the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV . 
Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day , Austerlitz having become antiquated . 
The altar and the throne fraternized majestically . 
One of the most undisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth century was established over France , and over the continent . 
Europe adopted the white cockade . 
Trestaillon was celebrated . 
The device non pluribus impar re-appeared on the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai d'Orsay . 
Where there had been an Imperial Guard , there was now a red house . 
The Arc du Carrousel , all laden with badly borne victories , thrown out of its element among these novelties , a little ashamed , it may be , of Marengo and Arcola , extricated itself from its predicament with the statue of the Duc d'Angouleme . 
The cemetery of the Madeleine , a terrible pauper 's grave in 1793 , was covered with jasper and marble , since the bones of Louis XVI . 
and Marie Antoinette lay in that dust . 
In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth , recalling the fact that the Duc d'Enghien had perished in the very month when Napoleon was crowned . 
Pope Pius VII. , who had performed the coronation very near this death , tranquilly bestowed his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation . 
At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow , aged four , whom it was seditious to call the King of Rome . 
And these things took place , and the kings resumed their thrones , and the master of Europe was put in a cage , and the old regime became the new regime , and all the shadows and all the light of the earth changed place , because , on the afternoon of a certain summer 's day , a shepherd said to a Prussian in the forest , `` Go this way , and not that ! '' 
This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April . 
Ancient unhealthy and poisonous realities were covered with new appearances . 
A lie wedded 1789 ; the right divine was masked under a charter ; fictions became constitutional ; prejudices , superstitions and mental reservations , with Article 14 in the heart , were varnished over with liberalism . 
It was the serpent 's change of skin . 
Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon . 
Under this reign of splendid matter , the ideal had received the strange name of ideology ! 
It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future into derision . 
The populace , however , that food for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer , sought him with its glance . 
Where is he ? 
