He could not have told . 
Why was he hastening ? 
He did not know . 
He was driving at random , straight ahead . 
Whither ? 
To Arras , no doubt ; but he might have been going elsewhere as well . 
At times he was conscious of it , and he shuddered . 
He plunged into the night as into a gulf . 
Something urged him forward ; something drew him on . 
No one could have told what was taking place within him ; every one will understand it . 
What man is there who has not entered , at least once in his life , into that obscure cavern of the unknown ? 
However , he had resolved on nothing , decided nothing , formed no plan , done nothing . 
None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive . 
He was , more than ever , as he had been at the first moment . 
Why was he going to Arras ? 
He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hired Scaufflaire 's cabriolet : that , whatever the result was to be , there was no reason why he should not see with his own eyes , and judge of matters for himself ; that this was even prudent ; that he must know what took place ; that no decision could be arrived at without having observed and scrutinized ; that one made mountains out of everything from a distance ; that , at any rate , when he should have seen that Champmathieu , some wretch , his conscience would probably be greatly relieved to allow him to go to the galleys in his stead ; that Javert would indeed be there ; and that Brevet , that Chenildieu , that Cochepaille , old convicts who had known him ; but they certainly would not recognize him ; -- bah ! 
what an idea ! 
that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth ; that all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu , and that there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures ; that accordingly there was no danger . 
That it was , no doubt , a dark moment , but that he should emerge from it ; that , after all , he held his destiny , however bad it might be , in his own hand ; that he was master of it . 
He clung to this thought . 
At bottom , to tell the whole truth , he would have preferred not to go to Arras . 
Nevertheless , he was going thither . 
As he meditated , he whipped up his horse , which was proceeding at that fine , regular , and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a half an hour . 
In proportion as the cabriolet advanced , he felt something within him draw back . 
At daybreak he was in the open country ; the town of M. sur M. lay far behind him . 
He watched the horizon grow white ; he stared at all the chilly figures of a winter 's dawn as they passed before his eyes , but without seeing them . 
The morning has its spectres as well as the evening . 
He did not see them ; but without his being aware of it , and by means of a sort of penetration which was almost physical , these black silhouettes of trees and of hills added some gloomy and sinister quality to the violent state of his soul . 
Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which sometimes border on the highway , he said to himself , `` And yet there are people there within who are sleeping ! '' 
The trot of the horse , the bells on the harness , the wheels on the road , produced a gentle , monotonous noise . 
These things are charming when one is joyous , and lugubrious when one is sad . 
It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin . 
He halted in front of the inn , to allow the horse a breathing spell , and to have him given some oats . 
The horse belonged , as Scaufflaire had said , to that small race of the Boulonnais , which has too much head , too much belly , and not enough neck and shoulders , but which has a broad chest , a large crupper , thin , fine legs , and solid hoofs -- a homely , but a robust and healthy race . 
The excellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours , and had not a drop of sweat on his loins . 
He did not get out of the tilbury . 
The stableman who brought the oats suddenly bent down and examined the left wheel . 
`` Are you going far in this condition ? '' 
said the man . 
He replied , with an air of not having roused himself from his revery : -- `` Why ? '' 
`` Have you come from a great distance ? '' 
went on the man . 
`` Five leagues . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` Why do you say , ` Ah ? ' '' 
The man bent down once more , was silent for a moment , with his eyes fixed on the wheel ; then he rose erect and said : -- `` Because , though this wheel has travelled five leagues , it certainly will not travel another quarter of a league . '' 
He sprang out of the tilbury . 
`` What is that you say , my friend ? '' 
`` I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagues without you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway . 
Just see here ! '' 
