He himself explained this with the irresistible accents of truth . 
In short , whatever this Jean Valjean might be , he was , undoubtedly , a conscience which was awakening . 
There existed some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun ; and , to all appearances , scruples had for a long time already controlled this man . 
Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar natures . 
An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul . 
Jean Valjean was sincere . 
This sincerity , visible , palpable , irrefragable , evident from the very grief that it caused him , rendered inquiries useless , and conferred authority on all that that man had said . 
Here , for Marius , there was a strange reversal of situations . 
What breathed from M. Fauchelevent ? 
distrust . 
What did Jean Valjean inspire ? 
confidence . 
In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Marius struck , he admitted the active principle , he admitted the passive principle , and he tried to reach a balance . 
But all this went on as in a storm . 
Marius , while endeavoring to form a clear idea of this man , and while pursuing Jean Valjean , so to speak , in the depths of his thought , lost him and found him again in a fatal mist . 
The deposit honestly restored , the probity of the confession -- these were good . 
This produced a lightening of the cloud , then the cloud became black once more . 
Troubled as were Marius ' memories , a shadow of them returned to him . 
After all , what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic ? 
Why had that man taken to flight on the arrival of the police , instead of entering a complaint ? 
Here Marius found the answer . 
Because that man was a fugitive from justice , who had broken his ban . 
Another question : Why had that man come to the barricade ? 
For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which had re-appeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application of heat . 
This man had been in the barricade . 
He had not fought there . 
What had he come there for ? 
In the presence of this question a spectre sprang up and replied : `` Javert . '' 
Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjean dragging the pinioned Javert out of the barricade , and he still heard behind the corner of the little Rue Mondetour that frightful pistol shot . 
Obviously , there was hatred between that police spy and the galley-slave . 
The one was in the other 's way . 
Jean Valjean had gone to the barricade for the purpose of revenging himself . 
He had arrived late . 
He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there . 
The Corsican vendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the law there ; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are but half turned towards good ; and those hearts are so constituted that a criminal , who is in the path of repentance , may be scrupulous in the matter of theft and unscrupulous in the matter of vengeance . 
Jean Valjean had killed Javert . 
At least , that seemed to be evident . 
This was the final question , to be sure ; but to this there was no reply . 
This question Marius felt like pincers . 
How had it come to pass that Jean Valjean 's existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a period ? 
What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed that child in contact with that man ? 
Are there then chains for two which are forged on high ? 
and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel with the demon ? 
So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in the mysterious galleys of wretchedness ? 
In that defiling of condemned persons which is called human destiny , can two brows pass side by side , the one ingenuous , the other formidable , the one all bathed in the divine whiteness of dawn , the other forever blemished by the flash of an eternal lightning ? 
Who could have arranged that inexplicable pairing off ? 
In what manner , in consequence of what prodigy , had any community of life been established between this celestial little creature and that old criminal ? 
Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf , and , what was still more incomprehensible , have attached the wolf to the lamb ? 
For the wolf loved the lamb , for the fierce creature adored the feeble one , for , during the space of nine years , the angel had had the monster as her point of support . 
Cosette 's childhood and girlhood , her advent in the daylight , her virginal growth towards life and light , had been sheltered by that hideous devotion . 
