Condemn the victim and to spare the assassin ! 
Could one be held to any gratitude towards so miserable a wretch ? 
All the ideas which Marius had cherished for the last four years were pierced through and through , as it were , by this unforeseen blow . 
He shuddered . 
Everything depended on him . 
Unknown to themselves , he held in his hand all those beings who were moving about there before his eyes . 
If he fired his pistol , M. Leblanc was saved , and Thenardier lost ; if he did not fire , M. Leblanc would be sacrificed , and , who knows ? 
Thenardier would escape . 
Should he dash down the one or allow the other to fall ? 
Remorse awaited him in either case . 
What was he to do ? 
What should he choose ? 
Be false to the most imperious souvenirs , to all those solemn vows to himself , to the most sacred duty , to the most venerated text ! 
Should he ignore his father 's testament , or allow the perpetration of a crime ! 
On the one hand , it seemed to him that he heard `` his Ursule '' supplicating for her father and on the other , the colonel commending Thenardier to his care . 
He felt that he was going mad . 
His knees gave way beneath him . 
And he had not even the time for deliberation , so great was the fury with which the scene before his eyes was hastening to its catastrophe . 
It was like a whirlwind of which he had thought himself the master , and which was now sweeping him away . 
He was on the verge of swooning . 
In the meantime , Thenardier , whom we shall henceforth call by no other name , was pacing up and down in front of the table in a sort of frenzy and wild triumph . 
He seized the candle in his fist , and set it on the chimney-piece with so violent a bang that the wick came near being extinguished , and the tallow bespattered the wall . 
Then he turned to M. Leblanc with a horrible look , and spit out these words : -- `` Done for ! 
Smoked brown ! 
Cooked ! 
Spitchcocked ! '' 
And again he began to march back and forth , in full eruption . 
`` Ah ! '' 
he cried , `` so I 've found you again at last , Mister philanthropist ! 
Mister threadbare millionnaire ! 
Mister giver of dolls ! 
you old ninny ! 
Ah ! 
so you do n't recognize me ! 
No , it was n't you who came to Montfermeil , to my inn , eight years ago , on Christmas eve , 1823 ! 
It was n't you who carried off that Fantine 's child from me ! 
The Lark ! 
It was n't you who had a yellow great-coat ! 
No ! 
Nor a package of duds in your hand , as you had this morning here ! 
Say , wife , it seems to be his mania to carry packets of woollen stockings into houses ! 
Old charity monger , get out with you ! 
Are you a hosier , Mister millionnaire ? 
You give away your stock in trade to the poor , holy man ! 
What bosh ! 
merry Andrew ! 
Ah ! 
and you do n't recognize me ? 
Well , I recognize you , that I do ! 
I recognized you the very moment you poked your snout in here . 
