The girl whom he could no longer call Ursule was evidently somewhere ; nothing warned Marius in what direction he should seek her . 
His whole life was now summed up in two words ; absolute uncertainty within an impenetrable fog . 
To see her once again ; he still aspired to this , but he no longer expected it . 
To crown all , his poverty had returned . 
He felt that icy breath close to him , on his heels . 
In the midst of his torments , and long before this , he had discontinued his work , and nothing is more dangerous than discontinued work ; it is a habit which vanishes . 
A habit which is easy to get rid of , and difficult to take up again . 
A certain amount of dreaming is good , like a narcotic in discreet doses . 
It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor , which are sometimes severe , and produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vapor which corrects the over-harsh contours of pure thought , fills in gaps here and there , binds together and rounds off the angles of the ideas . 
But too much dreaming sinks and drowns . 
Woe to the brain-worker who allows himself to fall entirely from thought into revery ! 
He thinks that he can re-ascend with equal ease , and he tells himself that , after all , it is the same thing . 
Error ! 
Thought is the toil of the intelligence , revery its voluptuousness . 
To replace thought with revery is to confound a poison with a food . 
Marius had begun in that way , as the reader will remember . 
Passion had supervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimaeras without object or bottom . 
One no longer emerges from one 's self except for the purpose of going off to dream . 
Idle production . 
Tumultuous and stagnant gulf . 
And , in proportion as labor diminishes , needs increase . 
This is a law . 
Man , in a state of revery , is generally prodigal and slack ; the unstrung mind can not hold life within close bounds . 
There is , in that mode of life , good mingled with evil , for if enervation is baleful , generosity is good and healthful . 
But the poor man who is generous and noble , and who does not work , is lost . 
Resources are exhausted , needs crop up . 
Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well as the most feeble and most vicious are drawn , and which ends in one of two holds , suicide or crime . 
By dint of going outdoors to think , the day comes when one goes out to throw one 's self in the water . 
Excess of revery breeds men like Escousse and Lebras . 
Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace , with his eyes fixed on the girl whom he no longer saw . 
What we have just written seems strange , and yet it is true . 
The memory of an absent being kindles in the darkness of the heart ; the more it has disappeared , the more it beams ; the gloomy and despairing soul sees this light on its horizon ; the star of the inner night . 
She -- that was Marius ' whole thought . 
He meditated of nothing else ; he was confusedly conscious that his old coat was becoming an impossible coat , and that his new coat was growing old , that his shirts were wearing out , that his hat was wearing out , that his boots were giving out , and he said to himself : `` If I could but see her once again before I die ! '' 
One sweet idea alone was left to him , that she had loved him , that her glance had told him so , that she did not know his name , but that she did know his soul , and that , wherever she was , however mysterious the place , she still loved him perhaps . 
Who knows whether she were not thinking of him as he was thinking of her ? 
Sometimes , in those inexplicable hours such as are experienced by every heart that loves , though he had no reasons for anything but sadness and yet felt an obscure quiver of joy , he said to himself : `` It is her thoughts that are coming to me ! '' 
Then he added : `` Perhaps my thoughts reach her also . '' 
This illusion , at which he shook his head a moment later , was sufficient , nevertheless , to throw beams , which at times resembled hope , into his soul . 
From time to time , especially at that evening hour which is the most depressing to even the dreamy , he allowed the purest , the most impersonal , the most ideal of the reveries which filled his brain , to fall upon a notebook which contained nothing else . 
He called this `` writing to her . '' 
It must not be supposed that his reason was deranged . 
Quite the contrary . 
He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly towards any fixed goal , but he was endowed with more clear-sightedness and rectitude than ever . 
Marius surveyed by a calm and real , although peculiar light , what passed before his eyes , even the most indifferent deeds and men ; he pronounced a just criticism on everything with a sort of honest dejection and candid disinterestedness . 
His judgment , which was almost wholly disassociated from hope , held itself aloof and soared on high . 
In this state of mind nothing escaped him , nothing deceived him , and every moment he was discovering the foundation of life , of humanity , and of destiny . 
Happy , even in the midst of anguish , is he to whom God has given a soul worthy of love and of unhappiness ! 
He who has not viewed the things of this world and the heart of man under this double light has seen nothing and knows nothing of the true . 
The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity . 
