What had taken place during those ten months ? 
It can be divined . 
After abandonment , straightened circumstances . 
Fantine had immediately lost sight of Favourite , Zephine and Dahlia ; the bond once broken on the side of the men , it was loosed between the women ; they would have been greatly astonished had any one told them a fortnight later , that they had been friends ; there no longer existed any reason for such a thing . 
Fantine had remained alone . 
The father of her child gone , -- alas ! 
such ruptures are irrevocable , -- she found herself absolutely isolated , minus the habit of work and plus the taste for pleasure . 
Drawn away by her liaison with Tholomyes to disdain the pretty trade which she knew , she had neglected to keep her market open ; it was now closed to her . 
She had no resource . 
Fantine barely knew how to read , and did not know how to write ; in her childhood she had only been taught to sign her name ; she had a public letter-writer indite an epistle to Tholomyes , then a second , then a third . 
Tholomyes replied to none of them . 
Fantine heard the gossips say , as they looked at her child : `` Who takes those children seriously ! 
One only shrugs one 's shoulders over such children ! '' 
Then she thought of Tholomyes , who had shrugged his shoulders over his child , and who did not take that innocent being seriously ; and her heart grew gloomy toward that man . 
But what was she to do ? 
She no longer knew to whom to apply . 
She had committed a fault , but the foundation of her nature , as will be remembered , was modesty and virtue . 
She was vaguely conscious that she was on the verge of falling into distress , and of gliding into a worse state . 
Courage was necessary ; she possessed it , and held herself firm . 
The idea of returning to her native town of M. sur M. occurred to her . 
There , some one might possibly know her and give her work ; yes , but it would be necessary to conceal her fault . 
In a confused way she perceived the necessity of a separation which would be more painful than the first one . 
Her heart contracted , but she took her resolution . 
Fantine , as we shall see , had the fierce bravery of life . 
She had already valiantly renounced finery , had dressed herself in linen , and had put all her silks , all her ornaments , all her ribbons , and all her laces on her daughter , the only vanity which was left to her , and a holy one it was . 
She sold all that she had , which produced for her two hundred francs ; her little debts paid , she had only about eighty francs left . 
At the age of twenty-two , on a beautiful spring morning , she quitted Paris , bearing her child on her back . 
Any one who had seen these two pass would have had pity on them . 
This woman had , in all the world , nothing but her child , and the child had , in all the world , no one but this woman . 
Fantine had nursed her child , and this had tired her chest , and she coughed a little . 
We shall have no further occasion to speak of M. Felix Tholomyes . 
Let us confine ourselves to saying , that , twenty years later , under King Louis Philippe , he was a great provincial lawyer , wealthy and influential , a wise elector , and a very severe juryman ; he was still a man of pleasure . 
Towards the middle of the day , after having , from time to time , for the sake of resting herself , travelled , for three or four sous a league , in what was then known as the Petites Voitures des Environs de Paris , the `` little suburban coach service , '' Fantine found herself at Montfermeil , in the alley Boulanger . 
As she passed the Thenardier hostelry , the two little girls , blissful in the monster swing , had dazzled her in a manner , and she had halted in front of that vision of joy . 
Charms exist . 
These two little girls were a charm to this mother . 
She gazed at them in much emotion . 
The presence of angels is an announcement of Paradise . 
She thought that , above this inn , she beheld the mysterious HERE of Providence . 
These two little creatures were evidently happy . 
She gazed at them , she admired them , in such emotion that at the moment when their mother was recovering her breath between two couplets of her song , she could not refrain from addressing to her the remark which we have just read : -- `` You have two pretty children , Madame . '' 
The most ferocious creatures are disarmed by caresses bestowed on their young . 
The mother raised her head and thanked her , and bade the wayfarer sit down on the bench at the door , she herself being seated on the threshold . 
The two women began to chat . 
`` My name is Madame Thenardier , '' said the mother of the two little girls . 
`` We keep this inn . '' 
Then , her mind still running on her romance , she resumed humming between her teeth : -- `` It must be so ; I am a knight , And I am off to Palestine . '' 
This Madame Thenardier was a sandy-complexioned woman , thin and angular -- the type of the soldier 's wife in all its unpleasantness ; and what was odd , with a languishing air , which she owed to her perusal of romances . 
She was a simpering , but masculine creature . 
Old romances produce that effect when rubbed against the imagination of cook-shop woman . 
