`` No . '' 
`` We have just seen the head of the procession pass , Joly and I. '' `` It 's a marvellous sight , '' said Joly . 
`` How quiet this street is ! '' 
exclaimed Laigle . 
`` Who would suspect that Paris was turned upside down ? 
How plainly it is to be seen that in former days there were nothing but convents here ! 
In this neighborhood ! 
Du Breul and Sauval give a list of them , and so does the Abbe Lebeuf . 
They were all round here , they fairly swarmed , booted and barefooted , shaven , bearded , gray , black , white , Franciscans , Minims , Capuchins , Carmelites , Little Augustines , Great Augustines , old Augustines -- there was no end of them . '' 
`` Do n't let 's talk of monks , '' interrupted Grantaire , `` it makes one want to scratch one 's self . '' 
Then he exclaimed : -- `` Bouh ! 
I 've just swallowed a bad oyster . 
Now hypochondria is taking possession of me again . 
The oysters are spoiled , the servants are ugly . 
I hate the human race . 
I just passed through the Rue Richelieu , in front of the big public library . 
That pile of oyster-shells which is called a library is disgusting even to think of . 
What paper ! 
What ink ! 
What scrawling ! 
And all that has been written ! 
What rascal was it who said that man was a featherless biped ? 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- And then , I met a pretty girl of my acquaintance , who is as beautiful as the spring , worthy to be called Floreal , and who is delighted , enraptured , as happy as the angels , because a wretch yesterday , a frightful banker all spotted with small-pox , deigned to take a fancy to her ! 
Alas ! 
woman keeps on the watch for a protector as much as for a lover ; cats chase mice as well as birds . 
Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic , she adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets , what do you call it ? 
She sewed , she had a camp bed , she dwelt beside a pot of flowers , she was contented . 
Now here she is a bankeress . 
This transformation took place last night . 
I met the victim this morning in high spirits . 
The hideous point about it is , that the jade is as pretty to-day as she was yesterday . 
Her financier did not show in her face . 
Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women , that the traces left upon them by caterpillars are visible . 
Ah ! 
there is no morality on earth . 
I call to witness the myrtle , the symbol of love , the laurel , the symbol of air , the olive , that ninny , the symbol of peace , the apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips , and the fig-tree , the grandfather of petticoats . 
As for right , do you know what right is ? 
The Gauls covet Clusium , Rome protects Clusium , and demands what wrong Clusium has done to them . 
Brennus answers : ` The wrong that Alba did to you , the wrong that Fidenae did to you , the wrong that the Eques , the Volsci , and the Sabines have done to you . 
They were your neighbors . 
The Clusians are ours . 
We understand neighborliness just as you do . 
You have stolen Alba , we shall take Clusium . ' 
Rome said : ` You shall not take Clusium . ' 
Brennus took Rome . 
Then he cried : ` Vae victis ! ' 
That is what right is . 
Ah ! 
what beasts of prey there are in this world ! 
What eagles ! 
