And she sprang out of bed , her eyes still half shut with the heaviness of sleep , extending her arms towards the corner of the wall . 
`` Ah ! 
mon Dieu , my broom ! '' 
said she . 
She opened her eyes wide now , and beheld the smiling countenance of Jean Valjean . 
`` Ah ! 
so it is true ! '' 
said the child . 
`` Good morning , Monsieur . '' 
Children accept joy and happiness instantly and familiarly , being themselves by nature joy and happiness . 
Cosette caught sight of Catherine at the foot of her bed , and took possession of her , and , as she played , she put a hundred questions to Jean Valjean . 
Where was she ? 
Was Paris very large ? 
Was Madame Thenardier very far away ? 
Was she to go back ? 
etc. , etc. . 
All at once she exclaimed , `` How pretty it is here ! '' 
It was a frightful hole , but she felt free . 
`` Must I sweep ? '' 
she resumed at last . 
`` Play ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
The day passed thus . 
Cosette , without troubling herself to understand anything , was inexpressibly happy with that doll and that kind man . 
TWO MISFORTUNES MAKE ONE PIECE OF GOOD FORTUNE On the following morning , at daybreak , Jean Valjean was still by Cosette 's bedside ; he watched there motionless , waiting for her to wake . 
Some new thing had come into his soul . 
Jean Valjean had never loved anything ; for twenty-five years he had been alone in the world . 
He had never been father , lover , husband , friend . 
In the prison he had been vicious , gloomy , chaste , ignorant , and shy . 
The heart of that ex-convict was full of virginity . 
His sister and his sister 's children had left him only a vague and far-off memory which had finally almost completely vanished ; he had made every effort to find them , and not having been able to find them , he had forgotten them . 
Human nature is made thus ; the other tender emotions of his youth , if he had ever had any , had fallen into an abyss . 
When he saw Cosette , when he had taken possession of her , carried her off , and delivered her , he felt his heart moved within him . 
All the passion and affection within him awoke , and rushed towards that child . 
He approached the bed , where she lay sleeping , and trembled with joy . 
He suffered all the pangs of a mother , and he knew not what it meant ; for that great and singular movement of a heart which begins to love is a very obscure and a very sweet thing . 
Poor old man , with a perfectly new heart ! 
Only , as he was five and fifty , and Cosette eight years of age , all that might have been love in the whole course of his life flowed together into a sort of ineffable light . 
It was the second white apparition which he had encountered . 
The Bishop had caused the dawn of virtue to rise on his horizon ; Cosette caused the dawn of love to rise . 
The early days passed in this dazzled state . 
Cosette , on her side , had also , unknown to herself , become another being , poor little thing ! 
She was so little when her mother left her , that she no longer remembered her . 
Like all children , who resemble young shoots of the vine , which cling to everything , she had tried to love ; she had not succeeded . 
All had repulsed her , -- the Thenardiers , their children , other children . 
She had loved the dog , and he had died , after which nothing and nobody would have anything to do with her . 
It is a sad thing to say , and we have already intimated it , that , at eight years of age , her heart was cold . 
It was not her fault ; it was not the faculty of loving that she lacked ; alas ! 
it was the possibility . 
Thus , from the very first day , all her sentient and thinking powers loved this kind man . 
