The supreme moment was approaching . 
The Bishop understood this ; time pressed ; it was as a priest that he had come : from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion ; he gazed at those closed eyes , he took that wrinkled , aged and ice-cold hand in his , and bent over the dying man . 
`` This hour is the hour of God . 
Do you not think that it would be regrettable if we had met in vain ? '' 
The conventionary opened his eyes again . 
A gravity mingled with gloom was imprinted on his countenance . 
`` Bishop , '' said he , with a slowness which probably arose more from his dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength , `` I have passed my life in meditation , study , and contemplation . 
I was sixty years of age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with its affairs . 
I obeyed . 
Abuses existed , I combated them ; tyrannies existed , I destroyed them ; rights and principles existed , I proclaimed and confessed them . 
Our territory was invaded , I defended it ; France was menaced , I offered my breast . 
I was not rich ; I am poor . 
I have been one of the masters of the state ; the vaults of the treasury were encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the walls , which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and silver ; I dined in Dead Tree Street , at twenty-two sous . 
I have succored the oppressed , I have comforted the suffering . 
I tore the cloth from the altar , it is true ; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country . 
I have always upheld the march forward of the human race , forward towards the light , and I have sometimes resisted progress without pity . 
I have , when the occasion offered , protected my own adversaries , men of your profession . 
And there is at Peteghem , in Flanders , at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer palace , a convent of Urbanists , the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu , which I saved in 1793 . 
I have done my duty according to my powers , and all the good that I was able . 
After which , I was hunted down , pursued , persecuted , blackened , jeered at , scorned , cursed , proscribed . 
For many years past , I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they have the right to despise me ; to the poor ignorant masses I present the visage of one damned . 
And I accept this isolation of hatred , without hating any one myself . 
Now I am eighty-six years old ; I am on the point of death . 
What is it that you have come to ask of me ? '' 
`` Your blessing , '' said the Bishop . 
And he knelt down . 
When the Bishop raised his head again , the face of the conventionary had become august . 
He had just expired . 
The Bishop returned home , deeply absorbed in thoughts which can not be known to us . 
He passed the whole night in prayer . 
On the following morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about member of the Convention G -- ; he contented himself with pointing heavenward . 
From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling towards all children and sufferers . 
Any allusion to `` that old wretch of a G -- '' caused him to fall into a singular preoccupation . 
No one could say that the passage of that soul before his , and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his , did not count for something in his approach to perfection . 
This `` pastoral visit '' naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of comment in all the little local coteries . 
`` Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a bishop ? 
There was evidently no conversion to be expected . 
All those revolutionists are backsliders . 
Then why go there ? 
What was there to be seen there ? 
He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried off by the devil . '' 
One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself spiritual , addressed this sally to him , `` Monseigneur , people are inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap ! '' 
-- `` Oh ! 
oh ! 
that 's a coarse color , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in a hat . '' 
A RESTRICTION We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves , were we to conclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was `` a philosophical bishop , '' or a `` patriotic cure . '' 
His meeting , which may almost be designated as his union , with conventionary G -- , left behind it in his mind a sort of astonishment , which rendered him still more gentle . 
That is all . 
Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician , this is , perhaps , the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the events of that epoch , supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an attitude . 
