She was happy ; above all she was stupefied . 
Such magnificent and beautiful things did not appear real . 
The doll frightened her , the gold piece frightened her . 
She trembled vaguely in the presence of this magnificence . 
The stranger alone did not frighten her . 
On the contrary , he reassured her . 
Ever since the preceding evening , amid all her amazement , even in her sleep , she had been thinking in her little childish mind of that man who seemed to be so poor and so sad , and who was so rich and so kind . 
Everything had changed for her since she had met that good man in the forest . 
Cosette , less happy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven , had never known what it was to take refuge under a mother 's shadow and under a wing . 
For the last five years , that is to say , as far back as her memory ran , the poor child had shivered and trembled . 
She had always been exposed completely naked to the sharp wind of adversity ; now it seemed to her she was clothed . 
Formerly her soul had seemed cold , now it was warm . 
Cosette was no longer afraid of the Thenardier . 
She was no longer alone ; there was some one there . 
She hastily set about her regular morning duties . 
That louis , which she had about her , in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou piece had fallen on the night before , distracted her thoughts . 
She dared not touch it , but she spent five minutes in gazing at it , with her tongue hanging out , if the truth must be told . 
As she swept the staircase , she paused , remained standing there motionless , forgetful of her broom and of the entire universe , occupied in gazing at that star which was blazing at the bottom of her pocket . 
It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the Thenardier joined her . 
She had gone in search of Cosette at her husband 's orders . 
What was quite unprecedented , she neither struck her nor said an insulting word to her . 
`` Cosette , '' she said , almost gently , `` come immediately . '' 
An instant later Cosette entered the public room . 
The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it . 
This bundle contained a little woollen gown , an apron , a fustian bodice , a kerchief , a petticoat , woollen stockings , shoes -- a complete outfit for a girl of seven years . 
All was black . 
`` My child , '' said the man , `` take these , and go and dress yourself quickly . '' 
Daylight was appearing when those of the inhabitants of Montfermeil who had begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading a little girl dressed in mourning , and carrying a pink doll in her arms , pass along the road to Paris . 
They were going in the direction of Livry . 
It was our man and Cosette . 
No one knew the man ; as Cosette was no longer in rags , many did not recognize her . 
Cosette was going away . 
With whom ? 
She did not know . 
Whither ? 
She knew not . 
All that she understood was that she was leaving the Thenardier tavern behind her . 
No one had thought of bidding her farewell , nor had she thought of taking leave of any one . 
She was leaving that hated and hating house . 
Poor , gentle creature , whose heart had been repressed up to that hour ! 
Cosette walked along gravely , with her large eyes wide open , and gazing at the sky . 
She had put her louis in the pocket of her new apron . 
From time to time , she bent down and glanced at it ; then she looked at the good man . 
She felt something as though she were beside the good God . 
HE WHO SEEKS TO BETTER HIMSELF MAY RENDER HIS SITUATION WORSE Madame Thenardier had allowed her husband to have his own way , as was her wont . 
She had expected great results . 
When the man and Cosette had taken their departure , Thenardier allowed a full quarter of an hour to elapse ; then he took her aside and showed her the fifteen hundred francs . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said she . 
It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she had dared to criticise one of the master 's acts . 
