Then , as he was in heaven , it was quite natural that he should forget earth . 
Both bore languidly the indefinable burden of immaterial pleasures . 
Thus lived these somnambulists who are called lovers . 
Alas ! 
Who is there who has not felt all these things ? 
Why does there come an hour when one emerges from this azure , and why does life go on afterwards ? 
Loving almost takes the place of thinking . 
Love is an ardent forgetfulness of all the rest . 
Then ask logic of passion if you will . 
There is no more absolute logical sequence in the human heart than there is a perfect geometrical figure in the celestial mechanism . 
For Cosette and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette . 
The universe around them had fallen into a hole . 
They lived in a golden minute . 
There was nothing before them , nothing behind . 
It hardly occurred to Marius that Cosette had a father . 
His brain was dazzled and obliterated . 
Of what did these lovers talk then ? 
We have seen , of the flowers , and the swallows , the setting sun and the rising moon , and all sorts of important things . 
They had told each other everything except everything . 
The everything of lovers is nothing . 
But the father , the realities , that lair , the ruffians , that adventure , to what purpose ? 
And was he very sure that this nightmare had actually existed ? 
They were two , and they adored each other , and beyond that there was nothing . 
Nothing else existed . 
It is probable that this vanishing of hell in our rear is inherent to the arrival of paradise . 
Have we beheld demons ? 
Are there any ? 
Have we trembled ? 
Have we suffered ? 
We no longer know . 
A rosy cloud hangs over it . 
So these two beings lived in this manner , high aloft , with all that improbability which is in nature ; neither at the nadir nor at the zenith , between man and seraphim , above the mire , below the ether , in the clouds ; hardly flesh and blood , soul and ecstasy from head to foot ; already too sublime to walk the earth , still too heavily charged with humanity to disappear in the blue , suspended like atoms which are waiting to be precipitated ; apparently beyond the bounds of destiny ; ignorant of that rut ; yesterday , to-day , to-morrow ; amazed , rapturous , floating , soaring ; at times so light that they could take their flight out into the infinite ; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity . 
They slept wide-awake , thus sweetly lulled . 
Oh ! 
splendid lethargy of the real overwhelmed by the ideal . 
Sometimes , beautiful as Cosette was , Marius shut his eyes in her presence . 
The best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes . 
Marius and Cosette never asked themselves whither this was to lead them . 
They considered that they had already arrived . 
It is a strange claim on man 's part to wish that love should lead to something . 
THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW Jean Valjean suspected nothing . 
Cosette , who was rather less dreamy than Marius , was gay , and that sufficed for Jean Valjean 's happiness . 
The thoughts which Cosette cherished , her tender preoccupations , Marius ' image which filled her heart , took away nothing from the incomparable purity of her beautiful , chaste , and smiling brow . 
She was at the age when the virgin bears her love as the angel his lily . 
So Jean Valjean was at ease . 
And then , when two lovers have come to an understanding , things always go well ; the third party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfect blindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the same in the case of all lovers . 
Thus , Cosette never objected to any of Jean Valjean 's proposals . 
Did she want to take a walk ? 
`` Yes , dear little father . '' 
Did she want to stay at home ? 
