And then , in proportion as he regained life , the old ulcers of his memory opened once more , he reflected again on the past , Colonel Pontmercy placed himself once more between M. Gillenormand and him , Marius , he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from a person who had been so unjust and so hard to his father . 
And with health , there returned to him a sort of harshness towards his grandfather . 
The old man was gently pained by this . 
M. Gillenormand , without however allowing it to appear , observed that Marius , ever since the latter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness , had not once called him father . 
It is true that he did not say `` monsieur '' to him ; but he contrived not to say either the one or the other , by means of a certain way of turning his phrases . 
Obviously , a crisis was approaching . 
As almost always happens in such cases , Marius skirmished before giving battle , by way of proving himself . 
This is called `` feeling the ground . '' 
One morning it came to pass that M. Gillenormand spoke slightingly of the Convention , apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his hands , and gave vent to a Royalist harangue on Danton , Saint-Juste and Robespierre . 
-- `` The men of '93 were giants , '' said Marius with severity . 
The old man held his peace , and uttered not a sound during the remainder of that day . 
Marius , who had always present to his mind the inflexible grandfather of his early years , interpreted this silence as a profound concentration of wrath , augured from it a hot conflict , and augmented his preparations for the fray in the inmost recesses of his mind . 
He decided that , in case of a refusal , he would tear off his bandages , dislocate his collar-bone , that he would lay bare all the wounds which he had left , and would reject all food . 
His wounds were his munitions of war . 
He would have Cosette or die . 
He awaited the propitious moment with the crafty patience of the sick . 
That moment arrived . 
MARIUS ATTACKED One day , M. Gillenormand , while his daughter was putting in order the phials and cups on the marble of the commode , bent over Marius and said to him in his tenderest accents : `` Look here , my little Marius , if I were in your place , I would eat meat now in preference to fish . 
A fried sole is excellent to begin a convalescence with , but a good cutlet is needed to put a sick man on his feet . '' 
Marius , who had almost entirely recovered his strength , collected the whole of it , drew himself up into a sitting posture , laid his two clenched fists on the sheets of his bed , looked his grandfather in the face , assumed a terrible air , and said : `` This leads me to say something to you . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I wish to marry . '' 
`` Agreed , '' said his grandfather . 
-- And he burst out laughing . 
`` How agreed ? '' 
`` Yes , agreed . 
You shall have your little girl . '' 
Marius , stunned and overwhelmed with the dazzling shock , trembled in every limb . 
M. Gillenormand went on : `` Yes , you shall have her , that pretty little girl of yours . 
She comes every day in the shape of an old gentleman to inquire after you . 
Ever since you were wounded , she has passed her time in weeping and making lint . 
I have made inquiries . 
She lives in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
Ah ! 
There we have it ! 
Ah ! 
so you want her ! 
Well , you shall have her . 
You 're caught . 
You had arranged your little plot , you had said to yourself : -- ` I 'm going to signify this squarely to my grandfather , to that mummy of the Regency and of the Directory , to that ancient beau , to that Dorante turned Geronte ; he has indulged in his frivolities also , that he has , and he has had his love affairs , and his grisettes and his Cosettes ; he has made his rustle , he has had his wings , he has eaten of the bread of spring ; he certainly must remember it . ' 
Ah ! 
you take the cockchafer by the horns . 
That 's good . 
I offer you a cutlet and you answer me : ` By the way , I want to marry . ' 
There 's a transition for you ! 
Ah ! 
you reckoned on a bickering ! 
You do not know that I am an old coward . 
What do you say to that ? 
You are vexed ? 
