At two o'clock in the morning , the sentinel , who was an old soldier , was relieved , and replaced by a conscript . 
A few moments later , the man with the dogs paid his visit , and went off without noticing anything , except , possibly , the excessive youth and `` the rustic air '' of the `` raw recruit . '' 
Two hours afterwards , at four o'clock , when they came to relieve the conscript , he was found asleep on the floor , lying like a log near Thenardier 's cage . 
As for Thenardier , he was no longer there . 
There was a hole in the ceiling of his cage , and , above it , another hole in the roof . 
One of the planks of his bed had been wrenched off , and probably carried away with him , as it was not found . 
They also seized in his cell a half-empty bottle which contained the remains of the stupefying wine with which the soldier had been drugged . 
The soldier 's bayonet had disappeared . 
At the moment when this discovery was made , it was assumed that Thenardier was out of reach . 
The truth is , that he was no longer in the New Building , but that he was still in great danger . 
Thenardier , on reaching the roof of the New Building , had found the remains of Brujon 's rope hanging to the bars of the upper trap of the chimney , but , as this broken fragment was much too short , he had not been able to escape by the outer wall , as Brujon and Guelemer had done . 
When one turns from the Rue des Ballets into the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile , one almost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin . 
There stood on that spot , in the last century , a house of which only the back wall now remains , a regular wall of masonry , which rises to the height of the third story between the adjoining buildings . 
This ruin can be recognized by two large square windows which are still to be seen there ; the middle one , that nearest the right gable , is barred with a worm-eaten beam adjusted like a prop . 
Through these windows there was formerly visible a lofty and lugubrious wall , which was a fragment of the outer wall of La Force . 
The empty space on the street left by the demolished house is half-filled by a fence of rotten boards , shored up by five stone posts . 
In this recess lies concealed a little shanty which leans against the portion of the ruin which has remained standing . 
The fence has a gate , which , a few years ago , was fastened only by a latch . 
It was the crest of this ruin that Thenardier had succeeded in reaching , a little after one o'clock in the morning . 
How had he got there ? 
That is what no one has ever been able to explain or understand . 
The lightning must , at the same time , have hindered and helped him . 
Had he made use of the ladders and scaffoldings of the slaters to get from roof to roof , from enclosure to enclosure , from compartment to compartment , to the buildings of the Charlemagne court , then to the buildings of the Saint-Louis court , to the outer wall , and thence to the hut on the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile ? 
But in that itinerary there existed breaks which seemed to render it an impossibility . 
Had he placed the plank from his bed like a bridge from the roof of the Fine-Air to the outer wall , and crawled flat , on his belly on the coping of the outer wall the whole distance round the prison as far as the hut ? 
But the outer wall of La Force formed a crenellated and unequal line ; it mounted and descended , it dropped at the firemen 's barracks , it rose towards the bath-house , it was cut in twain by buildings , it was not even of the same height on the Hotel Lamoignon as on the Rue Pavee ; everywhere occurred falls and right angles ; and then , the sentinels must have espied the dark form of the fugitive ; hence , the route taken by Thenardier still remains rather inexplicable . 
In two manners , flight was impossible . 
Had Thenardier , spurred on by that thirst for liberty which changes precipices into ditches , iron bars into wattles of osier , a legless man into an athlete , a gouty man into a bird , stupidity into instinct , instinct into intelligence , and intelligence into genius , had Thenardier invented a third mode ? 
No one has ever found out . 
The marvels of escape can not always be accounted for . 
The man who makes his escape , we repeat , is inspired ; there is something of the star and of the lightning in the mysterious gleam of flight ; the effort towards deliverance is no less surprising than the flight towards the sublime , and one says of the escaped thief : `` How did he contrive to scale that wall ? '' 
in the same way that one says of Corneille : `` Where did he find the means of dying ? '' 
At all events , dripping with perspiration , drenched with rain , with his clothes hanging in ribbons , his hands flayed , his elbows bleeding , his knees torn , Thenardier had reached what children , in their figurative language , call the edge of the wall of the ruin , there he had stretched himself out at full length , and there his strength had failed him . 
A steep escarpment three stories high separated him from the pavement of the street . 
The rope which he had was too short . 
There he waited , pale , exhausted , desperate with all the despair which he had undergone , still hidden by the night , but telling himself that the day was on the point of dawning , alarmed at the idea of hearing the neighboring clock of Saint-Paul strike four within a few minutes , an hour when the sentinel was relieved and when the latter would be found asleep under the pierced roof , staring in horror at a terrible depth , at the light of the street lanterns , the wet , black pavement , that pavement longed for yet frightful , which meant death , and which meant liberty . 
He asked himself whether his three accomplices in flight had succeeded , if they had heard him , and if they would come to his assistance . 
He listened . 
With the exception of the patrol , no one had passed through the street since he had been there . 
Nearly the whole of the descent of the market-gardeners from Montreuil , from Charonne , from Vincennes , and from Bercy to the markets was accomplished through the Rue Saint-Antoine . 
Four o'clock struck . 
Thenardier shuddered . 
A few moments later , that terrified and confused uproar which follows the discovery of an escape broke forth in the prison . 
The sound of doors opening and shutting , the creaking of gratings on their hinges , a tumult in the guard-house , the hoarse shouts of the turnkeys , the shock of musket-butts on the pavement of the courts , reached his ears . 
Lights ascended and descended past the grated windows of the dormitories , a torch ran along the ridge-pole of the top story of the New Building , the firemen belonging in the barracks on the right had been summoned . 
Their helmets , which the torch lighted up in the rain , went and came along the roofs . 
At the same time , Thenardier perceived in the direction of the Bastille a wan whiteness lighting up the edge of the sky in doleful wise . 
He was on top of a wall ten inches wide , stretched out under the heavy rains , with two gulfs to right and left , unable to stir , subject to the giddiness of a possible fall , and to the horror of a certain arrest , and his thoughts , like the pendulum of a clock , swung from one of these ideas to the other : `` Dead if I fall , caught if I stay . '' 
In the midst of this anguish , he suddenly saw , the street being still dark , a man who was gliding along the walls and coming from the Rue Pavee , halt in the recess above which Thenardier was , as it were , suspended . 
Here this man was joined by a second , who walked with the same caution , then by a third , then by a fourth . 
