Terrible entanglement ! 
There was no longer any slope , for the corpses had levelled the road with the plain , and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley . 
A heap of dead bodies in the upper part , a river of blood in the lower part -- such was that road on the evening of the 18th of June , 1815 . 
The blood ran even to the Nivelles highway , and there overflowed in a large pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way , at a spot which is still pointed out . 
It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point , in the direction of the Genappe road , that the destruction of the cuirassiers had taken place . 
The thickness of the layer of bodies was proportioned to the depth of the hollow road . 
Towards the middle , at the point where it became level , where Delort 's division had passed , the layer of corpses was thinner . 
The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was going in that direction . 
He was searching that vast tomb . 
He gazed about . 
He passed the dead in some sort of hideous review . 
He walked with his feet in the blood . 
All at once he paused . 
A few paces in front of him , in the hollow road , at the point where the pile of dead came to an end , an open hand , illumined by the moon , projected from beneath that heap of men . 
That hand had on its finger something sparkling , which was a ring of gold . 
The man bent over , remained in a crouching attitude for a moment , and when he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand . 
He did not precisely rise ; he remained in a stooping and frightened attitude , with his back turned to the heap of dead , scanning the horizon on his knees , with the whole upper portion of his body supported on his two forefingers , which rested on the earth , and his head peering above the edge of the hollow road . 
The jackal 's four paws suit some actions . 
Then coming to a decision , he rose to his feet . 
At that moment , he gave a terrible start . 
He felt some one clutch him from behind . 
He wheeled round ; it was the open hand , which had closed , and had seized the skirt of his coat . 
An honest man would have been terrified ; this man burst into a laugh . 
`` Come , '' said he , `` it 's only a dead body . 
I prefer a spook to a gendarme . '' 
But the hand weakened and released him . 
Effort is quickly exhausted in the grave . 
`` Well now , '' said the prowler , `` is that dead fellow alive ? 
Let 's see . '' 
He bent down again , fumbled among the heap , pushed aside everything that was in his way , seized the hand , grasped the arm , freed the head , pulled out the body , and a few moments later he was dragging the lifeless , or at least the unconscious , man , through the shadows of hollow road . 
He was a cuirassier , an officer , and even an officer of considerable rank ; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath the cuirass ; this officer no longer possessed a helmet . 
A furious sword-cut had scarred his face , where nothing was discernible but blood . 
However , he did not appear to have any broken limbs , and , by some happy chance , if that word is permissible here , the dead had been vaulted above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed . 
His eyes were still closed . 
On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor . 
The prowler tore off this cross , which disappeared into one of the gulfs which he had beneath his great coat . 
Then he felt of the officer 's fob , discovered a watch there , and took possession of it . 
Next he searched his waistcoat , found a purse and pocketed it . 
When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering to this dying man , the officer opened his eyes . 
`` Thanks , '' he said feebly . 
The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him , the freshness of the night , the air which he could inhale freely , had roused him from his lethargy . 
The prowler made no reply . 
He raised his head . 
A sound of footsteps was audible in the plain ; some patrol was probably approaching . 
The officer murmured , for the death agony was still in his voice : -- `` Who won the battle ? '' 
`` The English , '' answered the prowler . 
The officer went on : -- `` Look in my pockets ; you will find a watch and a purse . 
Take them . '' 
It was already done . 
The prowler executed the required feint , and said : -- `` There is nothing there . '' 
