Whence should proceed that cry of love , if not from the heights of sacrifice ? 
Oh my brothers , this is the point of junction , of those who think and of those who suffer ; this barricade is not made of paving-stones , nor of joists , nor of bits of iron ; it is made of two heaps , a heap of ideas , and a heap of woes . 
Here misery meets the ideal . 
The day embraces the night , and says to it : ` I am about to die , and thou shalt be born again with me . ' 
From the embrace of all desolations faith leaps forth . 
Sufferings bring hither their agony and ideas their immortality . 
This agony and this immortality are about to join and constitute our death . 
Brothers , he who dies here dies in the radiance of the future , and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the dawn . '' 
Enjolras paused rather than became silent ; his lips continued to move silently , as though he were talking to himself , which caused them all to gaze attentively at him , in the endeavor to hear more . 
There was no applause ; but they whispered together for a long time . 
Speech being a breath , the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves . 
MARIUS HAGGARD , JAVERT LACONIC Let us narrate what was passing in Marius ' thoughts . 
Let the reader recall the state of his soul . 
We have just recalled it , everything was a vision to him now . 
His judgment was disturbed . 
Marius , let us insist on this point , was under the shadow of the great , dark wings which are spread over those in the death agony . 
He felt that he had entered the tomb , it seemed to him that he was already on the other side of the wall , and he no longer beheld the faces of the living except with the eyes of one dead . 
How did M. Fauchelevent come there ? 
Why was he there ? 
What had he come there to do ? 
Marius did not address all these questions to himself . 
Besides , since our despair has this peculiarity , that it envelops others as well as ourselves , it seemed logical to him that all the world should come thither to die . 
Only , he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart . 
However , M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him , did not look at him , and had not even the air of hearing him , when Marius raised his voice to say : `` I know him . '' 
As far as Marius was concerned , this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was comforting , and , if such a word can be used for such impressions , we should say that it pleased him . 
He had always felt the absolute impossibility of addressing that enigmatical man , who was , in his eyes , both equivocal and imposing . 
Moreover , it had been a long time since he had seen him ; and this still further augmented the impossibility for Marius ' timid and reserved nature . 
The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondetour lane ; they bore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard . 
One of them wept as he took his leave . 
Before setting out , they embraced those who remained . 
When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure , Enjolras thought of the man who had been condemned to death . 
He entered the tap-room . 
Javert , still bound to the post , was engaged in meditation . 
`` Do you want anything ? '' 
Enjolras asked him . 
`` Javert replied : `` When are you going to kill me ? '' 
`` Wait . 
We need all our cartridges just at present . '' 
`` Then give me a drink , '' said Javert . 
Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water , and , as Javert was pinioned , he helped him to drink . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
inquired Enjolras . 
`` I am uncomfortable against this post , '' replied Javert . 
`` You are not tender to have left me to pass the night here . 
Bind me as you please , but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man . '' 
And with a motion of the head , he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf . 
There was , as the reader will remember , a long , broad table at the end of the room , on which they had been running bullets and making cartridges . 
All the cartridges having been made , and all the powder used , this table was free . 
At Enjolras ' command , four insurgents unbound Javert from the post . 
While they were loosing him , a fifth held a bayonet against his breast . 
