`` Total , fifty-seven francs , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
And she hummed vaguely , with these figures : -- `` It must be , said a warrior . '' 
`` I will pay it , '' said the mother . 
`` I have eighty francs . 
I shall have enough left to reach the country , by travelling on foot . 
I shall earn money there , and as soon as I have a little I will return for my darling . '' 
The man 's voice resumed : -- `` The little one has an outfit ? '' 
`` That is my husband , '' said the Thenardier . 
`` Of course she has an outfit , the poor treasure . 
-- I understood perfectly that it was your husband . 
-- And a beautiful outfit , too ! 
a senseless outfit , everything by the dozen , and silk gowns like a lady . 
It is here , in my carpet-bag . '' 
`` You must hand it over , '' struck in the man 's voice again . 
`` Of course I shall give it to you , '' said the mother . 
`` It would be very queer if I were to leave my daughter quite naked ! '' 
The master 's face appeared . 
`` That 's good , '' said he . 
The bargain was concluded . 
The mother passed the night at the inn , gave up her money and left her child , fastened her carpet-bag once more , now reduced in volume by the removal of the outfit , and light henceforth and set out on the following morning , intending to return soon . 
People arrange such departures tranquilly ; but they are despairs ! 
A neighbor of the Thenardiers met this mother as she was setting out , and came back with the remark : -- `` I have just seen a woman crying in the street so that it was enough to rend your heart . '' 
When Cosette 's mother had taken her departure , the man said to the woman : -- `` That will serve to pay my note for one hundred and ten francs which falls due to-morrow ; I lacked fifty francs . 
Do you know that I should have had a bailiff and a protest after me ? 
You played the mouse-trap nicely with your young ones . '' 
`` Without suspecting it , '' said the woman . 
FIRST SKETCH OF TWO UNPREPOSSESSING FIGURES The mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen ; but the cat rejoices even over a lean mouse . 
Who were these Thenardiers ? 
Let us say a word or two of them now . 
We will complete the sketch later on . 
These beings belonged to that bastard class composed of coarse people who have been successful , and of intelligent people who have descended in the scale , which is between the class called `` middle '' and the class denominated as `` inferior , '' and which combines some of the defects of the second with nearly all the vices of the first , without possessing the generous impulse of the workingman nor the honest order of the bourgeois . 
They were of those dwarfed natures which , if a dull fire chances to warm them up , easily become monstrous . 
There was in the woman a substratum of the brute , and in the man the material for a blackguard . 
Both were susceptible , in the highest degree , of the sort of hideous progress which is accomplished in the direction of evil . 
There exist crab-like souls which are continually retreating towards the darkness , retrograding in life rather than advancing , employing experience to augment their deformity , growing incessantly worse , and becoming more and more impregnated with an ever-augmenting blackness . 
This man and woman possessed such souls . 
Thenardier , in particular , was troublesome for a physiognomist . 
One can only look at some men to distrust them ; for one feels that they are dark in both directions . 
They are uneasy in the rear and threatening in front . 
There is something of the unknown about them . 
One can no more answer for what they have done than for what they will do . 
The shadow which they bear in their glance denounces them . 
From merely hearing them utter a word or seeing them make a gesture , one obtains a glimpse of sombre secrets in their past and of sombre mysteries in their future . 
This Thenardier , if he himself was to be believed , had been a soldier -- a sergeant , he said . 
He had probably been through the campaign of 1815 , and had even conducted himself with tolerable valor , it would seem . 
We shall see later on how much truth there was in this . 
The sign of his hostelry was in allusion to one of his feats of arms . 
He had painted it himself ; for he knew how to do a little of everything , and badly . 
It was at the epoch when the ancient classical romance which , after having been Clelie , was no longer anything but Lodoiska , still noble , but ever more and more vulgar , having fallen from Mademoiselle de Scuderi to Madame Bournon-Malarme , and from Madame de Lafayette to Madame Barthelemy-Hadot , was setting the loving hearts of the portresses of Paris aflame , and even ravaging the suburbs to some extent . 
Madame Thenardier was just intelligent enough to read this sort of books . 
