It was a sort of worship in two steps , with the grand altar for the colonel and the lesser one for Thenardier . 
What redoubled the tenderness of his gratitude towards Thenardier , was the idea of the distress into which he knew that Thenardier had fallen , and which had engulfed the latter . 
Marius had learned at Montfermeil of the ruin and bankruptcy of the unfortunate inn-keeper . 
Since that time , he had made unheard-of efforts to find traces of him and to reach him in that dark abyss of misery in which Thenardier had disappeared . 
Marius had beaten the whole country ; he had gone to Chelles , to Bondy , to Gourney , to Nogent , to Lagny . 
He had persisted for three years , expending in these explorations the little money which he had laid by . 
No one had been able to give him any news of Thenardier : he was supposed to have gone abroad . 
His creditors had also sought him , with less love than Marius , but with as much assiduity , and had not been able to lay their hands on him . 
Marius blamed himself , and was almost angry with himself for his lack of success in his researches . 
It was the only debt left him by the colonel , and Marius made it a matter of honor to pay it . 
`` What , '' he thought , `` when my father lay dying on the field of battle , did Thenardier contrive to find him amid the smoke and the grape-shot , and bear him off on his shoulders , and yet he owed him nothing , and I , who owe so much to Thenardier , can not join him in this shadow where he is lying in the pangs of death , and in my turn bring him back from death to life ! 
Oh ! 
I will find him ! '' 
To find Thenardier , in fact , Marius would have given one of his arms , to rescue him from his misery , he would have sacrificed all his blood . 
To see Thenardier , to render Thenardier some service , to say to him : `` You do not know me ; well , I do know you ! 
Here I am . 
Dispose of me ! '' 
This was Marius ' sweetest and most magnificent dream . 
MARIUS GROWN UP At this epoch , Marius was twenty years of age . 
It was three years since he had left his grandfather . 
Both parties had remained on the same terms , without attempting to approach each other , and without seeking to see each other . 
Besides , what was the use of seeing each other ? 
Marius was the brass vase , while Father Gillenormand was the iron pot . 
We admit that Marius was mistaken as to his grandfather 's heart . 
He had imagined that M. Gillenormand had never loved him , and that that crusty , harsh , and smiling old fellow who cursed , shouted , and stormed and brandished his cane , cherished for him , at the most , only that affection , which is at once slight and severe , of the dotards of comedy . 
Marius was in error . 
There are fathers who do not love their children ; there exists no grandfather who does not adore his grandson . 
At bottom , as we have said , M. Gillenormand idolized Marius . 
He idolized him after his own fashion , with an accompaniment of snappishness and boxes on the ear ; but , this child once gone , he felt a black void in his heart ; he would allow no one to mention the child to him , and all the while secretly regretted that he was so well obeyed . 
At first , he hoped that this Buonapartist , this Jacobin , this terrorist , this Septembrist , would return . 
But the weeks passed by , years passed ; to M. Gillenormand 's great despair , the `` blood-drinker '' did not make his appearance . 
`` I could not do otherwise than turn him out , '' said the grandfather to himself , and he asked himself : `` If the thing were to do over again , would I do it ? '' 
His pride instantly answered `` yes , '' but his aged head , which he shook in silence , replied sadly `` no . '' 
He had his hours of depression . 
He missed Marius . 
Old men need affection as they need the sun . 
It is warmth . 
Strong as his nature was , the absence of Marius had wrought some change in him . 
Nothing in the world could have induced him to take a step towards `` that rogue '' ; but he suffered . 
He never inquired about him , but he thought of him incessantly . 
He lived in the Marais in a more and more retired manner ; he was still merry and violent as of old , but his merriment had a convulsive harshness , and his violences always terminated in a sort of gentle and gloomy dejection . 
He sometimes said : `` Oh ! 
if he only would return , what a good box on the ear I would give him ! '' 
As for his aunt , she thought too little to love much ; Marius was no longer for her much more than a vague black form ; and she eventually came to occupy herself with him much less than with the cat or the paroquet which she probably had . 
What augmented Father Gillenormand 's secret suffering was , that he locked it all up within his breast , and did not allow its existence to be divined . 
His sorrow was like those recently invented furnaces which consume their own smoke . 
It sometimes happened that officious busybodies spoke to him of Marius , and asked him : `` What is your grandson doing ? '' 
`` What has become of him ? '' 
The old bourgeois replied with a sigh , that he was a sad case , and giving a fillip to his cuff , if he wished to appear gay : `` Monsieur le Baron de Pontmercy is practising pettifogging in some corner or other . '' 
While the old man regretted , Marius applauded himself . 
