From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate amount of pleasure . 
The most `` interesting thing '' they found were some unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys . 
They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby fruit-trees . 
In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of the punishments administered , when the wind had shaken the trees , they sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or an inhabited pear on the sly . 
I will now cede the privilege of speech to a letter which lies before me , a letter written five and twenty years ago by an old pupil , now Madame la Duchesse de -- one of the most elegant women in Paris . 
I quote literally : `` One hides one 's pear or one 's apple as best one may . 
When one goes up stairs to put the veil on the bed before supper , one stuffs them under one 's pillow and at night one eats them in bed , and when one can not do that , one eats them in the closet . '' 
That was one of their greatest luxuries . 
Once -- it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the convent -- one of the young girls , Mademoiselle Bouchard , who was connected with the Montmorency family , laid a wager that she would ask for a day 's leave of absence -- an enormity in so austere a community . 
The wager was accepted , but not one of those who bet believed that she would do it . 
When the moment came , as the archbishop was passing in front of the pupils , Mademoiselle Bouchard , to the indescribable terror of her companions , stepped out of the ranks , and said , `` Monseigneur , a day 's leave of absence . '' 
Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall , blooming , with the prettiest little rosy face in the world . 
M. de Quelen smiled and said , `` What , my dear child , a day 's leave of absence ! 
Three days if you like . 
I grant you three days . '' 
The prioress could do nothing ; the archbishop had spoken . 
Horror of the convent , but joy of the pupil . 
The effect may be imagined . 
This stern cloister was not so well walled off , however , but that the life of the passions of the outside world , drama , and even romance , did not make their way in . 
To prove this , we will confine ourselves to recording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact , which , however , bears no reference in itself to , and is not connected by any thread whatever with the story which we are relating . 
We mention the fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in the reader 's mind . 
About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was not a nun , who was treated with great respect , and who was addressed as Madame Albertine . 
Nothing was known about her , save that she was mad , and that in the world she passed for dead . 
Beneath this history it was said there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a great marriage . 
This woman , hardly thirty years of age , of dark complexion and tolerably pretty , had a vague look in her large black eyes . 
Could she see ? 
There was some doubt about this . 
She glided rather than walked , she never spoke ; it was not quite known whether she breathed . 
Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh . 
To touch her hand was like touching snow . 
She possessed a strange spectral grace . 
Wherever she entered , people felt cold . 
One day a sister , on seeing her pass , said to another sister , `` She passes for a dead woman . '' 
`` Perhaps she is one , '' replied the other . 
A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine . 
This arose from the eternal curiosity of the pupils . 
In the chapel there was a gallery called L'OEil de Boeuf . 
It was in this gallery , which had only a circular bay , an oeil de boeuf , that Madame Albertine listened to the offices . 
She always occupied it alone because this gallery , being on the level of the first story , the preacher or the officiating priest could be seen , which was interdicted to the nuns . 
One day the pulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank , M. Le Duc de Rohan , peer of France , officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de Leon , and who died afterward , in 1830 , as cardinal and Archbishop of Besancon . 
It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent . 
Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services . 
That day , as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan , she half rose , and said , in a loud voice , amid the silence of the chapel , `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
The whole community turned their heads in amazement , the preacher raised his eyes , but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility . 
A breath from the outer world , a flash of life , had passed for an instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished , and the mad woman had become a corpse again . 
Those two words , however , had set every one in the convent who had the privilege of speech to chattering . 
How many things were contained in that `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
what revelations ! 
