This child had not only grown , she had become idealized . 
As three days in April suffice to cover certain trees with flowers , six months had sufficed to clothe her with beauty . 
Her April had arrived . 
One sometimes sees people , who , poor and mean , seem to wake up , pass suddenly from indigence to luxury , indulge in expenditures of all sorts , and become dazzling , prodigal , magnificent , all of a sudden . 
That is the result of having pocketed an income ; a note fell due yesterday . 
The young girl had received her quarterly income . 
And then , she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat , her merino gown , her scholar 's shoes , and red hands ; taste had come to her with beauty ; she was a well-dressed person , clad with a sort of rich and simple elegance , and without affectation . 
She wore a dress of black damask , a cape of the same material , and a bonnet of white crape . 
Her white gloves displayed the delicacy of the hand which toyed with the carved , Chinese ivory handle of a parasol , and her silken shoe outlined the smallness of her foot . 
When one passed near her , her whole toilette exhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume . 
As for the man , he was the same as usual . 
The second time that Marius approached her , the young girl raised her eyelids ; her eyes were of a deep , celestial blue , but in that veiled azure , there was , as yet , nothing but the glance of a child . 
She looked at Marius indifferently , as she would have stared at the brat running beneath the sycamores , or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the bench , and Marius , on his side , continued his promenade , and thought about something else . 
He passed near the bench where the young girl sat , five or six times , but without even turning his eyes in her direction . 
On the following days , he returned , as was his wont , to the Luxembourg ; as usual , he found there `` the father and daughter ; '' but he paid no further attention to them . 
He thought no more about the girl now that she was beautiful than he had when she was homely . 
He passed very near the bench where she sat , because such was his habit . 
EFFECT OF THE SPRING One day , the air was warm , the Luxembourg was inundated with light and shade , the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that morning , the sparrows were giving vent to little twitters in the depths of the chestnut-trees . 
Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature , he was not thinking of anything , he simply lived and breathed , he passed near the bench , the young girl raised her eyes to him , the two glances met . 
What was there in the young girl 's glance on this occasion ? 
Marius could not have told . 
There was nothing and there was everything . 
It was a strange flash . 
She dropped her eyes , and he pursued his way . 
What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of a child ; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened , then abruptly closed again . 
There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner . 
Woe to him who chances to be there ! 
That first gaze of a soul which does not , as yet , know itself , is like the dawn in the sky . 
It is the awakening of something radiant and strange . 
Nothing can give any idea of the dangerous charm of that unexpected gleam , which flashes suddenly and vaguely forth from adorable shadows , and which is composed of all the innocence of the present , and of all the passion of the future . 
It is a sort of undecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance , and which waits . 
It is a snare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself , and in which she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it . 
It is a virgin looking like a woman . 
It is rare that a profound revery does not spring from that glance , where it falls . 
All purities and all candors meet in that celestial and fatal gleam which , more than all the best-planned tender glances of coquettes , possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming , in the depths of the soul , of that sombre flower , impregnated with perfume and with poison , which is called love . 
That evening , on his return to his garret , Marius cast his eyes over his garments , and perceived , for the first time , that he had been so slovenly , indecorous , and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk in the Luxembourg with his `` every-day clothes , '' that is to say , with a hat battered near the band , coarse carter 's boots , black trousers which showed white at the knees , and a black coat which was pale at the elbows . 
BEGINNING OF A GREAT MALADY On the following day , at the accustomed hour , Marius drew from his wardrobe his new coat , his new trousers , his new hat , and his new boots ; he clothed himself in this complete panoply , put on his gloves , a tremendous luxury , and set off for the Luxembourg . 
On the way thither , he encountered Courfeyrac , and pretended not to see him . 
Courfeyrac , on his return home , said to his friends : -- `` I have just met Marius ' new hat and new coat , with Marius inside them . 
He was going to pass an examination , no doubt . 
He looked utterly stupid . '' 
On arriving at the Luxembourg , Marius made the tour of the fountain basin , and stared at the swans ; then he remained for a long time in contemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black with mould , and one of whose hips was missing . 
Near the basin there was a bourgeois forty years of age , with a prominent stomach , who was holding by the hand a little urchin of five , and saying to him : `` Shun excess , my son , keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy . '' 
Marius listened to this bourgeois . 
Then he made the circuit of the basin once more . 
At last he directed his course towards `` his alley , '' slowly , and as if with regret . 
One would have said that he was both forced to go there and withheld from doing so . 
He did not perceive it himself , and thought that he was doing as he always did . 
On turning into the walk , he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at the other end , `` on their bench . '' 
He buttoned his coat up to the very top , pulled it down on his body so that there might be no wrinkles , examined , with a certain complaisance , the lustrous gleams of his trousers , and marched on the bench . 
