It is what used to be called the Rue Blomet . 
-- It all comes back to me now . 
I have heard of that little girl of the iron railing in the Rue Plumet . 
In a garden , a Pamela . 
Your taste is not bad . 
She is said to be a very tidy creature . 
Between ourselves , I think that simpleton of a lancer has been courting her a bit . 
I do n't know where he did it . 
However , that 's not to the purpose . 
Besides , he is not to be believed . 
He brags , Marius ! 
I think it quite proper that a young man like you should be in love . 
It 's the right thing at your age . 
I like you better as a lover than as a Jacobin . 
I like you better in love with a petticoat , sapristi ! 
with twenty petticoats , than with M. de Robespierre . 
For my part , I will do myself the justice to say , that in the line of sans-culottes , I have never loved any one but women . 
Pretty girls are pretty girls , the deuce ! 
There 's no objection to that . 
As for the little one , she receives you without her father 's knowledge . 
That 's in the established order of things . 
I have had adventures of that same sort myself . 
More than one . 
Do you know what is done then ? 
One does not take the matter ferociously ; one does not precipitate himself into the tragic ; one does not make one 's mind to marriage and M. le Maire with his scarf . 
One simply behaves like a fellow of spirit . 
One shows good sense . 
Slip along , mortals ; do n't marry . 
You come and look up your grandfather , who is a good-natured fellow at bottom , and who always has a few rolls of louis in an old drawer ; you say to him : ` See here , grandfather . ' 
And the grandfather says : ` That 's a simple matter . 
Youth must amuse itself , and old age must wear out . 
I have been young , you will be old . 
Come , my boy , you shall pass it on to your grandson . 
Here are two hundred pistoles . 
Amuse yourself , deuce take it ! ' 
Nothing better ! 
That 's the way the affair should be treated . 
You do n't marry , but that does no harm . 
You understand me ? '' 
Marius , petrified and incapable of uttering a syllable , made a sign with his head that he did not . 
The old man burst out laughing , winked his aged eye , gave him a slap on the knee , stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beaming air , and said to him , with the tenderest of shrugs of the shoulder : -- `` Booby ! 
make her your mistress . '' 
Marius turned pale . 
He had understood nothing of what his grandfather had just said . 
This twaddle about the Rue Blomet , Pamela , the barracks , the lancer , had passed before Marius like a dissolving view . 
Nothing of all that could bear any reference to Cosette , who was a lily . 
The good man was wandering in his mind . 
But this wandering terminated in words which Marius did understand , and which were a mortal insult to Cosette . 
Those words , `` make her your mistress , '' entered the heart of the strict young man like a sword . 
He rose , picked up his hat which lay on the floor , and walked to the door with a firm , assured step . 
