He said , `` Examine the road over which the fault has passed . '' 
Being , as he described himself with a smile , an ex-sinner , he had none of the asperities of austerity , and he professed , with a good deal of distinctness , and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous , a doctrine which may be summed up as follows : -- `` Man has upon him his flesh , which is at once his burden and his temptation . 
He drags it with him and yields to it . 
He must watch it , cheek it , repress it , and obey it only at the last extremity . 
There may be some fault even in this obedience ; but the fault thus committed is venial ; it is a fall , but a fall on the knees which may terminate in prayer . 
`` To be a saint is the exception ; to be an upright man is the rule . 
Err , fall , sin if you will , but be upright . 
`` The least possible sin is the law of man . 
No sin at all is the dream of the angel . 
All which is terrestrial is subject to sin . 
Sin is a gravitation . '' 
When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly , and growing angry very quickly , `` Oh ! 
oh ! '' 
he said , with a smile ; `` to all appearance , this is a great crime which all the world commits . 
These are hypocrisies which have taken fright , and are in haste to make protest and to put themselves under shelter . '' 
He was indulgent towards women and poor people , on whom the burden of human society rest . 
He said , `` The faults of women , of children , of the feeble , the indigent , and the ignorant , are the fault of the husbands , the fathers , the masters , the strong , the rich , and the wise . '' 
He said , moreover , `` Teach those who are ignorant as many things as possible ; society is culpable , in that it does not afford instruction gratis ; it is responsible for the night which it produces . 
This soul is full of shadow ; sin is therein committed . 
The guilty one is not the person who has committed the sin , but the person who has created the shadow . '' 
It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own of judging things : I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel . 
One day he heard a criminal case , which was in preparation and on the point of trial , discussed in a drawing-room . 
A wretched man , being at the end of his resources , had coined counterfeit money , out of love for a woman , and for the child which he had had by her . 
Counterfeiting was still punishable with death at that epoch . 
The woman had been arrested in the act of passing the first false piece made by the man . 
She was held , but there were no proofs except against her . 
She alone could accuse her lover , and destroy him by her confession . 
She denied ; they insisted . 
She persisted in her denial . 
Thereupon an idea occurred to the attorney for the crown . 
He invented an infidelity on the part of the lover , and succeeded , by means of fragments of letters cunningly presented , in persuading the unfortunate woman that she had a rival , and that the man was deceiving her . 
Thereupon , exasperated by jealousy , she denounced her lover , confessed all , proved all . 
The man was ruined . 
He was shortly to be tried at Aix with his accomplice . 
They were relating the matter , and each one was expressing enthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate . 
By bringing jealousy into play , he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath , he had educed the justice of revenge . 
The Bishop listened to all this in silence . 
When they had finished , he inquired , -- `` Where are this man and woman to be tried ? '' 
`` At the Court of Assizes . '' 
He went on , `` And where will the advocate of the crown be tried ? '' 
A tragic event occurred at D -- A man was condemned to death for murder . 
He was a wretched fellow , not exactly educated , not exactly ignorant , who had been a mountebank at fairs , and a writer for the public . 
The town took a great interest in the trial . 
On the eve of the day fixed for the execution of the condemned man , the chaplain of the prison fell ill . 
A priest was needed to attend the criminal in his last moments . 
They sent for the cure . 
It seems that he refused to come , saying , `` That is no affair of mine . 
I have nothing to do with that unpleasant task , and with that mountebank : I , too , am ill ; and besides , it is not my place . '' 
This reply was reported to the Bishop , who said , `` Monsieur le Cure is right : it is not his place ; it is mine . '' 
He went instantly to the prison , descended to the cell of the `` mountebank , '' called him by name , took him by the hand , and spoke to him . 
