He mentioned it to the cure . 
But what was to be done ? 
There were no episcopal ornaments . 
They could only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy , with a few ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said the Bishop . 
`` Let us announce our Te Deum from the pulpit , nevertheless , Monsieur le Cure . 
Things will arrange themselves . '' 
They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood . 
All the magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly . 
While they were thus embarrassed , a large chest was brought and deposited in the presbytery for the Bishop , by two unknown horsemen , who departed on the instant . 
The chest was opened ; it contained a cope of cloth of gold , a mitre ornamented with diamonds , an archbishop 's cross , a magnificent crosier , -- all the pontifical vestments which had been stolen a month previously from the treasury of Notre Dame d'Embrun . 
In the chest was a paper , on which these words were written , `` From Cravatte to Monseigneur Bienvenu . '' 
`` Did not I say that things would come right of themselves ? '' 
said the Bishop . 
Then he added , with a smile , `` To him who contents himself with the surplice of a curate , God sends the cope of an archbishop . '' 
`` Monseigneur , '' murmured the cure , throwing back his head with a smile . 
`` God -- or the Devil . '' 
The Bishop looked steadily at the cure , and repeated with authority , `` God ! '' 
When he returned to Chastelar , the people came out to stare at him as at a curiosity , all along the road . 
At the priest 's house in Chastelar he rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire , who were waiting for him , and he said to his sister : `` Well ! 
was I in the right ? 
The poor priest went to his poor mountaineers with empty hands , and he returns from them with his hands full . 
I set out bearing only my faith in God ; I have brought back the treasure of a cathedral . '' 
That evening , before he went to bed , he said again : `` Let us never fear robbers nor murderers . 
Those are dangers from without , petty dangers . 
Let us fear ourselves . 
Prejudices are the real robbers ; vices are the real murderers . 
The great dangers lie within ourselves . 
What matters it what threatens our head or our purse ! 
Let us think only of that which threatens our soul . '' 
Then , turning to his sister : `` Sister , never a precaution on the part of the priest , against his fellow-man . 
That which his fellow does , God permits . 
Let us confine ourselves to prayer , when we think that a danger is approaching us . 
Let us pray , not for ourselves , but that our brother may not fall into sin on our account . '' 
However , such incidents were rare in his life . 
We relate those of which we know ; but generally he passed his life in doing the same things at the same moment . 
One month of his year resembled one hour of his day . 
As to what became of `` the treasure '' of the cathedral of Embrun , we should be embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction . 
It consisted of very handsome things , very tempting things , and things which were very well adapted to be stolen for the benefit of the unfortunate . 
Stolen they had already been elsewhere . 
Half of the adventure was completed ; it only remained to impart a new direction to the theft , and to cause it to take a short trip in the direction of the poor . 
However , we make no assertions on this point . 
Only , a rather obscure note was found among the Bishop 's papers , which may bear some relation to this matter , and which is couched in these terms , `` The question is , to decide whether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the hospital . '' 
PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING The senator above mentioned was a clever man , who had made his own way , heedless of those things which present obstacles , and which are called conscience , sworn faith , justice , duty : he had marched straight to his goal , without once flinching in the line of his advancement and his interest . 
He was an old attorney , softened by success ; not a bad man by any means , who rendered all the small services in his power to his sons , his sons-in-law , his relations , and even to his friends , having wisely seized upon , in life , good sides , good opportunities , good windfalls . 
Everything else seemed to him very stupid . 
He was intelligent , and just sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple of Epicurus ; while he was , in reality , only a product of Pigault-Lebrun . 
He laughed willingly and pleasantly over infinite and eternal things , and at the `` Crotchets of that good old fellow the Bishop . '' 
He even sometimes laughed at him with an amiable authority in the presence of M. Myriel himself , who listened to him . 
