She had no longer a bed ; a rag which she called her coverlet , a mattress on the floor , and a seatless chair still remained . 
A little rosebush which she had , had dried up , forgotten , in one corner . 
In the other corner was a butter-pot to hold water , which froze in winter , and in which the various levels of the water remained long marked by these circles of ice . 
She had lost her shame ; she lost her coquetry . 
A final sign . 
She went out , with dirty caps . 
Whether from lack of time or from indifference , she no longer mended her linen . 
As the heels wore out , she dragged her stockings down into her shoes . 
This was evident from the perpendicular wrinkles . 
She patched her bodice , which was old and worn out , with scraps of calico which tore at the slightest movement . 
The people to whom she was indebted made `` scenes '' and gave her no peace . 
She found them in the street , she found them again on her staircase . 
She passed many a night weeping and thinking . 
Her eyes were very bright , and she felt a steady pain in her shoulder towards the top of the left shoulder-blade . 
She coughed a great deal . 
She deeply hated Father Madeleine , but made no complaint . 
She sewed seventeen hours a day ; but a contractor for the work of prisons , who made the prisoners work at a discount , suddenly made prices fall , which reduced the daily earnings of working-women to nine sous . 
Seventeen hours of toil , and nine sous a day ! 
Her creditors were more pitiless than ever . 
The second-hand dealer , who had taken back nearly all his furniture , said to her incessantly , `` When will you pay me , you hussy ? '' 
What did they want of her , good God ! 
She felt that she was being hunted , and something of the wild beast developed in her . 
About the same time , Thenardier wrote to her that he had waited with decidedly too much amiability and that he must have a hundred francs at once ; otherwise he would turn little Cosette out of doors , convalescent as she was from her heavy illness , into the cold and the streets , and that she might do what she liked with herself , and die if she chose . 
`` A hundred francs , '' thought Fantine . 
`` But in what trade can one earn a hundred sous a day ? '' 
`` Come ! '' 
said she , `` let us sell what is left . '' 
The unfortunate girl became a woman of the town . 
CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT What is this history of Fantine ? 
It is society purchasing a slave . 
From whom ? 
From misery . 
From hunger , cold , isolation , destitution . 
A dolorous bargain . 
A soul for a morsel of bread . 
Misery offers ; society accepts . 
The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization , but it does not , as yet , permeate it ; it is said that slavery has disappeared from European civilization . 
This is a mistake . 
It still exists ; but it weighs only upon the woman , and it is called prostitution . 
It weighs upon the woman , that is to say , upon grace , weakness , beauty , maternity . 
This is not one of the least of man 's disgraces . 
At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached , nothing is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been . 
She has become marble in becoming mire . 
Whoever touches her feels cold . 
She passes ; she endures you ; she ignores you ; she is the severe and dishonored figure . 
Life and the social order have said their last word for her . 
All has happened to her that will happen to her . 
She has felt everything , borne everything , experienced everything , suffered everything , lost everything , mourned everything . 
She is resigned , with that resignation which resembles indifference , as death resembles sleep . 
She no longer avoids anything . 
