Habituated as she was to dissimulation through endeavoring to copy her husband in all his actions , these emotions were more than she could endure . 
She made haste to send her daughters to bed , then she asked the man 's permission to send Cosette off also ; `` for she has worked hard all day , '' she added with a maternal air . 
Cosette went off to bed , carrying Catherine in her arms . 
From time to time the Thenardier went to the other end of the room where her husband was , to relieve her soul , as she said . 
She exchanged with her husband words which were all the more furious because she dared not utter them aloud . 
`` Old beast ! 
What has he got in his belly , to come and upset us in this manner ! 
To want that little monster to play ! 
to give away forty-franc dolls to a jade that I would sell for forty sous , so I would ! 
A little more and he will be saying Your Majesty to her , as though to the Duchess de Berry ! 
Is there any sense in it ? 
Is he mad , then , that mysterious old fellow ? '' 
`` Why ! 
it is perfectly simple , '' replied Thenardier , `` if that amuses him ! 
It amuses you to have the little one work ; it amuses him to have her play . 
He 's all right . 
A traveller can do what he pleases when he pays for it . 
If the old fellow is a philanthropist , what is that to you ? 
If he is an imbecile , it does not concern you . 
What are you worrying for , so long as he has money ? '' 
The language of a master , and the reasoning of an innkeeper , neither of which admitted of any reply . 
The man had placed his elbows on the table , and resumed his thoughtful attitude . 
All the other travellers , both pedlers and carters , had withdrawn a little , and had ceased singing . 
They were staring at him from a distance , with a sort of respectful awe . 
This poorly dressed man , who drew `` hind-wheels '' from his pocket with so much ease , and who lavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats in wooden shoes , was certainly a magnificent fellow , and one to be feared . 
Many hours passed . 
The midnight mass was over , the chimes had ceased , the drinkers had taken their departure , the drinking-shop was closed , the public room was deserted , the fire extinct , the stranger still remained in the same place and the same attitude . 
From time to time he changed the elbow on which he leaned . 
That was all ; but he had not said a word since Cosette had left the room . 
The Thenardiers alone , out of politeness and curiosity , had remained in the room . 
`` Is he going to pass the night in that fashion ? '' 
grumbled the Thenardier . 
When two o'clock in the morning struck , she declared herself vanquished , and said to her husband , `` I 'm going to bed . 
Do as you like . '' 
Her husband seated himself at a table in the corner , lighted a candle , and began to read the Courrier Francais . 
A good hour passed thus . 
The worthy inn-keeper had perused the Courrier Francais at least three times , from the date of the number to the printer 's name . 
The stranger did not stir . 
Thenardier fidgeted , coughed , spit , blew his nose , and creaked his chair . 
Not a movement on the man 's part . 
`` Is he asleep ? '' 
thought Thenardier . 
The man was not asleep , but nothing could arouse him . 
At last Thenardier took off his cap , stepped gently up to him , and ventured to say : -- `` Is not Monsieur going to his repose ? '' 
Not going to bed would have seemed to him excessive and familiar . 
To repose smacked of luxury and respect . 
These words possess the mysterious and admirable property of swelling the bill on the following day . 
A chamber where one sleeps costs twenty sous ; a chamber in which one reposes costs twenty francs . 
`` Well ! '' 
said the stranger , `` you are right . 
