In that heart , where there had been a wound , there was a scar . 
That is all . 
Only once , during all the time which he spent at Toulon , did he hear his sister mentioned . 
This happened , I think , towards the end of the fourth year of his captivity . 
I know not through what channels the news reached him . 
Some one who had known them in their own country had seen his sister . 
She was in Paris . 
She lived in a poor street Rear Saint-Sulpice , in the Rue du Gindre . 
She had with her only one child , a little boy , the youngest . 
Where were the other six ? 
Perhaps she did not know herself . 
Every morning she went to a printing office , No. 3 Rue du Sabot , where she was a folder and stitcher . 
She was obliged to be there at six o'clock in the morning -- long before daylight in winter . 
In the same building with the printing office there was a school , and to this school she took her little boy , who was seven years old . 
But as she entered the printing office at six , and the school only opened at seven , the child had to wait in the courtyard , for the school to open , for an hour -- one hour of a winter night in the open air ! 
They would not allow the child to come into the printing office , because he was in the way , they said . 
When the workmen passed in the morning , they beheld this poor little being seated on the pavement , overcome with drowsiness , and often fast asleep in the shadow , crouched down and doubled up over his basket . 
When it rained , an old woman , the portress , took pity on him ; she took him into her den , where there was a pallet , a spinning-wheel , and two wooden chairs , and the little one slumbered in a corner , pressing himself close to the cat that he might suffer less from cold . 
At seven o'clock the school opened , and he entered . 
That is what was told to Jean Valjean . 
They talked to him about it for one day ; it was a moment , a flash , as though a window had suddenly been opened upon the destiny of those things whom he had loved ; then all closed again . 
He heard nothing more forever . 
Nothing from them ever reached him again ; he never beheld them ; he never met them again ; and in the continuation of this mournful history they will not be met with any more . 
Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean 's turn to escape arrived . 
His comrades assisted him , as is the custom in that sad place . 
He escaped . 
He wandered for two days in the fields at liberty , if being at liberty is to be hunted , to turn the head every instant , to quake at the slightest noise , to be afraid of everything , -- of a smoking roof , of a passing man , of a barking dog , of a galloping horse , of a striking clock , of the day because one can see , of the night because one can not see , of the highway , of the path , of a bush , of sleep . 
On the evening of the second day he was captured . 
He had neither eaten nor slept for thirty-six hours . 
The maritime tribunal condemned him , for this crime , to a prolongation of his term for three years , which made eight years . 
In the sixth year his turn to escape occurred again ; he availed himself of it , but could not accomplish his flight fully . 
He was missing at roll-call . 
The cannon were fired , and at night the patrol found him hidden under the keel of a vessel in process of construction ; he resisted the galley guards who seized him . 
Escape and rebellion . 
This case , provided for by a special code , was punished by an addition of five years , two of them in the double chain . 
Thirteen years . 
In the tenth year his turn came round again ; he again profited by it ; he succeeded no better . 
Three years for this fresh attempt . 
Sixteen years . 
Finally , I think it was during his thirteenth year , he made a last attempt , and only succeeded in getting retaken at the end of four hours of absence . 
Three years for those four hours . 
Nineteen years . 
In October , 1815 , he was released ; he had entered there in 1796 , for having broken a pane of glass and taken a loaf of bread . 
Room for a brief parenthesis . 
This is the second time , during his studies on the penal question and damnation by law , that the author of this book has come across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point of departure for the disaster of a destiny . 
Claude Gaux had stolen a loaf ; Jean Valjean had stolen a loaf . 
English statistics prove the fact that four thefts out of five in London have hunger for their immediate cause . 
Jean Valjean had entered the galleys sobbing and shuddering ; he emerged impassive . 
He had entered in despair ; he emerged gloomy . 
What had taken place in that soul ? 
