He remained in this state during the rest of the day , a whirlwind within , a profound tranquillity without . 
He took no `` preservative measures , '' as they may be called . 
Everything was still confused , and jostling together in his brain . 
His trouble was so great that he could not perceive the form of a single idea distinctly , and he could have told nothing about himself , except that he had received a great blow . 
He repaired to Fantine 's bed of suffering , as usual , and prolonged his visit , through a kindly instinct , telling himself that he must behave thus , and recommend her well to the sisters , in case he should be obliged to be absent himself . 
He had a vague feeling that he might be obliged to go to Arras ; and without having the least in the world made up his mind to this trip , he said to himself that being , as he was , beyond the shadow of any suspicion , there could be nothing out of the way in being a witness to what was to take place , and he engaged the tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event . 
He dined with a good deal of appetite . 
On returning to his room , he communed with himself . 
He examined the situation , and found it unprecedented ; so unprecedented that in the midst of his revery he rose from his chair , moved by some inexplicable impulse of anxiety , and bolted his door . 
He feared lest something more should enter . 
He was barricading himself against possibilities . 
A moment later he extinguished his light ; it embarrassed him . 
lt seemed to him as though he might be seen . 
By whom ? 
Alas ! 
That on which he desired to close the door had already entered ; that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face , -- his conscience . 
His conscience ; that is to say , God . 
Nevertheless , he deluded himself at first ; he had a feeling of security and of solitude ; the bolt once drawn , he thought himself impregnable ; the candle extinguished , he felt himself invisible . 
Then he took possession of himself : he set his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hand , and began to meditate in the dark . 
`` Where do I stand ? 
Am not I dreaming ? 
What have I heard ? 
Is it really true that I have seen that Javert , and that he spoke to me in that manner ? 
Who can that Champmathieu be ? 
So he resembles me ! 
Is it possible ? 
When I reflect that yesterday I was so tranquil , and so far from suspecting anything ! 
What was I doing yesterday at this hour ? 
What is there in this incident ? 
What will the end be ? 
What is to be done ? '' 
This was the torment in which he found himself . 
His brain had lost its power of retaining ideas ; they passed like waves , and he clutched his brow in both hands to arrest them . 
Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult which overwhelmed his will and his reason , and from which he sought to draw proof and resolution . 
His head was burning . 
He went to the window and threw it wide open . 
There were no stars in the sky . 
He returned and seated himself at the table . 
The first hour passed in this manner . 
Gradually , however , vague outlines began to take form and to fix themselves in his meditation , and he was able to catch a glimpse with precision of the reality , -- not the whole situation , but some of the details . 
He began by recognizing the fact that , critical and extraordinary as was this situation , he was completely master of it . 
This only caused an increase of his stupor . 
Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned to his actions , all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a hole in which to bury his name . 
That which he had always feared most of all in his hours of self-communion , during his sleepless nights , was to ever hear that name pronounced ; he had said to himself , that that would be the end of all things for him ; that on the day when that name made its reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about him , and -- who knows ? 
-- perhaps even his new soul within him , also . 
He shuddered at the very thought that this was possible . 
Assuredly , if any one had said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that name would ring in his ears , when the hideous words , Jean Valjean , would suddenly emerge from the darkness and rise in front of him , when that formidable light , capable of dissipating the mystery in which he had enveloped himself , would suddenly blaze forth above his head , and that that name would not menace him , that that light would but produce an obscurity more dense , that this rent veil would but increase the mystery , that this earthquake would solidify his edifice , that this prodigious incident would have no other result , so far as he was concerned , if so it seemed good to him , than that of rendering his existence at once clearer and more impenetrable , and that , out of his confrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean , the good and worthy citizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored , more peaceful , and more respected than ever -- if any one had told him that , he would have tossed his head and regarded the words as those of a madman . 
Well , all this was precisely what had just come to pass ; all that accumulation of impossibilities was a fact , and God had permitted these wild fancies to become real things ! 
His revery continued to grow clearer . 
He came more and more to an understanding of his position . 
