The mother must have felt pleased in her grave , to see her daughter wearing mourning for her , and , above all , to see that she was properly clothed , and that she was warm . 
He thought of that forest of Montfermeil ; they had traversed it together , Cosette and he ; he thought of what the weather had been , of the leafless trees , of the wood destitute of birds , of the sunless sky ; it mattered not , it was charming . 
He arranged the tiny garments on the bed , the fichu next to the petticoat , the stockings beside the shoes , and he looked at them , one after the other . 
She was no taller than that , she had her big doll in her arms , she had put her louis d'or in the pocket of that apron , she had laughed , they walked hand in hand , she had no one in the world but him . 
Then his venerable , white head fell forward on the bed , that stoical old heart broke , his face was engulfed , so to speak , in Cosette 's garments , and if any one had passed up the stairs at that moment , he would have heard frightful sobs . 
THE IMMORTAL LIVER -LSB- 68 -RSB- -LSB- 68 -RSB- In allusion to the story of Prometheus . 
The old and formidable struggle , of which we have already witnessed so many phases , began once more . 
Jacob struggled with the angel but one night . 
Alas ! 
how many times have we beheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience , in the darkness , and struggling desperately against it ! 
Unheard-of conflict ! 
At certain moments the foot slips ; at other moments the ground crumbles away underfoot . 
How many times had that conscience , mad for the good , clasped and overthrown him ! 
How many times had the truth set her knee inexorably upon his breast ! 
How many times , hurled to earth by the light , had he begged for mercy ! 
How many times had that implacable spark , lighted within him , and upon him by the Bishop , dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind ! 
How many times had he risen to his feet in the combat , held fast to the rock , leaning against sophism , dragged in the dust , now getting the upper hand of his conscience , again overthrown by it ! 
How many times , after an equivoque , after the specious and treacherous reasoning of egotism , had he heard his irritated conscience cry in his ear : `` A trip ! 
you wretch ! '' 
How many times had his refractory thoughts rattled convulsively in his throat , under the evidence of duty ! 
Resistance to God . 
Funereal sweats . 
What secret wounds which he alone felt bleed ! 
What excoriations in his lamentable existence ! 
How many times he had risen bleeding , bruised , broken , enlightened , despair in his heart , serenity in his soul ! 
and , vanquished , he had felt himself the conqueror . 
And , after having dislocated , broken , and rent his conscience with red-hot pincers , it had said to him , as it stood over him , formidable , luminous , and tranquil : `` Now , go in peace ! '' 
But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict , what a lugubrious peace , alas ! 
Nevertheless , that night Jean Valjean felt that he was passing through his final combat . 
A heart-rending question presented itself . 
Predestinations are not all direct ; they do not open out in a straight avenue before the predestined man ; they have blind courts , impassable alleys , obscure turns , disturbing crossroads offering the choice of many ways . 
Jean Valjean had halted at that moment at the most perilous of these crossroads . 
He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil . 
He had that gloomy intersection beneath his eyes . 
On this occasion once more , as had happened to him already in other sad vicissitudes , two roads opened out before him , the one tempting , the other alarming . 
Which was he to take ? 
He was counselled to the one which alarmed him whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness . 
Once more , Jean Valjean had the choice between Is it then true ? 
the soul may recover ; but not fate . 
This is the problem which presented itself to him : by that mysterious index finger which we all perceive the terrible port and the smiling ambush . 
Frightful thing ! 
an incurable destiny ! 
In what manner was Jean Valjean to behave in relation to the happiness of Cosette and Marius ? 
It was he who had willed that happiness , it was he who had brought it about ; he had , himself , buried it in his entrails , and at that moment , when he reflected on it , he was able to enjoy the sort of satisfaction which an armorer would experience on recognizing his factory mark on a knife , on withdrawing it , all smoking , from his own breast . 
Cosette had Marius , Marius possessed Cosette . 
They had everything , even riches . 
And this was his doing . 
But what was he , Jean Valjean , to do with this happiness , now that it existed , now that it was there ? 
Should he force himself on this happiness ? 
Should he treat it as belonging to him ? 
