The door was closed . 
The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker . 
The sun was charming ; the branches had that soft shivering of May , which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind . 
A brave little bird , probably a lover , was carolling in a distracted manner in a large tree . 
The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation , resembling the hollow of a sphere , in the stone on the left , at the foot of the pier of the door . 
At this moment the leaves of the door parted , and a peasant woman emerged . 
She saw the wayfarer , and perceived what he was looking at . 
`` It was a French cannon-ball which made that , '' she said to him . 
And she added : -- `` That which you see there , higher up in the door , near a nail , is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg . 
The bullet did not pierce the wood . '' 
`` What is the name of this place ? '' 
inquired the wayfarer . 
`` Hougomont , '' said the peasant woman . 
The traveller straightened himself up . 
He walked on a few paces , and went off to look over the tops of the hedges . 
On the horizon through the trees , he perceived a sort of little elevation , and on this elevation something which at that distance resembled a lion . 
He was on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
HOUGOMONT Hougomont , -- this was a funereal spot , the beginning of the obstacle , the first resistance , which that great wood-cutter of Europe , called Napoleon , encountered at Waterloo , the first knot under the blows of his axe . 
It was a chateau ; it is no longer anything but a farm . 
For the antiquary , Hougomont is Hugomons . 
This manor was built by Hugo , Sire of Somerel , the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers . 
The traveller pushed open the door , elbowed an ancient calash under the porch , and entered the courtyard . 
The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the sixteenth century , which here simulates an arcade , everything else having fallen prostrate around it . 
A monumental aspect often has its birth in ruin . 
In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door , of the time of Henry IV. , permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard ; beside this door , a manure-hole , some pickaxes , some shovels , some carts , an old well , with its flagstone and its iron reel , a chicken jumping , and a turkey spreading its tail , a chapel surmounted by a small bell-tower , a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the wall of the chapel -- behold the court , the conquest of which was one of Napoleon 's dreams . 
This corner of earth , could he but have seized it , would , perhaps , have given him the world likewise . 
Chickens are scattering its dust abroad with their beaks . 
A growl is audible ; it is a huge dog , who shows his teeth and replaces the English . 
The English behaved admirably there . 
Cooke 's four companies of guards there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army . 
Hougomont viewed on the map , as a geometrical plan , comprising buildings and enclosures , presents a sort of irregular rectangle , one angle of which is nicked out . 
It is this angle which contains the southern door , guarded by this wall , which commands it only a gun 's length away . 
Hougomont has two doors , -- the southern door , that of the chateau ; and the northern door , belonging to the farm . 
Napoleon sent his brother Jerome against Hougomont ; the divisions of Foy , Guilleminot , and Bachelu hurled themselves against it ; nearly the entire corps of Reille was employed against it , and miscarried ; Kellermann 's balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall . 
Bauduin 's brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the north , and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the beginning of a breach on the south , but without taking it . 
The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south . 
A bit of the north door , broken by the French , hangs suspended to the wall . 
It consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams , on which the scars of the attack are visible . 
The northern door , which was beaten in by the French , and which has had a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall , stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock ; it is cut squarely in the wall , built of stone below , of brick above which closes in the courtyard on the north . 
It is a simple door for carts , such as exist in all farms , with the two large leaves made of rustic planks : beyond lie the meadows . 
The dispute over this entrance was furious . 
For a long time , all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on the door-posts . 
It was there that Bauduin was killed . 
The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard ; its horror is visible there ; the confusion of the fray was petrified there ; it lives and it dies there ; it was only yesterday . 
The walls are in the death agony , the stones fall ; the breaches cry aloud ; the holes are wounds ; the drooping , quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee . 
This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day . 
Buildings which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles . 
The English barricaded themselves there ; the French made their way in , but could not stand their ground . 
Beside the chapel , one wing of the chateau , the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont , rises in a crumbling state , -- disembowelled , one might say . 
The chateau served for a dungeon , the chapel for a block-house . 
