People suffer in the light ; excess burns . 
The flame is the enemy of the wing . 
To burn without ceasing to fly , -- therein lies the marvel of genius . 
When you shall have learned to know , and to love , you will still suffer . 
The day is born in tears . 
The luminous weep , if only over those in darkness . 
ROOTS Slang is the tongue of those who sit in darkness . 
Thought is moved in its most sombre depths , social philosophy is bidden to its most poignant meditations , in the presence of that enigmatic dialect at once so blighted and rebellious . 
Therein lies chastisement made visible . 
Every syllable has an air of being marked . 
The words of the vulgar tongue appear therein wrinkled and shrivelled , as it were , beneath the hot iron of the executioner . 
Some seem to be still smoking . 
Such and such a phrase produces upon you the effect of the shoulder of a thief branded with the fleur-de-lys , which has suddenly been laid bare . 
Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these substantives which are fugitives from justice . 
Metaphor is sometimes so shameless , that one feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter . 
Moreover , in spite of all this , and because of all this , this strange dialect has by rights , its own compartment in that great impartial case of pigeon-holes where there is room for the rusty farthing as well as for the gold medal , and which is called literature . 
Slang , whether the public admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry . 
It is a language . 
Yes , by the deformity of certain terms , we recognize the fact that it was chewed by Mandrin , and by the splendor of certain metonymies , we feel that Villon spoke it . 
That exquisite and celebrated verse -- Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan ? 
But where are the snows of years gone by ? 
is a verse of slang . 
Antam -- ante annum -- is a word of Thunes slang , which signified the past year , and by extension , formerly . 
Thirty-five years ago , at the epoch of the departure of the great chain-gang , there could be read in one of the cells at Bicetre , this maxim engraved with a nail on the wall by a king of Thunes condemned to the galleys : Les dabs d'antan trimaient siempre pour la pierre du Coesre . 
This means Kings in days gone by always went and had themselves anointed . 
In the opinion of that king , anointment meant the galleys . 
The word decarade , which expresses the departure of heavy vehicles at a gallop , is attributed to Villon , and it is worthy of him . 
This word , which strikes fire with all four of its feet , sums up in a masterly onomatopoeia the whole of La Fontaine 's admirable verse : -- Six forts chevaux tiraient un coche . 
Six stout horses drew a coach . 
From a purely literary point of view , few studies would prove more curious and fruitful than the study of slang . 
It is a whole language within a language , a sort of sickly excrescence , an unhealthy graft which has produced a vegetation , a parasite which has its roots in the old Gallic trunk , and whose sinister foliage crawls all over one side of the language . 
This is what may be called the first , the vulgar aspect of slang . 
But , for those who study the tongue as it should be studied , that is to say , as geologists study the earth , slang appears like a veritable alluvial deposit . 
According as one digs a longer or shorter distance into it , one finds in slang , below the old popular French , Provencal , Spanish , Italian , Levantine , that language of the Mediterranean ports , English and German , the Romance language in its three varieties , French , Italian , and Romance Romance , Latin , and finally Basque and Celtic . 
A profound and unique formation . 
A subterranean edifice erected in common by all the miserable . 
Each accursed race has deposited its layer , each suffering has dropped its stone there , each heart has contributed its pebble . 
A throng of evil , base , or irritated souls , who have traversed life and have vanished into eternity , linger there almost entirely visible still beneath the form of some monstrous word . 
Do you want Spanish ? 
The old Gothic slang abounded in it . 
Here is boffete , a box on the ear , which is derived from bofeton ; vantane , window -LRB- later on vanterne -RRB- , which comes from vantana ; gat , cat , which comes from gato ; acite , oil , which comes from aceyte . 
Do you want Italian ? 
Here is spade , sword , which comes from spada ; carvel , boat , which comes from caravella . 
Do you want English ? 
Here is bichot , which comes from bishop ; raille , spy , which comes from rascal , rascalion ; pilche , a case , which comes from pilcher , a sheath . 
Do you want German ? 
Here is the caleur , the waiter , kellner ; the hers , the master , herzog -LRB- duke -RRB- . 
Do you want Latin ? 
Here is frangir , to break , frangere ; affurer , to steal , fur ; cadene , chain , catena . 
There is one word which crops up in every language of the continent , with a sort of mysterious power and authority . 
