Stupefied , he turned round . 
Behind him , in the portion of the passage which he had just passed through , at a distance which appeared to him immense , piercing the dense obscurity , flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air of surveying him . 
It was the gloomy star of the police which was rising in the sewer . 
In the rear of that star eight or ten forms were moving about in a confused way , black , upright , indistinct , horrible . 
EXPLANATION On the day of the sixth of June , a battue of the sewers had been ordered . 
It was feared that the vanquished might have taken to them for refuge , and Prefect Gisquet was to search occult Paris while General Bugeaud swept public Paris ; a double and connected operation which exacted a double strategy on the part of the public force , represented above by the army and below by the police . 
Three squads of agents and sewermen explored the subterranean drain of Paris , the first on the right bank , the second on the left bank , the third in the city . 
The agents of police were armed with carabines , with bludgeons , swords and poignards . 
That which was directed at Jean Valjean at that moment , was the lantern of the patrol of the right bank . 
This patrol had just visited the curving gallery and the three blind alleys which lie beneath the Rue du Cadran . 
While they were passing their lantern through the depths of these blind alleys , Jean Valjean had encountered on his path the entrance to the gallery , had perceived that it was narrower than the principal passage and had not penetrated thither . 
He had passed on . 
The police , on emerging from the gallery du Cadran , had fancied that they heard the sound of footsteps in the direction of the belt sewer . 
They were , in fact , the steps of Jean Valjean . 
The sergeant in command of the patrol had raised his lantern , and the squad had begun to gaze into the mist in the direction whence the sound proceeded . 
This was an indescribable moment for Jean Valjean . 
Happily , if he saw the lantern well , the lantern saw him but ill . 
It was light and he was shadow . 
He was very far off , and mingled with the darkness of the place . 
He hugged the wall and halted . 
Moreover , he did not understand what it was that was moving behind him . 
The lack of sleep and food , and his emotions had caused him also to pass into the state of a visionary . 
He beheld a gleam , and around that gleam , forms . 
What was it ? 
He did not comprehend . 
Jean Valjean having paused , the sound ceased . 
The men of the patrol listened , and heard nothing , they looked and saw nothing . 
They held a consultation . 
There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer a sort of cross-roads called de service , which was afterwards suppressed , on account of the little interior lake which formed there , swallowing up the torrent of rain in heavy storms . 
The patrol could form a cluster in this open space . 
Jean Valjean saw these spectres form a sort of circle . 
These bull-dogs ' heads approached each other closely and whispered together . 
The result of this council held by the watch dogs was , that they had been mistaken , that there had been no noise , that it was useless to get entangled in the belt sewer , that it would only be a waste of time , but that they ought to hasten towards Saint-Merry ; that if there was anything to do , and any `` bousingot '' to track out , it was in that quarter . 
From time to time , parties re-sole their old insults . 
In 1832 , the word bousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin , which had become obsolete , and the word demagogue which has since rendered such excellent service . 
The sergeant gave orders to turn to the left , towards the watershed of the Seine . 
If it had occurred to them to separate into two squads , and to go in both directions , Jean Valjean would have been captured . 
All hung on that thread . 
It is probable that the instructions of the prefecture , foreseeing a possibility of combat and insurgents in force , had forbidden the patrol to part company . 
The patrol resumed its march , leaving Jean Valjean behind it . 
Of all this movement , Jean Valjean perceived nothing , except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenly wheeled round . 
Before taking his departure , the Sergeant , in order to acquit his policeman 's conscience , discharged his gun in the direction of Jean Valjean . 
The detonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt , like the rumbling of that titanic entrail . 
A bit of plaster which fell into the stream and splashed up the water a few paces away from Jean Valjean , warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head . 
Slow and measured steps resounded for some time on the timber work , gradually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance ; the group of black forms vanished , a glimmer of light oscillated and floated , communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter , then disappeared ; the silence became profound once more , the obscurity became complete , blindness and deafness resumed possession of the shadows ; and Jean Valjean , not daring to stir as yet , remained for a long time leaning with his back against the wall , with straining ears , and dilated pupils , watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol . 
THE `` SPUN '' MAN This justice must be rendered to the police of that period , that even in the most serious public junctures , it imperturbably fulfilled its duties connected with the sewers and surveillance . 
A revolt was , in its eyes , no pretext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their own mouths , and for neglecting society for the reason that the government was in peril . 
The ordinary service was performed correctly in company with the extraordinary service , and was not troubled by the latter . 
In the midst of an incalculable political event already begun , under the pressure of a possible revolution , a police agent , `` spun '' a thief without allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection and barricades . 
It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoon of the 6th of June on the banks of the Seine , on the slope of the right shore , a little beyond the Pont des Invalides . 
