And she hid her blushing face on the breast of the superb and intoxicated young man . 
He fell upon the bench , and she beside him . 
They had no words more . 
The stars were beginning to gleam . 
How did it come to pass that their lips met ? 
How comes it to pass that the birds sing , that snow melts , that the rose unfolds , that May expands , that the dawn grows white behind the black trees on the shivering crest of the hills ? 
A kiss , and that was all . 
Both started , and gazed into the darkness with sparkling eyes . 
They felt neither the cool night , nor the cold stone , nor the damp earth , nor the wet grass ; they looked at each other , and their hearts were full of thoughts . 
They had clasped hands unconsciously . 
She did not ask him , she did not even wonder , how he had entered there , and how he had made his way into the garden . 
It seemed so simple to her that he should be there ! 
From time to time , Marius ' knee touched Cosette 's knee , and both shivered . 
At intervals , Cosette stammered a word . 
Her soul fluttered on her lips like a drop of dew on a flower . 
Little by little they began to talk to each other . 
Effusion followed silence , which is fulness . 
The night was serene and splendid overhead . 
These two beings , pure as spirits , told each other everything , their dreams , their intoxications , their ecstasies , their chimaeras , their weaknesses , how they had adored each other from afar , how they had longed for each other , their despair when they had ceased to see each other . 
They confided to each other in an ideal intimacy , which nothing could augment , their most secret and most mysterious thoughts . 
They related to each other , with candid faith in their illusions , all that love , youth , and the remains of childhood which still lingered about them , suggested to their minds . 
Their two hearts poured themselves out into each other in such wise , that at the expiration of a quarter of an hour , it was the young man who had the young girl 's soul , and the young girl who had the young man 's soul . 
Each became permeated with the other , they were enchanted with each other , they dazzled each other . 
When they had finished , when they had told each other everything , she laid her head on his shoulder and asked him : -- `` What is your name ? '' 
`` My name is Marius , '' said he . 
`` And yours ? '' 
`` My name is Cosette . '' 
THE MALICIOUS PLAYFULNESS OF THE WIND Since 1823 , when the tavern of Montfermeil was on the way to shipwreck and was being gradually engulfed , not in the abyss of a bankruptcy , but in the cesspool of petty debts , the Thenardier pair had had two other children ; both males . 
That made five ; two girls and three boys . 
Madame Thenardier had got rid of the last two , while they were still young and very small , with remarkable luck . 
Got rid of is the word . 
There was but a mere fragment of nature in that woman . 
A phenomenon , by the way , of which there is more than one example extant . 
Like the Marechale de La Mothe-Houdancourt , the Thenardier was a mother to her daughters only . 
There her maternity ended . 
Her hatred of the human race began with her own sons . 
In the direction of her sons her evil disposition was uncompromising , and her heart had a lugubrious wall in that quarter . 
As the reader has seen , she detested the eldest ; she cursed the other two . 
Why ? 
Because . 
The most terrible of motives , the most unanswerable of retorts -- Because . 
`` I have no need of a litter of squalling brats , '' said this mother . 
Let us explain how the Thenardiers had succeeded in getting rid of their last two children ; and even in drawing profit from the operation . 
The woman Magnon , who was mentioned a few pages further back , was the same one who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the two children which she had had . 
She lived on the Quai des Celestins , at the corner of this ancient street of the Petit-Musc which afforded her the opportunity of changing her evil repute into good odor . 
The reader will remember the great epidemic of croup which ravaged the river districts of the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago , and of which science took advantage to make experiments on a grand scale as to the efficacy of inhalations of alum , so beneficially replaced at the present day by the external tincture of iodine . 
During this epidemic , the Magnon lost both her boys , who were still very young , one in the morning , the other in the evening of the same day . 
This was a blow . 
These children were precious to their mother ; they represented eighty francs a month . 
These eighty francs were punctually paid in the name of M. Gillenormand , by collector of his rents , M. Barge , a retired tip-staff , in the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile . 
