He passed the entire day with him , forgetful of food and sleep , praying to God for the soul of the condemned man , and praying the condemned man for his own . 
He told him the best truths , which are also the most simple . 
He was father , brother , friend ; he was bishop only to bless . 
He taught him everything , encouraged and consoled him . 
The man was on the point of dying in despair . 
Death was an abyss to him . 
As he stood trembling on its mournful brink , he recoiled with horror . 
He was not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent . 
His condemnation , which had been a profound shock , had , in a manner , broken through , here and there , that wall which separates us from the mystery of things , and which we call life . 
He gazed incessantly beyond this world through these fatal breaches , and beheld only darkness . 
The Bishop made him see light . 
On the following day , when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch , the Bishop was still there . 
He followed him , and exhibited himself to the eyes of the crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal cross upon his neck , side by side with the criminal bound with cords . 
He mounted the tumbril with him , he mounted the scaffold with him . 
The sufferer , who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day , was radiant . 
He felt that his soul was reconciled , and he hoped in God . 
The Bishop embraced him , and at the moment when the knife was about to fall , he said to him : `` God raises from the dead him whom man slays ; he whom his brothers have rejected finds his Father once more . 
Pray , believe , enter into life : the Father is there . '' 
When he descended from the scaffold , there was something in his look which made the people draw aside to let him pass . 
They did not know which was most worthy of admiration , his pallor or his serenity . 
On his return to the humble dwelling , which he designated , with a smile , as his palace , he said to his sister , `` I have just officiated pontifically . '' 
Since the most sublime things are often those which are the least understood , there were people in the town who said , when commenting on this conduct of the Bishop , `` It is affectation . '' 
This , however , was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms . 
The populace , which perceives no jest in holy deeds , was touched , and admired him . 
As for the Bishop , it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine , and it was a long time before he recovered from it . 
In fact , when the scaffold is there , all erected and prepared , it has something about it which produces hallucination . 
One may feel a certain indifference to the death penalty , one may refrain from pronouncing upon it , from saying yes or no , so long as one has not seen a guillotine with one 's own eyes : but if one encounters one of them , the shock is violent ; one is forced to decide , and to take part for or against . 
Some admire it , like de Maistre ; others execrate it , like Beccaria . 
The guillotine is the concretion of the law ; it is called vindicte ; it is not neutral , and it does not permit you to remain neutral . 
He who sees it shivers with the most mysterious of shivers . 
All social problems erect their interrogation point around this chopping-knife . 
The scaffold is a vision . 
The scaffold is not a piece of carpentry ; the scaffold is not a machine ; the scaffold is not an inert bit of mechanism constructed of wood , iron and cords . 
It seems as though it were a being , possessed of I know not what sombre initiative ; one would say that this piece of carpenter 's work saw , that this machine heard , that this mechanism understood , that this wood , this iron , and these cords were possessed of will . 
In the frightful meditation into which its presence casts the soul the scaffold appears in terrible guise , and as though taking part in what is going on . 
The scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner ; it devours , it eats flesh , it drinks blood ; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated by the judge and the carpenter , a spectre which seems to live with a horrible vitality composed of all the death which it has inflicted . 
Therefore , the impression was terrible and profound ; on the day following the execution , and on many succeeding days , the Bishop appeared to be crushed . 
The almost violent serenity of the funereal moment had disappeared ; the phantom of social justice tormented him . 
He , who generally returned from all his deeds with a radiant satisfaction , seemed to be reproaching himself . 
At times he talked to himself , and stammered lugubrious monologues in a low voice . 
This is one which his sister overheard one evening and preserved : `` I did not think that it was so monstrous . 
It is wrong to become absorbed in the divine law to such a degree as not to perceive human law . 
Death belongs to God alone . 
By what right do men touch that unknown thing ? '' 
In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished . 
Nevertheless , it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided passing the place of execution . 
M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick and dying . 
He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest duty and his greatest labor . 
Widowed and orphaned families had no need to summon him ; he came of his own accord . 
He understood how to sit down and hold his peace for long hours beside the man who had lost the wife of his love , of the mother who had lost her child . 
