There is no insurrection except in a forward direction . 
Any other sort of rising is bad ; every violent step towards the rear is a revolt ; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human race . 
Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth ; the pavements which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right . 
These pavements bequeath to the uprising only their mud . 
Danton against Louis XIV . 
is insurrection ; Hebert against Danton is revolt . 
Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be , as Lafayette says , the most holy of duties , an uprising may be the most fatal of crimes . 
There is also a difference in the intensity of heat ; insurrection is often a volcano , revolt is often only a fire of straw . 
Revolt , as we have said , is sometimes found among those in power . 
Polignac is a rioter ; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing powers . 
Insurrection is sometimes resurrection . 
The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutely modern fact , and all history anterior to this fact being , for the space of four thousand years , filled with violated right , and the suffering of peoples , each epoch of history brings with it that protest of which it is capable . 
Under the Caesars , there was no insurrection , but there was Juvenal . 
The facit indignatio replaces the Gracchi . 
Under the Caesars , there is the exile to Syene ; there is also the man of the Annales . 
We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who , on his part also , overwhelms the real world with a protest in the name of the ideal world , who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on Rome-Nineveh , on Rome-Babylon , on Rome-Sodom , the flaming reflection of the Apocalypse . 
John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal ; we may understand him , he is a Jew , and it is Hebrew ; but the man who writes the Annales is of the Latin race , let us rather say he is a Roman . 
As the Neros reign in a black way , they should be painted to match . 
The work of the graving-tool alone would be too pale ; there must be poured into the channel a concentrated prose which bites . 
Despots count for something in the question of philosophers . 
A word that is chained is a terrible word . 
The writer doubles and trebles his style when silence is imposed on a nation by its master . 
From this silence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters into thought and there congeals into bronze . 
The compression of history produces conciseness in the historian . 
The granite solidity of such and such a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by the tyrant . 
Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are augmentations of force . 
The Ciceronian period , which hardly sufficed for Verres , would be blunted on Caligula . 
The less spread of sail in the phrase , the more intensity in the blow . 
Tacitus thinks with all his might . 
The honesty of a great heart , condensed in justice and truth , overwhelms as with lightning . 
Be it remarked , in passing , that Tacitus is not historically superposed upon Caesar . 
The Tiberii were reserved for him . 
Caesar and Tacitus are two successive phenomena , a meeting between whom seems to be mysteriously avoided , by the One who , when He sets the centuries on the stage , regulates the entrances and the exits . 
Caesar is great , Tacitus is great ; God spares these two greatnesses by not allowing them to clash with one another . 
The guardian of justice , in striking Caesar , might strike too hard and be unjust . 
God does not will it . 
The great wars of Africa and Spain , the pirates of Sicily destroyed , civilization introduced into Gaul , into Britanny , into Germany , -- all this glory covers the Rubicon . 
There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine justice , hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the formidable historian , sparing Caesar Tacitus , and according extenuating circumstances to genius . 
Certainly , despotism remains despotism , even under the despot of genius . 
There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants , but the moral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants . 
In such reigns , nothing veils the shame ; and those who make examples , Tacitus as well as Juvenal , slap this ignominy which can not reply , in the face , more usefully in the presence of all humanity . 
Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla . 
Under Claudius and under Domitian , there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the repulsiveness of the tyrant . 
The villainy of slaves is a direct product of the despot ; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein the master is reflected ; public powers are unclean ; hearts are small ; consciences are dull , souls are like vermin ; thus it is under Caracalla , thus it is under Commodus , thus it is under Heliogabalus , while , from the Roman Senate , under Caesar , there comes nothing but the odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles . 
Hence the advent , apparently tardy , of the Tacituses and the Juvenals ; it is in the hour for evidence , that the demonstrator makes his appearance . 
But Juvenal and Tacitus , like Isaiah in Biblical times , like Dante in the Middle Ages , is man ; riot and insurrection are the multitude , which is sometimes right and sometimes wrong . 
In the majority of cases , riot proceeds from a material fact ; insurrection is always a moral phenomenon . 
Riot is Masaniello ; insurrection , Spartacus . 
Insurrection borders on mind , riot on the stomach ; Gaster grows irritated ; but Gaster , assuredly , is not always in the wrong . 
In questions of famine , riot , Buzancais , for example , holds a true , pathetic , and just point of departure . 
