The man set the candle down on a small table . 
`` Well , '' said the Bishop , `` may you pass a good night . 
To-morrow morning , before you set out , you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows . '' 
`` Thanks , Monsieur l'Abbe , '' said the man . 
Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace , when all of a sudden , and without transition , he made a strange movement , which would have frozen the two sainted women with horror , had they witnessed it . 
Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him at that moment . 
Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a menace ? 
Was he simply obeying a sort of instinctive impulse which was obscure even to himself ? 
He turned abruptly to the old man , folded his arms , and bending upon his host a savage gaze , he exclaimed in a hoarse voice : -- `` Ah ! 
really ! 
You lodge me in your house , close to yourself like this ? '' 
He broke off , and added with a laugh in which there lurked something monstrous : -- `` Have you really reflected well ? 
How do you know that I have not been an assassin ? '' 
The Bishop replied : -- `` That is the concern of the good God . '' 
Then gravely , and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking to himself , he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed his benediction on the man , who did not bow , and without turning his head or looking behind him , he returned to his bedroom . 
When the alcove was in use , a large serge curtain drawn from wall to wall concealed the altar . 
The Bishop knelt before this curtain as he passed and said a brief prayer . 
A moment later he was in his garden , walking , meditating , conteplating , his heart and soul wholly absorbed in those grand and mysterious things which God shows at night to the eyes which remain open . 
As for the man , he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit by the nice white sheets . 
Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils after the manner of convicts , he dropped , all dressed as he was , upon the bed , where he immediately fell into a profound sleep . 
Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his apartment . 
A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house . 
JEAN VALJEAN Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke . 
Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie . 
He had not learned to read in his childhood . 
When he reached man 's estate , be became a tree-pruner at Faverolles . 
His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu ; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean , probably a sobriquet , and a contraction of viola Jean , `` here 's Jean . '' 
Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition which constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures . 
On the whole , however , there was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant about Jean Valjean in appearance , at least . 
He had lost his father and mother at a very early age . 
His mother had died of a milk fever , which had not been properly attended to . 
His father , a tree-pruner , like himself , had been killed by a fall from a tree . 
All that remained to Jean Valjean was a sister older than himself , -- a widow with seven children , boys and girls . 
This sister had brought up Jean Valjean , and so long as she had a husband she lodged and fed her young brother . 
The husband died . 
The eldest of the seven children was eight years old . 
The youngest , one . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year . 
He took the father 's place , and , in his turn , supported the sister who had brought him up . 
This was done simply as a duty and even a little churlishly on the part of Jean Valjean . 
Thus his youth had been spent in rude and ill-paid toil . 
He had never known a `` kind woman friend '' in his native parts . 
He had not had the time to fall in love . 
He returned at night weary , and ate his broth without uttering a word . 
His sister , mother Jeanne , often took the best part of his repast from his bowl while he was eating , -- a bit of meat , a slice of bacon , the heart of the cabbage , -- to give to one of her children . 
As he went on eating , with his head bent over the table and almost into his soup , his long hair falling about his bowl and concealing his eyes , he had the air of perceiving nothing and allowing it . 
There was at Faverolles , not far from the Valjean thatched cottage , on the other side of the lane , a farmer 's wife named Marie-Claude ; the Valjean children , habitually famished , sometimes went to borrow from Marie-Claude a pint of milk , in their mother 's name , which they drank behind a hedge or in some alley corner , snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the little girls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks . 
If their mother had known of this marauding , she would have punished the delinquents severely . 
Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for the pint of milk behind their mother 's back , and the children were not punished . 
In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day ; then he hired out as a hay-maker , as laborer , as neat-herd on a farm , as a drudge . 
