Zero does not exist . 
Everything is something . 
Nothing is nothing . 
Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread . 
Even to see and to show does not suffice . 
Philosophy should be an energy ; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition of man . 
Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius ; in other words , the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man of felicity . 
Eden should be changed into a Lyceum . 
Science should be a cordial . 
To enjoy , -- what a sad aim , and what a paltry ambition ! 
The brute enjoys . 
To offer thought to the thirst of men , to give them all as an elixir the notion of God , to make conscience and science fraternize in them , to render them just by this mysterious confrontation ; such is the function of real philosophy . 
Morality is a blossoming out of truths . 
Contemplation leads to action . 
The absolute should be practicable . 
It is necessary that the ideal should be breathable , drinkable , and eatable to the human mind . 
It is the ideal which has the right to say : Take , this is my body , this is my blood . 
Wisdom is a holy communion . 
It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying , and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion . 
Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at its ease , without any other result than that of being convenient to curiosity . 
For our part , adjourning the development of our thought to another occasion , we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither understand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end , without those two forces which are their two motors : faith and love . 
Progress is the goal , the ideal is the type . 
What is this ideal ? 
It is God . 
Ideal , absolute , perfection , infinity : identical words . 
PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME History and philosophy have eternal duties , which are , at the same time , simple duties ; to combat Caiphas the High-priest , Draco the Lawgiver , Trimalcion the Legislator , Tiberius the Emperor ; this is clear , direct , and limpid , and offers no obscurity . 
But the right to live apart , even with its inconveniences and its abuses , insists on being stated and taken into account . 
Cenobitism is a human problem . 
When one speaks of convents , those abodes of error , but of innocence , of aberration but of good-will , of ignorance but of devotion , of torture but of martyrdom , it always becomes necessary to say either yes or no . 
A convent is a contradiction . 
Its object , salvation ; its means thereto , sacrifice . 
The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme abnegation . 
To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of monasticism . 
In the cloister , one suffers in order to enjoy . 
One draws a bill of exchange on death . 
One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light . 
In the cloister , hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise . 
The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity . 
It does not seem to us , that on such a subject mockery is permissible . 
All about it is serious , the good as well as the bad . 
The just man frowns , but never smiles with a malicious sneer . 
We understand wrath , but not malice . 
FAITH , LAW A few words more . 
We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues , we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal ; but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man . 
We salute the man who kneels . 
A faith ; this is a necessity for man . 
Woe to him who believes nothing . 
One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed . 
There is visible labor and invisible labor . 
To contemplate is to labor , to think is to act . 
