She felt that which she had never felt before -- a sensation of expansion . 
The man no longer produced on her the effect of being old or poor ; she thought Jean Valjean handsome , just as she thought the hovel pretty . 
These are the effects of the dawn , of childhood , of joy . 
The novelty of the earth and of life counts for something here . 
Nothing is so charming as the coloring reflection of happiness on a garret . 
We all have in our past a delightful garret . 
Nature , a difference of fifty years , had set a profound gulf between Jean Valjean and Cosette ; destiny filled in this gulf . 
Destiny suddenly united and wedded with its irresistible power these two uprooted existences , differing in age , alike in sorrow . 
One , in fact , completed the other . 
Cosette 's instinct sought a father , as Jean Valjean 's instinct sought a child . 
To meet was to find each other . 
At the mysterious moment when their hands touched , they were welded together . 
When these two souls perceived each other , they recognized each other as necessary to each other , and embraced each other closely . 
Taking the words in their most comprehensive and absolute sense , we may say that , separated from every one by the walls of the tomb , Jean Valjean was the widower , and Cosette was the orphan : this situation caused Jean Valjean to become Cosette 's father after a celestial fashion . 
And in truth , the mysterious impression produced on Cosette in the depths of the forest of Chelles by the hand of Jean Valjean grasping hers in the dark was not an illusion , but a reality . 
The entrance of that man into the destiny of that child had been the advent of God . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean had chosen his refuge well . 
There he seemed perfectly secure . 
The chamber with a dressing-room , which he occupied with Cosette , was the one whose window opened on the boulevard . 
This being the only window in the house , no neighbors ' glances were to be feared from across the way or at the side . 
The ground-floor of Number 50-52 , a sort of dilapidated penthouse , served as a wagon-house for market-gardeners , and no communication existed between it and the first story . 
It was separated by the flooring , which had neither traps nor stairs , and which formed the diaphragm of the building , as it were . 
The first story contained , as we have said , numerous chambers and several attics , only one of which was occupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean Valjean 's housekeeping ; all the rest was uninhabited . 
It was this old woman , ornamented with the name of the principal lodger , and in reality intrusted with the functions of portress , who had let him the lodging on Christmas eve . 
He had represented himself to her as a gentleman of means who had been ruined by Spanish bonds , who was coming there to live with his little daughter . 
He had paid her six months in advance , and had commissioned the old woman to furnish the chamber and dressing-room , as we have seen . 
It was this good woman who had lighted the fire in the stove , and prepared everything on the evening of their arrival . 
Week followed week ; these two beings led a happy life in that hovel . 
Cosette laughed , chattered , and sang from daybreak . 
Children have their morning song as well as birds . 
It sometimes happened that Jean Valjean clasped her tiny red hand , all cracked with chilblains , and kissed it . 
The poor child , who was used to being beaten , did not know the meaning of this , and ran away in confusion . 
At times she became serious and stared at her little black gown . 
Cosette was no longer in rags ; she was in mourning . 
She had emerged from misery , and she was entering into life . 
Jean Valjean had undertaken to teach her to read . 
Sometimes , as he made the child spell , he remembered that it was with the idea of doing evil that he had learned to read in prison . 
This idea had ended in teaching a child to read . 
Then the ex-convict smiled with the pensive smile of the angels . 
He felt in it a premeditation from on high , the will of some one who was not man , and he became absorbed in revery . 
Good thoughts have their abysses as well as evil ones . 
To teach Cosette to read , and to let her play , this constituted nearly the whole of Jean Valjean 's existence . 
And then he talked of her mother , and he made her pray . 
She called him father , and knew no other name for him . 
He passed hours in watching her dressing and undressing her doll , and in listening to her prattle . 
Life , henceforth , appeared to him to be full of interest ; men seemed to him good and just ; he no longer reproached any one in thought ; he saw no reason why he should not live to be a very old man , now that this child loved him . 
He saw a whole future stretching out before him , illuminated by Cosette as by a charming light . 
The best of us are not exempt from egotistical thoughts . 
At times , he reflected with a sort of joy that she would be ugly . 
This is only a personal opinion ; but , to utter our whole thought , at the point where Jean Valjean had arrived when he began to love Cosette , it is by no means clear to us that he did not need this encouragement in order that he might persevere in well-doing . 
