This chain suggested , not the beams , which it was its office to transport , but the mastodons and mammoths which it might have served to harness ; it had the air of the galleys , but of cyclopean and superhuman galleys , and it seemed to have been detached from some monster . 
Homer would have bound Polyphemus with it , and Shakespeare , Caliban . 
Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street ? 
In the first place , to encumber the street ; next , in order that it might finish the process of rusting . 
There is a throng of institutions in the old social order , which one comes across in this fashion as one walks about outdoors , and which have no other reasons for existence than the above . 
The centre of the chain swung very near the ground in the middle , and in the loop , as in the rope of a swing , there were seated and grouped , on that particular evening , in exquisite interlacement , two little girls ; one about two years and a half old , the other , eighteen months ; the younger in the arms of the other . 
A handkerchief , cleverly knotted about them , prevented their falling out . 
A mother had caught sight of that frightful chain , and had said , `` Come ! 
there 's a plaything for my children . '' 
The two children , who were dressed prettily and with some elegance , were radiant with pleasure ; one would have said that they were two roses amid old iron ; their eyes were a triumph ; their fresh cheeks were full of laughter . 
One had chestnut hair ; the other , brown . 
Their innocent faces were two delighted surprises ; a blossoming shrub which grew near wafted to the passers-by perfumes which seemed to emanate from them ; the child of eighteen months displayed her pretty little bare stomach with the chaste indecency of childhood . 
Above and around these two delicate heads , all made of happiness and steeped in light , the gigantic fore-carriage , black with rust , almost terrible , all entangled in curves and wild angles , rose in a vault , like the entrance of a cavern . 
A few paces apart , crouching down upon the threshold of the hostelry , the mother , not a very prepossessing woman , by the way , though touching at that moment , was swinging the two children by means of a long cord , watching them carefully , for fear of accidents , with that animal and celestial expression which is peculiar to maternity . 
At every backward and forward swing the hideous links emitted a strident sound , which resembled a cry of rage ; the little girls were in ecstasies ; the setting sun mingled in this joy , and nothing could be more charming than this caprice of chance which had made of a chain of Titans the swing of cherubim . 
As she rocked her little ones , the mother hummed in a discordant voice a romance then celebrated : -- `` It must be , said a warrior . '' 
Her song , and the contemplation of her daughters , prevented her hearing and seeing what was going on in the street . 
In the meantime , some one had approached her , as she was beginning the first couplet of the romance , and suddenly she heard a voice saying very near her ear : -- `` You have two beautiful children there , Madame . '' 
`` To the fair and tender Imogene -- '' replied the mother , continuing her romance ; then she turned her head . 
A woman stood before her , a few paces distant . 
This woman also had a child , which she carried in her arms . 
She was carrying , in addition , a large carpet-bag , which seemed very heavy . 
This woman 's child was one of the most divine creatures that it is possible to behold . 
lt was a girl , two or three years of age . 
She could have entered into competition with the two other little ones , so far as the coquetry of her dress was concerned ; she wore a cap of fine linen , ribbons on her bodice , and Valenciennes lace on her cap . 
The folds of her skirt were raised so as to permit a view of her white , firm , and dimpled leg . 
She was admirably rosy and healthy . 
The little beauty inspired a desire to take a bite from the apples of her cheeks . 
Of her eyes nothing could be known , except that they must be very large , and that they had magnificent lashes . 
She was asleep . 
She slept with that slumber of absolute confidence peculiar to her age . 
The arms of mothers are made of tenderness ; in them children sleep profoundly . 
As for the mother , her appearance was sad and poverty-stricken . 
She was dressed like a working-woman who is inclined to turn into a peasant again . 
She was young . 
Was she handsome ? 
Perhaps ; but in that attire it was not apparent . 
Her hair , a golden lock of which had escaped , seemed very thick , but was severely concealed beneath an ugly , tight , close , nun-like cap , tied under the chin . 
A smile displays beautiful teeth when one has them ; but she did not smile . 
Her eyes did not seem to have been dry for a very long time . 
She was pale ; she had a very weary and rather sickly appearance . 
She gazed upon her daughter asleep in her arms with the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own child . 
A large blue handkerchief , such as the Invalides use , was folded into a fichu , and concealed her figure clumsily . 
Her hands were sunburnt and all dotted with freckles , her forefinger was hardened and lacerated with the needle ; she wore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff , a linen gown , and coarse shoes . 
It was Fantine . 
It was Fantine , but difficult to recognize . 
Nevertheless , on scrutinizing her attentively , it was evident that she still retained her beauty . 
A melancholy fold , which resembled the beginning of irony , wrinkled her right cheek . 
As for her toilette , that aerial toilette of muslin and ribbons , which seemed made of mirth , of folly , and of music , full of bells , and perfumed with lilacs had vanished like that beautiful and dazzling hoar-frost which is mistaken for diamonds in the sunlight ; it melts and leaves the branch quite black . 
Ten months had elapsed since the `` pretty farce . '' 
