There is nothing that is not strictly logical about this . 
It is in vain that mirrors are banished from the convent , women are conscious of their faces ; now , girls who are conscious of their beauty do not easily become nuns ; the vocation being voluntary in inverse proportion to their good looks , more is to be hoped from the ugly than from the pretty . 
Hence a lively taste for plain girls . 
The whole of this adventure increased the importance of good , old Fauchelevent ; he won a triple success ; in the eyes of Jean Valjean , whom he had saved and sheltered ; in those of grave-digger Gribier , who said to himself : `` He spared me that fine '' ; with the convent , which , being enabled , thanks to him , to retain the coffin of Mother Crucifixion under the altar , eluded Caesar and satisfied God . 
There was a coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus , and a coffin without a body in the Vaugirard cemetery , public order had no doubt been deeply disturbed thereby , but no one was aware of it . 
As for the convent , its gratitude to Fauchelevent was very great . 
Fauchelevent became the best of servitors and the most precious of gardeners . 
Upon the occasion of the archbishop 's next visit , the prioress recounted the affair to his Grace , making something of a confession at the same time , and yet boasting of her deed . 
On leaving the convent , the archbishop mentioned it with approval , and in a whisper to M. de Latil , Monsieur 's confessor , afterwards Archbishop of Reims and Cardinal . 
This admiration for Fauchelevent became widespread , for it made its way to Rome . 
We have seen a note addressed by the then reigning Pope , Leo XII. , to one of his relatives , a Monsignor in the Nuncio 's establishment in Paris , and bearing , like himself , the name of Della Genga ; it contained these lines : `` It appears that there is in a convent in Paris an excellent gardener , who is also a holy man , named Fauvent . '' 
Nothing of this triumph reached Fauchelevent in his hut ; he went on grafting , weeding , and covering up his melon beds , without in the least suspecting his excellences and his sanctity . 
Neither did he suspect his glory , any more than a Durham or Surrey bull whose portrait is published in the London Illustrated News , with this inscription : `` Bull which carried off the prize at the Cattle Show . '' 
CLOISTERED Cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent . 
It was quite natural that Cosette should think herself Jean Valjean 's daughter . 
Moreover , as she knew nothing , she could say nothing , and then , she would not have said anything in any case . 
As we have just observed , nothing trains children to silence like unhappiness . 
Cosette had suffered so much , that she feared everything , even to speak or to breathe . 
A single word had so often brought down an avalanche upon her . 
She had hardly begun to regain her confidence since she had been with Jean Valjean . 
She speedily became accustomed to the convent . 
Only she regretted Catherine , but she dared not say so . 
Once , however , she did say to Jean Valjean : `` Father , if I had known , I would have brought her away with me . '' 
Cosette had been obliged , on becoming a scholar in the convent , to don the garb of the pupils of the house . 
Jean Valjean succeeded in getting them to restore to him the garments which she laid aside . 
This was the same mourning suit which he had made her put on when she had quitted the Thenardiers ' inn . 
It was not very threadbare even now . 
Jean Valjean locked up these garments , plus the stockings and the shoes , with a quantity of camphor and all the aromatics in which convents abound , in a little valise which he found means of procuring . 
He set this valise on a chair near his bed , and he always carried the key about his person . 
`` Father , '' Cosette asked him one day , `` what is there in that box which smells so good ? '' 
Father Fauchelevent received other recompense for his good action , in addition to the glory which we just mentioned , and of which he knew nothing ; in the first place it made him happy ; next , he had much less work , since it was shared . 
Lastly , as he was very fond of snuff , he found the presence of M. Madeleine an advantage , in that he used three times as much as he had done previously , and that in an infinitely more luxurious manner , seeing that M. Madeleine paid for it . 
The nuns did not adopt the name of Ultime ; they called Jean Valjean the other Fauvent . 
If these holy women had possessed anything of Javert 's glance , they would eventually have noticed that when there was any errand to be done outside in the behalf of the garden , it was always the elder Fauchelevent , the old , the infirm , the lame man , who went , and never the other ; but whether it is that eyes constantly fixed on God know not how to spy , or whether they were , by preference , occupied in keeping watch on each other , they paid no heed to this . 
Moreover , it was well for Jean Valjean that he kept close and did not stir out . 
Javert watched the quarter for more than a month . 
This convent was for Jean Valjean like an island surrounded by gulfs . 
Henceforth , those four walls constituted his world . 
He saw enough of the sky there to enable him to preserve his serenity , and Cosette enough to remain happy . 
A very sweet life began for him . 
He inhabited the old hut at the end of the garden , in company with Fauchelevent . 
This hovel , built of old rubbish , which was still in existence in 1845 , was composed , as the reader already knows , of three chambers , all of which were utterly bare and had nothing beyond the walls . 
The principal one had been given up , by force , for Jean Valjean had opposed it in vain , to M. Madeleine , by Father Fauchelevent . 
The walls of this chamber had for ornament , in addition to the two nails whereon to hang the knee-cap and the basket , a Royalist bank-note of ' 93 , applied to the wall over the chimney-piece , and of which the following is an exact facsimile : -- -LCB- GRAPHIC HERE -RCB- This specimen of Vendean paper money had been nailed to the wall by the preceding gardener , an old Chouan , who had died in the convent , and whose place Fauchelevent had taken . 
Jean Valjean worked in the garden every day and made himself very useful . 
He had formerly been a pruner of trees , and he gladly found himself a gardener once more . 
It will be remembered that he knew all sorts of secrets and receipts for agriculture . 
He turned these to advantage . 
Almost all the trees in the orchard were ungrafted , and wild . 
He budded them and made them produce excellent fruit . 
