Spain buys a great deal of it . 
It is the country of jet ... '' Here he paused , the pen fell from his fingers , he was seized by one of those sobs which at times welled up from the very depths of his being ; the poor man clasped his head in both hands , and meditated . 
`` Oh ! '' 
he exclaimed within himself -LSB- lamentable cries , heard by God alone -RSB- , `` all is over . 
I shall never see her more . 
She is a smile which passed over me . 
I am about to plunge into the night without even seeing her again . 
Oh ! 
one minute , one instant , to hear her voice , to touch her dress , to gaze upon her , upon her , the angel ! 
and then to die ! 
It is nothing to die , what is frightful is to die without seeing her . 
She would smile on me , she would say a word to me , would that do any harm to any one ? 
No , all is over , and forever . 
Here I am all alone . 
My God ! 
My God ! 
I shall never see her again ! '' 
At that moment there came a knock at the door . 
A BOTTLE OF INK WHICH ONLY SUCCEEDED IN WHITENING That same day , or to speak more accurately , that same evening , as Marius left the table , and was on the point of withdrawing to his study , having a case to look over , Basque handed him a letter saying : `` The person who wrote the letter is in the antechamber . '' 
Cosette had taken the grandfather 's arm and was strolling in the garden . 
A letter , like a man , may have an unprepossessing exterior . 
Coarse paper , coarsely folded -- the very sight of certain missives is displeasing . 
The letter which Basque had brought was of this sort . 
Marius took it . 
It smelled of tobacco . 
Nothing evokes a memory like an odor . 
Marius recognized that tobacco . 
He looked at the superscription : `` To Monsieur , Monsieur le Baron Pommerci . 
At his hotel . '' 
The recognition of the tobacco caused him to recognize the writing as well . 
It may be said that amazement has its lightning flashes . 
Marius was , as it were , illuminated by one of these flashes . 
The sense of smell , that mysterious aid to memory , had just revived a whole world within him . 
This was certainly the paper , the fashion of folding , the dull tint of ink ; it was certainly the well-known handwriting , especially was it the same tobacco . 
The Jondrette garret rose before his mind . 
Thus , strange freak of chance ! 
one of the two scents which he had so diligently sought , the one in connection with which he had lately again exerted so many efforts and which he supposed to be forever lost , had come and presented itself to him of its own accord . 
He eagerly broke the seal , and read : `` Monsieur le Baron : -- If the Supreme Being had given me the talents , I might have been baron Thenard , member of the Institute -LSB- academy of ciences -RSB- , but I am not . 
I only bear the same as him , happy if this memory recommends me to the eccellence of your kindnesses . 
The benefit with which you will honor me will be reciprocle . 
I am in possession of a secret concerning an individual . 
This individual concerns you . 
I hold the secret at your disposal desiring to have the honor to be huseful to you . 
I will furnish you with the simple means of driving from your honorabel family that individual who has no right there , madame la baronne being of lofty birth . 
The sanctuary of virtue can not cohabit longer with crime without abdicating . 
I awate in the entichamber the orders of monsieur le baron . 
`` With respect . '' 
The letter was signed `` Thenard . '' 
This signature was not false . 
It was merely a trifle abridged . 
