Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought they heard the voice of a man ; they wheeled round in affright . 
`` Answer me ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
The servant stammered : -- `` The portress told me that he could not come to-day . '' 
`` Be calm , my child , '' said the sister ; `` lie down again . '' 
Fantine , without changing her attitude , continued in a loud voice , and with an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending : -- `` He can not come ? 
Why not ? 
You know the reason . 
You are whispering it to each other there . 
I want to know it . '' 
The servant-maid hastened to say in the nun 's ear , `` Say that he is busy with the city council . '' 
Sister Simplice blushed faintly , for it was a lie that the maid had proposed to her . 
On the other hand , it seemed to her that the mere communication of the truth to the invalid would , without doubt , deal her a terrible blow , and that this was a serious matter in Fantine 's present state . 
Her flush did not last long ; the sister raised her calm , sad eyes to Fantine , and said , `` Monsieur le Maire has gone away . '' 
Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed : her eyes sparkled ; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face . 
`` Gone ! '' 
she cried ; `` he has gone to get Cosette . '' 
Then she raised her arms to heaven , and her white face became ineffable ; her lips moved ; she was praying in a low voice . 
When her prayer was finished , `` Sister , '' she said , `` I am willing to lie down again ; I will do anything you wish ; I was naughty just now ; I beg your pardon for having spoken so loud ; it is very wrong to talk loudly ; I know that well , my good sister , but , you see , I am very happy : the good God is good ; M. Madeleine is good ; just think ! 
he has gone to Montfermeil to get my little Cosette . '' 
She lay down again , with the nun 's assistance , helped the nun to arrange her pillow , and kissed the little silver cross which she wore on her neck , and which Sister Simplice had given her . 
`` My child , '' said the sister , `` try to rest now , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine took the sister 's hand in her moist hands , and the latter was pained to feel that perspiration . 
`` He set out this morning for Paris ; in fact , he need not even go through Paris ; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence . 
Do you remember how he said to me yesterday , when I spoke to him of Cosette , Soon , soon ? 
He wants to give me a surprise , you know ! 
he made me sign a letter so that she could be taken from the Thenardiers ; they can not say anything , can they ? 
they will give back Cosette , for they have been paid ; the authorities will not allow them to keep the child since they have received their pay . 
Do not make signs to me that I must not talk , sister ! 
I am extremely happy ; I am doing well ; I am not ill at all any more ; I am going to see Cosette again ; I am even quite hungry ; it is nearly five years since I saw her last ; you can not imagine how much attached one gets to children , and then , she will be so pretty ; you will see ! 
If you only knew what pretty little rosy fingers she had ! 
In the first place , she will have very beautiful hands ; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old ; like this ! 
she must be a big girl now ; she is seven years old ; she is quite a young lady ; I call her Cosette , but her name is really Euphrasie . 
Stop ! 
this morning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece , and I had a sort of idea come across me , like that , that I should see Cosette again soon . 
Mon Dieu ! 
how wrong it is not to see one 's children for years ! 
One ought to reflect that life is not eternal . 
Oh , how good M. le Maire is to go ! 
it is very cold ! 
it is true ; he had on his cloak , at least ? 
he will be here to-morrow , will he not ? 
to-morrow will be a festival day ; to-morrow morning , sister , you must remind me to put on my little cap that has lace on it . 
What a place that Montfermeil is ! 
I took that journey on foot once ; it was very long for me , but the diligences go very quickly ! 
he will be here to-morrow with Cosette : how far is it from here to Montfermeil ? '' 
The sister , who had no idea of distances , replied , `` Oh , I think that be will be here to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow ! 
to-morrow ! '' 
said Fantine , `` I shall see Cosette to-morrow ! 
