The younger wedded the man of her dreams , but she died . 
The elder did not marry at all . 
At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which we are relating , she was an antique virtue , an incombustible prude , with one of the sharpest noses , and one of the most obtuse minds that it is possible to see . 
A characteristic detail ; outside of her immediate family , no one had ever known her first name . 
She was called Mademoiselle Gillenormand , the elder . 
In the matter of cant , Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have given points to a miss . 
Her modesty was carried to the other extreme of blackness . 
She cherished a frightful memory of her life ; one day , a man had beheld her garter . 
Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty . 
Her guimpe was never sufficiently opaque , and never ascended sufficiently high . 
She multiplied clasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking . 
The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels in proportion as the fortress is the less menaced . 
Nevertheless , let him who can explain these antique mysteries of innocence , she allowed an officer of the Lancers , her grand nephew , named Theodule , to embrace her without displeasure . 
In spite of this favored Lancer , the label : Prude , under which we have classed her , suited her to absolute perfection . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand was a sort of twilight soul . 
Prudery is a demi-virtue and a demi-vice . 
To prudery she added bigotry , a well-assorted lining . 
She belonged to the society of the Virgin , wore a white veil on certain festivals , mumbled special orisons , revered `` the holy blood , '' venerated `` the sacred heart , '' remained for hours in contemplation before a rococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was inaccessible to the rank and file of the faithful , and there allowed her soul to soar among little clouds of marble , and through great rays of gilded wood . 
She had a chapel friend , an ancient virgin like herself , named Mademoiselle Vaubois , who was a positive blockhead , and beside whom Mademoiselle Gillenormand had the pleasure of being an eagle . 
Beyond the Agnus Dei and Ave Maria , Mademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge of anything except of the different ways of making preserves . 
Mademoiselle Vaubois , perfect in her style , was the ermine of stupidity without a single spot of intelligence . 
Let us say it plainly , Mademoiselle Gillenormand had gained rather than lost as she grew older . 
This is the case with passive natures . 
She had never been malicious , which is relative kindness ; and then , years wear away the angles , and the softening which comes with time had come to her . 
She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not herself know the secret . 
There breathed from her whole person the stupor of a life that was finished , and which had never had a beginning . 
She kept house for her father . 
M. Gillenormand had his daughter near him , as we have seen that Monseigneur Bienvenu had his sister with him . 
These households comprised of an old man and an old spinster are not rare , and always have the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning on each other for support . 
There was also in this house , between this elderly spinster and this old man , a child , a little boy , who was always trembling and mute in the presence of M. Gillenormand . 
M. Gillenormand never addressed this child except in a severe voice , and sometimes , with uplifted cane : `` Here , sir ! 
rascal , scoundrel , come here ! 
-- Answer me , you scamp ! 
Just let me see you , you good-for-nothing ! '' 
etc. , etc. . 
He idolized him . 
This was his grandson . 
We shall meet with this child again later on . 
BOOK THIRD . 
-- THE GRANDFATHER AND THE GRANDSON AN ANCIENT SALON When M. Gillenormand lived in the Rue Servandoni , he had frequented many very good and very aristocratic salons . 
Although a bourgeois , M. Gillenormand was received in society . 
As he had a double measure of wit , in the first place , that which was born with him , and secondly , that which was attributed to him , he was even sought out and made much of . 
He never went anywhere except on condition of being the chief person there . 
There are people who will have influence at any price , and who will have other people busy themselves over them ; when they can not be oracles , they turn wags . 
M. Gillenormand was not of this nature ; his domination in the Royalist salons which he frequented cost his self-respect nothing . 
He was an oracle everywhere . 
It had happened to him to hold his own against M. de Bonald , and even against M. Bengy-Puy-Vallee . 
About 1817 , he invariably passed two afternoons a week in a house in his own neighborhood , in the Rue Ferou , with Madame la Baronne de T. , a worthy and respectable person , whose husband had been Ambassador of France to Berlin under Louis XVI . 
Baron de T. , who , during his lifetime , had gone very passionately into ecstasies and magnetic visions , had died bankrupt , during the emigration , leaving , as his entire fortune , some very curious Memoirs about Mesmer and his tub , in ten manuscript volumes , bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges . 
Madame de T. had not published the memoirs , out of pride , and maintained herself on a meagre income which had survived no one knew how . 
