The sister dared not speak to her . 
The clock struck a quarter past three . 
Fantine fell back on her pillow . 
She said nothing , but began to plait the sheets once more . 
Half an hour passed , then an hour , no one came ; every time the clock struck , Fantine started up and looked towards the door , then fell back again . 
Her thought was clearly perceptible , but she uttered no name , she made no complaint , she blamed no one . 
But she coughed in a melancholy way . 
One would have said that something dark was descending upon her . 
She was livid and her lips were blue . 
She smiled now and then . 
Five o'clock struck . 
Then the sister heard her say , very low and gently , `` He is wrong not to come to-day , since I am going away to-morrow . '' 
Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine 's delay . 
In the meantime , Fantine was staring at the tester of her bed . 
She seemed to be endeavoring to recall something . 
All at once she began to sing in a voice as feeble as a breath . 
The nun listened . 
This is what Fantine was singing : -- `` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . 
`` Yestere'en the Virgin Mary came near my stove , in a broidered mantle clad , and said to me , ` Here , hide ` neath my veil the child whom you one day begged from me . 
Haste to the city , buy linen , buy a needle , buy thread . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
`` Dear Holy Virgin , beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons decked . 
God may give me his loveliest star ; I prefer the child thou hast granted me . 
` Madame , what shall I do with this linen fine ? ' 
-- ` Make of it clothes for thy new-born babe . ' 
`` Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , and corn-flowers are blue . '' 
` Wash this linen . ' 
-- ` Where ? ' 
-- ` In the stream . 
Make of it , soiling not , spoiling not , a petticoat fair with its bodice fine , which I will embroider and fill with flowers . ' 
-- ` Madame , the child is no longer here ; what is to be done ? ' 
-- ` Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to bury me . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through , Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . '' 
This song was an old cradle romance with which she had , in former days , lulled her little Cosette to sleep , and which had never recurred to her mind in all the five years during which she had been parted from her child . 
She sang it in so sad a voice , and to so sweet an air , that it was enough to make any one , even a nun , weep . 
The sister , accustomed as she was to austerities , felt a tear spring to her eyes . 
The clock struck six . 
Fantine did not seem to hear it . 
She no longer seemed to pay attention to anything about her . 
Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of the factory , whether the mayor had returned , and if he would not come to the infirmary soon . 
The girl returned in a few minutes . 
Fantine was still motionless and seemed absorbed in her own thoughts . 
The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone , that the mayor had set out that morning before six o'clock , in a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , cold as the weather was ; that he had gone alone , without even a driver ; that no one knew what road he had taken ; that people said he had been seen to turn into the road to Arras ; that others asserted that they had met him on the road to Paris . 
That when he went away he had been very gentle , as usual , and that he had merely told the portress not to expect him that night . 
While the two women were whispering together , with their backs turned to Fantine 's bed , the sister interrogating , the servant conjecturing , Fantine , with the feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies , which unite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation of death , had raised herself to her knees in bed , with her shrivelled hands resting on the bolster , and her head thrust through the opening of the curtains , and was listening . 
All at once she cried : -- `` You are speaking of M. Madeleine ! 
Why are you talking so low ? 
What is he doing ? 
Why does he not come ? '' 
