Upon that I declare that this little gentleman is none of mine . 
Let him be taken care of . 
It is not his fault . '' 
This manner of procedure was good-tempered . 
The woman , whose name was Magnon , sent him another parcel in the following year . 
It was a boy again . 
Thereupon , M. Gillenormand capitulated . 
He sent the two brats back to their mother , promising to pay eighty francs a month for their maintenance , on the condition that the said mother would not do so any more . 
He added : `` I insist upon it that the mother shall treat them well . 
I shall go to see them from time to time . '' 
And this he did . 
He had had a brother who was a priest , and who had been rector of the Academy of Poitiers for three and thirty years , and had died at seventy-nine . 
`` I lost him young , '' said he . 
This brother , of whom but little memory remains , was a peaceable miser , who , being a priest , thought himself bound to bestow alms on the poor whom he met , but he never gave them anything except bad or demonetized sous , thereby discovering a means of going to hell by way of paradise . 
As for M. Gillenormand the elder , he never haggled over his alms-giving , but gave gladly and nobly . 
He was kindly , abrupt , charitable , and if he had been rich , his turn of mind would have been magnificent . 
He desired that all which concerned him should be done in a grand manner , even his rogueries . 
One day , having been cheated by a business man in a matter of inheritance , in a gross and apparent manner , he uttered this solemn exclamation : `` That was indecently done ! 
I am really ashamed of this pilfering . 
Everything has degenerated in this century , even the rascals . 
Morbleu ! 
this is not the way to rob a man of my standing . 
I am robbed as though in a forest , but badly robbed . 
Silva , sint consule dignae ! '' 
He had had two wives , as we have already mentioned ; by the first he had had a daughter , who had remained unmarried , and by the second another daughter , who had died at about the age of thirty , who had wedded , through love , or chance , or otherwise , a soldier of fortune who had served in the armies of the Republic and of the Empire , who had won the cross at Austerlitz and had been made colonel at Waterloo . 
`` He is the disgrace of my family , '' said the old bourgeois . 
He took an immense amount of snuff , and had a particularly graceful manner of plucking at his lace ruffle with the back of one hand . 
He believed very little in God . 
RULE : RECEIVE NO ONE EXCEPT IN THE EVENING Such was M. Luc-Esprit Gillenormand , who had not lost his hair , -- which was gray rather than white , -- and which was always dressed in `` dog 's ears . '' 
To sum up , he was venerable in spite of all this . 
He had something of the eighteenth century about him ; frivolous and great . 
In 1814 and during the early years of the Restoration , M. Gillenormand , who was still young , -- he was only seventy-four , -- lived in the Faubourg Saint Germain , Rue Servandoni , near Saint-Sulpice . 
He had only retired to the Marais when he quitted society , long after attaining the age of eighty . 
And , on abandoning society , he had immured himself in his habits . 
The principal one , and that which was invariable , was to keep his door absolutely closed during the day , and never to receive any one whatever except in the evening . 
He dined at five o'clock , and after that his door was open . 
That had been the fashion of his century , and he would not swerve from it . 
`` The day is vulgar , '' said he , `` and deserves only a closed shutter . 
Fashionable people only light up their minds when the zenith lights up its stars . '' 
And he barricaded himself against every one , even had it been the king himself . 
This was the antiquated elegance of his day . 
TWO DO NOT MAKE A PAIR We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand 's two daughters . 
They had come into the world ten years apart . 
In their youth they had borne very little resemblance to each other , either in character or countenance , and had also been as little like sisters to each other as possible . 
The youngest had a charming soul , which turned towards all that belongs to the light , was occupied with flowers , with verses , with music , which fluttered away into glorious space , enthusiastic , ethereal , and was wedded from her very youth , in ideal , to a vague and heroic figure . 
The elder had also her chimera ; she espied in the azure some very wealthy purveyor , a contractor , a splendidly stupid husband , a million made man , or even a prefect ; the receptions of the Prefecture , an usher in the antechamber with a chain on his neck , official balls , the harangues of the town-hall , to be `` Madame la Prefete , '' -- all this had created a whirlwind in her imagination . 
Thus the two sisters strayed , each in her own dream , at the epoch when they were young girls . 
Both had wings , the one like an angel , the other like a goose . 
No ambition is ever fully realized , here below at least . 
No paradise becomes terrestrial in our day . 
