`` That 's true , '' said he , `` both of you together have no more than that . '' 
And , forgetting his motto : `` half shares , '' he took all . 
He hesitated a little over the large sous . 
After due reflection , he took them also , muttering : `` Never mind ! 
You cut folks ' throats too cheap altogether . '' 
That done , he once more drew the big key from under his blouse . 
`` Now , my friend , you must leave . 
It 's like the fair here , you pay when you go out . 
You have paid , now clear out . '' 
And he began to laugh . 
Had he , in lending to this stranger the aid of his key , and in making some other man than himself emerge from that portal , the pure and disinterested intention of rescuing an assassin ? 
We may be permitted to doubt this . 
Thenardier helped Jean Valjean to replace Marius on his shoulders , then he betook himself to the grating on tiptoe , and barefooted , making Jean Valjean a sign to follow him , looked out , laid his finger on his mouth , and remained for several seconds , as though in suspense ; his inspection finished , he placed the key in the lock . 
The bolt slipped back and the gate swung open . 
It neither grated nor squeaked . 
It moved very softly . 
It was obvious that this gate and those hinges , carefully oiled , were in the habit of opening more frequently than was supposed . 
This softness was suspicious ; it hinted at furtive goings and comings , silent entrances and exits of nocturnal men , and the wolf-like tread of crime . 
The sewer was evidently an accomplice of some mysterious band . 
This taciturn grating was a receiver of stolen goods . 
Thenardier opened the gate a little way , allowing just sufficient space for Jean Valjean to pass out , closed the grating again , gave the key a double turn in the lock and plunged back into the darkness , without making any more noise than a breath . 
He seemed to walk with the velvet paws of a tiger . 
A moment later , that hideous providence had retreated into the invisibility . 
Jean Valjean found himself in the open air . 
MARIUS PRODUCES ON SOME ONE WHO IS A JUDGE OF THE MATTER , THE EFFECT OF BEING DEAD He allowed Marius to slide down upon the shore . 
They were in the open air ! 
The miasmas , darkness , horror lay behind him . 
The pure , healthful , living , joyous air that was easy to breathe inundated him . 
Everywhere around him reigned silence , but that charming silence when the sun has set in an unclouded azure sky . 
Twilight had descended ; night was drawing on , the great deliverer , the friend of all those who need a mantle of darkness that they may escape from an anguish . 
The sky presented itself in all directions like an enormous calm . 
The river flowed to his feet with the sound of a kiss . 
The aerial dialogue of the nests bidding each other good night in the elms of the Champs-Elysees was audible . 
A few stars , daintily piercing the pale blue of the zenith , and visible to revery alone , formed imperceptible little splendors amid the immensity . 
Evening was unfolding over the head of Jean Valjean all the sweetness of the infinite . 
It was that exquisite and undecided hour which says neither yes nor no . 
Night was already sufficiently advanced to render it possible to lose oneself at a little distance and yet there was sufficient daylight to permit of recognition at close quarters . 
For several seconds , Jean Valjean was irresistibly overcome by that august and caressing serenity ; such moments of oblivion do come to men ; suffering refrains from harassing the unhappy wretch ; everything is eclipsed in the thoughts ; peace broods over the dreamer like night ; and , beneath the twilight which beams and in imitation of the sky which is illuminated , the soul becomes studded with stars . 
Jean Valjean could not refrain from contemplating that vast , clear shadow which rested over him ; thoughtfully he bathed in the sea of ecstasy and prayer in the majestic silence of the eternal heavens . 
Then he bent down swiftly to Marius , as though the sentiment of duty had returned to him , and , dipping up water in the hollow of his hand , he gently sprinkled a few drops on the latter 's face . 
Marius ' eyelids did not open ; but his half-open mouth still breathed . 
Jean Valjean was on the point of dipping his hand in the river once more , when , all at once , he experienced an indescribable embarrassment , such as a person feels when there is some one behind him whom he does not see . 
We have already alluded to this impression , with which everyone is familiar . 
He turned round . 
Some one was , in fact , behind him , as there had been a short while before . 
A man of lofty stature , enveloped in a long coat , with folded arms , and bearing in his right fist a bludgeon of which the leaden head was visible , stood a few paces in the rear of the spot where Jean Valjean was crouching over Marius . 
With the aid of the darkness , it seemed a sort of apparition . 
An ordinary man would have been alarmed because of the twilight , a thoughtful man on account of the bludgeon . 
Jean Valjean recognized Javert . 
The reader has divined , no doubt , that Thenardier 's pursuer was no other than Javert . 
