`` Enjolras said : ` Joly is ill , Grantaire is drunk . ' 
It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet . 
If he had come for me , I would have followed him . 
So much the worse for Enjolras ! 
I wo n't go to his funeral . '' 
This resolution once arrived at , Bossuet , Joly , and Grantaire did not stir from the wine-shop . 
By two o'clock in the afternoon , the table at which they sat was covered with empty bottles . 
Two candles were burning on it , one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green , the other in the neck of a cracked carafe . 
Grantaire had seduced Joly and Bossuet to wine ; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards cheerfulness . 
As for Grantaire , he had got beyond wine , that merely moderate inspirer of dreams , ever since mid-day . 
Wine enjoys only a conventional popularity with serious drinkers . 
There is , in fact , in the matter of inebriety , white magic and black magic ; wine is only white magic . 
Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams . 
The blackness of a terrible fit of drunkenness yawning before him , far from arresting him , attracted him . 
He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass . 
The beer-glass is the abyss . 
Having neither opium nor hashish on hand , and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight , he had had recourse to that fearful mixture of brandy , stout , absinthe , which produces the most terrible of lethargies . 
It is of these three vapors , beer , brandy , and absinthe , that the lead of the soul is composed . 
They are three grooms ; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them ; and there are formed there in a membranous smoke , vaguely condensed into the wing of the bat , three mute furies , Nightmare , Night , and Death , which hover about the slumbering Psyche . 
Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase ; far from it . 
He was tremendously gay , and Bossuet and Joly retorted . 
They clinked glasses . 
Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words and ideas , a peculiarity of gesture ; he rested his left fist on his knee with dignity , his arm forming a right angle , and , with cravat untied , seated astride a stool , his full glass in his right hand , he hurled solemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote : -- `` Let the doors of the palace be thrown open ! 
Let every one be a member of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup . 
Let us drink . '' 
And turning to Madame Hucheloup , he added : -- `` Woman ancient and consecrated by use , draw near that I may contemplate thee ! '' 
And Joly exclaimed : -- `` Matelote and Gibelotte , dod ' t gib Grantaire anything more to drink . 
He has already devoured , since this bording , in wild prodigality , two francs and ninety-five centibes . '' 
And Grantaire began again : -- `` Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission , and putting them on the table in the guise of candles ? '' 
Bossuet , though very drunk , preserved his equanimity . 
He was seated on the sill of the open window , wetting his back in the falling rain , and gazing at his two friends . 
All at once , he heard a tumult behind him , hurried footsteps , cries of `` To arms ! '' 
He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis , at the end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , Enjolras passing , gun in hand , and Gavroche with his pistol , Feuilly with his sword , Courfeyrac with his sword , and Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss , Combeferre with his gun , Bahorel with his gun , and the whole armed and stormy rabble which was following them . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long . 
Bossuet improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his mouth , and shouted : -- `` Courfeyrac ! 
Courfeyrac ! 
Hohee ! '' 
Courfeyrac heard the shout , caught sight of Bossuet , and advanced a few paces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie , shouting : `` What do you want ? '' 
which crossed a `` Where are you going ? '' 
`` To make a barricade , '' replied Courfeyrac . 
`` Well , here ! 
This is a good place ! 
Make it here ! '' 
`` That 's true , Aigle , '' said Courfeyrac . 
And at a signal from Courfeyrac , the mob flung themselves into the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE The spot was , in fact , admirably adapted , the entrance to the street widened out , the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit . 
Corinthe created an obstacle , the Rue Mondetour was easily barricaded on the right and the left , no attack was possible except from the Rue Saint-Denis , that is to say , in front , and in full sight . 
Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal . 
Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob . 
There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight . 
