The merchant who had demanded the bucket of water took it to his horse himself . 
Cosette resumed her place under the kitchen table , and her knitting . 
The man , who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had poured out for himself , observed the child with peculiar attention . 
Cosette was ugly . 
If she had been happy , she might have been pretty . 
We have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure . 
Cosette was thin and pale ; she was nearly eight years old , but she seemed to be hardly six . 
Her large eyes , sunken in a sort of shadow , were almost put out with weeping . 
The corners of her mouth had that curve of habitual anguish which is seen in condemned persons and desperately sick people . 
Her hands were , as her mother had divined , `` ruined with chilblains . '' 
The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought into relief all the angles of her bones , and rendered her thinness frightfully apparent . 
As she was always shivering , she had acquired the habit of pressing her knees one against the other . 
Her entire clothing was but a rag which would have inspired pity in summer , and which inspired horror in winter . 
All she had on was hole-ridden linen , not a scrap of woollen . 
Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black and blue spots could be descried , which marked the places where the Thenardier woman had touched her . 
Her naked legs were thin and red . 
The hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep . 
This child 's whole person , her mien , her attitude , the sound of her voice , the intervals which she allowed to elapse between one word and the next , her glance , her silence , her slightest gesture , expressed and betrayed one sole idea , -- fear . 
Fear was diffused all over her ; she was covered with it , so to speak ; fear drew her elbows close to her hips , withdrew her heels under her petticoat , made her occupy as little space as possible , allowed her only the breath that was absolutely necessary , and had become what might be called the habit of her body , admitting of no possible variation except an increase . 
In the depths of her eyes there was an astonished nook where terror lurked . 
Her fear was such , that on her arrival , wet as she was , Cosette did not dare to approach the fire and dry herself , but sat silently down to her work again . 
The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was habitually so gloomy , and at times so tragic , that it seemed at certain moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon . 
As we have stated , she had never known what it is to pray ; she had never set foot in a church . 
`` Have I the time ? '' 
said the Thenardier . 
The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette . 
All at once , the Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` By the way , where 's that bread ? '' 
Cosette , according to her custom whenever the Thenardier uplifted her voice , emerged with great haste from beneath the table . 
She had completely forgotten the bread . 
She had recourse to the expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear . 
She lied . 
`` Madame , the baker 's shop was shut . '' 
`` You should have knocked . '' 
`` I did knock , Madame . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He did not open the door . '' 
`` I 'll find out to-morrow whether that is true , '' said the Thenardier ; `` and if you are telling me a lie , I 'll lead you a pretty dance . 
In the meantime , give me back my fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron , and turned green . 
The fifteen-sou piece was not there . 
`` Ah , come now , '' said Madame Thenardier , `` did you hear me ? '' 
Cosette turned her pocket inside out ; there was nothing in it . 
What could have become of that money ? 
The unhappy little creature could not find a word to say . 
She was petrified . 
`` Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece ? '' 
screamed the Thenardier , hoarsely , `` or do you want to rob me of it ? '' 
At the same time , she stretched out her arm towards the cat-o ' - nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner . 
This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength to shriek : -- `` Mercy , Madame , Madame ! 
I will not do so any more ! '' 
