Her glory consisted in her caps , which were always white . 
She passed her time , on Sundays , after mass , in counting over the linen in her chest , and in spreading out on her bed the dresses in the piece which she bought and never had made up . 
She knew how to read . 
M. Mabeuf had nicknamed her Mother Plutarque . 
M. Mabeuf had taken a fancy to Marius , because Marius , being young and gentle , warmed his age without startling his timidity . 
Youth combined with gentleness produces on old people the effect of the sun without wind . 
When Marius was saturated with military glory , with gunpowder , with marches and countermarches , and with all those prodigious battles in which his father had given and received such tremendous blows of the sword , he went to see M. Mabeuf , and M. Mabeuf talked to him of his hero from the point of view of flowers . 
His brother the cure died about 1830 , and almost immediately , as when the night is drawing on , the whole horizon grew dark for M. Mabeuf . 
A notary 's failure deprived him of the sum of ten thousand francs , which was all that he possessed in his brother 's right and his own . 
The Revolution of July brought a crisis to publishing . 
In a period of embarrassment , the first thing which does not sell is a Flora . 
The Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz stopped short . 
Weeks passed by without a single purchaser . 
Sometimes M. Mabeuf started at the sound of the bell . 
`` Monsieur , '' said Mother Plutarque sadly , `` it is the water-carrier . '' 
In short , one day , M. Mabeuf quitted the Rue Mesieres , abdicated the functions of warden , gave up Saint-Sulpice , sold not a part of his books , but of his prints , -- that to which he was the least attached , -- and installed himself in a little house on the Rue Montparnasse , where , however , he remained but one quarter for two reasons : in the first place , the ground floor and the garden cost three hundred francs , and he dared not spend more than two hundred francs on his rent ; in the second , being near Faton 's shooting-gallery , he could hear the pistol-shots ; which was intolerable to him . 
He carried off his Flora , his copper-plates , his herbariums , his portfolios , and his books , and established himself near the Salpetriere , in a sort of thatched cottage of the village of Austerlitz , where , for fifty crowns a year , he got three rooms and a garden enclosed by a hedge , and containing a well . 
He took advantage of this removal to sell off nearly all his furniture . 
On the day of his entrance into his new quarters , he was very gay , and drove the nails on which his engravings and herbariums were to hang , with his own hands , dug in his garden the rest of the day , and at night , perceiving that Mother Plutarque had a melancholy air , and was very thoughtful , he tapped her on the shoulder and said to her with a smile : `` We have the indigo ! '' 
Only two visitors , the bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques and Marius , were admitted to view the thatched cottage at Austerlitz , a brawling name which was , to tell the truth , extremely disagreeable to him . 
However , as we have just pointed out , brains which are absorbed in some bit of wisdom , or folly , or , as it often happens , in both at once , are but slowly accessible to the things of actual life . 
Their own destiny is a far-off thing to them . 
There results from such concentration a passivity , which , if it were the outcome of reasoning , would resemble philosophy . 
One declines , descends , trickles away , even crumbles away , and yet is hardly conscious of it one 's self . 
It always ends , it is true , in an awakening , but the awakening is tardy . 
In the meantime , it seems as though we held ourselves neutral in the game which is going on between our happiness and our unhappiness . 
We are the stake , and we look on at the game with indifference . 
It is thus that , athwart the cloud which formed about him , when all his hopes were extinguished one after the other , M. Mabeuf remained rather puerilely , but profoundly serene . 
His habits of mind had the regular swing of a pendulum . 
Once mounted on an illusion , he went for a very long time , even after the illusion had disappeared . 
A clock does not stop short at the precise moment when the key is lost . 
M. Mabeuf had his innocent pleasures . 
These pleasures were inexpensive and unexpected ; the merest chance furnished them . 
One day , Mother Plutarque was reading a romance in one corner of the room . 
She was reading aloud , finding that she understood better thus . 
To read aloud is to assure one 's self of what one is reading . 
There are people who read very loud , and who have the appearance of giving themselves their word of honor as to what they are perusing . 
It was with this sort of energy that Mother Plutarque was reading the romance which she had in hand . 
M. Mabeuf heard her without listening to her . 
In the course of her reading , Mother Plutarque came to this phrase . 
It was a question of an officer of dragoons and a beauty : -- '' -- The beauty pouted , and the dragoon -- '' Here she interrupted herself to wipe her glasses . 
`` Bouddha and the Dragon , '' struck in M. Mabeuf in a low voice . 
`` Yes , it is true that there was a dragon , which , from the depths of its cave , spouted flame through his maw and set the heavens on fire . 
Many stars had already been consumed by this monster , which , besides , had the claws of a tiger . 
Bouddha went into its den and succeeded in converting the dragon . 
That is a good book that you are reading , Mother Plutarque . 
There is no more beautiful legend in existence . '' 
And M. Mabeuf fell into a delicious revery . 
POVERTY A GOOD NEIGHBOR FOR MISERY Marius liked this candid old man who saw himself gradually falling into the clutches of indigence , and who came to feel astonishment , little by little , without , however , being made melancholy by it . 
Marius met Courfeyrac and sought out M. Mabeuf . 
