Where did you go ? 
Why have you stayed away so long ? 
Formerly your journeys only lasted three or four days . 
I sent Nicolette , the answer always was : ` He is absent . ' 
How long have you been back ? 
Why did you not let us know ? 
Do you know that you are very much changed ? 
Ah ! 
what a naughty father ! 
he has been ill , and we have not known it ! 
Stay , Marius , feel how cold his hand is ! '' 
`` So you are here ! 
Monsieur Pontmercy , you pardon me ! '' 
repeated Jean Valjean . 
At that word which Jean Valjean had just uttered once more , all that was swelling Marius ' heart found vent . 
He burst forth : `` Cosette , do you hear ? 
he has come to that ! 
he asks my forgiveness ! 
And do you know what he has done for me , Cosette ? 
He has saved my life . 
He has done more -- he has given you to me . 
And after having saved me , and after having given you to me , Cosette , what has he done with himself ? 
He has sacrificed himself . 
Behold the man . 
And he says to me the ingrate , to me the forgetful , to me the pitiless , to me the guilty one : Thanks ! 
Cosette , my whole life passed at the feet of this man would be too little . 
That barricade , that sewer , that furnace , that cesspool , -- all that he traversed for me , for thee , Cosette ! 
He carried me away through all the deaths which he put aside before me , and accepted for himself . 
Every courage , every virtue , every heroism , every sanctity he possesses ! 
Cosette , that man is an angel ! '' 
`` Hush ! 
hush ! '' 
said Jean Valjean in a low voice . 
`` Why tell all that ? '' 
`` But you ! '' 
cried Marius with a wrath in which there was veneration , `` why did you not tell it to me ? 
It is your own fault , too . 
You save people 's lives , and you conceal it from them ! 
You do more , under the pretext of unmasking yourself , you calumniate yourself . 
It is frightful . '' 
`` I told the truth , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` No , '' retorted Marius , `` the truth is the whole truth ; and that you did not tell . 
You were Monsieur Madeleine , why not have said so ? 
You saved Javert , why not have said so ? 
I owed my life to you , why not have said so ? '' 
`` Because I thought as you do . 
I thought that you were in the right . 
It was necessary that I should go away . 
If you had known about that affair , of the sewer , you would have made me remain near you . 
I was therefore forced to hold my peace . 
