you see , good sister of the good God , that I am no longer ill ; I am mad ; I could dance if any one wished it . '' 
A person who had seen her a quarter of an hour previously would not have understood the change ; she was all rosy now ; she spoke in a lively and natural voice ; her whole face was one smile ; now and then she talked , she laughed softly ; the joy of a mother is almost infantile . 
`` Well , '' resumed the nun , `` now that you are happy , mind me , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice : `` Yes , lie down again ; be good , for you are going to have your child ; Sister Simplice is right ; every one here is right . '' 
And then , without stirring , without even moving her head , she began to stare all about her with wide-open eyes and a joyous air , and she said nothing more . 
The sister drew the curtains together again , hoping that she would fall into a doze . 
Between seven and eight o'clock the doctor came ; not hearing any sound , he thought Fantine was asleep , entered softly , and approached the bed on tiptoe ; he opened the curtains a little , and , by the light of the taper , he saw Fantine 's big eyes gazing at him . 
She said to him , `` She will be allowed to sleep beside me in a little bed , will she not , sir ? '' 
The doctor thought that she was delirious . 
She added : -- `` See ! 
there is just room . '' 
The doctor took Sister Simplice aside , and she explained matters to him ; that M. Madeleine was absent for a day or two , and that in their doubt they had not thought it well to undeceive the invalid , who believed that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil ; that it was possible , after all , that her guess was correct : the doctor approved . 
He returned to Fantine 's bed , and she went on : -- `` You see , when she wakes up in the morning , I shall be able to say good morning to her , poor kitten , and when I can not sleep at night , I can hear her asleep ; her little gentle breathing will do me good . '' 
`` Give me your hand , '' said the doctor . 
She stretched out her arm , and exclaimed with a laugh : -- `` Ah , hold ! 
in truth , you did not know it ; I am cured ; Cosette will arrive to-morrow . '' 
The doctor was surprised ; she was better ; the pressure on her chest had decreased ; her pulse had regained its strength ; a sort of life had suddenly supervened and reanimated this poor , worn-out creature . 
`` Doctor , '' she went on , `` did the sister tell you that M. le Maire has gone to get that mite of a child ? '' 
The doctor recommended silence , and that all painful emotions should be avoided ; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona , and , in case the fever should increase again during the night , a calming potion . 
As he took his departure , he said to the sister : -- `` She is doing better ; if good luck willed that the mayor should actually arrive to-morrow with the child , who knows ? 
there are crises so astounding ; great joy has been known to arrest maladies ; I know well that this is an organic disease , and in an advanced state , but all those things are such mysteries : we may be able to save her . '' 
THE TRAVELLER ON HIS ARRIVAL TAKES PRECAUTIONS FOR DEPARTURE It was nearly eight o'clock in the evening when the cart , which we left on the road , entered the porte-cochere of the Hotel de la Poste in Arras ; the man whom we have been following up to this moment alighted from it , responded with an abstracted air to the attentions of the people of the inn , sent back the extra horse , and with his own hands led the little white horse to the stable ; then he opened the door of a billiard-room which was situated on the ground floor , sat down there , and leaned his elbows on a table ; he had taken fourteen hours for the journey which he had counted on making in six ; he did himself the justice to acknowledge that it was not his fault , but at bottom , he was not sorry . 
The landlady of the hotel entered . 
`` Does Monsieur wish a bed ? 
Does Monsieur require supper ? '' 
He made a sign of the head in the negative . 
`` The stableman says that Monsieur 's horse is extremely fatigued . '' 
Here he broke his silence . 
`` Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrow morning ? '' 
`` Oh , Monsieur ! 
he must rest for two days at least . '' 
He inquired : -- `` Is not the posting-station located here ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
The hostess conducted him to the office ; he showed his passport , and inquired whether there was any way of returning that same night to M. sur M. by the mail-wagon ; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to be vacant ; he engaged it and paid for it . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the clerk , `` do not fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o'clock in the morning . '' 
This done , he left the hotel and began to wander about the town . 
He was not acquainted with Arras ; the streets were dark , and he walked on at random ; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of the passers-by . 
He crossed the little river Crinchon , and found himself in a labyrinth of narrow alleys where he lost his way . 
A citizen was passing along with a lantern . 
After some hesitation , he decided to apply to this man , not without having first glanced behind and in front of him , as though he feared lest some one should hear the question which he was about to put . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` where is the court-house , if you please . '' 
`` You do not belong in town , sir ? '' 
replied the bourgeois , who was an oldish man ; `` well , follow me . 
I happen to be going in the direction of the court-house , that is to say , in the direction of the hotel of the prefecture ; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at this moment , and the courts are holding their sittings provisionally in the prefecture . '' 
`` Is it there that the Assizes are held ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Certainly , sir ; you see , the prefecture of to-day was the bishop 's palace before the Revolution . 
M. de Conzie , who was bishop in ' 82 , built a grand hall there . 
It is in this grand hall that the court is held . '' 
On the way , the bourgeois said to him : -- `` If Monsieur desires to witness a case , it is rather late . 
