We have seen that the country owed much to him ; the poor owed him everything ; he was so useful and he was so gentle that people had been obliged to honor and respect him . 
His workmen , in particular , adored him , and he endured this adoration with a sort of melancholy gravity . 
When he was known to be rich , `` people in society '' bowed to him , and he received invitations in the town ; he was called , in town , Monsieur Madeleine ; his workmen and the children continued to call him Father Madeleine , and that was what was most adapted to make him smile . 
In proportion as he mounted , throve , invitations rained down upon him . 
`` Society '' claimed him for its own . 
The prim little drawing-rooms on M. sur M. , which , of course , had at first been closed to the artisan , opened both leaves of their folding-doors to the millionnaire . 
They made a thousand advances to him . 
He refused . 
This time the good gossips had no trouble . 
`` He is an ignorant man , of no education . 
No one knows where he came from . 
He would not know how to behave in society . 
It has not been absolutely proved that he knows how to read . '' 
When they saw him making money , they said , `` He is a man of business . '' 
When they saw him scattering his money about , they said , `` He is an ambitious man . '' 
When he was seen to decline honors , they said , `` He is an adventurer . '' 
When they saw him repulse society , they said , `` He is a brute . '' 
In 1820 , five years after his arrival in M. sur M. , the services which he had rendered to the district were so dazzling , the opinion of the whole country round about was so unanimous , that the King again appointed him mayor of the town . 
He again declined ; but the prefect resisted his refusal , all the notabilities of the place came to implore him , the people in the street besought him ; the urging was so vigorous that he ended by accepting . 
It was noticed that the thing which seemed chiefly to bring him to a decision was the almost irritated apostrophe addressed to him by an old woman of the people , who called to him from her threshold , in an angry way : `` A good mayor is a useful thing . 
Is he drawing back before the good which he can do ? '' 
This was the third phase of his ascent . 
Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine . 
Monsieur Madeleine became Monsieur le Maire . 
SUMS DEPOSITED WITH LAFFITTE On the other hand , he remained as simple as on the first day . 
He had gray hair , a serious eye , the sunburned complexion of a laborer , the thoughtful visage of a philosopher . 
He habitually wore a hat with a wide brim , and a long coat of coarse cloth , buttoned to the chin . 
He fulfilled his duties as mayor ; but , with that exception , he lived in solitude . 
He spoke to but few people . 
He avoided polite attentions ; he escaped quickly ; he smiled to relieve himself of the necessity of talking ; he gave , in order to get rid of the necessity for smiling , The women said of him , `` What a good-natured bear ! '' 
His pleasure consisted in strolling in the fields . 
He always took his meals alone , with an open book before him , which he read . 
He had a well-selected little library . 
He loved books ; books are cold but safe friends . 
In proportion as leisure came to him with fortune , he seemed to take advantage of it to cultivate his mind . 
It had been observed that , ever since his arrival at M. sur M. . 
his language had grown more polished , more choice , and more gentle with every passing year . 
He liked to carry a gun with him on his strolls , but he rarely made use of it . 
When he did happen to do so , his shooting was something so infallible as to inspire terror . 
He never killed an inoffensive animal . 
He never shot at a little bird . 
Although he was no longer young , it was thought that he was still prodigiously strong . 
He offered his assistance to any one who was in need of it , lifted a horse , released a wheel clogged in the mud , or stopped a runaway bull by the horns . 
He always had his pockets full of money when he went out ; but they were empty on his return . 
When he passed through a village , the ragged brats ran joyously after him , and surrounded him like a swarm of gnats . 
It was thought that he must , in the past , have lived a country life , since he knew all sorts of useful secrets , which he taught to the peasants . 
He taught them how to destroy scurf on wheat , by sprinkling it and the granary and inundating the cracks in the floor with a solution of common salt ; and how to chase away weevils by hanging up orviot in bloom everywhere , on the walls and the ceilings , among the grass and in the houses . 
He had `` recipes '' for exterminating from a field , blight , tares , foxtail , and all parasitic growths which destroy the wheat . 
He defended a rabbit warren against rats , simply by the odor of a guinea-pig which he placed in it . 
One day he saw some country people busily engaged in pulling up nettles ; he examined the plants , which were uprooted and already dried , and said : `` They are dead . 
