Each one vied with the rest in saluting her as Madame la Baronne . 
The officer , Theodule Gillenormand , now a captain , had come from Chartres , where he was stationed in garrison , to be present at the wedding of his cousin Pontmercy . 
Cosette did not recognize him . 
He , on his side , habituated as he was to have women consider him handsome , retained no more recollection of Cosette than of any other woman . 
`` How right I was not to believe in that story about the lancer ! '' 
said Father Gillenormand , to himself . 
Cosette had never been more tender with Jean Valjean . 
She was in unison with Father Gillenormand ; while he erected joy into aphorisms and maxims , she exhaled goodness like a perfume . 
Happiness desires that all the world should be happy . 
She regained , for the purpose of addressing Jean Valjean , inflections of voice belonging to the time when she was a little girl . 
She caressed him with her smile . 
A banquet had been spread in the dining-room . 
Illumination as brilliant as the daylight is the necessary seasoning of a great joy . 
Mist and obscurity are not accepted by the happy . 
They do not consent to be black . 
The night , yes ; the shadows , no . 
If there is no sun , one must be made . 
The dining-room was full of gay things . 
In the centre , above the white and glittering table , was a Venetian lustre with flat plates , with all sorts of colored birds , blue , violet , red , and green , perched amid the candles ; around the chandelier , girandoles , on the walls , sconces with triple and quintuple branches ; mirrors , silverware , glassware , plate , porcelain , faience , pottery , gold and silversmith 's work , all was sparkling and gay . 
The empty spaces between the candelabra were filled in with bouquets , so that where there was not a light , there was a flower . 
In the antechamber , three violins and a flute softly played quartettes by Haydn . 
Jean Valjean had seated himself on a chair in the drawing-room , behind the door , the leaf of which folded back upon him in such a manner as to nearly conceal him . 
A few moments before they sat down to table , Cosette came , as though inspired by a sudden whim , and made him a deep courtesy , spreading out her bridal toilet with both hands , and with a tenderly roguish glance , she asked him : `` Father , are you satisfied ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I am content ! '' 
`` Well , then , laugh . '' 
Jean Valjean began to laugh . 
A few moments later , Basque announced that dinner was served . 
The guests , preceded by M. Gillenormand with Cosette on his arm , entered the dining-room , and arranged themselves in the proper order around the table . 
Two large arm-chairs figured on the right and left of the bride , the first for M. Gillenormand , the other for Jean Valjean . 
M. Gillenormand took his seat . 
The other arm-chair remained empty . 
They looked about for M. Fauchelevent . 
He was no longer there . 
M. Gillenormand questioned Basque . 
`` Do you know where M. Fauchelevent is ? '' 
`` Sir , '' replied Basque , `` I do , precisely . 
M. Fauchelevent told me to say to you , sir , that he was suffering , his injured hand was paining him somewhat , and that he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne . 
That he begged to be excused , that he would come to-morrow . 
He has just taken his departure . '' 
That empty arm-chair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for a moment . 
But , if M. Fauchelevent was absent , M. Gillenormand was present , and the grandfather beamed for two . 
He affirmed that M. Fauchelevent had done well to retire early , if he were suffering , but that it was only a slight ailment . 
This declaration sufficed . 
Moreover , what is an obscure corner in such a submersion of joy ? 
Cosette and Marius were passing through one of those egotistical and blessed moments when no other faculty is left to a person than that of receiving happiness . 
And then , an idea occurred to M. Gillenormand . 
-- `` Pardieu , this armchair is empty . 
Come hither , Marius . 
Your aunt will permit it , although she has a right to you . 
This armchair is for you . 
