On some semi-official occasion or other , I do not recollect what , Count *** -LSB- this senator -RSB- and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect . 
At dessert , the senator , who was slightly exhilarated , though still perfectly dignified , exclaimed : -- `` Egad , Bishop , let 's have a discussion . 
It is hard for a senator and a bishop to look at each other without winking . 
We are two augurs . 
I am going to make a confession to you . 
I have a philosophy of my own . '' 
`` And you are right , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` As one makes one 's philosophy , so one lies on it . 
You are on the bed of purple , senator . '' 
The senator was encouraged , and went on : -- `` Let us be good fellows . '' 
`` Good devils even , '' said the Bishop . 
`` I declare to you , '' continued the senator , `` that the Marquis d'Argens , Pyrrhon , Hobbes , and M. Naigeon are no rascals . 
I have all the philosophers in my library gilded on the edges . '' 
`` Like yourself , Count , '' interposed the Bishop . 
The senator resumed : -- `` I hate Diderot ; he is an ideologist , a declaimer , and a revolutionist , a believer in God at bottom , and more bigoted than Voltaire . 
Voltaire made sport of Needham , and he was wrong , for Needham 's eels prove that God is useless . 
A drop of vinegar in a spoonful of flour paste supplies the fiat lux . 
Suppose the drop to be larger and the spoonful bigger ; you have the world . 
Man is the eel . 
Then what is the good of the Eternal Father ? 
The Jehovah hypothesis tires me , Bishop . 
It is good for nothing but to produce shallow people , whose reasoning is hollow . 
Down with that great All , which torments me ! 
Hurrah for Zero which leaves me in peace ! 
Between you and me , and in order to empty my sack , and make confession to my pastor , as it behooves me to do , I will admit to you that I have good sense . 
I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus , who preaches renunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity . 
'T is the counsel of an avaricious man to beggars . 
Renunciation ; why ? 
Sacrifice ; to what end ? 
I do not see one wolf immolating himself for the happiness of another wolf . 
Let us stick to nature , then . 
We are at the top ; let us have a superior philosophy . 
What is the advantage of being at the top , if one sees no further than the end of other people 's noses ? 
Let us live merrily . 
Life is all . 
That man has another future elsewhere , on high , below , anywhere , I do n't believe ; not one single word of it . 
Ah ! 
sacrifice and renunciation are recommended to me ; I must take heed to everything I do ; I must cudgel my brains over good and evil , over the just and the unjust , over the fas and the nefas . 
Why ? 
Because I shall have to render an account of my actions . 
When ? 
After death . 
What a fine dream ! 
After my death it will be a very clever person who can catch me . 
Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand , if you can . 
Let us tell the truth , we who are initiated , and who have raised the veil of Isis : there is no such thing as either good or evil ; there is vegetation . 
Let us seek the real . 
Let us get to the bottom of it . 
Let us go into it thoroughly . 
What the deuce ! 
