What he had just done smacked of theft . 
At last the candle was lighted ; he leaned his elbows on the table , unfolded the paper , and read . 
In violent emotions , one does not read , one flings to the earth , so to speak , the paper which one holds , one clutches it like a victim , one crushes it , one digs into it the nails of one 's wrath , or of one 's joy ; one hastens to the end , one leaps to the beginning ; attention is at fever heat ; it takes up in the gross , as it were , the essential points ; it seizes on one point , and the rest disappears . 
In Marius ' note to Cosette , Jean Valjean saw only these words : -- `` I die . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee . '' 
In the presence of these two lines , he was horribly dazzled ; he remained for a moment , crushed , as it were , by the change of emotion which was taking place within him , he stared at Marius ' note with a sort of intoxicated amazement , he had before his eyes that splendor , the death of a hated individual . 
He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy . 
So it was all over . 
The catastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope . 
The being who obstructed his destiny was disappearing . 
That man had taken himself off of his own accord , freely , willingly . 
This man was going to his death , and he , Jean Valjean , had had no hand in the matter , and it was through no fault of his . 
Perhaps , even , he is already dead . 
Here his fever entered into calculations . 
No , he is not dead yet . 
The letter had evidently been intended for Cosette to read on the following morning ; after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o'clock and midnight , nothing more has taken place ; the barricade will not be attacked seriously until daybreak ; but that makes no difference , from the moment when `` that man '' is concerned in this war , he is lost ; he is caught in the gearing . 
Jean Valjean felt himself delivered . 
So he was about to find himself alone with Cosette once more . 
The rivalry would cease ; the future was beginning again . 
He had but to keep this note in his pocket . 
Cosette would never know what had become of that man . 
All that there requires to be done is to let things take their own course . 
This man can not escape . 
If he is not already dead , it is certain that he is about to die . 
What good fortune ! 
Having said all this to himself , he became gloomy . 
Then he went down stairs and woke up the porter . 
About an hour later , Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a National Guard , and with his arms . 
The porter had easily found in the neighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment . 
He had a loaded gun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges . 
He strode off in the direction of the markets . 
GAVROCHE 'S EXCESS OF ZEAL In the meantime , Gavroche had had an adventure . 
Gavroche , after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du Chaume , entered the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , and not seeing `` even a cat '' there , he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all the song of which he was capable . 
His march , far from being retarded by his singing , was accelerated by it . 
He began to sow along the sleeping or terrified houses these incendiary couplets : -- `` L'oiseau medit dans les charmilles , Et pretend qu ` hier Atala Avec un Russe s ` en alla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Mon ami Pierrot , tu babilles , Parce que l'autre jour Mila Cogna sa vitre et m ` appela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Les drolesses sont fort gentilles , Leur poison qui m ` ensorcela Griserait Monsieur Orfila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` J'aime l'amour et les bisbilles , J'aime Agnes , j' aime Pamela , Lisa en m ` allumant se brula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jadis , quand je vis les mantilles De Suzette et de Zeila , Mon ame aleurs plis se mela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Amour , quand dans l'ombre ou tu brilles , Tu coiffes de roses Lola , Je me damnerais pour cela . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jeanne a ton miroir tu t ` habilles ! 
Mon coeur un beau jour s ` envola . 
Je crois que c'est Jeanne qui l' a. Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Le soir , en sortant des quadrilles , Je montre aux etoiles Stella , Et je leur dis : ` Regardez-la . ' 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 56 -RSB- -LSB- 56 -RSB- `` The bird slanders in the elms , And pretends that yesterday , Atala Went off with a Russian , Where fair maids go . 
