The novices wear the same habit , but all in white . 
The professed nuns also wear a rosary at their side . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual Adoration , like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , who , at the beginning of this century , had two houses in Paris , -- one at the Temple , the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve . 
However , the Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus , of whom we are speaking , were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve and at the Temple . 
There were numerous differences in their rule ; there were some in their costume . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore the black guimpe , and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve wore a white one , and had , besides , on their breasts , a Holy Sacrament about three inches long , in silver gilt or gilded copper . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy Sacrament . 
The Perpetual Adoration , which was common to the house of the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple , leaves those two orders perfectly distinct . 
Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga , just as there existed a similarity in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy , the life , and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin , between the two orders , which were , nevertheless , widely separated , and on occasion even hostile . 
The Oratory of Italy , established at Florence by Philip de Neri , and the Oratory of France , established by Pierre de Berulle . 
The Oratory of France claimed the precedence , since Philip de Neri was only a saint , while Berulle was a cardinal . 
Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round , abstain from meat , fast in Lent and on many other days which are peculiar to them , rise from their first sleep , from one to three o'clock in the morning , to read their breviary and chant matins , sleep in all seasons between serge sheets and on straw , make no use of the bath , never light a fire , scourge themselves every Friday , observe the rule of silence , speak to each other only during the recreation hours , which are very brief , and wear drugget chemises for six months in the year , from September 14th , which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross , until Easter . 
These six months are a modification : the rule says all the year , but this drugget chemise , intolerable in the heat of summer , produced fevers and nervous spasms . 
The use of it had to be restricted . 
Even with this palliation , when the nuns put on this chemise on the 14th of September , they suffer from fever for three or four days . 
Obedience , poverty , chastity , perseverance in their seclusion , -- these are their vows , which the rule greatly aggravates . 
The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers , who are called meres vocales because they have a voice in the chapter . 
A prioress can only be re-elected twice , which fixes the longest possible reign of a prioress at nine years . 
They never see the officiating priest , who is always hidden from them by a serge curtain nine feet in height . 
During the sermon , when the preacher is in the chapel , they drop their veils over their faces . 
They must always speak low , walk with their eyes on the ground and their heads bowed . 
One man only is allowed to enter the convent , -- the archbishop of the diocese . 
There is really one other , -- the gardener . 
But he is always an old man , and , in order that he may always be alone in the garden , and that the nuns may be warned to avoid him , a bell is attached to his knee . 
Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive . 
It is the canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation . 
As at the voice of Christ , ut voci Christi , at a gesture , at the first sign , ad nutum , ad primum signum , immediately , with cheerfulness , with perseverance , with a certain blind obedience , prompte , hilariter , perseveranter et caeca quadam obedientia , as the file in the hand of the workman , quasi limam in manibus fabri , without power to read or to write without express permission , legere vel scribere non addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia . 
Each one of them in turn makes what they call reparation . 
The reparation is the prayer for all the sins , for all the faults , for all the dissensions , for all the violations , for all the iniquities , for all the crimes committed on earth . 
For the space of twelve consecutive hours , from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock in the morning , or from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock in the afternoon , the sister who is making reparation remains on her knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament , with hands clasped , a rope around her neck . 
When her fatigue becomes unendurable , she prostrates herself flat on her face against the earth , with her arms outstretched in the form of a cross ; this is her only relief . 
In this attitude she prays for all the guilty in the universe . 
This is great to sublimity . 
As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle , it is called without distinction , to make reparation or to be at the post . 
The nuns even prefer , out of humility , this last expression , which contains an idea of torture and abasement . 
To make reparation is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed . 
The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to fall directly behind her . 
Besides this , there is always a sister kneeling before the Holy Sacrament . 
This station lasts an hour . 
They relieve each other like soldiers on guard . 
This is the Perpetual Adoration . 
The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped with peculiar solemnity , recalling , not the saints and martyrs , but moments in the life of Jesus Christ : as Mother Nativity , Mother Conception , Mother Presentation , Mother Passion . 
But the names of saints are not interdicted . 
When one sees them , one never sees anything but their mouths . 
All their teeth are yellow . 
No tooth-brush ever entered that convent . 
Brushing one 's teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is the loss of one 's soul . 
They never say my . 
They possess nothing of their own , and they must not attach themselves to anything . 
