Then he shouted with all his might : -- `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
He paused and waited . 
There was no reply . 
The landscape was gloomy and deserted . 
He was encompassed by space . 
There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was lost , and a silence which engulfed his voice . 
An icy north wind was blowing , and imparted to things around him a sort of lugubrious life . 
The bushes shook their thin little arms with incredible fury . 
One would have said that they were threatening and pursuing some one . 
He set out on his march again , then he began to run ; and from time to time he halted and shouted into that solitude , with a voice which was the most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to hear , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
Assuredly , if the child had heard him , he would have been alarmed and would have taken good care not to show himself . 
But the child was no doubt already far away . 
He encountered a priest on horseback . 
He stepped up to him and said : -- `` Monsieur le Cure , have you seen a child pass ? '' 
`` No , '' said the priest . 
`` One named Little Gervais ? '' 
`` I have seen no one . '' 
He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the priest . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , this is for your poor people . 
Monsieur le Cure , he was a little lad , about ten years old , with a marmot , I think , and a hurdy-gurdy . 
One of those Savoyards , you know ? '' 
`` I have not seen him . '' 
`` Little Gervais ? 
There are no villages here ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
`` If he is like what you say , my friend , he is a little stranger . 
Such persons pass through these parts . 
We know nothing of them . '' 
Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence , and gave them to the priest . 
`` For your poor , '' he said . 
Then he added , wildly : -- `` Monsieur l'Abbe , have me arrested . 
I am a thief . '' 
The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste , much alarmed . 
Jean Valjean set out on a run , in the direction which he had first taken . 
In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance , gazing , calling , shouting , but he met no one . 
Two or three times he ran across the plain towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being reclining or crouching down ; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood or rocks nearly on a level with the earth . 
At length , at a spot where three paths intersected each other , he stopped . 
The moon had risen . 
He sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
His shout died away in the mist , without even awakening an echo . 
He murmured yet once more , `` Little Gervais ! '' 
but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice . 
It was his last effort ; his legs gave way abruptly under him , as though an invisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil conscience ; he fell exhausted , on a large stone , his fists clenched in his hair and his face on his knees , and he cried , `` I am a wretch ! '' 
Then his heart burst , and he began to cry . 
It was the first time that he had wept in nineteen years . 
When Jean Valjean left the Bishop 's house , he was , as we have seen , quite thrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto . 
