Cosette , in her retreat , encountered a tree and leaned against it . 
Had it not been for this tree , she would have fallen . 
Then she heard his voice , that voice which she had really never heard , barely rising above the rustle of the leaves , and murmuring : -- `` Pardon me , here I am . 
My heart is full . 
I could not live on as I was living , and I have come . 
Have you read what I placed there on the bench ? 
Do you recognize me at all ? 
Have no fear of me . 
It is a long time , you remember the day , since you looked at me at the Luxembourg , near the Gladiator . 
And the day when you passed before me ? 
It was on the 16th of June and the 2d of July . 
It is nearly a year ago . 
I have not seen you for a long time . 
I inquired of the woman who let the chairs , and she told me that she no longer saw you . 
You lived in the Rue de l'Ouest , on the third floor , in the front apartments of a new house , -- you see that I know ! 
I followed you . 
What else was there for me to do ? 
And then you disappeared . 
I thought I saw you pass once , while I was reading the newspapers under the arcade of the Odeon . 
I ran after you . 
But no . 
It was a person who had a bonnet like yours . 
At night I came hither . 
Do not be afraid , no one sees me . 
I come to gaze upon your windows near at hand . 
I walk very softly , so that you may not hear , for you might be alarmed . 
The other evening I was behind you , you turned round , I fled . 
Once , I heard you singing . 
I was happy . 
Did it affect you because I heard you singing through the shutters ? 
That could not hurt you . 
No , it is not so ? 
You see , you are my angel ! 
Let me come sometimes ; I think that I am going to die . 
If you only knew ! 
I adore you . 
Forgive me , I speak to you , but I do not know what I am saying ; I may have displeased you ; have I displeased you ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
my mother ! '' 
said she . 
And she sank down as though on the point of death . 
He grasped her , she fell , he took her in his arms , he pressed her close , without knowing what he was doing . 
He supported her , though he was tottering himself . 
It was as though his brain were full of smoke ; lightnings darted between his lips ; his ideas vanished ; it seemed to him that he was accomplishing some religious act , and that he was committing a profanation . 
Moreover , he had not the least passion for this lovely woman whose force he felt against his breast . 
He was beside himself with love . 
She took his hand and laid it on her heart . 
He felt the paper there , he stammered : -- `` You love me , then ? '' 
She replied in a voice so low that it was no longer anything more than a barely audible breath : -- `` Hush ! 
Thou knowest it ! '' 
