All the four-footed furniture comported itself as though it had but three legs -- the whitewashed walls had for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup : -- Elle etonne a dix pas , elle epouvente a deux , Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux ; On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche Et qu'un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche . 
-LSB- 48 -RSB- -LSB- 48 -RSB- She astounds at ten paces , she frightens at two , a wart inhabits her hazardous nose ; you tremble every instant lest she should blow it at you , and lest , some fine day , her nose should tumble into her mouth . 
This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall . 
Mame Hucheloup , a good likeness , went and came from morning till night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity . 
Two serving-maids , named Matelote and Gibelotte , -LSB- 49 -RSB- and who had never been known by any other names , helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine , and the various broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls . 
Matelote , large , plump , redhaired , and noisy , the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup , was homelier than any mythological monster , be it what it may ; still , as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress , she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup . 
Gibelotte , tall , delicate , white with a lymphatic pallor , with circles round her eyes , and drooping lids , always languid and weary , afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude , the first up in the house and the last in bed , waited on every one , even the other maid , silently and gently , smiling through her fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile . 
-LSB- 49 -RSB- Matelote : a culinary preparation of various fishes . 
Gibelotte : stewed rabbits . 
Before entering the restaurant room , the visitor read on the door the following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac : -- Regale si tu peux et mange si tu l'oses . 
-LSB- 50 -RSB- -LSB- 50 -RSB- Treat if you can , and eat if you dare . 
PRELIMINARY GAYETIES Laigle de Meaux , as the reader knows , lived more with Joly than elsewhere . 
He had a lodging , as a bird has one on a branch . 
The two friends lived together , ate together , slept together . 
They had everything in common , even Musichetta , to some extent . 
They were , what the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called , bini . 
On the morning of the 5th of June , they went to Corinthe to breakfast . 
Joly , who was all stuffed up , had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning to share . 
Laigle 's coat was threadbare , but Joly was well dressed . 
It was about nine o'clock in the morning , when they opened the door of Corinthe . 
They ascended to the first floor . 
Matelote and Gibelotte received them . 
`` Oysters , cheese , and ham , '' said Laigle . 
And they seated themselves at a table . 
The wine-shop was empty ; there was no one there but themselves . 
Gibelotte , knowing Joly and Laigle , set a bottle of wine on the table . 
While they were busy with their first oysters , a head appeared at the hatchway of the staircase , and a voice said : -- `` I am passing by . 
I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie cheese . 
I enter . '' 
It was Grantaire . 
Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table . 
At the sight of Grantaire , Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the table . 
That made three . 
`` Are you going to drink those two bottles ? '' 
Laigle inquired of Grantaire . 
Grantaire replied : -- `` All are ingenious , thou alone art ingenuous . 
Two bottles never yet astonished a man . '' 
The others had begun by eating , Grantaire began by drinking . 
Half a bottle was rapidly gulped down . 
`` So you have a hole in your stomach ? '' 
began Laigle again . 
`` You have one in your elbow , '' said Grantaire . 
And after having emptied his glass , he added : -- `` Ah , by the way , Laigle of the funeral oration , your coat is old . '' 
`` I should hope so , '' retorted Laigle . 
`` That 's why we get on well together , my coat and I . 
It has acquired all my folds , it does not bind me anywhere , it is moulded on my deformities , it falls in with all my movements , I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm . 
Old coats are just like old friends . '' 
`` That 's true , '' ejaculated Joly , striking into the dialogue , `` an old goat is an old abi '' -LRB- ami , friend -RRB- . 
`` Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up , '' said Grantaire . 
`` Grantaire , '' demanded Laigle , `` have you just come from the boulevard ? '' 
