Homer would have come thither to laugh with Perrault ; and there was in that black garden , youth , health , noise , cries , giddiness , pleasure , happiness enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses , those of the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale , those of the throne as well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand . 
In that house more than anywhere else , perhaps , arise those children 's sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of thoughtfulness . 
It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of five years exclaimed one day : `` Mother ! 
one of the big girls has just told me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remain here . 
What happiness ! '' 
It was here , too , that this memorable dialogue took place : -- A Vocal Mother . 
Why are you weeping , my child ? 
The child -LRB- aged six -RRB- . 
I told Alix that I knew my French history . 
She says that I do not know it , but I do . 
Alix , the big girl -LRB- aged nine -RRB- . 
No ; she does not know it . 
The Mother . 
How is that , my child ? 
Alix . 
She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any question in the book , and she would answer it . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` She did not answer it . '' 
`` Let us see about it . 
What did you ask her ? '' 
`` I opened the book at random , as she proposed , and I put the first question that I came across . '' 
`` And what was the question ? '' 
`` It was , ` What happened after that ? ' '' 
It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder : -- `` How well bred ! 
it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just like a person ! '' 
It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once picked up a confession which had been written out in advance , in order that she might not forget it , by a sinner of seven years : -- `` Father , I accuse myself of having been avaricious . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having been an adulteress . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen . '' 
It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six years of age improvised the following tale , which was listened to by blue eyes aged four and five years : -- `` There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a great many flowers . 
They plucked the flowers and put them in their pockets . 
After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their playthings . 
There was a wolf in that country ; there was a great deal of forest ; and the wolf was in the forest ; and he ate the little cocks . '' 
And this other poem : -- `` There came a blow with a stick . 
`` It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat . 
`` It was not good for her ; it hurt her . 
`` Then a lady put Punchinello in prison . '' 
It was there that a little abandoned child , a foundling whom the convent was bringing up out of charity , uttered this sweet and heart-breaking saying . 
She heard the others talking of their mothers , and she murmured in her corner : -- `` As for me , my mother was not there when I was born ! '' 
There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through the corridors with her bunch of keys , and whose name was Sister Agatha . 
The big big girls -- those over ten years of age -- called her Agathocles . 
The refectory , a large apartment of an oblong square form , which received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden , was dark and damp , and , as the children say , full of beasts . 
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects . 
Each of its four corners had received , in the language of the pupils , a special and expressive name . 
There was Spider corner , Caterpillar corner , Wood-louse corner , and Cricket corner . 
Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed . 
It was not so cold there as elsewhere . 
From the refectory the names had passed to the boarding-school , and there served as in the old College Mazarin to distinguish four nations . 
Every pupil belonged to one of these four nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at meals . 
One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he was passing . 
He inquired of another pupil , a charming brunette with rosy cheeks , who stood near him : -- `` Who is that ? '' 
