`` Who are you ? '' 
demanded the master of the house . 
The man replied : `` I have just come from Puy-Moisson . 
I have walked all day long . 
I have travelled twelve leagues . 
Can you ? 
-- if I pay ? '' 
`` I would not refuse , '' said the peasant , `` to lodge any respectable man who would pay me . 
But why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` There is no room . '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible . 
This is neither a fair nor a market day . 
Have you been to Labarre ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
The traveller replied with embarrassment : `` I do not know . 
He did not receive me . '' 
`` Have you been to What 's - his-name 's , in the Rue Chaffaut ? '' 
The stranger 's embarrassment increased ; he stammered , `` He did not receive me either . '' 
The peasant 's countenance assumed an expression of distrust ; he surveyed the newcomer from head to feet , and suddenly exclaimed , with a sort of shudder : -- `` Are you the man ? 
-- '' He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger , took three steps backwards , placed the lamp on the table , and took his gun down from the wall . 
Meanwhile , at the words , Are you the man ? 
the woman had risen , had clasped her two children in her arms , and had taken refuge precipitately behind her husband , staring in terror at the stranger , with her bosom uncovered , and with frightened eyes , as she murmured in a low tone , `` Tso-maraude . '' 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- Patois of the French Alps : chat de maraude , rascally marauder . 
All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it to one 's self . 
After having scrutinized the man for several moments , as one scrutinizes a viper , the master of the house returned to the door and said : -- `` Clear out ! '' 
`` For pity 's sake , a glass of water , '' said the man . 
`` A shot from my gun ! '' 
said the peasant . 
Then he closed the door violently , and the man heard him shoot two large bolts . 
A moment later , the window-shutter was closed , and the sound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside . 
Night continued to fall . 
A cold wind from the Alps was blowing . 
By the light of the expiring day the stranger perceived , in one of the gardens which bordered the street , a sort of hut , which seemed to him to be built of sods . 
He climbed over the wooden fence resolutely , and found himself in the garden . 
He approached the hut ; its door consisted of a very low and narrow aperture , and it resembled those buildings which road-laborers construct for themselves along the roads . 
He thought without doubt , that it was , in fact , the dwelling of a road-laborer ; he was suffering from cold and hunger , but this was , at least , a shelter from the cold . 
This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night . 
He threw himself flat on his face , and crawled into the hut . 
It was warm there , and he found a tolerably good bed of straw . 
He lay , for a moment , stretched out on this bed , without the power to make a movement , so fatigued was he . 
Then , as the knapsack on his back was in his way , and as it furnished , moreover , a pillow ready to his hand , he set about unbuckling one of the straps . 
At that moment , a ferocious growl became audible . 
He raised his eyes . 
The head of an enormous dog was outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut . 
It was a dog 's kennel . 
He was himself vigorous and formidable ; he armed himself with his staff , made a shield of his knapsack , and made his way out of the kennel in the best way he could , not without enlarging the rents in his rags . 
He left the garden in the same manner , but backwards , being obliged , in order to keep the dog respectful , to have recourse to that manoeuvre with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as la rose couverte . 
When he had , not without difficulty , repassed the fence , and found himself once more in the street , alone , without refuge , without shelter , without a roof over his head , chased even from that bed of straw and from that miserable kennel , he dropped rather than seated himself on a stone , and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim , `` I am not even a dog ! '' 
