Why not ? 
That was the war of Ambiorix , of Artevelde , of Marnix , of Pelagius . 
But Ambiorix fought against Rome , Artevelde against France , Marnix against Spain , Pelagius against the Moors ; all against the foreigner . 
Well , the monarchy is a foreigner ; oppression is a stranger ; the right divine is a stranger . 
Despotism violates the moral frontier , an invasion violates the geographical frontier . 
Driving out the tyrant or driving out the English , in both cases , regaining possession of one 's own territory . 
There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices ; after philosophy , action is required ; live force finishes what the idea has sketched out ; Prometheus chained begins , Arostogeiton ends ; the encyclopedia enlightens souls , the 10th of August electrifies them . 
After AEschylus , Thrasybulus ; after Diderot , Danton . 
Multitudes have a tendency to accept the master . 
Their mass bears witness to apathy . 
A crowd is easily led as a whole to obedience . 
Men must be stirred up , pushed on , treated roughly by the very benefit of their deliverance , their eyes must be wounded by the true , light must be hurled at them in terrible handfuls . 
They must be a little thunderstruck themselves at their own well-being ; this dazzling awakens them . 
Hence the necessity of tocsins and wars . 
Great combatants must rise , must enlighten nations with audacity , and shake up that sad humanity which is covered with gloom by the right divine , Caesarian glory , force , fanaticism , irresponsible power , and absolute majesty ; a rabble stupidly occupied in the contemplation , in their twilight splendor , of these sombre triumphs of the night . 
Down with the tyrant ! 
Of whom are you speaking ? 
Do you call Louis Philippe the tyrant ? 
No ; no more than Louis XVI . 
Both of them are what history is in the habit of calling good kings ; but principles are not to be parcelled out , the logic of the true is rectilinear , the peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance ; no concessions , then ; all encroachments on man should be repressed . 
There is a divine right in Louis XVI. , there is because a Bourbon in Louis Philippe ; both represent in a certain measure the confiscation of right , and , in order to clear away universal insurrection , they must be combated ; it must be done , France being always the one to begin . 
When the master falls in France , he falls everywhere . 
In short , what cause is more just , and consequently , what war is greater , than that which re-establishes social truth , restores her throne to liberty , restores the people to the people , restores sovereignty to man , replaces the purple on the head of France , restores equity and reason in their plenitude , suppresses every germ of antagonism by restoring each one to himself , annihilates the obstacle which royalty presents to the whole immense universal concord , and places the human race once more on a level with the right ? 
These wars build up peace . 
An enormous fortress of prejudices , privileges , superstitions , lies , exactions , abuses , violences , iniquities , and darkness still stands erect in this world , with its towers of hatred . 
It must be cast down . 
This monstrous mass must be made to crumble . 
To conquer at Austerlitz is grand ; to take the Bastille is immense . 
There is no one who has not noticed it in his own case -- the soul , -- and therein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity , has a strange aptitude for reasoning almost coldly in the most violent extremities , and it often happens that heartbroken passion and profound despair in the very agony of their blackest monologues , treat subjects and discuss theses . 
Logic is mingled with convulsion , and the thread of the syllogism floats , without breaking , in the mournful storm of thought . 
This was the situation of Marius ' mind . 
As he meditated thus , dejected but resolute , hesitating in every direction , and , in short , shuddering at what he was about to do , his glance strayed to the interior of the barricade . 
The insurgents were here conversing in a low voice , without moving , and there was perceptible that quasi-silence which marks the last stage of expectation . 
Overhead , at the small window in the third story Marius descried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularly attentive . 
This was the porter who had been killed by Le Cabuc . 
Below , by the lights of the torch , which was thrust between the paving-stones , this head could be vaguely distinguished . 
Nothing could be stranger , in that sombre and uncertain gleam , than that livid , motionless , astonished face , with its bristling hair , its eyes fixed and staring , and its yawning mouth , bent over the street in an attitude of curiosity . 
One would have said that the man who was dead was surveying those who were about to die . 
A long trail of blood which had flowed from that head , descended in reddish threads from the window to the height of the first floor , where it stopped . 
THE FLAG : ACT FIRST As yet , nothing had come . 
Ten o'clock had sounded from Saint-Merry . 
Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves , carbines in hand , near the outlet of the grand barricade . 
They no longer addressed each other , they listened , seeking to catch even the faintest and most distant sound of marching . 
Suddenly , in the midst of the dismal calm , a clear , gay , young voice , which seemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis , rose and began to sing distinctly , to the old popular air of `` By the Light of the Moon , '' this bit of poetry , terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock : -- Mon nez est en larmes , Mon ami Bugeaud , Prete moi tes gendarmes Pour leur dire un mot . 
En capote bleue , La poule au shako , Voici la banlieue ! 
Co-cocorico ! 
-LSB- 54 -RSB- -LSB- 54 -RSB- My nose is in tears , my friend Bugeaud , lend me thy gendarmes that I may say a word to them . 
With a blue capote and a chicken in his shako , here 's the banlieue , co-cocorico . 
They pressed each other 's hands . 
`` That is Gavroche , '' said Enjolras . 
