Up to that moment she had never thought of her face . 
She saw herself in her mirror , but she did not look at herself . 
And then , she had so often been told that she was homely ; Jean Valjean alone said gently : `` No indeed ! 
no indeed ! '' 
At all events , Cosette had always thought herself homely , and had grown up in that belief with the easy resignation of childhood . 
And here , all at once , was her mirror saying to her , as Jean Valjean had said : `` No indeed ! '' 
That night , she did not sleep . 
`` What if I were pretty ! '' 
she thought . 
`` How odd it would be if I were pretty ! '' 
And she recalled those of her companions whose beauty had produced a sensation in the convent , and she said to herself : `` What ! 
Am I to be like Mademoiselle So-and-So ? '' 
The next morning she looked at herself again , not by accident this time , and she was assailed with doubts : `` Where did I get such an idea ? '' 
said she ; `` no , I am ugly . '' 
She had not slept well , that was all , her eyes were sunken and she was pale . 
She had not felt very joyous on the preceding evening in the belief that she was beautiful , but it made her very sad not to be able to believe in it any longer . 
She did not look at herself again , and for more than a fortnight she tried to dress her hair with her back turned to the mirror . 
In the evening , after dinner , she generally embroidered in wool or did some convent needlework in the drawing-room , and Jean Valjean read beside her . 
Once she raised her eyes from her work , and was rendered quite uneasy by the manner in which her father was gazing at her . 
On another occasion , she was passing along the street , and it seemed to her that some one behind her , whom she did not see , said : `` A pretty woman ! 
but badly dressed . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
she thought , `` he does not mean me . 
I am well dressed and ugly . '' 
She was then wearing a plush hat and her merino gown . 
At last , one day when she was in the garden , she heard poor old Toussaint saying : `` Do you notice how pretty Cosette is growing , sir ? '' 
Cosette did not hear her father 's reply , but Toussaint 's words caused a sort of commotion within her . 
She fled from the garden , ran up to her room , flew to the looking-glass , -- it was three months since she had looked at herself , -- and gave vent to a cry . 
She had just dazzled herself . 
She was beautiful and lovely ; she could not help agreeing with Toussaint and her mirror . 
Her figure was formed , her skin had grown white , her hair was lustrous , an unaccustomed splendor had been lighted in her blue eyes . 
The consciousness of her beauty burst upon her in an instant , like the sudden advent of daylight ; other people noticed it also , Toussaint had said so , it was evidently she of whom the passer-by had spoken , there could no longer be any doubt of that ; she descended to the garden again , thinking herself a queen , imagining that she heard the birds singing , though it was winter , seeing the sky gilded , the sun among the trees , flowers in the thickets , distracted , wild , in inexpressible delight . 
Jean Valjean , on his side , experienced a deep and undefinable oppression at heart . 
In fact , he had , for some time past , been contemplating with terror that beauty which seemed to grow more radiant every day on Cosette 's sweet face . 
The dawn that was smiling for all was gloomy for him . 
Cosette had been beautiful for a tolerably long time before she became aware of it herself . 
But , from the very first day , that unexpected light which was rising slowly and enveloping the whole of the young girl 's person , wounded Jean Valjean 's sombre eye . 
He felt that it was a change in a happy life , a life so happy that he did not dare to move for fear of disarranging something . 
This man , who had passed through all manner of distresses , who was still all bleeding from the bruises of fate , who had been almost wicked and who had become almost a saint , who , after having dragged the chain of the galleys , was now dragging the invisible but heavy chain of indefinite misery , this man whom the law had not released from its grasp and who could be seized at any moment and brought back from the obscurity of his virtue to the broad daylight of public opprobrium , this man accepted all , excused all , pardoned all , and merely asked of Providence , of man , of the law , of society , of nature , of the world , one thing , that Cosette might love him ! 
That Cosette might continue to love him ! 
That God would not prevent the heart of the child from coming to him , and from remaining with him ! 
Beloved by Cosette , he felt that he was healed , rested , appeased , loaded with benefits , recompensed , crowned . 
Beloved by Cosette , it was well with him ! 
He asked nothing more ! 
Had any one said to him : `` Do you want anything better ? '' 
he would have answered : `` No . '' 
God might have said to him : `` Do you desire heaven ? '' 
and he would have replied : `` I should lose by it . '' 
Everything which could affect this situation , if only on the surface , made him shudder like the beginning of something new . 
He had never known very distinctly himself what the beauty of a woman means ; but he understood instinctively , that it was something terrible . 
