He who has not been a stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of ruin . 
The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall . 
As for us , when Providence intervenes and strikes , we let it work . 
1812 commenced to disarm us . 
In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn legislative body , emboldened by catastrophe , possessed only traits which aroused indignation . 
And it was a crime to applaud , in 1814 , in the presence of those marshals who betrayed ; in the presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill to another , insulting after having deified ; in the presence of that idolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol , -- it was a duty to turn aside the head . 
In 1815 , when the supreme disasters filled the air , when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach , when Waterloo could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon , the mournful acclamation of the army and the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable in it , and , after making all allowance for the despot , a heart like that of the Bishop of D -- , ought not perhaps to have failed to recognize the august and touching features presented by the embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink of the abyss . 
With this exception , he was in all things just , true , equitable , intelligent , humble and dignified , beneficent and kindly , which is only another sort of benevolence . 
He was a priest , a sage , and a man . 
It must be admitted , that even in the political views with which we have just reproached him , and which we are disposed to judge almost with severity , he was tolerant and easy , more so , perhaps , than we who are speaking here . 
The porter of the town-hall had been placed there by the Emperor . 
He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard , a member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz , as much of a Bonapartist as the eagle . 
This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate remarks , which the law then stigmatized as seditious speeches . 
After the imperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor , he never dressed himself in his regimentals , as he said , so that he should not be obliged to wear his cross . 
He had himself devoutly removed the imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him ; this made a hole , and he would not put anything in its place . 
`` I will die , '' he said , `` rather than wear the three frogs upon my heart ! '' 
He liked to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII . 
`` The gouty old creature in English gaiters ! '' 
he said ; `` let him take himself off to Prussia with that queue of his . '' 
He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two things which he most detested , Prussia and England . 
He did it so often that he lost his place . 
There he was , turned out of the house , with his wife and children , and without bread . 
The Bishop sent for him , reproved him gently , and appointed him beadle in the cathedral . 
In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had , by dint of holy deeds and gentle manners , filled the town of D -- with a sort of tender and filial reverence . 
Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been accepted and tacitly pardoned , as it were , by the people , the good and weakly flock who adored their emperor , but loved their bishop . 
THE SOLITUDE OF MONSEIGNEUR WELCOME A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbes , just as a general is by a covey of young officers . 
This is what that charming Saint Francois de Sales calls somewhere `` les pretres blancs-becs , '' callow priests . 
Every career has its aspirants , who form a train for those who have attained eminence in it . 
There is no power which has not its dependents . 
There is no fortune which has not its court . 
The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present . 
Every metropolis has its staff of officials . 
Every bishop who possesses the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the seminary , which goes the round , and maintains good order in the episcopal palace , and mounts guard over monseigneur 's smile . 
To please a bishop is equivalent to getting one 's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate . 
It is necessary to walk one 's path discreetly ; the apostleship does not disdain the canonship . 
Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere , there are big mitres in the Church . 
These are the bishops who stand well at Court , who are rich , well endowed , skilful , accepted by the world , who know how to pray , no doubt , but who know also how to beg , who feel little scruple at making a whole diocese dance attendance in their person , who are connecting links between the sacristy and diplomacy , who are abbes rather than priests , prelates rather than bishops . 
Happy those who approach them ! 
Being persons of influence , they create a shower about them , upon the assiduous and the favored , and upon all the young men who understand the art of pleasing , of large parishes , prebends , archidiaconates , chaplaincies , and cathedral posts , while awaiting episcopal honors . 
As they advance themselves , they cause their satellites to progress also ; it is a whole solar system on the march . 
Their radiance casts a gleam of purple over their suite . 
Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the scenes , into nice little promotions . 
The larger the diocese of the patron , the fatter the curacy for the favorite . 
And then , there is Rome . 
A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop , an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal , carries you with him as conclavist ; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction , you receive the pallium , and behold ! 
you are an auditor , then a papal chamberlain , then monsignor , and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step , and between the Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot . 
Every skull-cap may dream of the tiara . 
The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a king in a regular manner ; and what a king ! 
the supreme king . 
Then what a nursery of aspirations is a seminary ! 
