The musketry of the besiegers , though confined and embarrassed by being directed from below upwards , was deadly . 
The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedily surrounded by heads of the slain , whence dripped long , red and smoking streams , the uproar was indescribable ; a close and burning smoke almost produced night over this combat . 
Words are lacking to express horror when it has reached this pitch . 
There were no longer men in this conflict , which was now infernal . 
They were no longer giants matched with colossi . 
It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer . 
Demons attacked , spectres resisted . 
It was heroism become monstrous . 
ORESTES FASTING AND PYLADES DRUNK At length , by dint of mounting on each other 's backs , aiding themselves with the skeleton of the staircase , climbing up the walls , clinging to the ceiling , slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door , the last one who offered resistance , a score of assailants , soldiers , National Guardsmen , municipal guardsmen , in utter confusion , the majority disfigured by wounds in the face during that redoubtable ascent , blinded by blood , furious , rendered savage , made an irruption into the apartment on the first floor . 
There they found only one man still on his feet , Enjolras . 
Without cartridges , without sword , he had nothing in his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he had broken over the head of those who were entering . 
He had placed the billiard table between his assailants and himself ; he had retreated into the corner of the room , and there , with haughty eye , and head borne high , with this stump of a weapon in his hand , he was still so alarming as to speedily create an empty space around him . 
A cry arose : `` He is the leader ! 
It was he who slew the artillery-man . 
It is well that he has placed himself there . 
Let him remain there . 
Let us shoot him down on the spot . '' 
`` Shoot me , '' said Enjolras . 
And flinging away his bit of gun-barrel , and folding his arms , he offered his breast . 
The audacity of a fine death always affects men . 
As soon as Enjolras folded his arms and accepted his end , the din of strife ceased in the room , and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral solemnity . 
The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless , appeared to oppress this tumult , and this young man , haughty , bloody , and charming , who alone had not a wound , who was as indifferent as an invulnerable being , seemed , by the authority of his tranquil glance , to constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully . 
His beauty , at that moment augmented by his pride , was resplendent , and he was fresh and rosy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had just elapsed , as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded . 
It was of him , possibly , that a witness spoke afterwards , before the council of war : `` There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo . '' 
A National Guardsman who had taken aim at Enjolras , lowered his gun , saying : `` It seems to me that I am about to shoot a flower . '' 
Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras , and silently made ready their guns . 
Then a sergeant shouted : `` Take aim ! '' 
An officer intervened . 
`` Wait . '' 
And addressing Enjolras : `` Do you wish to have your eyes bandaged ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Was it you who killed the artillery sergeant ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Grantaire had waked up a few moments before . 
Grantaire , it will be remembered , had been asleep ever since the preceding evening in the upper room of the wine-shop , seated on a chair and leaning on the table . 
He realized in its fullest sense the old metaphor of `` dead drunk . '' 
The hideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a lethargy . 
His table being small , and not suitable for the barricade , he had been left in possession of it . 
He was still in the same posture , with his breast bent over the table , his head lying flat on his arms , surrounded by glasses , beer-jugs and bottles . 
His was the overwhelming slumber of the torpid bear and the satiated leech . 
Nothing had had any effect upon it , neither the fusillade , nor the cannon-balls , nor the grape-shot which had made its way through the window into the room where he was . 
Nor the tremendous uproar of the assault . 
He merely replied to the cannonade , now and then , by a snore . 
He seemed to be waiting there for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of waking . 
Many corpses were strewn around him ; and , at the first glance , there was nothing to distinguish him from those profound sleepers of death . 
Noise does not rouse a drunken man ; silence awakens him . 
The fall of everything around him only augmented Grantaire 's prostration ; the crumbling of all things was his lullaby . 
The sort of halt which the tumult underwent in the presence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavy slumber . 
It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed , which suddenly comes to a dead stop . 
The persons dozing within it wake up . 
