said Madame Thenardier , `` if the beast has not been watered , it must be . '' 
Then glancing about her : -- `` Well , now ! 
Where 's that other beast ? '' 
She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of the table , almost under the drinkers ' feet . 
`` Are you coming ? '' 
shrieked Madame Thenardier . 
Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden herself . 
The Thenardier resumed : -- `` Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name , go and water that horse . '' 
`` But , Madame , '' said Cosette , feebly , `` there is no water . '' 
The Thenardier threw the street door wide open : -- `` Well , go and get some , then ! '' 
Cosette dropped her head , and went for an empty bucket which stood near the chimney-corner . 
This bucket was bigger than she was , and the child could have set down in it at her ease . 
The Thenardier returned to her stove , and tasted what was in the stewpan , with a wooden spoon , grumbling the while : -- `` There 's plenty in the spring . 
There never was such a malicious creature as that . 
I think I should have done better to strain my onions . '' 
Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous , pepper , and shallots . 
`` See here , Mam ` selle Toad , '' she added , `` on your way back , you will get a big loaf from the baker . 
Here 's a fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron ; she took the coin without saying a word , and put it in that pocket . 
Then she stood motionless , bucket in hand , the open door before her . 
She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue . 
`` Get along with you ! '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
Cosette went out . 
The door closed behind her . 
ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL The line of open-air booths starting at the church , extended , as the reader will remember , as far as the hostelry of the Thenardiers . 
These booths were all illuminated , because the citizens would soon pass on their way to the midnight mass , with candles burning in paper funnels , which , as the schoolmaster , then seated at the table at the Thenardiers ' observed , produced `` a magical effect . '' 
In compensation , not a star was visible in the sky . 
The last of these stalls , established precisely opposite the Thenardiers ' door , was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel , glass , and magnificent objects of tin . 
In the first row , and far forwards , the merchant had placed on a background of white napkins , an immense doll , nearly two feet high , who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe , with gold wheat-ears on her head , which had real hair and enamel eyes . 
All that day , this marvel had been displayed to the wonderment of all passers-by under ten years of age , without a mother being found in Montfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to her child . 
Eponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it , and Cosette herself had ventured to cast a glance at it , on the sly , it is true . 
At the moment when Cosette emerged , bucket in hand , melancholy and overcome as she was , she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to that wonderful doll , towards the lady , as she called it . 
The poor child paused in amazement . 
She had not yet beheld that doll close to . 
The whole shop seemed a palace to her : the doll was not a doll ; it was a vision . 
It was joy , splendor , riches , happiness , which appeared in a sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundly engulfed in gloomy and chilly misery . 
With the sad and innocent sagacity of childhood , Cosette measured the abyss which separated her from that doll . 
She said to herself that one must be a queen , or at least a princess , to have a `` thing '' like that . 
She gazed at that beautiful pink dress , that beautiful smooth hair , and she thought , `` How happy that doll must be ! '' 
She could not take her eyes from that fantastic stall . 
The more she looked , the more dazzled she grew . 
She thought she was gazing at paradise . 
There were other dolls behind the large one , which seemed to her to be fairies and genii . 
The merchant , who was pacing back and forth in front of his shop , produced on her somewhat the effect of being the Eternal Father . 
In this adoration she forgot everything , even the errand with which she was charged . 
All at once the Thenardier 's coarse voice recalled her to reality : `` What , you silly jade ! 
you have not gone ? 
Wait ! 
I 'll give it to you ! 
