That is legal and delightful . 
Fortunatus beside Fortunata . '' 
-- Applause from the whole table . 
Marius took Jean Valjean 's place beside Cosette , and things fell out so that Cosette , who had , at first , been saddened by Jean Valjean 's absence , ended by being satisfied with it . 
From the moment when Marius took his place , and was the substitute , Cosette would not have regretted God himself . 
She set her sweet little foot , shod in white satin , on Marius ' foot . 
The arm-chair being occupied , M. Fauchelevent was obliterated ; and nothing was lacking . 
And , five minutes afterward , the whole table from one end to the other , was laughing with all the animation of forgetfulness . 
At dessert , M. Gillenormand , rising to his feet , with a glass of champagne in his hand -- only half full so that the palsy of his eighty years might not cause an overflow , -- proposed the health of the married pair . 
`` You shall not escape two sermons , '' he exclaimed . 
`` This morning you had one from the cure , this evening you shall have one from your grandfather . 
Listen to me ; I will give you a bit of advice : Adore each other . 
I do not make a pack of gyrations , I go straight to the mark , be happy . 
In all creation , only the turtle-doves are wise . 
Philosophers say : ` Moderate your joys . ' 
I say : ` Give rein to your joys . ' 
Be as much smitten with each other as fiends . 
Be in a rage about it . 
The philosophers talk stuff and nonsense . 
I should like to stuff their philosophy down their gullets again . 
Can there be too many perfumes , too many open rose-buds , too many nightingales singing , too many green leaves , too much aurora in life ? 
can people love each other too much ? 
can people please each other too much ? 
Take care , Estelle , thou art too pretty ! 
Have a care , Nemorin , thou art too handsome ! 
Fine stupidity , in sooth ! 
Can people enchant each other too much , cajole each other too much , charm each other too much ? 
Can one be too much alive , too happy ? 
Moderate your joys . 
Ah , indeed ! 
Down with the philosophers ! 
Wisdom consists in jubilation . 
Make merry , let us make merry . 
Are we happy because we are good , or are we good because we are happy ? 
Is the Sancy diamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy , or because it weighs six hundred carats ? 
I know nothing about it , life is full of such problems ; the important point is to possess the Sancy and happiness . 
Let us be happy without quibbling and quirking . 
Let us obey the sun blindly . 
What is the sun ? 
It is love . 
He who says love , says woman . 
Ah ! 
ah ! 
behold omnipotence -- women . 
Ask that demagogue of a Marius if he is not the slave of that little tyrant of a Cosette . 
And of his own free will , too , the coward ! 
Woman ! 
There is no Robespierre who keeps his place but woman reigns . 
I am no longer Royalist except towards that royalty . 
What is Adam ? 
