It was in vain that his daughter said to him : `` But he is your grandnephew , nevertheless , '' -- it turned out that M. Gillenormand , who was a grandfather to the very finger-tips , was not in the least a grand-uncle . 
In fact , as he had good sense , and as he had compared the two , Theodule had only served to make him regret Marius all the more . 
One evening , -- it was the 24th of June , which did not prevent Father Gillenormand having a rousing fire on the hearth , -- he had dismissed his daughter , who was sewing in a neighboring apartment . 
He was alone in his chamber , amid its pastoral scenes , with his feet propped on the andirons , half enveloped in his huge screen of coromandel lacquer , with its nine leaves , with his elbow resting on a table where burned two candles under a green shade , engulfed in his tapestry armchair , and in his hand a book which he was not reading . 
He was dressed , according to his wont , like an incroyable , and resembled an antique portrait by Garat . 
This would have made people run after him in the street , had not his daughter covered him up , whenever he went out , in a vast bishop 's wadded cloak , which concealed his attire . 
At home , he never wore a dressing gown , except when he rose and retired . 
`` It gives one a look of age , '' said he . 
Father Gillenormand was thinking of Marius lovingly and bitterly ; and , as usual , bitterness predominated . 
His tenderness once soured always ended by boiling and turning to indignation . 
He had reached the point where a man tries to make up his mind and to accept that which rends his heart . 
He was explaining to himself that there was no longer any reason why Marius should return , that if he intended to return , he should have done it long ago , that he must renounce the idea . 
He was trying to accustom himself to the thought that all was over , and that he should die without having beheld `` that gentleman '' again . 
But his whole nature revolted ; his aged paternity would not consent to this . 
`` Well ! '' 
said he , -- this was his doleful refrain , -- `` he will not return ! '' 
His bald head had fallen upon his breast , and he fixed a melancholy and irritated gaze upon the ashes on his hearth . 
In the very midst of his revery , his old servant Basque entered , and inquired : -- `` Can Monsieur receive M. Marius ? '' 
The old man sat up erect , pallid , and like a corpse which rises under the influence of a galvanic shock . 
All his blood had retreated to his heart . 
He stammered : -- `` M. Marius what ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Basque , intimidated and put out of countenance by his master 's air ; `` I have not seen him . 
Nicolette came in and said to me : ` There 's a young man here ; say that it is M. Marius . ' '' 
Father Gillenormand stammered in a low voice : -- `` Show him in . '' 
And he remained in the same attitude , with shaking head , and his eyes fixed on the door . 
It opened once more . 
A young man entered . 
It was Marius . 
Marius halted at the door , as though waiting to be bidden to enter . 
His almost squalid attire was not perceptible in the obscurity caused by the shade . 
Nothing could be seen but his calm , grave , but strangely sad face . 
It was several minutes before Father Gillenormand , dulled with amazement and joy , could see anything except a brightness as when one is in the presence of an apparition . 
He was on the point of swooning ; he saw Marius through a dazzling light . 
It certainly was he , it certainly was Marius . 
At last ! 
After the lapse of four years ! 
He grasped him entire , so to speak , in a single glance . 
He found him noble , handsome , distinguished , well-grown , a complete man , with a suitable mien and a charming air . 
He felt a desire to open his arms , to call him , to fling himself forward ; his heart melted with rapture , affectionate words swelled and overflowed his breast ; at length all his tenderness came to the light and reached his lips , and , by a contrast which constituted the very foundation of his nature , what came forth was harshness . 
He said abruptly : -- `` What have you come here for ? '' 
Marius replied with embarrassment : -- `` Monsieur -- '' M. Gillenormand would have liked to have Marius throw himself into his arms . 
He was displeased with Marius and with himself . 
He was conscious that he was brusque , and that Marius was cold . 
It caused the goodman unendurable and irritating anxiety to feel so tender and forlorn within , and only to be able to be hard outside . 
Bitterness returned . 
He interrupted Marius in a peevish tone : -- `` Then why did you come ? '' 
That `` then '' signified : If you do not come to embrace me . 
Marius looked at his grandfather , whose pallor gave him a face of marble . 
`` Monsieur -- '' `` Have you come to beg my pardon ? 
Do you acknowledge your faults ? '' 
