The Grand Sewer , which is , it must be remembered , nothing else than the old brook of Menilmontant , terminates , if one ascends it , in a blind sack , that is to say , at its ancient point of departure which was its source , at the foot of the knoll of Menilmontant . 
There is no direct communication with the branch which collects the waters of Paris beginning with the Quartier Popincourt , and which falls into the Seine through the Amelot sewer above the ancient Isle Louviers . 
This branch , which completes the collecting sewer , is separated from it , under the Rue Menilmontant itself , by a pile which marks the dividing point of the waters , between upstream and downstream . 
If Jean Valjean had ascended the gallery he would have arrived , after a thousand efforts , and broken down with fatigue , and in an expiring condition , in the gloom , at a wall . 
He would have been lost . 
In case of necessity , by retracing his steps a little way , and entering the passage of the Filles-du-Calvaire , on condition that he did not hesitate at the subterranean crossing of the Carrefour Boucherat , and by taking the corridor Saint-Louis , then the Saint-Gilles gut on the left , then turning to the right and avoiding the Saint-Sebastian gallery , he might have reached the Amelot sewer , and thence , provided that he did not go astray in the sort of F which lies under the Bastille , he might have attained the outlet on the Seine near the Arsenal . 
But in order to do this , he must have been thoroughly familiar with the enormous madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications and in all its openings . 
Now , we must again insist that he knew nothing of that frightful drain which he was traversing ; and had any one asked him in what he was , he would have answered : `` In the night . '' 
His instinct served him well . 
To descend was , in fact , possible safety . 
He left on his right the two narrow passages which branch out in the form of a claw under the Rue Laffitte and the Rue Saint-Georges and the long , bifurcated corridor of the Chaussee d'Antin . 
A little beyond an affluent , which was , probably , the Madeleine branch , he halted . 
He was extremely weary . 
A passably large air-hole , probably the man-hole in the Rue d'Anjou , furnished a light that was almost vivid . 
Jean Valjean , with the gentleness of movement which a brother would exercise towards his wounded brother , deposited Marius on the banquette of the sewer . 
Marius ' blood-stained face appeared under the wan light of the air-hole like the ashes at the bottom of a tomb . 
His eyes were closed , his hair was plastered down on his temples like a painter 's brushes dried in red wash ; his hands hung limp and dead . 
A clot of blood had collected in the knot of his cravat ; his limbs were cold , and blood was clotted at the corners of his mouth ; his shirt had thrust itself into his wounds , the cloth of his coat was chafing the yawning gashes in the living flesh . 
Jean Valjean , pushing aside the garments with the tips of his fingers , laid his hand upon Marius ' breast ; his heart was still beating . 
Jean Valjean tore up his shirt , bandaged the young man 's wounds as well as he was able and stopped the flowing blood ; then bending over Marius , who still lay unconscious and almost without breathing , in that half light , he gazed at him with inexpressible hatred . 
On disarranging Marius ' garments , he had found two things in his pockets , the roll which had been forgotten there on the preceding evening , and Marius ' pocketbook . 
He ate the roll and opened the pocketbook . 
On the first page he found the four lines written by Marius . 
The reader will recall them : `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
Jean Valjean read these four lines by the light of the air-hole , and remained for a moment as though absorbed in thought , repeating in a low tone : `` Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , number 6 , Monsieur Gillenormand . '' 
He replaced the pocketbook in Marius ' pocket . 
He had eaten , his strength had returned to him ; he took Marius up once more upon his back , placed the latter 's head carefully on his right shoulder , and resumed his descent of the sewer . 
The Grand Sewer , directed according to the course of the valley of Menilmontant , is about two leagues long . 
It is paved throughout a notable portion of its extent . 
This torch of the names of the streets of Paris , with which we are illuminating for the reader Jean Valjean 's subterranean march , Jean Valjean himself did not possess . 
Nothing told him what zone of the city he was traversing , nor what way he had made . 
Only the growing pallor of the pools of light which he encountered from time to time indicated to him that the sun was withdrawing from the pavement , and that the day would soon be over ; and the rolling of vehicles overhead , having become intermittent instead of continuous , then having almost ceased , he concluded that he was no longer under central Paris , and that he was approaching some solitary region , in the vicinity of the outer boulevards , or the extreme outer quays . 
Where there are fewer houses and streets , the sewer has fewer air-holes . 
The gloom deepened around Jean Valjean . 
Nevertheless , he continued to advance , groping his way in the dark . 
Suddenly this darkness became terrible . 
IN THE CASE OF SAND AS IN THAT OF WOMAN , THERE IS A FINENESS WHICH IS TREACHEROUS He felt that he was entering the water , and that he no longer had a pavement under his feet , but only mud . 
It sometimes happens , that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland a man , either a traveller or a fisherman , while walking at low tide on the beach far from shore , suddenly notices that for several minutes past , he has been walking with some difficulty . 
The beach under foot is like pitch ; his soles stick fast to it ; it is no longer sand , it is bird-lime . 
The strand is perfectly dry , but at every step that he takes , as soon as the foot is raised , the print is filled with water . 
The eye , however , has perceived no change ; the immense beach is smooth and tranquil , all the sand has the same aspect , nothing distinguishes the soil that is solid from that which is not solid ; the joyous little cloud of sand-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of the passer-by . 
The man pursues his way , he walks on , turns towards the land , endeavors to approach the shore . 
He is not uneasy . 
Uneasy about what ? 
Only he is conscious that the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing at every step that he takes . 
All at once he sinks in . 
He sinks in two or three inches . 
Decidedly , he is not on the right road ; he halts to get his bearings . 
Suddenly he glances at his feet ; his feet have disappeared . 
