But why ? 
It is horrible . 
I have been dead for four months . 
Oh ! 
how wicked it was of you to go to that battle ! 
What had I done to you ? 
I pardon you , but you will never do it again . 
A little while ago , when they came to tell us to come to you , I still thought that I was about to die , but it was from joy . 
I was so sad ! 
I have not taken the time to dress myself , I must frighten people with my looks ! 
What will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar ? 
Do speak ! 
You let me do all the talking . 
We are still in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
It seems that your shoulder was terrible . 
They told me that you could put your fist in it . 
And then , it seems that they cut your flesh with the scissors . 
That is frightful . 
I have cried till I have no eyes left . 
It is queer that a person can suffer like that . 
Your grandfather has a very kindly air . 
Do n't disturb yourself , do n't rise on your elbow , you will injure yourself . 
Oh ! 
how happy I am ! 
So our unhappiness is over ! 
I am quite foolish . 
I had things to say to you , and I no longer know in the least what they were . 
Do you still love me ? 
We live in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
There is no garden . 
I made lint all the time ; stay , sir , look , it is your fault , I have a callous on my fingers . '' 
`` Angel ! '' 
said Marius . 
Angel is the only word in the language which can not be worn out . 
No other word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it . 
Then as there were spectators , they paused and said not a word more , contenting themselves with softly touching each other 's hands . 
M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried : `` Talk loud , the rest of you . 
Make a noise , you people behind the scenes . 
Come , a little uproar , the deuce ! 
so that the children can chatter at their ease . '' 
And , approaching Marius and Cosette , he said to them in a very low voice : `` Call each other thou . 
Do n't stand on ceremony . '' 
Aunt Gillenormand looked on in amazement at this irruption of light in her elderly household . 
There was nothing aggressive about this amazement ; it was not the least in the world like the scandalized and envious glance of an owl at two turtle-doves , it was the stupid eye of a poor innocent seven and fifty years of age ; it was a life which had been a failure gazing at that triumph , love . 
`` Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior , '' said her father to her , `` I told you that this is what would happen to you . '' 
He remained silent for a moment , and then added : `` Look at the happiness of others . '' 
Then he turned to Cosette . 
`` How pretty she is ! 
how pretty she is ! 
She 's a Greuze . 
