In the midst of this silence , a cracked voice launched this lugubrious sarcasm from the corridor : -- `` If there 's any wood to be split , I 'm there ! '' 
It was the man with the axe , who was growing merry . 
At the same moment , an enormous , bristling , and clayey face made its appearance at the door , with a hideous laugh which exhibited not teeth , but fangs . 
It was the face of the man with the butcher 's axe . 
`` Why have you taken off your mask ? '' 
cried Thenardier in a rage . 
`` For fun , '' retorted the man . 
For the last few minutes M. Leblanc had appeared to be watching and following all the movements of Thenardier , who , blinded and dazzled by his own rage , was stalking to and fro in the den with full confidence that the door was guarded , and of holding an unarmed man fast , he being armed himself , of being nine against one , supposing that the female Thenardier counted for but one man . 
During his address to the man with the pole-axe , he had turned his back to M. Leblanc . 
M. Leblanc seized this moment , overturned the chair with his foot and the table with his fist , and with one bound , with prodigious agility , before Thenardier had time to turn round , he had reached the window . 
To open it , to scale the frame , to bestride it , was the work of a second only . 
He was half out when six robust fists seized him and dragged him back energetically into the hovel . 
These were the three `` chimney-builders , '' who had flung themselves upon him . 
At the same time the Thenardier woman had wound her hands in his hair . 
At the trampling which ensued , the other ruffians rushed up from the corridor . 
The old man on the bed , who seemed under the influence of wine , descended from the pallet and came reeling up , with a stone-breaker 's hammer in his hand . 
One of the `` chimney-builders , '' whose smirched face was lighted up by the candle , and in whom Marius recognized , in spite of his daubing , Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , lifted above M. Leblanc 's head a sort of bludgeon made of two balls of lead , at the two ends of a bar of iron . 
Marius could not resist this sight . 
`` My father , '' he thought , `` forgive me ! '' 
And his finger sought the trigger of his pistol . 
The shot was on the point of being discharged when Thenardier 's voice shouted : -- `` Do n't harm him ! '' 
This desperate attempt of the victim , far from exasperating Thenardier , had calmed him . 
There existed in him two men , the ferocious man and the adroit man . 
Up to that moment , in the excess of his triumph in the presence of the prey which had been brought down , and which did not stir , the ferocious man had prevailed ; when the victim struggled and tried to resist , the adroit man reappeared and took the upper hand . 
`` Do n't hurt him ! '' 
he repeated , and without suspecting it , his first success was to arrest the pistol in the act of being discharged , and to paralyze Marius , in whose opinion the urgency of the case disappeared , and who , in the face of this new phase , saw no inconvenience in waiting a while longer . 
Who knows whether some chance would not arise which would deliver him from the horrible alternative of allowing Ursule 's father to perish , or of destroying the colonel 's saviour ? 
A herculean struggle had begun . 
With one blow full in the chest , M. Leblanc had sent the old man tumbling , rolling in the middle of the room , then with two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown two more assailants , and he held one under each of his knees ; the wretches were rattling in the throat beneath this pressure as under a granite millstone ; but the other four had seized the formidable old man by both arms and the back of his neck , and were holding him doubled up over the two `` chimney-builders '' on the floor . 
Thus , the master of some and mastered by the rest , crushing those beneath him and stifling under those on top of him , endeavoring in vain to shake off all the efforts which were heaped upon him , M. Leblanc disappeared under the horrible group of ruffians like the wild boar beneath a howling pile of dogs and hounds . 
They succeeded in overthrowing him upon the bed nearest the window , and there they held him in awe . 
The Thenardier woman had not released her clutch on his hair . 
`` Do n't you mix yourself up in this affair , '' said Thenardier . 
`` You 'll tear your shawl . '' 
The Thenardier obeyed , as the female wolf obeys the male wolf , with a growl . 
`` Now , '' said Thenardier , `` search him , you other fellows ! '' 
M. Leblanc seemed to have renounced the idea of resistance . 
They searched him . 
He had nothing on his person except a leather purse containing six francs , and his handkerchief . 
Thenardier put the handkerchief into his own pocket . 
`` What ! 
No pocket-book ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` No , nor watch , '' replied one of the `` chimney-builders . '' 
`` Never mind , '' murmured the masked man who carried the big key , in the voice of a ventriloquist , `` he 's a tough old fellow . '' 
Thenardier went to the corner near the door , picked up a bundle of ropes and threw them at the men . 
`` Tie him to the leg of the bed , '' said he . 
And , catching sight of the old man who had been stretched across the room by the blow from M. Leblanc 's fist , and who made no movement , he added : -- `` Is Boulatruelle dead ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Bigrenaille , `` he 's drunk . '' 
`` Sweep him into a corner , '' said Thenardier . 
