It is a hard trade . 
In the wheelwright 's trade one works always in the open air , in courtyards , under sheds when the masters are good , never in closed workshops , because space is required , you see . 
In winter one gets so cold that one beats one 's arms together to warm one 's self ; but the masters do n't like it ; they say it wastes time . 
Handling iron when there is ice between the paving-stones is hard work . 
That wears a man out quickly One is old while he is still quite young in that trade . 
At forty a man is done for . 
I was fifty-three . 
I was in a bad state . 
And then , workmen are so mean ! 
When a man is no longer young , they call him nothing but an old bird , old beast ! 
I was not earning more than thirty sous a day . 
They paid me as little as possible . 
The masters took advantage of my age -- and then I had my daughter , who was a laundress at the river . 
She earned a little also . 
It sufficed for us two . 
She had trouble , also ; all day long up to her waist in a tub , in rain , in snow . 
When the wind cuts your face , when it freezes , it is all the same ; you must still wash . 
There are people who have not much linen , and wait until late ; if you do not wash , you lose your custom . 
The planks are badly joined , and water drops on you from everywhere ; you have your petticoats all damp above and below . 
That penetrates . 
She has also worked at the laundry of the Enfants-Rouges , where the water comes through faucets . 
You are not in the tub there ; you wash at the faucet in front of you , and rinse in a basin behind you . 
As it is enclosed , you are not so cold ; but there is that hot steam , which is terrible , and which ruins your eyes . 
She came home at seven o'clock in the evening , and went to bed at once , she was so tired . 
Her husband beat her . 
She is dead . 
We have not been very happy . 
She was a good girl , who did not go to the ball , and who was very peaceable . 
I remember one Shrove-Tuesday when she went to bed at eight o'clock . 
There , I am telling the truth ; you have only to ask . 
Ah , yes ! 
how stupid I am ! 
Paris is a gulf . 
Who knows Father Champmathieu there ? 
But M. Baloup does , I tell you . 
Go see at M. Baloup 's ; and after all , I do n't know what is wanted of me . '' 
The man ceased speaking , and remained standing . 
He had said these things in a loud , rapid , hoarse voice , with a sort of irritated and savage ingenuousness . 
Once he paused to salute some one in the crowd . 
The sort of affirmations which he seemed to fling out before him at random came like hiccoughs , and to each he added the gesture of a wood-cutter who is splitting wood . 
When he had finished , the audience burst into a laugh . 
He stared at the public , and , perceiving that they were laughing , and not understanding why , he began to laugh himself . 
It was inauspicious . 
The President , an attentive and benevolent man , raised his voice . 
He reminded `` the gentlemen of the jury '' that `` the sieur Baloup , formerly a master-wheelwright , with whom the accused stated that he had served , had been summoned in vain . 
He had become bankrupt , and was not to be found . '' 
Then turning to the accused , he enjoined him to listen to what he was about to say , and added : `` You are in a position where reflection is necessary . 
The gravest presumptions rest upon you , and may induce vital results . 
Prisoner , in your own interests , I summon you for the last time to explain yourself clearly on two points . 
In the first place , did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierron orchard , break the branch , and steal the apples ; that is to say , commit the crime of breaking in and theft ? 
