He was present at all the dressings of the wounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself . 
When the dead flesh was cut away with scissors , he said : `` Aie ! 
aie ! '' 
Nothing was more touching than to see him with his gentle , senile palsy , offer the wounded man a cup of his cooling-draught . 
He overwhelmed the doctor with questions . 
He did not observe that he asked the same ones over and over again . 
On the day when the doctor announced to him that Marius was out of danger , the good man was in a delirium . 
He made his porter a present of three louis . 
That evening , on his return to his own chamber , he danced a gavotte , using his thumb and forefinger as castanets , and he sang the following song : `` Jeanne est nee a Fougere `` Amour , tu vis en elle ; Vrai nid d'une bergere ; Car c'est dans sa prunelle J'adore son jupon , Que tu mets ton carquois . 
Fripon . 
Narquois ! 
`` Moi , je la chante , et j' aime , Plus que Diane meme , Jeanne et ses durs tetons Bretons . '' 
-LSB- 61 -RSB- -LSB- 61 -RSB- `` Jeanne was born at Fougere , a true shepherd 's nest ; I adore her petticoat , the rogue . 
`` Love , thou dwellest in her ; For 't is in her eyes that thou placest thy quiver , sly scamp ! 
`` As for me , I sing her , and I love , more than Diana herself , Jeanne and her firm Breton breasts . '' 
Then he knelt upon a chair , and Basque , who was watching him through the half-open door , made sure that he was praying . 
Up to that time , he had not believed in God . 
At each succeeding phase of improvement , which became more and more pronounced , the grandfather raved . 
He executed a multitude of mechanical actions full of joy ; he ascended and descended the stairs , without knowing why . 
A pretty female neighbor was amazed one morning at receiving a big bouquet ; it was M. Gillenormand who had sent it to her . 
The husband made a jealous scene . 
M. Gillenormand tried to draw Nicolette upon his knees . 
He called Marius , `` M. le Baron . '' 
He shouted : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
Every moment , he kept asking the doctor : `` Is he no longer in danger ? '' 
He gazed upon Marius with the eyes of a grandmother . 
He brooded over him while he ate . 
He no longer knew himself , he no longer rendered himself an account of himself . 
Marius was the master of the house , there was abdication in his joy , he was the grandson of his grandson . 
In the state of joy in which he then was , he was the most venerable of children . 
In his fear lest he might fatigue or annoy the convalescent , he stepped behind him to smile . 
He was content , joyous , delighted , charming , young . 
His white locks added a gentle majesty to the gay radiance of his visage . 
When grace is mingled with wrinkles , it is adorable . 
There is an indescribable aurora in beaming old age . 
As for Marius , as he allowed them to dress his wounds and care for him , he had but one fixed idea : Cosette . 
After the fever and delirium had left him , he did not again pronounce her name , and it might have been supposed that he no longer thought of her . 
He held his peace , precisely because his soul was there . 
He did not know what had become of Cosette ; the whole affair of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory ; shadows that were almost indistinct , floated through his mind , Eponine , Gavroche , Mabeuf , the Thenardiers , all his friends gloomily intermingled with the smoke of the barricade ; the strange passage of M. Fauchelevent through that adventure produced on him the effect of a puzzle in a tempest ; he understood nothing connected with his own life , he did not know how nor by whom he had been saved , and no one of those around him knew this ; all that they had been able to tell him was , that he had been brought home at night in a hackney-coach , to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; past , present , future were nothing more to him than the mist of a vague idea ; but in that fog there was one immovable point , one clear and precise outline , something made of granite , a resolution , a will ; to find Cosette once more . 
For him , the idea of life was not distinct from the idea of Cosette . 
He had decreed in his heart that he would not accept the one without the other , and he was immovably resolved to exact of any person whatever , who should desire to force him to live , -- from his grandfather , from fate , from hell , -- the restitution of his vanished Eden . 
He did not conceal from himself the fact that obstacles existed . 
Let us here emphasize one detail , he was not won over and was but little softened by all the solicitude and tenderness of his grandfather . 
In the first place , he was not in the secret ; then , in his reveries of an invalid , which were still feverish , possibly , he distrusted this tenderness as a strange and novel thing , which had for its object his conquest . 
He remained cold . 
The grandfather absolutely wasted his poor old smile . 
Marius said to himself that it was all right so long as he , Marius , did not speak , and let things take their course ; but that when it became a question of Cosette , he would find another face , and that his grandfather 's true attitude would be unmasked . 
Then there would be an unpleasant scene ; a recrudescence of family questions , a confrontation of positions , every sort of sarcasm and all manner of objections at one and the same time , Fauchelevent , Coupelevent , fortune , poverty , a stone about his neck , the future . 
Violent resistance ; conclusion : a refusal . 
Marius stiffened himself in advance . 
