The kingdom of Eve . 
No '89 for Eve . 
There has been the royal sceptre surmounted by a fleur-de-lys , there has been the imperial sceptre surmounted by a globe , there has been the sceptre of Charlemagne , which was of iron , there has been the sceptre of Louis the Great , which was of gold , -- the revolution twisted them between its thumb and forefinger , ha ` penny straws ; it is done with , it is broken , it lies on the earth , there is no longer any sceptre , but make me a revolution against that little embroidered handkerchief , which smells of patchouli ! 
I should like to see you do it . 
Try . 
Why is it so solid ? 
Because it is a gewgaw . 
Ah ! 
you are the nineteenth century ? 
Well , what then ? 
And we have been as foolish as you . 
Do not imagine that you have effected much change in the universe , because your trip-gallant is called the cholera-morbus , and because your pourree is called the cachuca . 
In fact , the women must always be loved . 
I defy you to escape from that . 
These friends are our angels . 
Yes , love , woman , the kiss forms a circle from which I defy you to escape ; and , for my own part , I should be only too happy to re-enter it . 
Which of you has seen the planet Venus , the coquette of the abyss , the Celimene of the ocean , rise in the infinite , calming all here below ? 
The ocean is a rough Alcestis . 
Well , grumble as he will , when Venus appears he is forced to smile . 
That brute beast submits . 
We are all made so . 
Wrath , tempest , claps of thunder , foam to the very ceiling . 
A woman enters on the scene , a planet rises ; flat on your face ! 
Marius was fighting six months ago ; to-day he is married . 
That is well . 
Yes , Marius , yes , Cosette , you are in the right . 
Exist boldly for each other , make us burst with rage that we can not do the same , idealize each other , catch in your beaks all the tiny blades of felicity that exist on earth , and arrange yourselves a nest for life . 
Pardi , to love , to be loved , what a fine miracle when one is young ! 
Do n't imagine that you have invented that . 
I , too , have had my dream , I , too , have meditated , I , too , have sighed ; I , too , have had a moonlight soul . 
Love is a child six thousand years old . 
Love has the right to a long white beard . 
Methusalem is a street arab beside Cupid . 
For sixty centuries men and women have got out of their scrape by loving . 
The devil , who is cunning , took to hating man ; man , who is still more cunning , took to loving woman . 
In this way he does more good than the devil does him harm . 
This craft was discovered in the days of the terrestrial paradise . 
The invention is old , my friends , but it is perfectly new . 
Profit by it . 
Be Daphnis and Chloe , while waiting to become Philemon and Baucis . 
Manage so that , when you are with each other , nothing shall be lacking to you , and that Cosette may be the sun for Marius , and that Marius may be the universe to Cosette . 
Cosette , let your fine weather be the smile of your husband ; Marius , let your rain be your wife 's tears . 
And let it never rain in your household . 
You have filched the winning number in the lottery ; you have gained the great prize , guard it well , keep it under lock and key , do not squander it , adore each other and snap your fingers at all the rest . 
Believe what I say to you . 
It is good sense . 
And good sense can not lie . 
Be a religion to each other . 
Each man has his own fashion of adoring God . 
Saperlotte ! 
