`` She is a spider , Monseigneur . '' 
`` Bah ! 
And that one yonder ? '' 
`` She is a cricket . '' 
`` And that one ? '' 
`` She is a caterpillar . '' 
`` Really ! 
and yourself ? '' 
`` I am a wood-louse , Monseigneur . '' 
Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities . 
At the beginning of this century Ecouen was one of those strict and graceful places where young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august . 
At Ecouen , in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament , a distinction was made between virgins and florists . 
There were also the `` dais '' and the `` censors , '' -- the first who held the cords of the dais , and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament . 
The flowers belonged by right to the florists . 
Four `` virgins '' walked in advance . 
On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory , `` Who is a virgin ? '' 
Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a `` little one '' of seven years , to a `` big girl '' of sixteen , who took the head of the procession , while she , the little one , remained at the rear , `` You are a virgin , but I am not . '' 
DISTRACTIONS Above the door of the refectory this prayer , which was called the white Paternoster , and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to paradise , was inscribed in large black letters : -- `` Little white Paternoster , which God made , which God said , which God placed in paradise . 
In the evening , when I went to bed , I found three angels sitting on my bed , one at the foot , two at the head , the good Virgin Mary in the middle , who told me to lie down without hesitation . 
The good God is my father , the good Virgin is my mother , the three apostles are my brothers , the three virgins are my sisters . 
The shirt in which God was born envelopes my body ; Saint Margaret 's cross is written on my breast . 
Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows , weeping for God , when she met M. Saint John . 
` Monsieur Saint John , whence come you ? ' 
` I come from Ave Salus . ' 
` You have not seen the good God ; where is he ? ' 
` He is on the tree of the Cross , his feet hanging , his hands nailed , a little cap of white thorns on his head . ' 
Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide , thrice in the morning , shall win paradise at the last . '' 
In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under a triple coating of daubing paint . 
At the present time it is finally disappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then , and who are old women now . 
A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this refectory , whose only door , as we think we have mentioned , opened on the garden . 
Two narrow tables , each flanked by two wooden benches , formed two long parallel lines from one end to the other of the refectory . 
The walls were white , the tables were black ; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety in convents . 
The meals were plain , and the food of the children themselves severe . 
A single dish of meat and vegetables combined , or salt fish -- such was their luxury . 
This meagre fare , which was reserved for the pupils alone , was , nevertheless , an exception . 
The children ate in silence , under the eye of the mother whose turn it was , who , if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against the rule , opened and shut a wooden book from time to time . 
This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints , read aloud from a little pulpit with a desk , which was situated at the foot of the crucifix . 
The reader was one of the big girls , in weekly turn . 
At regular distances , on the bare tables , there were large , varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives and forks , and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or spoiled fish ; this was punished . 
These bowls were called ronds d'eau . 
The child who broke the silence `` made a cross with her tongue . '' 
Where ? 
On the ground . 
She licked the pavement . 
The dust , that end of all joys , was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of chirping . 
There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as a unique copy , and which it is forbidden to read . 
It is the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate . 
Nemo regulas , seu constitutiones nostras , externis communicabit . 
The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book , and set to reading it with avidity , a reading which was often interrupted by the fear of being caught , which caused them to close the volume precipitately . 
