Is this second infinity intelligent also ? 
Does it think ? 
Does it love ? 
Does it will ? 
If these two infinities are intelligent , each of them has a will principle , and there is an I in the upper infinity as there is an I in the lower infinity . 
The I below is the soul ; the I on high is God . 
To place the infinity here below in contact , by the medium of thought , with the infinity on high , is called praying . 
Let us take nothing from the human mind ; to suppress is bad . 
We must reform and transform . 
Certain faculties in man are directed towards the Unknown ; thought , revery , prayer . 
The Unknown is an ocean . 
What is conscience ? 
It is the compass of the Unknown . 
Thought , revery , prayer , -- these are great and mysterious radiations . 
Let us respect them . 
Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul ? 
Into the shadow ; that is to say , to the light . 
The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of humanity . 
Close to the right of the man , beside it , at the least , there exists the right of the soul . 
To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite , such is the law . 
Let us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of creation , and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars . 
We have a duty to labor over the human soul , to defend the mystery against the miracle , to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd , to admit , as an inexplicable fact , only what is necessary , to purify belief , to remove superstitions from above religion ; to clear God of caterpillars . 
THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER With regard to the modes of prayer , all are good , provided that they are sincere . 
Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite . 
There is , as we know , a philosophy which denies the infinite . 
There is also a philosophy , pathologically classified , which denies the sun ; this philosophy is called blindness . 
To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth , is a fine blind man 's self-sufficiency . 
The curious thing is the haughty , superior , and compassionate airs which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which beholds God . 
One fancies he hears a mole crying , `` I pity them with their sun ! '' 
There are , as we know , powerful and illustrious atheists . 
At bottom , led back to the truth by their very force , they are not absolutely sure that they are atheists ; it is with them only a question of definition , and in any case , if they do not believe in God , being great minds , they prove God . 
We salute them as philosophers , while inexorably denouncing their philosophy . 
Let us go on . 
The remarkable thing about it is , also , their facility in paying themselves off with words . 
A metaphysical school of the North , impregnated to some extent with fog , has fancied that it has worked a revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with the word Will . 
To say : `` the plant wills , '' instead of : `` the plant grows '' : this would be fecund in results , indeed , if we were to add : `` the universe wills . '' 
Why ? 
Because it would come to this : the plant wills , therefore it has an _ I _ ; the universe wills , therefore it has a God . 
As for us , who , however , in contradistinction to this school , reject nothing a priori , a will in the plant , accepted by this school , appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it . 
To deny the will of the infinite , that is to say , God , is impossible on any other conditions than a denial of the infinite . 
We have demonstrated this . 
The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism . 
Everything becomes `` a mental conception . '' 
With nihilism , no discussion is possible ; for the nihilist logic doubts the existence of its interlocutor , and is not quite sure that it exists itself . 
From its point of view , it is possible that it may be for itself , only `` a mental conception . '' 
Only , it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in the lump , simply by the utterance of the word , mind . 
In short , no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all end in the monosyllable , No . 
To No there is only one reply , Yes . 
Nihilism has no point . 
There is no such thing as nothingness . 
