This is a theft . 
`` Seventhly : for a broken thread ten sous are withheld in the weaving shop ; this is an abuse of the contractor , since the cloth is none the worse for it . 
`` Eighthly : it is annoying for visitors to La Force to be obliged to traverse the boys ' court in order to reach the parlor of Sainte-Marie-l'Egyptienne . 
`` Ninthly : it is a fact that any day gendarmes can be overheard relating in the court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put by the magistrates to prisoners . 
For a gendarme , who should be sworn to secrecy , to repeat what he has heard in the examination room is a grave disorder . 
`` Tenthly : Mme. Henry is an honest woman ; her canteen is very neat ; but it is bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap of the secret cells . 
This is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a great civilization . '' 
Javert wrote these lines in his calmest and most correct chirography , not omitting a single comma , and making the paper screech under his pen . 
Below the last line he signed : `` JAVERT , `` Inspector of the 1st class . 
`` The Post of the Place du Chatelet . 
`` June 7th , 1832 , about one o'clock in the morning . '' 
Javert dried the fresh ink on the paper , folded it like a letter , sealed it , wrote on the back : Note for the administration , left it on the table , and quitted the post . 
The glazed and grated door fell to behind him . 
Again he traversed the Place du Chatelet diagonally , regained the quay , and returned with automatic precision to the very point which he had abandoned a quarter of an hour previously , leaned on his elbows and found himself again in the same attitude on the same paving-stone of the parapet . 
He did not appear to have stirred . 
The darkness was complete . 
It was the sepulchral moment which follows midnight . 
A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars . 
Not a single light burned in the houses of the city ; no one was passing ; all of the streets and quays which could be seen were deserted ; Notre-Dame and the towers of the Court-House seemed features of the night . 
A street lantern reddened the margin of the quay . 
The outlines of the bridges lay shapeless in the mist one behind the other . 
Recent rains had swollen the river . 
The spot where Javert was leaning was , it will be remembered , situated precisely over the rapids of the Seine , perpendicularly above that formidable spiral of whirlpools which loose and knot themselves again like an endless screw . 
Javert bent his head and gazed . 
All was black . 
Nothing was to be distinguished . 
A sound of foam was audible ; but the river could not be seen . 
At moments , in that dizzy depth , a gleam of light appeared , and undulated vaguely , water possessing the power of taking light , no one knows whence , and converting it into a snake . 
The light vanished , and all became indistinct once more . 
Immensity seemed thrown open there . 
What lay below was not water , it was a gulf . 
The wall of the quay , abrupt , confused , mingled with the vapors , instantly concealed from sight , produced the effect of an escarpment of the infinite . 
Nothing was to be seen , but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odor of the wet stones could be felt . 
A fierce breath rose from this abyss . 
The flood in the river , divined rather than perceived , the tragic whispering of the waves , the melancholy vastness of the arches of the bridge , the imaginable fall into that gloomy void , into all that shadow was full of horror . 
Javert remained motionless for several minutes , gazing at this opening of shadow ; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembled attention . 
The water roared . 
All at once he took off his hat and placed it on the edge of the quay . 
A moment later , a tall black figure , which a belated passer-by in the distance might have taken for a phantom , appeared erect upon the parapet of the quay , bent over towards the Seine , then drew itself up again , and fell straight down into the shadows ; a dull splash followed ; and the shadow alone was in the secret of the convulsions of that obscure form which had disappeared beneath the water . 
IN WHICH THE TREE WITH THE ZINC PLASTER APPEARS AGAIN Some time after the events which we have just recorded , Sieur Boulatruelle experienced a lively emotion . 
Sieur Boulatruelle was that road-mender of Montfermeil whom the reader has already seen in the gloomy parts of this book . 
Boulatruelle , as the reader may , perchance , recall , was a man who was occupied with divers and troublesome matters . 
He broke stones and damaged travellers on the highway . 
Road-mender and thief as he was , he cherished one dream ; he believed in the treasures buried in the forest of Montfermeil . 
He hoped some day to find the money in the earth at the foot of a tree ; in the meanwhile , he lived to search the pockets of passers-by . 
Nevertheless , for an instant , he was prudent . 
He had just escaped neatly . 
He had been , as the reader is aware , picked up in Jondrette 's garret in company with the other ruffians . 
Utility of a vice : his drunkenness had been his salvation . 
The authorities had never been able to make out whether he had been there in the quality of a robber or a man who had been robbed . 
