Here is our poor street all riddled with balls . 
They are a pack of rascals . 
Above all things , do n't open the door . '' 
-- And the house assumes the air of a tomb . 
The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house ; he sees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near ; if he cries , he knows that they are listening to him , and that no one will come ; there stand walls which might protect him , there are men who might save him ; and these walls have ears of flesh , and these men have bowels of stone . 
Whom shall he reproach ? 
No one and every one . 
The incomplete times in which we live . 
It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into revolution , and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest , and from Minerva turns to Pallas . 
The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits it ; it almost always comes too soon . 
Then it becomes resigned , and stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph . 
It serves those who deny it without complaint , even excusing them , and even disculpates them , and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment . 
It is indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude . 
Is this ingratitude , however ? 
Yes , from the point of view of the human race . 
No , from the point of view of the individual . 
Progress is man 's mode of existence . 
The general life of the human race is called Progress , the collective stride of the human race is called Progress . 
Progress advances ; it makes the great human and terrestrial journey towards the celestial and the divine ; it has its halting places where it rallies the laggard troop , it has its stations where it meditates , in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on its horizon , it has its nights when it sleeps ; and it is one of the poignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow resting on the human soul , and that he gropes in darkness without being able to awaken that slumbering Progress . 
`` God is dead , perhaps , '' said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer of these lines , confounding progress with God , and taking the interruption of movement for the death of Being . 
He who despairs is in the wrong . 
Progress infallibly awakes , and , in short , we may say that it marches on , even when it is asleep , for it has increased in size . 
When we behold it erect once more , we find it taller . 
To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more than it does on the stream ; erect no barriers , cast in no boulders ; obstacles make water froth and humanity boil . 
Hence arise troubles ; but after these troubles , we recognize the fact that ground has been gained . 
Until order , which is nothing else than universal peace , has been established , until harmony and unity reign , progress will have revolutions as its halting-places . 
What , then , is progress ? 
We have just enunciated it ; the permanent life of the peoples . 
Now , it sometimes happens , that the momentary life of individuals offers resistance to the eternal life of the human race . 
Let us admit without bitterness , that the individual has his distinct interests , and can , without forfeiture , stipulate for his interest , and defend it ; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism ; momentary life has its rights , and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to the future . 
The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth , is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations , its equal , after all , who will have their turn later on . 
-- `` I exist , '' murmurs that some one whose name is All . 
`` I am young and in love , I am old and I wish to repose , I am the father of a family , I toil , I prosper , I am successful in business , I have houses to lease , I have money in the government funds , I am happy , I have a wife and children , I have all this , I desire to live , leave me in peace . '' 
-- Hence , at certain hours , a profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race . 
Utopia , moreover , we must admit , quits its radiant sphere when it makes war . 
It , the truth of to-morrow , borrows its mode of procedure , battle , from the lie of yesterday . 
It , the future , behaves like the past . 
It , pure idea , becomes a deed of violence . 
It complicates its heroism with a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer ; a violence of occasion and expedient , contrary to principle , and for which it is fatally punished . 
The Utopia , insurrection , fights with the old military code in its fist ; it shoots spies , it executes traitors ; it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness . 
It makes use of death , a serious matter . 
It seems as though Utopia had no longer any faith in radiance , its irresistible and incorruptible force . 
It strikes with the sword . 
Now , no sword is simple . 
Every blade has two edges ; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other . 
Having made this reservation , and made it with all severity , it is impossible for us not to admire , whether they succeed or not , those the glorious combatants of the future , the confessors of Utopia . 
Even when they miscarry , they are worthy of veneration ; and it is , perhaps , in failure , that they possess the most majesty . 
Victory , when it is in accord with progress , merits the applause of the people ; but a heroic defeat merits their tender compassion . 
The one is magnificent , the other sublime . 
For our own part , we prefer martyrdom to success . 
