Revolts have illuminated with a red glare all the most original points of the Parisian character , generosity , devotion , stormy gayety , students proving that bravery forms part of intelligence , the National Guard invincible , bivouacs of shopkeepers , fortresses of street urchins , contempt of death on the part of passers-by . 
Schools and legions clashed together . 
After all , between the combatants , there was only a difference of age ; the race is the same ; it is the same stoical men who died at the age of twenty for their ideas , at forty for their families . 
The army , always a sad thing in civil wars , opposed prudence to audacity . 
Uprisings , while proving popular intrepidity , also educated the courage of the bourgeois . 
`` This is well . 
But is all this worth the bloodshed ? 
And to the bloodshed add the future darkness , progress compromised , uneasiness among the best men , honest liberals in despair , foreign absolutism happy in these wounds dealt to revolution by its own hand , the vanquished of 1830 triumphing and saying : ` We told you so ! ' 
Add Paris enlarged , possibly , but France most assuredly diminished . 
Add , for all must needs be told , the massacres which have too often dishonored the victory of order grown ferocious over liberty gone mad . 
To sum up all , uprisings have been disastrous . '' 
Thus speaks that approximation to wisdom with which the bourgeoisie , that approximation to the people , so willingly contents itself . 
For our parts , we reject this word uprisings as too large , and consequently as too convenient . 
We make a distinction between one popular movement and another popular movement . 
We do not inquire whether an uprising costs as much as a battle . 
Why a battle , in the first place ? 
Here the question of war comes up . 
Is war less of a scourge than an uprising is of a calamity ? 
And then , are all uprisings calamities ? 
And what if the revolt of July did cost a hundred and twenty millions ? 
The establishment of Philip V. in Spain cost France two milliards . 
Even at the same price , we should prefer the 14th of July . 
However , we reject these figures , which appear to be reasons and which are only words . 
An uprising being given , we examine it by itself . 
In all that is said by the doctrinarian objection above presented , there is no question of anything but effect , we seek the cause . 
We will be explicit . 
THE ROOT OF THE MATTER There is such a thing as an uprising , and there is such a thing as insurrection ; these are two separate phases of wrath ; one is in the wrong , the other is in the right . 
In democratic states , the only ones which are founded on justice , it sometimes happens that the fraction usurps ; then the whole rises and the necessary claim of its rights may proceed as far as resort to arms . 
In all questions which result from collective sovereignty , the war of the whole against the fraction is insurrection ; the attack of the fraction against the whole is revolt ; according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention , they are justly or unjustly attacked . 
The same cannon , pointed against the populace , is wrong on the 10th of August , and right on the 14th of Vendemiaire . 
Alike in appearance , fundamentally different in reality ; the Swiss defend the false , Bonaparte defends the true . 
That which universal suffrage has effected in its liberty and in its sovereignty can not be undone by the street . 
It is the same in things pertaining purely to civilization ; the instinct of the masses , clear-sighted to-day , may be troubled to-morrow . 
The same fury legitimate when directed against Terray and absurd when directed against Turgot . 
The destruction of machines , the pillage of warehouses , the breaking of rails , the demolition of docks , the false routes of multitudes , the refusal by the people of justice to progress , Ramus assassinated by students , Rousseau driven out of Switzerland and stoned , -- that is revolt . 
Israel against Moses , Athens against Phocian , Rome against Cicero , -- that is an uprising ; Paris against the Bastille , -- that is insurrection . 
The soldiers against Alexander , the sailors against Christopher Columbus , -- this is the same revolt ; impious revolt ; why ? 
Because Alexander is doing for Asia with the sword that which Christopher Columbus is doing for America with the compass ; Alexander like Columbus , is finding a world . 
These gifts of a world to civilization are such augmentations of light , that all resistance in that case is culpable . 
Sometimes the populace counterfeits fidelity to itself . 
The masses are traitors to the people . 
Is there , for example , anything stranger than that long and bloody protest of dealers in contraband salt , a legitimate chronic revolt , which , at the decisive moment , on the day of salvation , at the very hour of popular victory , espouses the throne , turns into chouannerie , and , from having been an insurrection against , becomes an uprising for , sombre masterpieces of ignorance ! 
The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets , and with a rope 's end round his neck , mounts the white cockade . 
`` Death to the salt duties , '' brings forth , `` Long live the King ! '' 
The assassins of Saint-Barthelemy , the cut-throats of September , the manslaughterers of Avignon , the assassins of Coligny , the assassins of Madam Lamballe , the assassins of Brune , Miquelets , Verdets , Cadenettes , the companions of Jehu , the chevaliers of Brassard , -- behold an uprising . 
La Vendee is a grand , catholic uprising . 
The sound of right in movement is recognizable , it does not always proceed from the trembling of excited masses ; there are mad rages , there are cracked bells , all tocsins do not give out the sound of bronze . 
The brawl of passions and ignorances is quite another thing from the shock of progress . 
Show me in what direction you are going . 
Rise , if you will , but let it be that you may grow great . 
