Then he saw Moscow . 
Then La Beresina , then Lutzen , Bautzen , Dresden , Wachau , Leipzig , and the defiles of Gelenhausen ; then Montmirail , Chateau-Thierry , Craon , the banks of the Marne , the banks of the Aisne , and the redoubtable position of Laon . 
At Arnay-Le-Duc , being then a captain , he put ten Cossacks to the sword , and saved , not his general , but his corporal . 
He was well slashed up on this occasion , and twenty-seven splinters were extracted from his left arm alone . 
Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had just exchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry . 
He had what was called under the old regime , the double hand , that is to say , an equal aptitude for handling the sabre or the musket as a soldier , or a squadron or a battalion as an officer . 
It is from this aptitude , perfected by a military education , which certain special branches of the service arise , the dragoons , for example , who are both cavalry-men and infantry at one and the same time . 
He accompanied Napoleon to the Island of Elba . 
At Waterloo , he was chief of a squadron of cuirassiers , in Dubois ' brigade . 
It was he who captured the standard of the Lunenburg battalion . 
He came and cast the flag at the Emperor 's feet . 
He was covered with blood . 
While tearing down the banner he had received a sword-cut across his face . 
The Emperor , greatly pleased , shouted to him : `` You are a colonel , you are a baron , you are an officer of the Legion of Honor ! '' 
Pontmercy replied : `` Sire , I thank you for my widow . '' 
An hour later , he fell in the ravine of Ohain . 
Now , who was this Georges Pontmercy ? 
He was this same `` brigand of the Loire . '' 
We have already seen something of his history . 
After Waterloo , Pontmercy , who had been pulled out of the hollow road of Ohain , as it will be remembered , had succeeded in joining the army , and had dragged himself from ambulance to ambulance as far as the cantonments of the Loire . 
The Restoration had placed him on half-pay , then had sent him into residence , that is to say , under surveillance , at Vernon . 
King Louis XVIII. , regarding all that which had taken place during the Hundred Days as not having occurred at all , did not recognize his quality as an officer of the Legion of Honor , nor his grade of colonel , nor his title of baron . 
He , on his side , neglected no occasion of signing himself `` Colonel Baron Pontmercy . '' 
He had only an old blue coat , and he never went out without fastening to it his rosette as an officer of the Legion of Honor . 
The Attorney for the Crown had him warned that the authorities would prosecute him for `` illegal '' wearing of this decoration . 
When this notice was conveyed to him through an officious intermediary , Pontmercy retorted with a bitter smile : `` I do not know whether I no longer understand French , or whether you no longer speak it ; but the fact is that I do not understand . '' 
Then he went out for eight successive days with his rosette . 
They dared not interfere with him . 
Two or three times the Minister of War and the general in command of the department wrote to him with the following address : A Monsieur le Commandant Pontmercy . '' 
He sent back the letters with the seals unbroken . 
At the same moment , Napoleon at Saint Helena was treating in the same fashion the missives of Sir Hudson Lowe addressed to General Bonaparte . 
Pontmercy had ended , may we be pardoned the expression , by having in his mouth the same saliva as his Emperor . 
In the same way , there were at Rome Carthaginian prisoners who refused to salute Flaminius , and who had a little of Hannibal 's spirit . 
One day he encountered the district-attorney in one of the streets of Vernon , stepped up to him , and said : `` Mr. Crown Attorney , am I permitted to wear my scar ? '' 
He had nothing save his meagre half-pay as chief of squadron . 
He had hired the smallest house which he could find at Vernon . 
He lived there alone , we have just seen how . 
Under the Empire , between two wars , he had found time to marry Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
The old bourgeois , thoroughly indignant at bottom , had given his consent with a sigh , saying : `` The greatest families are forced into it . '' 
In 1815 , Madame Pontmercy , an admirable woman in every sense , by the way , lofty in sentiment and rare , and worthy of her husband , died , leaving a child . 
This child had been the colonel 's joy in his solitude ; but the grandfather had imperatively claimed his grandson , declaring that if the child were not given to him he would disinherit him . 
The father had yielded in the little one 's interest , and had transferred his love to flowers . 
Moreover , he had renounced everything , and neither stirred up mischief nor conspired . 
He shared his thoughts between the innocent things which he was then doing and the great things which he had done . 
He passed his time in expecting a pink or in recalling Austerlitz . 
M. Gillenormand kept up no relations with his son-in-law . 
The colonel was `` a bandit '' to him . 
M. Gillenormand never mentioned the colonel , except when he occasionally made mocking allusions to `` his Baronship . '' 
It had been expressly agreed that Pontmercy should never attempt to see his son nor to speak to him , under penalty of having the latter handed over to him disowned and disinherited . 
For the Gillenormands , Pontmercy was a man afflicted with the plague . 
