What ! 
these men do not recognize me ! 
I wish Javert were here ; he would recognize me . '' 
Nothing can reproduce the sombre and kindly melancholy of tone which accompanied these words . 
He turned to the three convicts , and said : -- `` Well , I recognize you ; do you remember , Brevet ? '' 
He paused , hesitated for an instant , and said : -- `` Do you remember the knitted suspenders with a checked pattern which you wore in the galleys ? '' 
Brevet gave a start of surprise , and surveyed him from head to foot with a frightened air . 
He continued : -- `` Chenildieu , you who conferred on yourself the name of ` Jenie-Dieu , ' your whole right shoulder bears a deep burn , because you one day laid your shoulder against the chafing-dish full of coals , in order to efface the three letters T. F. P. , which are still visible , nevertheless ; answer , is this true ? '' 
`` It is true , '' said Chenildieu . 
He addressed himself to Cochepaille : -- `` Cochepaille , you have , near the bend in your left arm , a date stamped in blue letters with burnt powder ; the date is that of the landing of the Emperor at Cannes , March 1 , 1815 ; pull up your sleeve ! '' 
Cochepaille pushed up his sleeve ; all eyes were focused on him and on his bare arm . 
A gendarme held a light close to it ; there was the date . 
The unhappy man turned to the spectators and the judges with a smile which still rends the hearts of all who saw it whenever they think of it . 
It was a smile of triumph ; it was also a smile of despair . 
`` You see plainly , '' he said , `` that I am Jean Valjean . '' 
In that chamber there were no longer either judges , accusers , nor gendarmes ; there was nothing but staring eyes and sympathizing hearts . 
No one recalled any longer the part that each might be called upon to play ; the district-attorney forgot he was there for the purpose of prosecuting , the President that he was there to preside , the counsel for the defence that he was there to defend . 
It was a striking circumstance that no question was put , that no authority intervened . 
The peculiarity of sublime spectacles is , that they capture all souls and turn witnesses into spectators . 
No one , probably , could have explained what he felt ; no one , probably , said to himself that he was witnessing the splendid outburst of a grand light : all felt themselves inwardly dazzled . 
It was evident that they had Jean Valjean before their eyes . 
That was clear . 
The appearance of this man had sufficed to suffuse with light that matter which had been so obscure but a moment previously , without any further explanation : the whole crowd , as by a sort of electric revelation , understood instantly and at a single glance the simple and magnificent history of a man who was delivering himself up so that another man might not be condemned in his stead . 
The details , the hesitations , little possible oppositions , were swallowed up in that vast and luminous fact . 
It was an impression which vanished speedily , but which was irresistible at the moment . 
`` I do not wish to disturb the court further , '' resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` I shall withdraw , since you do not arrest me . 
I have many things to do . 
The district-attorney knows who I am ; he knows whither I am going ; he can have me arrested when he likes . '' 
He directed his steps towards the door . 
Not a voice was raised , not an arm extended to hinder him . 
All stood aside . 
At that moment there was about him that divine something which causes multitudes to stand aside and make way for a man . 
He traversed the crowd slowly . 
It was never known who opened the door , but it is certain that he found the door open when he reached it . 
On arriving there he turned round and said : -- `` I am at your command , Mr. District-Attorney . '' 
Then he addressed the audience : -- `` All of you , all who are present -- consider me worthy of pity , do you not ? 
Good God ! 
When I think of what I was on the point of doing , I consider that I am to be envied . 
Nevertheless , I should have preferred not to have had this occur . '' 
He withdrew , and the door closed behind him as it had opened , for those who do certain sovereign things are always sure of being served by some one in the crowd . 
Less than an hour after this , the verdict of the jury freed the said Champmathieu from all accusations ; and Champmathieu , being at once released , went off in a state of stupefaction , thinking that all men were fools , and comprehending nothing of this vision . 
IN WHAT MIRROR M. MADELEINE CONTEMPLATES HIS HAIR The day had begun to dawn . 
Fantine had passed a sleepless and feverish night , filled with happy visions ; at daybreak she fell asleep . 
Sister Simplice , who had been watching with her , availed herself of this slumber to go and prepare a new potion of chinchona . 
The worthy sister had been in the laboratory of the infirmary but a few moments , bending over her drugs and phials , and scrutinizing things very closely , on account of the dimness which the half-light of dawn spreads over all objects . 
Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a faint shriek . 
M. Madeleine stood before her ; he had just entered silently . 
`` Is it you , Mr. Mayor ? '' 
she exclaimed . 
