The reader has not forgotten that Jean Valjean had religious habits at M. sur M . 
Some papers , among others the Constitutional , presented this commutation as a triumph of the priestly party . 
Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys . 
He was called 9,430 . 
However , and we will mention it at once in order that we may not be obliged to recur to the subject , the prosperity of M. sur M. vanished with M. Madeleine ; all that he had foreseen during his night of fever and hesitation was realized ; lacking him , there actually was a soul lacking . 
After this fall , there took place at M. sur M. that egotistical division of great existences which have fallen , that fatal dismemberment of flourishing things which is accomplished every day , obscurely , in the human community , and which history has noted only once , because it occurred after the death of Alexander . 
Lieutenants are crowned kings ; superintendents improvise manufacturers out of themselves . 
Envious rivalries arose . 
M. Madeleine 's vast workshops were shut ; his buildings fell to ruin , his workmen were scattered . 
Some of them quitted the country , others abandoned the trade . 
Thenceforth , everything was done on a small scale , instead of on a grand scale ; for lucre instead of the general good . 
There was no longer a centre ; everywhere there was competition and animosity . 
M. Madeleine had reigned over all and directed all . 
No sooner had he fallen , than each pulled things to himself ; the spirit of combat succeeded to the spirit of organization , bitterness to cordiality , hatred of one another to the benevolence of the founder towards all ; the threads which M. Madeleine had set were tangled and broken , the methods were adulterated , the products were debased , confidence was killed ; the market diminished , for lack of orders ; salaries were reduced , the workshops stood still , bankruptcy arrived . 
And then there was nothing more for the poor . 
All had vanished . 
The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere . 
Less than four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizes establishing the identity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine , for the benefit of the galleys , the cost of collecting taxes had doubled in the arrondissement of M. sur M. ; and M. de Villele called attention to the fact in the rostrum , in the month of February , 1827 . 
IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERUSE TWO VERSES , WHICH ARE OF THE DEVIL 'S COMPOSITION , POSSIBLY Before proceeding further , it will be to the purpose to narrate in some detail , a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch , in Montfermeil , and which is not lacking in coincidence with certain conjectures of the indictment . 
There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition , which is all the more curious and all the more precious , because a popular superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in Siberia . 
We are among those who respect everything which is in the nature of a rare plant . 
Here , then , is the superstition of Montfermeil : it is thought that the devil , from time immemorial , has selected the forest as a hiding-place for his treasures . 
Goodwives affirm that it is no rarity to encounter at nightfall , in secluded nooks of the forest , a black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper , wearing wooden shoes , clad in trousers and a blouse of linen , and recognizable by the fact , that , instead of a cap or hat , he has two immense horns on his head . 
This ought , in fact , to render him recognizable . 
This man is habitually engaged in digging a hole . 
There are three ways of profiting by such an encounter . 
The first is to approach the man and speak to him . 
Then it is seen that the man is simply a peasant , that he appears black because it is nightfall ; that he is not digging any hole whatever , but is cutting grass for his cows , and that what had been taken for horns is nothing but a dung-fork which he is carrying on his back , and whose teeth , thanks to the perspective of evening , seemed to spring from his head . 
The man returns home and dies within the week . 
The second way is to watch him , to wait until he has dug his hole , until he has filled it and has gone away ; then to run with great speed to the trench , to open it once more and to seize the `` treasure '' which the black man has necessarily placed there . 
In this case one dies within the month . 
Finally , the last method is not to speak to the black man , not to look at him , and to flee at the best speed of one 's legs . 
One then dies within the year . 
As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences , the second , which at all events , presents some advantages , among others that of possessing a treasure , if only for a month , is the one most generally adopted . 
So bold men , who are tempted by every chance , have quite frequently , as we are assured , opened the holes excavated by the black man , and tried to rob the devil . 
The success of the operation appears to be but moderate . 
At least , if the tradition is to be believed , and in particular the two enigmatical lines in barbarous Latin , which an evil Norman monk , a bit of a sorcerer , named Tryphon has left on this subject . 
This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey of Saint-Georges de Bocherville , near Rouen , and toads spawn on his grave . 
Accordingly , enormous efforts are made . 
Such trenches are ordinarily extremely deep ; a man sweats , digs , toils all night -- for it must be done at night ; he wets his shirt , burns out his candle , breaks his mattock , and when he arrives at the bottom of the hole , when he lays his hand on the `` treasure , '' what does he find ? 
What is the devil 's treasure ? 
A sou , sometimes a crown-piece , a stone , a skeleton , a bleeding body , sometimes a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in a portfolio , sometimes nothing . 
This is what Tryphon 's verses seem to announce to the indiscreet and curious : -- `` Fodit , et in fossa thesauros condit opaca , As , nummas , lapides , cadaver , simulacra , nihilque . '' 
It seems that in our day there is sometimes found a powder-horn with bullets , sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn , which has evidently served the devil . 
Tryphon does not record these two finds , since Tryphon lived in the twelfth century , and since the devil does not appear to have had the wit to invent powder before Roger Bacon 's time , and cards before the time of Charles VI . 
Moreover , if one plays at cards , one is sure to lose all that one possesses ! 
and as for the powder in the horn , it possesses the property of making your gun burst in your face . 
Now , a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to the prosecuting attorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during his flight of several days had been prowling around Montfermeil , it was remarked in that village that a certain old road-laborer , named Boulatruelle , had `` peculiar ways '' in the forest . 
People thereabouts thought they knew that this Boulatruelle had been in the galleys . 
He was subjected to certain police supervision , and , as he could find work nowhere , the administration employed him at reduced rates as a road-mender on the cross-road from Gagny to Lagny . 
