He is dead ! 
He is dead ! 
He has got himself killed on the barricades ! 
Out of hatred to me ! 
He did that to spite me ! 
Ah ! 
You blood-drinker ! 
This is the way he returns to me ! 
Misery of my life , he is dead ! '' 
He went to the window , threw it wide open as though he were stifling , and , erect before the darkness , he began to talk into the street , to the night : `` Pierced , sabred , exterminated , slashed , hacked in pieces ! 
Just look at that , the villain ! 
He knew well that I was waiting for him , and that I had had his room arranged , and that I had placed at the head of my bed his portrait taken when he was a little child ! 
He knew well that he had only to come back , and that I had been recalling him for years , and that I remained by my fireside , with my hands on my knees , not knowing what to do , and that I was mad over it ! 
You knew well , that you had but to return and to say : ` It is I , ' and you would have been the master of the house , and that I should have obeyed you , and that you could have done whatever you pleased with your old numskull of a grandfather ! 
you knew that well , and you said : `` No , he is a Royalist , I will not go ! 
And you went to the barricades , and you got yourself killed out of malice ! 
To revenge yourself for what I said to you about Monsieur le Duc de Berry . 
It is infamous ! 
Go to bed then and sleep tranquilly ! 
he is dead , and this is my awakening . '' 
The doctor , who was beginning to be uneasy in both quarters , quitted Marius for a moment , went to M. Gillenormand , and took his arm . 
The grandfather turned round , gazed at him with eyes which seemed exaggerated in size and bloodshot , and said to him calmly : `` I thank you , sir . 
I am composed , I am a man , I witnessed the death of Louis XVI. , I know how to bear events . 
One thing is terrible and that is to think that it is your newspapers which do all the mischief . 
You will have scribblers , chatterers , lawyers , orators , tribunes , discussions , progress , enlightenment , the rights of man , the liberty of the press , and this is the way that your children will be brought home to you . 
Ah ! 
Marius ! 
It is abominable ! 
Killed ! 
Dead before me ! 
A barricade ! 
Ah , the scamp ! 
Doctor , you live in this quarter , I believe ? 
Oh ! 
I know you well . 
I see your cabriolet pass my window . 
I am going to tell you . 
You are wrong to think that I am angry . 
One does not fly into a rage against a dead man . 
That would be stupid . 
This is a child whom I have reared . 
I was already old while he was very young . 
He played in the Tuileries garden with his little shovel and his little chair , and in order that the inspectors might not grumble , I stopped up the holes that he made in the earth with his shovel , with my cane . 
One day he exclaimed : Down with Louis XVIII . ! 
and off he went . 
It was no fault of mine . 
He was all rosy and blond . 
His mother is dead . 
Have you ever noticed that all little children are blond ? 
Why is it so ? 
