When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic unity , the secret of life has been discovered so far as they are concerned ; they are no longer anything more than the two boundaries of the same destiny ; they are no longer anything but the two wings of the same spirit . 
Love , soar . 
On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as she walks , you are lost , you love . 
But one thing remains for you to do : to think of her so intently that she is constrained to think of you . 
What love commences can be finished by God alone . 
True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a handkerchief found , and eternity is required for its devotion and its hopes . 
It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely little . 
If you are a stone , be adamant ; if you are a plant , be the sensitive plant ; if you are a man , be love . 
Nothing suffices for love . 
We have happiness , we desire paradise ; we possess paradise , we desire heaven . 
Oh ye who love each other , all this is contained in love . 
Understand how to find it there . 
Love has contemplation as well as heaven , and more than heaven , it has voluptuousness . 
`` Does she still come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
`` No , sir . '' 
`` This is the church where she attends mass , is it not ? '' 
`` She no longer comes here . '' 
`` Does she still live in this house ? '' 
`` She has moved away . '' 
`` Where has she gone to dwell ? '' 
`` She did not say . '' 
What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one 's soul ! 
Love has its childishness , other passions have their pettinesses . 
Shame on the passions which belittle man ! 
Honor to the one which makes a child of him ! 
There is one strange thing , do you know it ? 
I dwell in the night . 
There is a being who carried off my sky when she went away . 
Oh ! 
would that we were lying side by side in the same grave , hand in hand , and from time to time , in the darkness , gently caressing a finger , -- that would suffice for my eternity ! 
Ye who suffer because ye love , love yet more . 
To die of love , is to live in it . 
Love . 
A sombre and starry transfiguration is mingled with this torture . 
There is ecstasy in agony . 
Oh joy of the birds ! 
It is because they have nests that they sing . 
Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise . 
Deep hearts , sage minds , take life as God has made it ; it is a long trial , an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny . 
This destiny , the true one , begins for a man with the first step inside the tomb . 
Then something appears to him , and he begins to distinguish the definitive . 
The definitive , meditate upon that word . 
The living perceive the infinite ; the definitive permits itself to be seen only by the dead . 
In the meanwhile , love and suffer , hope and contemplate . 
Woe , alas ! 
to him who shall have loved only bodies , forms , appearances ! 
Death will deprive him of all . 
Try to love souls , you will find them again . 
I encountered in the street , a very poor young man who was in love . 
His hat was old , his coat was worn , his elbows were in holes ; water trickled through his shoes , and the stars through his soul . 
