and then you see it is horrible , here we are dining in a room with a bed in it , and that disgusts me with life . '' 
THE WISDOM OF THOLOMYES In the meantime , while some sang , the rest talked together tumultuously all at once ; it was no longer anything but noise . 
Tholomyes intervened . 
`` Let us not talk at random nor too fast , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Let us reflect , if we wish to be brilliant . 
Too much improvisation empties the mind in a stupid way . 
Running beer gathers no froth . 
No haste , gentlemen . 
Let us mingle majesty with the feast . 
Let us eat with meditation ; let us make haste slowly . 
Let us not hurry . 
Consider the springtime ; if it makes haste , it is done for ; that is to say , it gets frozen . 
Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees . 
Excess of zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners . 
No zeal , gentlemen ! 
Grimod de la Reyniere agrees with Talleyrand . '' 
A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group . 
`` Leave us in peace , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` Down with the tyrant ! '' 
said Fameuil . 
`` Bombarda , Bombance , and Bambochel ! '' 
cried Listolier . 
`` Sunday exists , '' resumed Fameuil . 
`` We are sober , '' added Listolier . 
`` Tholomyes , '' remarked Blachevelle , `` contemplate my calmness -LSB- mon calme -RSB- . '' 
`` You are the Marquis of that , '' retorted Tholomyes . 
This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool . 
The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist . 
All the frogs held their peace . 
`` Friends , '' cried Tholomyes , with the accent of a man who had recovered his empire , `` Come to yourselves . 
This pun which has fallen from the skies must not be received with too much stupor . 
Everything which falls in that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect . 
The pun is the dung of the mind which soars . 
The jest falls , no matter where ; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges into the azure depths . 
A whitish speck flattened against the rock does not prevent the condor from soaring aloft . 
Far be it from me to insult the pun ! 
I honor it in proportion to its merits ; nothing more . 
All the most august , the most sublime , the most charming of humanity , and perhaps outside of humanity , have made puns . 
Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter , Moses on Isaac , AEschylus on Polynices , Cleopatra on Octavius . 
And observe that Cleopatra 's pun preceded the battle of Actium , and that had it not been for it , no one would have remembered the city of Toryne , a Greek name which signifies a ladle . 
That once conceded , I return to my exhortation . 
I repeat , brothers , I repeat , no zeal , no hubbub , no excess ; even in witticisms , gayety , jollities , or plays on words . 
Listen to me . 
I have the prudence of Amphiaraus and the baldness of Caesar . 
There must be a limit , even to rebuses . 
Est modus in rebus . 
`` There must be a limit , even to dinners . 
You are fond of apple turnovers , ladies ; do not indulge in them to excess . 
Even in the matter of turnovers , good sense and art are requisite . 
Gluttony chastises the glutton , Gula punit Gulax . 
