I would ask his pardon . 
Oh , my God ! 
It makes no difference to me whether I ask his pardon . 
Do me the favor to-day , for this once , Monsieur Javert . 
Hold ! 
you do not know that in prison one can earn only seven sous a day ; it is not the government 's fault , but seven sous is one 's earnings ; and just fancy , I must pay one hundred francs , or my little girl will be sent to me . 
Oh , my God ! 
I can not have her with me . 
What I do is so vile ! 
Oh , my Cosette ! 
Oh , my little angel of the Holy Virgin ! 
what will become of her , poor creature ? 
I will tell you : it is the Thenardiers , inn-keepers , peasants ; and such people are unreasonable . 
They want money . 
Do n't put me in prison ! 
You see , there is a little girl who will be turned out into the street to get along as best she may , in the very heart of the winter ; and you must have pity on such a being , my good Monsieur Javert . 
If she were older , she might earn her living ; but it can not be done at that age . 
I am not a bad woman at bottom . 
It is not cowardliness and gluttony that have made me what I am . 
If I have drunk brandy , it was out of misery . 
I do not love it ; but it benumbs the senses . 
When I was happy , it was only necessary to glance into my closets , and it would have been evident that I was not a coquettish and untidy woman . 
I had linen , a great deal of linen . 
Have pity on me , Monsieur Javert ! '' 
She spoke thus , rent in twain , shaken with sobs , blinded with tears , her neck bare , wringing her hands , and coughing with a dry , short cough , stammering softly with a voice of agony . 
Great sorrow is a divine and terrible ray , which transfigures the unhappy . 
At that moment Fantine had become beautiful once more . 
From time to time she paused , and tenderly kissed the police agent 's coat . 
She would have softened a heart of granite ; but a heart of wood can not be softened . 
`` Come ! '' 
said Javert , `` I have heard you out . 
Have you entirely finished ? 
You will get six months . 
Now march ! 
The Eternal Father in person could do nothing more . '' 
At these solemn words , `` the Eternal Father in person could do nothing more , '' she understood that her fate was sealed . 
She sank down , murmuring , `` Mercy ! '' 
Javert turned his back . 
The soldiers seized her by the arms . 
A few moments earlier a man had entered , but no one had paid any heed to him . 
He shut the door , leaned his back against it , and listened to Fantine 's despairing supplications . 
At the instant when the soldiers laid their hands upon the unfortunate woman , who would not rise , he emerged from the shadow , and said : -- `` One moment , if you please . '' 
Javert raised his eyes and recognized M. Madeleine . 
He removed his hat , and , saluting him with a sort of aggrieved awkwardness : -- `` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor -- '' The words `` Mr. Mayor '' produced a curious effect upon Fantine . 
She rose to her feet with one bound , like a spectre springing from the earth , thrust aside the soldiers with both arms , walked straight up to M. Madeleine before any one could prevent her , and gazing intently at him , with a bewildered air , she cried : -- `` Ah ! 
so it is you who are M. le Maire ! '' 
Then she burst into a laugh , and spit in his face . 
M. Madeleine wiped his face , and said : -- `` Inspector Javert , set this woman at liberty . '' 
Javert felt that he was on the verge of going mad . 
He experienced at that moment , blow upon blow and almost simultaneously , the most violent emotions which he had ever undergone in all his life . 
