I want to know what you are doing there ! 
Get along , you little monster ! '' 
The Thenardier had cast a glance into the street , and had caught sight of Cosette in her ecstasy . 
Cosette fled , dragging her pail , and taking the longest strides of which she was capable . 
THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE As the Thenardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is near the church , it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of Chelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water . 
She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant . 
So long as she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church , the lighted stalls illuminated the road ; but soon the last light from the last stall vanished . 
The poor child found herself in the dark . 
She plunged into it . 
Only , as a certain emotion overcame her , she made as much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walked along . 
This made a noise which afforded her company . 
The further she went , the denser the darkness became . 
There was no one in the streets . 
However , she did encounter a woman , who turned around on seeing her , and stood still , muttering between her teeth : `` Where can that child be going ? 
Is it a werewolf child ? '' 
Then the woman recognized Cosette . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` it 's the Lark ! '' 
In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and deserted streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of Chelles . 
So long as she had the houses or even the walls only on both sides of her path , she proceeded with tolerable boldness . 
From time to time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a shutter -- this was light and life ; there were people there , and it reassured her . 
But in proportion as she advanced , her pace slackened mechanically , as it were . 
When she had passed the corner of the last house , Cosette paused . 
It had been hard to advance further than the last stall ; it became impossible to proceed further than the last house . 
She set her bucket on the ground , thrust her hand into her hair , and began slowly to scratch her head , -- a gesture peculiar to children when terrified and undecided what to do . 
It was no longer Montfermeil ; it was the open fields . 
Black and desert space was before her . 
She gazed in despair at that darkness , where there was no longer any one , where there were beasts , where there were spectres , possibly . 
She took a good look , and heard the beasts walking on the grass , and she distinctly saw spectres moving in the trees . 
Then she seized her bucket again ; fear had lent her audacity . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she ; `` I will tell him that there was no more water ! '' 
And she resolutely re-entered Montfermeil . 
Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to scratch her head again . 
Now it was the Thenardier who appeared to her , with her hideous , hyena mouth , and wrath flashing in her eyes . 
The child cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her . 
What was she to do ? 
What was to become of her ? 
Where was she to go ? 
In front of her was the spectre of the Thenardier ; behind her all the phantoms of the night and of the forest . 
It was before the Thenardier that she recoiled . 
She resumed her path to the spring , and began to run . 
She emerged from the village , she entered the forest at a run , no longer looking at or listening to anything . 
She only paused in her course when her breath failed her ; but she did not halt in her advance . 
She went straight before her in desperation . 
As she ran she felt like crying . 
The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely . 
She no longer thought , she no longer saw . 
The immensity of night was facing this tiny creature . 
On the one hand , all shadow ; on the other , an atom . 
It was only seven or eight minutes ' walk from the edge of the woods to the spring . 
