He had not the air of owning a sou , but he does not consider money ; he pays to Lagny , and he goes only as far as Chelles . 
It is night ; all the houses are shut ; he does not enter the inn , and he is not to be found . 
So he has dived through the earth . '' 
The man had not plunged into the earth , but he had gone with great strides through the dark , down the principal street of Chelles , then he had turned to the right before reaching the church , into the cross-road leading to Montfermeil , like a person who was acquainted with the country and had been there before . 
He followed this road rapidly . 
At the spot where it is intersected by the ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny , he heard people coming . 
He concealed himself precipitately in a ditch , and there waited until the passers-by were at a distance . 
The precaution was nearly superfluous , however ; for , as we have already said , it was a very dark December night . 
Not more than two or three stars were visible in the sky . 
It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins . 
The man did not return to the road to Montfermeil ; he struck across the fields to the right , and entered the forest with long strides . 
Once in the forest he slackened his pace , and began a careful examination of all the trees , advancing , step by step , as though seeking and following a mysterious road known to himself alone . 
There came a moment when he appeared to lose himself , and he paused in indecision . 
At last he arrived , by dint of feeling his way inch by inch , at a clearing where there was a great heap of whitish stones . 
He stepped up briskly to these stones , and examined them attentively through the mists of night , as though he were passing them in review . 
A large tree , covered with those excrescences which are the warts of vegetation , stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones . 
He went up to this tree and passed his hand over the bark of the trunk , as though seeking to recognize and count all the warts . 
Opposite this tree , which was an ash , there was a chestnut-tree , suffering from a peeling of the bark , to which a band of zinc had been nailed by way of dressing . 
He raised himself on tiptoe and touched this band of zinc . 
Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the space between the tree and the heap of stones , like a person who is trying to assure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed . 
That done , he took his bearings , and resumed his march through the forest . 
It was the man who had just met Cosette . 
As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil , he had espied that tiny shadow moving with a groan , depositing a burden on the ground , then taking it up and setting out again . 
He drew near , and perceived that it was a very young child , laden with an enormous bucket of water . 
Then he approached the child , and silently grasped the handle of the bucket . 
COSETTE SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE STRANGER IN THE DARK Cosette , as we have said , was not frightened . 
The man accosted her . 
He spoke in a voice that was grave and almost bass . 
`` My child , what you are carrying is very heavy for you . '' 
Cosette raised her head and replied : -- `` Yes , sir . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' said the man ; `` I will carry it for you . '' 
Cosette let go of the bucket-handle . 
The man walked along beside her . 
`` It really is very heavy , '' he muttered between his teeth . 
Then he added : -- `` How old are you , little one ? '' 
`` Eight , sir . '' 
`` And have you come from far like this ? '' 
`` From the spring in the forest . '' 
`` Are you going far ? '' 
`` A good quarter of an hour 's walk from here . '' 
The man said nothing for a moment ; then he remarked abruptly : -- `` So you have no mother . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' answered the child . 
Before the man had time to speak again , she added : -- `` I do n't think so . 
Other people have mothers . 
I have none . '' 
And after a silence she went on : -- `` I think that I never had any . '' 
The man halted ; he set the bucket on the ground , bent down and placed both hands on the child 's shoulders , making an effort to look at her and to see her face in the dark . 
Cosette 's thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid light in the sky . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said the man . 
