`` Go on ! '' 
shouted Bossuet to the artillerists . 
THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY Thet flocked round Gavroche . 
But he had no time to tell anything . 
Marius drew him aside with a shudder . 
`` What are you doing here ? '' 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said the child , `` what are you doing here yourself ? '' 
And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery . 
His eyes grew larger with the proud light within them . 
It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued : `` Who told you to come back ? 
Did you deliver my letter at the address ? '' 
Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that letter . 
In his haste to return to the barricade , he had got rid of it rather than delivered it . 
He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had not been able to make out . 
It is true that the man was bareheaded , but that was not sufficient . 
In short , he had been administering to himself little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius ' reproaches . 
In order to extricate himself from the predicament , he took the simplest course ; he lied abominably . 
`` Citizen , I delivered the letter to the porter . 
The lady was asleep . 
She will have the letter when she wakes up . 
Marius had had two objects in sending that letter : to bid farewell to Cosette and to save Gavroche . 
He was obliged to content himself with the half of his desire . 
The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the barricade , was a coincidence which occurred to him . 
He pointed out M. Fauchelevent to Gavroche . 
`` Do you know that man ? '' 
`` No , '' said Gavroche . 
Gavroche had , in fact , as we have just mentioned , seen Jean Valjean only at night . 
The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in Marius ' mind were dissipated . 
Did he know M. Fauchelevent 's opinions ? 
Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican . 
Hence his very natural presence in this combat . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche was shouting , at the other end of the barricade : `` My gun ! '' 
Courfeyrac had it returned to him . 
Gavroche warned `` his comrades '' as he called them , that the barricade was blocked . 
He had had great difficulty in reaching it . 
A battalion of the line whose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie was on the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne ; on the opposite side , the municipal guard occupied the Rue des Precheurs . 
The bulk of the army was facing them in front . 
This information given , Gavroche added : `` I authorize you to hit 'em a tremendous whack . '' 
Meanwhile , Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his embrasure . 
The assailants , dissatisfied , no doubt , with their shot , had not repeated it . 
A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of the street behind the piece of ordnance . 
The soldiers were tearing up the pavement and constructing with the stones a small , low wall , a sort of side-work not more than eighteen inches high , and facing the barricade . 
In the angle at the left of this epaulement , there was visible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massed in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Enjolras , on the watch , thought he distinguished the peculiar sound which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the caissons , and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevation and incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left . 
Then the cannoneers began to load the piece . 
The chief seized the lint-stock himself and lowered it to the vent . 
`` Down with your heads , hug the wall ! '' 
shouted Enjolras , `` and all on your knees along the barricade ! '' 
The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop , and who had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche 's arrival , rushed pell-mell towards the barricade ; but before Enjolras ' order could be executed , the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a round of grape-shot . 
