Up to this point , everything above him had been , to his gaze , merely a smooth , limpid and simple surface ; there was nothing incomprehensible , nothing obscure ; nothing that was not defined , regularly disposed , linked , precise , circumscribed , exact , limited , closed , fully provided for ; authority was a plane surface ; there was no fall in it , no dizziness in its presence . 
Javert had never beheld the unknown except from below . 
The irregular , the unforeseen , the disordered opening of chaos , the possible slip over a precipice -- this was the work of the lower regions , of rebels , of the wicked , of wretches . 
Now Javert threw himself back , and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedented apparition : a gulf on high . 
What ! 
one was dismantled from top to bottom ! 
one was disconcerted , absolutely ! 
In what could one trust ! 
That which had been agreed upon was giving way ! 
What ! 
the defect in society 's armor could be discovered by a magnanimous wretch ! 
What ! 
an honest servitor of the law could suddenly find himself caught between two crimes -- the crime of allowing a man to escape and the crime of arresting him ! 
everything was not settled in the orders given by the State to the functionary ! 
There might be blind alleys in duty ! 
What , -- all this was real ! 
was it true that an ex-ruffian , weighed down with convictions , could rise erect and end by being in the right ? 
Was this credible ? 
were there cases in which the law should retire before transfigured crime , and stammer its excuses ? 
-- Yes , that was the state of the case ! 
and Javert saw it ! 
and Javert had touched it ! 
and not only could he not deny it , but he had taken part in it . 
These were realities . 
It was abominable that actual facts could reach such deformity . 
If facts did their duty , they would confine themselves to being proofs of the law ; facts -- it is God who sends them . 
Was anarchy , then , on the point of now descending from on high ? 
Thus , -- and in the exaggeration of anguish , and the optical illusion of consternation , all that might have corrected and restrained this impression was effaced , and society , and the human race , and the universe were , henceforth , summed up in his eyes , in one simple and terrible feature , -- thus the penal laws , the thing judged , the force due to legislation , the decrees of the sovereign courts , the magistracy , the government , prevention , repression , official cruelty , wisdom , legal infallibility , the principle of authority , all the dogmas on which rest political and civil security , sovereignty , justice , public truth , all this was rubbish , a shapeless mass , chaos ; he himself , Javert , the spy of order , incorruptibility in the service of the police , the bull-dog providence of society , vanquished and hurled to earth ; and , erect , at the summit of all that ruin , a man with a green cap on his head and a halo round his brow ; this was the astounding confusion to which he had come ; this was the fearful vision which he bore within his soul . 
Was this to be endured ? 
No . 
A violent state , if ever such existed . 
There were only two ways of escaping from it . 
One was to go resolutely to Jean Valjean , and restore to his cell the convict from the galleys . 
The other ... Javert quitted the parapet , and , with head erect this time , betook himself , with a firm tread , towards the station-house indicated by a lantern at one of the corners of the Place du Chatelet . 
On arriving there , he saw through the window a sergeant of police , and he entered . 
Policemen recognize each other by the very way in which they open the door of a station-house . 
Javert mentioned his name , showed his card to the sergeant , and seated himself at the table of the post on which a candle was burning . 
On a table lay a pen , a leaden inkstand and paper , provided in the event of possible reports and the orders of the night patrols . 
This table , still completed by its straw-seated chair , is an institution ; it exists in all police stations ; it is invariably ornamented with a box-wood saucer filled with sawdust and a wafer box of cardboard filled with red wafers , and it forms the lowest stage of official style . 
It is there that the literature of the State has its beginning . 
Javert took a pen and a sheet of paper , and began to write . 
This is what he wrote : A FEW OBSERVATIONS FOR THE GOOD OF THE SERVICE . 
`` In the first place : I beg Monsieur le Prefet to cast his eyes on this . 
`` Secondly : prisoners , on arriving after examination , take off their shoes and stand barefoot on the flagstones while they are being searched . 
Many of them cough on their return to prison . 
This entails hospital expenses . 
`` Thirdly : the mode of keeping track of a man with relays of police agents from distance to distance , is good , but , on important occasions , it is requisite that at least two agents should never lose sight of each other , so that , in case one agent should , for any cause , grow weak in his service , the other may supervise him and take his place . 
`` Fourthly : it is inexplicable why the special regulation of the prison of the Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair , even by paying for it . 
`` Fifthly : in the Madelonettes there are only two bars to the canteen , so that the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand . 
`` Sixthly : the prisoners called barkers , who summon the other prisoners to the parlor , force the prisoner to pay them two sous to call his name distinctly . 
