They are pale and grave . 
Between 1825 and 1830 three of them went mad . 
AUSTERITIES One is a postulant for two years at least , often for four ; a novice for four . 
It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their order . 
In their cells , they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations , of which they must never speak . 
On the day when a novice makes her profession , she is dressed in her handsomest attire , she is crowned with white roses , her hair is brushed until it shines , and curled . 
Then she prostrates herself ; a great black veil is thrown over her , and the office for the dead is sung . 
Then the nuns separate into two files ; one file passes close to her , saying in plaintive accents , `` Our sister is dead '' ; and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy , `` Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ ! '' 
At the epoch when this story takes place , a boarding-school was attached to the convent -- a boarding-school for young girls of noble and mostly wealthy families , among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen , and an English girl bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot . 
These young girls , reared by these nuns between four walls , grew up with a horror of the world and of the age . 
One of them said to us one day , `` The sight of the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot . '' 
They were dressed in blue , with a white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their breast . 
On certain grand festival days , particularly Saint Martha 's day , they were permitted , as a high favor and a supreme happiness , to dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoit for a whole day . 
In the early days the nuns were in the habit of lending them their black garments . 
This seemed profane , and the prioress forbade it . 
Only the novices were permitted to lend . 
It is remarkable that these performances , tolerated and encouraged , no doubt , in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit , were a genuine happiness and a real recreation for the scholars . 
They simply amused themselves with it . 
It was new ; it gave them a change . 
Candid reasons of childhood , which do not , however , succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one 's hand and standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk . 
The pupils conformed , with the exception of the austerities , to all the practices of the convent . 
There was a certain young woman who entered the world , and who after many years of married life had not succeeded in breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door , `` forever ! '' 
Like the nuns , the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor . 
Their very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them . 
The following illustrates to what a degree severity on that point was carried . 
One day a young girl received a visit from her mother , who was accompanied by a little sister three years of age . 
The young girl wept , for she wished greatly to embrace her sister . 
Impossible . 
She begged that , at least , the child might be permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it . 
This was almost indignantly refused . 
GAYETIES None the less , these young girls filled this grave house with charming souvenirs . 
At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister . 
The recreation hour struck . 
A door swung on its hinges . 
The birds said , `` Good ; here come the children ! '' 
An irruption of youth inundated that garden intersected with a cross like a shroud . 
Radiant faces , white foreheads , innocent eyes , full of merry light , all sorts of auroras , were scattered about amid these shadows . 
After the psalmodies , the bells , the peals , and knells and offices , the sound of these little girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees . 
The hive of joy was opened , and each one brought her honey . 
They played , they called to each other , they formed into groups , they ran about ; pretty little white teeth chattered in the corners ; the veils superintended the laughs from a distance , shades kept watch of the sunbeams , but what mattered it ? 
Still they beamed and laughed . 
Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling brilliancy . 
They looked on , vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of the hives . 
It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house of mourning . 
The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns ; the gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence . 
Thanks to these children , there was , among so many austere hours , one hour of ingenuousness . 
The little ones skipped about ; the elder ones danced . 
In this cloister play was mingled with heaven . 
Nothing is so delightful and so august as all these fresh , expanding young souls . 
