Lastly , he has his own fauna , which he observes attentively in the corners ; the lady-bird , the death 's - head plant-louse , the daddy-long-legs , `` the devil , '' a black insect , which menaces by twisting about its tail armed with two horns . 
He has his fabulous monster , which has scales under its belly , but is not a lizard , which has pustules on its back , but is not a toad , which inhabits the nooks of old lime-kilns and wells that have run dry , which is black , hairy , sticky , which crawls sometimes slowly , sometimes rapidly , which has no cry , but which has a look , and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it ; he calls this monster `` the deaf thing . '' 
The search for these `` deaf things '' among the stones is a joy of formidable nature . 
Another pleasure consists in suddenly prying up a paving-stone , and taking a look at the wood-lice . 
Each region of Paris is celebrated for the interesting treasures which are to be found there . 
There are ear-wigs in the timber-yards of the Ursulines , there are millepeds in the Pantheon , there are tadpoles in the ditches of the Champs-de-Mars . 
As far as sayings are concerned , this child has as many of them as Talleyrand . 
He is no less cynical , but he is more honest . 
He is endowed with a certain indescribable , unexpected joviality ; he upsets the composure of the shopkeeper with his wild laughter . 
He ranges boldly from high comedy to farce . 
A funeral passes by . 
Among those who accompany the dead there is a doctor . 
`` Hey there ! '' 
shouts some street Arab , `` how long has it been customary for doctors to carry home their own work ? '' 
Another is in a crowd . 
A grave man , adorned with spectacles and trinkets , turns round indignantly : `` You good-for-nothing , you have seized my wife 's waist ! '' 
-- `` I , sir ? 
Search me ! '' 
HE IS AGREEABLE In the evening , thanks to a few sous , which he always finds means to procure , the homuncio enters a theatre . 
On crossing that magic threshold , he becomes transfigured ; he was the street Arab , he becomes the titi . 
-LSB- 18 -RSB- Theatres are a sort of ship turned upside down with the keel in the air . 
It is in that keel that the titi huddle together . 
The titi is to the gamin what the moth is to the larva ; the same being endowed with wings and soaring . 
It suffices for him to be there , with his radiance of happiness , with his power of enthusiasm and joy , with his hand-clapping , which resembles a clapping of wings , to confer on that narrow , dark , fetid , sordid , unhealthy , hideous , abominable keel , the name of Paradise . 
-LSB- 18 -RSB- Chicken : slang allusion to the noise made in calling poultry . 
Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary , and you have the gamin . 
The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition . 
His tendency , and we say it with the proper amount of regret , would not constitute classic taste . 
He is not very academic by nature . 
Thus , to give an example , the popularity of Mademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormy children was seasoned with a touch of irony . 
The gamin called her Mademoiselle Muche -- `` hide yourself . '' 
This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights , has rags like a baby and tatters like a philosopher , fishes in the sewer , hunts in the cesspool , extracts mirth from foulness , whips up the squares with his wit , grins and bites , whistles and sings , shouts , and shrieks , tempers Alleluia with Matantur-lurette , chants every rhythm from the De Profundis to the Jack-pudding , finds without seeking , knows what he is ignorant of , is a Spartan to the point of thieving , is mad to wisdom , is lyrical to filth , would crouch down on Olympus , wallows in the dunghill and emerges from it covered with stars . 
The gamin of Paris is Rabelais in this youth . 
He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch-pocket . 
He is not easily astonished , he is still less easily terrified , he makes songs on superstitions , he takes the wind out of exaggerations , he twits mysteries , he thrusts out his tongue at ghosts , he takes the poetry out of stilted things , he introduces caricature into epic extravaganzas . 
It is not that he is prosaic ; far from that ; but he replaces the solemn vision by the farcical phantasmagoria . 
If Adamastor were to appear to him , the street Arab would say : `` Hi there ! 
The bugaboo ! '' 
HE MAY BE OF USE Paris begins with the lounger and ends with the street Arab , two beings of which no other city is capable ; the passive acceptance , which contents itself with gazing , and the inexhaustible initiative ; Prudhomme and Fouillou . 
Paris alone has this in its natural history . 
The whole of the monarchy is contained in the lounger ; the whole of anarchy in the gamin . 
This pale child of the Parisian faubourgs lives and develops , makes connections , `` grows supple '' in suffering , in the presence of social realities and of human things , a thoughtful witness . 
He thinks himself heedless ; and he is not . 
He looks and is on the verge of laughter ; he is on the verge of something else also . 
Whoever you may be , if your name is Prejudice , Abuse , Ignorance , Oppression , Iniquity , Despotism , Injustice , Fanaticism , Tyranny , beware of the gaping gamin . 
The little fellow will grow up . 
Of what clay is he made ? 
Of the first mud that comes to hand . 
A handful of dirt , a breath , and behold Adam . 
It suffices for a God to pass by . 
