Nevertheless , it would be a good thing to know how to make use of them . 
When the nettle is young , the leaf makes an excellent vegetable ; when it is older , it has filaments and fibres like hemp and flax . 
Nettle cloth is as good as linen cloth . 
Chopped up , nettles are good for poultry ; pounded , they are good for horned cattle . 
The seed of the nettle , mixed with fodder , gives gloss to the hair of animals ; the root , mixed with salt , produces a beautiful yellow coloring-matter . 
Moreover , it is an excellent hay , which can be cut twice . 
And what is required for the nettle ? 
A little soil , no care , no culture . 
Only the seed falls as it is ripe , and it is difficult to collect it . 
That is all . 
With the exercise of a little care , the nettle could be made useful ; it is neglected and it becomes hurtful . 
It is exterminated . 
How many men resemble the nettle ! '' 
He added , after a pause : `` Remember this , my friends : there are no such things as bad plants or bad men . 
There are only bad cultivators . '' 
The children loved him because he knew how to make charming little trifles of straw and cocoanuts . 
When he saw the door of a church hung in black , he entered : he sought out funerals as other men seek christenings . 
Widowhood and the grief of others attracted him , because of his great gentleness ; he mingled with the friends clad in mourning , with families dressed in black , with the priests groaning around a coffin . 
He seemed to like to give to his thoughts for text these funereal psalmodies filled with the vision of the other world . 
With his eyes fixed on heaven , he listened with a sort of aspiration towards all the mysteries of the infinite , those sad voices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of death . 
He performed a multitude of good actions , concealing his agency in them as a man conceals himself because of evil actions . 
He penetrated houses privately , at night ; he ascended staircases furtively . 
A poor wretch on returning to his attic would find that his door had been opened , sometimes even forced , during his absence . 
The poor man made a clamor over it : some malefactor had been there ! 
He entered , and the first thing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on some piece of furniture . 
The `` malefactor '' who had been there was Father Madeleine . 
He was affable and sad . 
The people said : `` There is a rich man who has not a haughty air . 
There is a happy man who has not a contented air . '' 
Some people maintained that he was a mysterious person , and that no one ever entered his chamber , which was a regular anchorite 's cell , furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones and skulls of dead men ! 
This was much talked of , so that one of the elegant and malicious young women of M. sur M. came to him one day , and asked : `` Monsieur le Maire , pray show us your chamber . 
It is said to be a grotto . '' 
He smiled , and introduced them instantly into this `` grotto . '' 
They were well punished for their curiosity . 
The room was very simply furnished in mahogany , which was rather ugly , like all furniture of that sort , and hung with paper worth twelve sous . 
They could see nothing remarkable about it , except two candlesticks of antique pattern which stood on the chimney-piece and appeared to be silver , `` for they were hall-marked , '' an observation full of the type of wit of petty towns . 
Nevertheless , people continued to say that no one ever got into the room , and that it was a hermit 's cave , a mysterious retreat , a hole , a tomb . 
It was also whispered about that he had `` immense '' sums deposited with Laffitte , with this peculiar feature , that they were always at his immediate disposal , so that , it was added , M. Madeleine could make his appearance at Laffitte 's any morning , sign a receipt , and carry off his two or three millions in ten minutes . 
In reality , `` these two or three millions '' were reducible , as we have said , to six hundred and thirty or forty thousand francs . 
M. MADELEINE IN MOURNING At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M. Myriel , Bishop of D -- , surnamed `` Monseigneur Bienvenu , '' who had died in the odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two . 
The Bishop of D -- -- to supply here a detail which the papers omitted -- had been blind for many years before his death , and content to be blind , as his sister was beside him . 
Let us remark by the way , that to be blind and to be loved , is , in fact , one of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon this earth , where nothing is complete . 
To have continually at one 's side a woman , a daughter , a sister , a charming being , who is there because you need her and because she can not do without you ; to know that we are indispensable to a person who is necessary to us ; to be able to incessantly measure one 's affection by the amount of her presence which she bestows on us , and to say to ourselves , `` Since she consecrates the whole of her time to me , it is because I possess the whole of her heart '' ; to behold her thought in lieu of her face ; to be able to verify the fidelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world ; to regard the rustle of a gown as the sound of wings ; to hear her come and go , retire , speak , return , sing , and to think that one is the centre of these steps , of this speech ; to manifest at each instant one 's personal attraction ; to feel one 's self all the more powerful because of one 's infirmity ; to become in one 's obscurity , and through one 's obscurity , the star around which this angel gravitates , -- few felicities equal this . 
The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction that one is loved ; loved for one 's own sake -- let us say rather , loved in spite of one 's self ; this conviction the blind man possesses . 
To be served in distress is to be caressed . 
Does he lack anything ? 
No . 
One does not lose the sight when one has love . 
And what love ! 
A love wholly constituted of virtue ! 
