Or chance decreed that Marius should traverse Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau between Enjolras and Courfeyrac . 
Courfeyrac took his arm : -- `` Pay attention . 
This is the Rue Platriere , now called Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau , on account of a singular household which lived in it sixty years ago . 
This consisted of Jean-Jacques and Therese . 
From time to time , little beings were born there . 
Therese gave birth to them , Jean-Jacques represented them as foundlings . '' 
And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly : -- `` Silence in the presence of Jean-Jacques ! 
I admire that man . 
He denied his own children , that may be ; but he adopted the people . '' 
Not one of these young men articulated the word : The Emperor . 
Jean Prouvaire alone sometimes said Napoleon ; all the others said `` Bonaparte . '' 
Enjolras pronounced it `` Buonaparte . '' 
Marius was vaguely surprised . 
Initium sapientiae . 
THE BACK ROOM OF THE CAFE MUSAIN One of the conversations among the young men , at which Marius was present and in which he sometimes joined , was a veritable shock to his mind . 
This took place in the back room of the Cafe Musain . 
Nearly all the Friends of the A B C had convened that evening . 
The argand lamp was solemnly lighted . 
They talked of one thing and another , without passion and with noise . 
With the exception of Enjolras and Marius , who held their peace , all were haranguing rather at hap-hazard . 
Conversations between comrades sometimes are subject to these peaceable tumults . 
It was a game and an uproar as much as a conversation . 
They tossed words to each other and caught them up in turn . 
They were chattering in all quarters . 
No woman was admitted to this back room , except Louison , the dish-washer of the cafe , who passed through it from time to time , to go to her washing in the `` lavatory . '' 
Grantaire , thoroughly drunk , was deafening the corner of which he had taken possession , reasoning and contradicting at the top of his lungs , and shouting : -- `` I am thirsty . 
Mortals , I am dreaming : that the tun of Heidelberg has an attack of apoplexy , and that I am one of the dozen leeches which will be applied to it . 
I want a drink . 
I desire to forget life . 
Life is a hideous invention of I know not whom . 
It lasts no time at all , and is worth nothing . 
One breaks one 's neck in living . 
Life is a theatre set in which there are but few practicable entrances . 
Happiness is an antique reliquary painted on one side only . 
Ecclesiastes says : ` All is vanity . ' 
I agree with that good man , who never existed , perhaps . 
Zero not wishing to go stark naked , clothed himself in vanity . 
O vanity ! 
The patching up of everything with big words ! 
a kitchen is a laboratory , a dancer is a professor , an acrobat is a gymnast , a boxer is a pugilist , an apothecary is a chemist , a wigmaker is an artist , a hodman is an architect , a jockey is a sportsman , a wood-louse is a pterigybranche . 
Vanity has a right and a wrong side ; the right side is stupid , it is the negro with his glass beads ; the wrong side is foolish , it is the philosopher with his rags . 
I weep over the one and I laugh over the other . 
What are called honors and dignities , and even dignity and honor , are generally of pinchbeck . 
Kings make playthings of human pride . 
Caligula made a horse a consul ; Charles II . 
made a knight of a sirloin . 
Wrap yourself up now , then , between Consul Incitatus and Baronet Roastbeef . 
As for the intrinsic value of people , it is no longer respectable in the least . 
Listen to the panegyric which neighbor makes of neighbor . 
White on white is ferocious ; if the lily could speak , what a setting down it would give the dove ! 
