He does not know you , it will be easy . 
Since a lass there is , try to get a sight of her . 
You must write us the tale . 
It will amuse his grandfather . '' 
Theodule had no excessive taste for this sort of spying ; but he was much touched by the ten louis , and he thought he saw a chance for a possible sequel . 
He accepted the commission and said : `` As you please , aunt . '' 
And he added in an aside , to himself : `` Here I am a duenna . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand embraced him . 
`` You are not the man to play such pranks , Theodule . 
You obey discipline , you are the slave of orders , you are a man of scruples and duty , and you would not quit your family to go and see a creature . '' 
The lancer made the pleased grimace of Cartouche when praised for his probity . 
Marius , on the evening following this dialogue , mounted the diligence without suspecting that he was watched . 
As for the watcher , the first thing he did was to fall asleep . 
His slumber was complete and conscientious . 
Argus snored all night long . 
At daybreak , the conductor of the diligence shouted : `` Vernon ! 
relay of Vernon ! 
Travellers for Vernon ! '' 
And Lieutenant Theodule woke . 
`` Good , '' he growled , still half asleep , `` this is where I get out . '' 
Then , as his memory cleared by degrees , the effect of waking , he recalled his aunt , the ten louis , and the account which he had undertaken to render of the deeds and proceedings of Marius . 
This set him to laughing . 
`` Perhaps he is no longer in the coach , '' he thought , as he rebuttoned the waistcoat of his undress uniform . 
`` He may have stopped at Poissy ; he may have stopped at Triel ; if he did not get out at Meulan , he may have got out at Mantes , unless he got out at Rolleboise , or if he did not go on as far as Pacy , with the choice of turning to the left at Evreus , or to the right at Laroche-Guyon . 
Run after him , aunty . 
What the devil am I to write to that good old soul ? '' 
At that moment a pair of black trousers descending from the imperial , made its appearance at the window of the coupe . 
`` Can that be Marius ? '' 
said the lieutenant . 
It was Marius . 
A little peasant girl , all entangled with the horses and the postilions at the end of the vehicle , was offering flowers to the travellers . 
`` Give your ladies flowers ! '' 
she cried . 
Marius approached her and purchased the finest flowers in her flat basket . 
`` Come now , '' said Theodule , leaping down from the coupe , `` this piques my curiosity . 
Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to ? 
She must be a splendidly handsome woman for so fine a bouquet . 
I want to see her . '' 
And no longer in pursuance of orders , but from personal curiosity , like dogs who hunt on their own account , he set out to follow Marius . 
Marius paid no attention to Theodule . 
Elegant women descended from the diligence ; he did not glance at them . 
He seemed to see nothing around him . 
`` He is pretty deeply in love ! '' 
thought Theodule . 
Marius directed his steps towards the church . 
`` Capital , '' said Theodule to himself . 
`` Rendezvous seasoned with a bit of mass are the best sort . 
Nothing is so exquisite as an ogle which passes over the good God 's head . '' 
On arriving at the church , Marius did not enter it , but skirted the apse . 
He disappeared behind one of the angles of the apse . 
