This man was dressed in a great-coat which was perfectly new and too large for him , and in a frightful pair of trousers all hanging in rags and black with mud . 
Bossuet burst out laughing . 
`` Who is that man ? '' 
`` He ? '' 
retorted Courfeyrac , `` he 's a poet . 
Poets are very fond of wearing the trousers of dealers in rabbit skins and the overcoats of peers of France . '' 
`` Let 's see where Marius will go , '' said Bossuet ; `` let 's see where the man is going , let 's follow them , hey ? '' 
`` Bossuet ! '' 
exclaimed Courfeyrac , `` eagle of Meaux ! 
You are a prodigious brute . 
Follow a man who is following another man , indeed ! '' 
They retraced their steps . 
Marius had , in fact , seen Jondrette passing along the Rue Mouffetard , and was spying on his proceedings . 
Jondrette walked straight ahead , without a suspicion that he was already held by a glance . 
He quitted the Rue Mouffetard , and Marius saw him enter one of the most terrible hovels in the Rue Gracieuse ; he remained there about a quarter of an hour , then returned to the Rue Mouffetard . 
He halted at an ironmonger 's shop , which then stood at the corner of the Rue Pierre-Lombard , and a few minutes later Marius saw him emerge from the shop , holding in his hand a huge cold chisel with a white wood handle , which he concealed beneath his great-coat . 
At the top of the Rue Petit-Gentilly he turned to the left and proceeded rapidly to the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
The day was declining ; the snow , which had ceased for a moment , had just begun again . 
Marius posted himself on the watch at the very corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier , which was deserted , as usual , and did not follow Jondrette into it . 
It was lucky that he did so , for , on arriving in the vicinity of the wall where Marius had heard the long-haired man and the bearded man conversing , Jondrette turned round , made sure that no one was following him , did not see him , then sprang across the wall and disappeared . 
The waste land bordered by this wall communicated with the back yard of an ex-livery stable-keeper of bad repute , who had failed and who still kept a few old single-seated berlins under his sheds . 
Marius thought that it would be wise to profit by Jondrette 's absence to return home ; moreover , it was growing late ; every evening , Ma'am Bougon when she set out for her dish-washing in town , had a habit of locking the door , which was always closed at dusk . 
Marius had given his key to the inspector of police ; it was important , therefore , that he should make haste . 
Evening had arrived , night had almost closed in ; on the horizon and in the immensity of space , there remained but one spot illuminated by the sun , and that was the moon . 
It was rising in a ruddy glow behind the low dome of Salpetriere . 
Marius returned to No. 50-52 with great strides . 
The door was still open when he arrived . 
He mounted the stairs on tip-toe and glided along the wall of the corridor to his chamber . 
This corridor , as the reader will remember , was bordered on both sides by attics , all of which were , for the moment , empty and to let . 
Ma'am Bougon was in the habit of leaving all the doors open . 
As he passed one of these attics , Marius thought he perceived in the uninhabited cell the motionless heads of four men , vaguely lighted up by a remnant of daylight , falling through a dormer window , Marius made no attempt to see , not wishing to be seen himself . 
He succeeded in reaching his chamber without being seen and without making any noise . 
It was high time . 
A moment later he heard Ma'am Bougon take her departure , locking the door of the house behind her . 
IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE WORDS TO AN ENGLISH AIR WHICH WAS IN FASHION IN 1832 Marius seated himself on his bed . 
It might have been half-past five o'clock . 
Only half an hour separated him from what was about to happen . 
He heard the beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of a watch in the dark . 
He thought of the double march which was going on at that moment in the dark , -- crime advancing on one side , justice coming up on the other . 
He was not afraid , but he could not think without a shudder of what was about to take place . 
As is the case with all those who are suddenly assailed by an unforeseen adventure , the entire day produced upon him the effect of a dream , and in order to persuade himself that he was not the prey of a nightmare , he had to feel the cold barrels of the steel pistols in his trousers pockets . 
It was no longer snowing ; the moon disengaged itself more and more clearly from the mist , and its light , mingled with the white reflection of the snow which had fallen , communicated to the chamber a sort of twilight aspect . 
There was a light in the Jondrette den . 
Marius saw the hole in the wall shining with a reddish glow which seemed bloody to him . 
It was true that the light could not be produced by a candle . 
However , there was not a sound in the Jondrette quarters , not a soul was moving there , not a soul speaking , not a breath ; the silence was glacial and profound , and had it not been for that light , he might have thought himself next door to a sepulchre . 
Marius softly removed his boots and pushed them under his bed . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
Marius heard the lower door turn on its hinges ; a heavy step mounted the staircase , and hastened along the corridor ; the latch of the hovel was noisily lifted ; it was Jondrette returning . 
Instantly , several voices arose . 
