Then he entered through a gap in the fence into the elephant 's enclosure and helped the young ones to clamber through the breach . 
The two children , somewhat frightened , followed Gavroche without uttering a word , and confided themselves to this little Providence in rags which had given them bread and had promised them a shelter . 
There , extended along the fence , lay a ladder which by day served the laborers in the neighboring timber-yard . 
Gavroche raised it with remarkable vigor , and placed it against one of the elephant 's forelegs . 
Near the point where the ladder ended , a sort of black hole in the belly of the colossus could be distinguished . 
Gavroche pointed out the ladder and the hole to his guests , and said to them : -- `` Climb up and go in . '' 
The two little boys exchanged terrified glances . 
`` You 're afraid , brats ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche . 
And he added : -- `` You shall see ! '' 
He clasped the rough leg of the elephant , and in a twinkling , without deigning to make use of the ladder , he had reached the aperture . 
He entered it as an adder slips through a crevice , and disappeared within , and an instant later , the two children saw his head , which looked pale , appear vaguely , on the edge of the shadowy hole , like a wan and whitish spectre . 
`` Well ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` climb up , young ` uns ! 
You 'll see how snug it is here ! 
Come up , you ! '' 
he said to the elder , `` I 'll lend you a hand . '' 
The little fellows nudged each other , the gamin frightened and inspired them with confidence at one and the same time , and then , it was raining very hard . 
The elder one undertook the risk . 
The younger , on seeing his brother climbing up , and himself left alone between the paws of this huge beast , felt greatly inclined to cry , but he did not dare . 
The elder lad climbed , with uncertain steps , up the rungs of the ladder ; Gavroche , in the meanwhile , encouraging him with exclamations like a fencing-master to his pupils , or a muleteer to his mules . 
`` Do n't be afraid ! 
-- That 's it ! 
-- Come on ! 
-- Put your feet there ! 
-- Give us your hand here ! 
-- Boldly ! '' 
And when the child was within reach , he seized him suddenly and vigorously by the arm , and pulled him towards him . 
`` Nabbed ! '' 
said he . 
The brat had passed through the crack . 
`` Now , '' said Gavroche , `` wait for me . 
Be so good as to take a seat , Monsieur . '' 
And making his way out of the hole as he had entered it , he slipped down the elephant 's leg with the agility of a monkey , landed on his feet in the grass , grasped the child of five round the body , and planted him fairly in the middle of the ladder , then he began to climb up behind him , shouting to the elder : -- `` I 'm going to boost him , do you tug . '' 
And in another instant , the small lad was pushed , dragged , pulled , thrust , stuffed into the hole , before he had time to recover himself , and Gavroche , entering behind him , and repulsing the ladder with a kick which sent it flat on the grass , began to clap his hands and to cry : -- `` Here we are ! 
Long live General Lafayette ! '' 
This explosion over , he added : -- `` Now , young ` uns , you are in my house . '' 
Gavroche was at home , in fact . 
Oh , unforeseen utility of the useless ! 
Charity of great things ! 
Goodness of giants ! 
This huge monument , which had embodied an idea of the Emperor 's , had become the box of a street urchin . 
The brat had been accepted and sheltered by the colossus . 
The bourgeois decked out in their Sunday finery who passed the elephant of the Bastille , were fond of saying as they scanned it disdainfully with their prominent eyes : `` What 's the good of that ? '' 
It served to save from the cold , the frost , the hail , and rain , to shelter from the winds of winter , to preserve from slumber in the mud which produces fever , and from slumber in the snow which produces death , a little being who had no father , no mother , no bread , no clothes , no refuge . 
It served to receive the innocent whom society repulsed . 
It served to diminish public crime . 
It was a lair open to one against whom all doors were shut . 
It seemed as though the miserable old mastodon , invaded by vermin and oblivion , covered with warts , with mould , and ulcers , tottering , worm-eaten , abandoned , condemned , a sort of mendicant colossus , asking alms in vain with a benevolent look in the midst of the cross-roads , had taken pity on that other mendicant , the poor pygmy , who roamed without shoes to his feet , without a roof over his head , blowing on his fingers , clad in rags , fed on rejected scraps . 
That was what the elephant of the Bastille was good for . 
