This point was never explained . 
He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber . 
On arriving at the top , he left his candle on the top step of his stairs , opened his door with very little noise , went and closed his window and his shutters by feeling , then returned for his candle and re-entered his room . 
It was a useful precaution ; it will be recollected that his window could be seen from the street . 
He cast a glance about him , at his table , at his chair , at his bed which had not been disturbed for three days . 
No trace of the disorder of the night before last remained . 
The portress had `` done up '' his room ; only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the two iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had been blackened by the fire . 
He took a sheet of paper , on which he wrote : `` These are the two tips of my iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais , which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes , '' and he arranged this piece of paper , the bits of iron , and the coin in such a way that they were the first things to be seen on entering the room . 
From a cupboard he pulled out one of his old shirts , which he tore in pieces . 
In the strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks . 
He betrayed neither haste nor agitation ; and while he was wrapping up the Bishop 's candlesticks , he nibbled at a piece of black bread . 
It was probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight . 
This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room when the authorities made an examination later on . 
There came two taps at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said he . 
It was Sister Simplice . 
She was pale ; her eyes were red ; the candle which she carried trembled in her hand . 
The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is , that however polished or cool we may be , they wring human nature from our very bowels , and force it to reappear on the surface . 
The emotions of that day had turned the nun into a woman once more . 
She had wept , and she was trembling . 
Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper , which he handed to the nun , saying , `` Sister , you will give this to Monsieur le Cure . '' 
The paper was not folded . 
She cast a glance upon it . 
`` You can read it , '' said he . 
She read : -- `` I beg Monsieur le Cure to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me . 
He will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial , and of the funeral of the woman who died yesterday . 
The rest is for the poor . '' 
The sister tried to speak , but she only managed to stammer a few inarticulate sounds . 
She succeeded in saying , however : -- `` Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor , unhappy woman ? '' 
`` No , '' said he ; `` I am pursued ; it would only end in their arresting me in that room , and that would disturb her . '' 
He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the staircase . 
They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps , and the old portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones : -- `` My good sir , I swear to you by the good God , that not a soul has entered this house all day , nor all the evening , and that I have not even left the door . '' 
A man responded : -- `` But there is a light in that room , nevertheless . '' 
They recognized Javert 's voice . 
The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner of the wall on the right . 
Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed himself in this angle . 
Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table . 
The door opened . 
Javert entered . 
The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress were audible in the corridor . 
The nun did not raise her eyes . 
She was praying . 
The candle was on the chimney-piece , and gave but very little light . 
Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement . 
It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert , his element , the very air he breathed , was veneration for all authority . 
This was impregnable , and admitted of neither objection nor restriction . 
In his eyes , of course , the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all ; he was religious , superficial and correct on this point as on all others . 
In his eyes , a priest was a mind , who never makes a mistake ; a nun was a creature who never sins ; they were souls walled in from this world , with a single door which never opened except to allow the truth to pass through . 
On perceiving the sister , his first movement was to retire . 
But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him imperiously in the opposite direction . 
