No one knew him . 
He was evidently only a chance passer-by . 
Whence came he ? 
From the south ; from the seashore , perhaps , for he made his entrance into D -- by the same street which , seven months previously , had witnessed the passage of the Emperor Napoleon on his way from Cannes to Paris . 
This man must have been walking all day . 
He seemed very much fatigued . 
Some women of the ancient market town which is situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of the boulevard Gassendi , and drink at the fountain which stands at the end of the promenade . 
He must have been very thirsty : for the children who followed him saw him stop again for a drink , two hundred paces further on , at the fountain in the market-place . 
On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert , he turned to the left , and directed his steps toward the town-hall . 
He entered , then came out a quarter of an hour later . 
A gendarme was seated near the door , on the stone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March to read to the frightened throng of the inhabitants of D -- the proclamation of the Gulf Juan . 
The man pulled off his cap and humbly saluted the gendarme . 
The gendarme , without replying to his salute , stared attentively at him , followed him for a while with his eyes , and then entered the town-hall . 
There then existed at D -- a fine inn at the sign of the Cross of Colbas . 
This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre , a man of consideration in the town on account of his relationship to another Labarre , who kept the inn of the Three Dauphins in Grenoble , and had served in the Guides . 
At the time of the Emperor 's landing , many rumors had circulated throughout the country with regard to this inn of the Three Dauphins . 
It was said that General Bertrand , disguised as a carter , had made frequent trips thither in the month of January , and that he had distributed crosses of honor to the soldiers and handfuls of gold to the citizens . 
The truth is , that when the Emperor entered Grenoble he had refused to install himself at the hotel of the prefecture ; he had thanked the mayor , saying , `` I am going to the house of a brave man of my acquaintance '' ; and he had betaken himself to the Three Dauphins . 
This glory of the Labarre of the Three Dauphins was reflected upon the Labarre of the Cross of Colbas , at a distance of five and twenty leagues . 
It was said of him in the town , `` That is the cousin of the man of Grenoble . '' 
The man bent his steps towards this inn , which was the best in the country-side . 
He entered the kitchen , which opened on a level with the street . 
All the stoves were lighted ; a huge fire blazed gayly in the fireplace . 
The host , who was also the chief cook , was going from one stew-pan to another , very busily superintending an excellent dinner designed for the wagoners , whose loud talking , conversation , and laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment . 
Any one who has travelled knows that there is no one who indulges in better cheer than wagoners . 
A fat marmot , flanked by white partridges and heather-cocks , was turning on a long spit before the fire ; on the stove , two huge carps from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking . 
The host , hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter , said , without raising his eyes from his stoves : -- `` What do you wish , sir ? '' 
`` Food and lodging , '' said the man . 
`` Nothing easier , '' replied the host . 
At that moment he turned his head , took in the traveller 's appearance with a single glance , and added , `` By paying for it . '' 
The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse , and answered , `` I have money . '' 
`` In that case , we are at your service , '' said the host . 
The man put his purse back in his pocket , removed his knapsack from his back , put it on the ground near the door , retained his stick in his hand , and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire . 
D -- is in the mountains . 
The evenings are cold there in October . 
But as the host went back and forth , he scrutinized the traveller . 
`` Will dinner be ready soon ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Immediately , '' replied the landlord . 
While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire , with his back turned , the worthy host , Jacquin Labarre , drew a pencil from his pocket , then tore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying on a small table near the window . 
On the white margin he wrote a line or two , folded it without sealing , and then intrusted this scrap of paper to a child who seemed to serve him in the capacity both of scullion and lackey . 
The landlord whispered a word in the scullion 's ear , and the child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall . 
The traveller saw nothing of all this . 
Once more he inquired , `` Will dinner be ready soon ? '' 
`` Immediately , '' responded the host . 
The child returned . 
He brought back the paper . 
The host unfolded it eagerly , like a person who is expecting a reply . 
He seemed to read it attentively , then tossed his head , and remained thoughtful for a moment . 
Then he took a step in the direction of the traveller , who appeared to be immersed in reflections which were not very serene . 
