There are still human beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of the paradox merrily . 
This , ladies , which you are drinking with so tranquil an air is Madeira wine , you must know , from the vineyard of Coural das Freiras , which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms above the level of the sea . 
Attention while you drink ! 
three hundred and seventeen fathoms ! 
and Monsieur Bombarda , the magnificent eating-house keeper , gives you those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for four francs and fifty centimes . '' 
Again Fameuil interrupted him : -- `` Tholomyes , your opinions fix the law . 
Who is your favorite author ? '' 
`` Ber -- '' `` Quin ? '' 
`` No ; Choux . '' 
And Tholomyes continued : -- `` Honor to Bombarda ! 
He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could but get me an Indian dancing-girl , and Thygelion of Chaeronea if he could bring me a Greek courtesan ; for , oh , ladies ! 
there were Bombardas in Greece and in Egypt . 
Apuleius tells us of them . 
Alas ! 
always the same , and nothing new ; nothing more unpublished by the creator in creation ! 
Nil sub sole novum , says Solomon ; amor omnibus idem , says Virgil ; and Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint-Cloud , as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos . 
One last word . 
Do you know what Aspasia was , ladies ? 
Although she lived at an epoch when women had , as yet , no soul , she was a soul ; a soul of a rosy and purple hue , more ardent hued than fire , fresher than the dawn . 
Aspasia was a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met ; she was the goddess prostitute ; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut . 
Aspasia was created in case a mistress should be needed for Prometheus . '' 
Tholomyes , once started , would have found some difficulty in stopping , had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment . 
The shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt . 
It was a Beauceron mare , old and thin , and one fit for the knacker , which was dragging a very heavy cart . 
On arriving in front of Bombarda 's , the worn-out , exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further . 
This incident attracted a crowd . 
Hardly had the cursing and indignant carter had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word , Matin -LRB- the jade -RRB- , backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip , when the jade fell , never to rise again . 
On hearing the hubbub made by the passersby , Tholomyes ' merry auditors turned their heads , and Tholomyes took advantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with this melancholy strophe : -- `` Elle etait de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses -LSB- 3 -RSB- Ont le meme destin ; Et , rosse , elle a vecu ce que vivant les rosses , L'espace d'un matin ! '' 
-LSB- 3 -RSB- She belonged to that circle where cuckoos and carriages share the same fate ; and a jade herself , she lived , as jades live , for the space of a morning -LRB- or jade -RRB- . 
`` Poor horse ! '' 
sighed Fantine . 
And Dahlia exclaimed : -- `` There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses . 
How can one be such a pitiful fool as that ! '' 
At that moment Favourite , folding her arms and throwing her head back , looked resolutely at Tholomyes and said : -- `` Come , now ! 
the surprise ? '' 
`` Exactly . 
The moment has arrived , '' replied Tholomyes . 
`` Gentlemen , the hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck . 
Wait for us a moment , ladies . '' 
`` It begins with a kiss , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` On the brow , '' added Tholomyes . 
Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress 's brow ; then all four filed out through the door , with their fingers on their lips . 
Favourite clapped her hands on their departure . 
`` It is beginning to be amusing already , '' said she . 
`` Do n't be too long , '' murmured Fantine ; `` we are waiting for you . '' 
A MERRY END TO MIRTH When the young girls were left alone , they leaned two by two on the window-sills , chatting , craning out their heads , and talking from one window to the other . 
They saw the young men emerge from the Cafe Bombarda arm in arm . 
The latter turned round , made signs to them , smiled , and disappeared in that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the Champs-Elysees . 
`` Do n't be long ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
