Before Father Mabeuf , who was easily terrified , and who was , as we have said , quick to take alarm , was able to reply by a single syllable , this being , whose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness , had unhooked the chain , plunged in and withdrawn the bucket , and filled the watering-pot , and the goodman beheld this apparition , which had bare feet and a tattered petticoat , running about among the flower-beds distributing life around her . 
The sound of the watering-pot on the leaves filled Father Mabeuf 's soul with ecstasy . 
It seemed to him that the rhododendron was happy now . 
The first bucketful emptied , the girl drew a second , then a third . 
She watered the whole garden . 
There was something about her , as she thus ran about among paths , where her outline appeared perfectly black , waving her angular arms , and with her fichu all in rags , that resembled a bat . 
When she had finished , Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in his eyes , and laid his hand on her brow . 
`` God will bless you , '' said he , `` you are an angel since you take care of the flowers . '' 
`` No , '' she replied . 
`` I am the devil , but that 's all the same to me . '' 
The old man exclaimed , without either waiting for or hearing her response : -- `` What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor , and that I can do nothing for you ! '' 
`` You can do something , '' said she . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Tell me where M. Marius lives . '' 
The old man did not understand . 
`` What Monsieur Marius ? '' 
He raised his glassy eyes and seemed to be seeking something that had vanished . 
`` A young man who used to come here . '' 
In the meantime , M. Mabeuf had searched his memory . 
`` Ah ! 
yes -- '' he exclaimed . 
`` I know what you mean . 
Wait ! 
Monsieur Marius -- the Baron Marius Pontmercy , parbleu ! 
He lives , -- or rather , he no longer lives , -- ah well , I do n't know . '' 
As he spoke , he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron , and he continued : -- `` Hold , I know now . 
He very often passes along the boulevard , and goes in the direction of the Glaciere , Rue Croulebarbe . 
The meadow of the Lark . 
Go there . 
It is not hard to meet him . '' 
When M. Mabeuf straightened himself up , there was no longer any one there ; the girl had disappeared . 
He was decidedly terrified . 
`` Really , '' he thought , `` if my garden had not been watered , I should think that she was a spirit . '' 
An hour later , when he was in bed , it came back to him , and as he fell asleep , at that confused moment when thought , like that fabulous bird which changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea , little by little assumes the form of a dream in order to traverse slumber , he said to himself in a bewildered way : -- `` In sooth , that greatly resembles what Rubaudiere narrates of the goblins . 
Could it have been a goblin ? '' 
AN APPARITION TO MARIUS Some days after this visit of a `` spirit '' to Farmer Mabeuf , one morning , -- it was on a Monday , the day when Marius borrowed the hundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thenardier -- Marius had put this coin in his pocket , and before carrying it to the clerk 's office , he had gone `` to take a little stroll , '' in the hope that this would make him work on his return . 
It was always thus , however . 
As soon as he rose , he seated himself before a book and a sheet of paper in order to scribble some translation ; his task at that epoch consisted in turning into French a celebrated quarrel between Germans , the Gans and Savigny controversy ; he took Savigny , he took Gans , read four lines , tried to write one , could not , saw a star between him and his paper , and rose from his chair , saying : `` I shall go out . 
That will put me in spirits . '' 
And off he went to the Lark 's meadow . 
There he beheld more than ever the star , and less than ever Savigny and Gans . 
He returned home , tried to take up his work again , and did not succeed ; there was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads which were broken in his brain ; then he said to himself : `` I will not go out to-morrow . 
It prevents my working . '' 
And he went out every day . 
He lived in the Lark 's meadow more than in Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
That was his real address : Boulevard de la Sante , at the seventh tree from the Rue Croulebarbe . 
That morning he had quitted the seventh tree and had seated himself on the parapet of the River des Gobelins . 
A cheerful sunlight penetrated the freshly unfolded and luminous leaves . 
He was dreaming of `` Her . '' 
And his meditation turning to a reproach , fell back upon himself ; he reflected dolefully on his idleness , his paralysis of soul , which was gaining on him , and of that night which was growing more dense every moment before him , to such a point that he no longer even saw the sun . 
