Had he not another and a grand object , which was the true one -- to save , not his person , but his soul ; to become honest and good once more ; to be a just man ? 
Was it not that above all , that alone , which he had always desired , which the Bishop had enjoined upon him -- to shut the door on his past ? 
But he was not shutting it ! 
great God ! 
he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action ! 
He was becoming a thief once more , and the most odious of thieves ! 
He was robbing another of his existence , his life , his peace , his place in the sunshine . 
He was becoming an assassin . 
He was murdering , morally murdering , a wretched man . 
He was inflicting on him that frightful living death , that death beneath the open sky , which is called the galleys . 
On the other hand , to surrender himself to save that man , struck down with so melancholy an error , to resume his own name , to become once more , out of duty , the convict Jean Valjean , that was , in truth , to achieve his resurrection , and to close forever that hell whence he had just emerged ; to fall back there in appearance was to escape from it in reality . 
This must be done ! 
He had done nothing if he did not do all this ; his whole life was useless ; all his penitence was wasted . 
There was no longer any need of saying , `` What is the use ? '' 
He felt that the Bishop was there , that the Bishop was present all the more because he was dead , that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at him , that henceforth Mayor Madeleine , with all his virtues , would be abominable to him , and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure and admirable in his sight ; that men beheld his mask , but that the Bishop saw his face ; that men saw his life , but that the Bishop beheld his conscience . 
So he must go to Arras , deliver the false Jean Valjean , and denounce the real one . 
Alas ! 
that was the greatest of sacrifices , the most poignant of victories , the last step to take ; but it must be done . 
Sad fate ! 
he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of God when he returned to infamy in the eyes of men . 
`` Well , said he , `` let us decide upon this ; let us do our duty ; let us save this man . '' 
He uttered these words aloud , without perceiving that he was speaking aloud . 
He took his books , verified them , and put them in order . 
He flung in the fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed tradesmen . 
He wrote and sealed a letter , and on the envelope it might have been read , had there been any one in his chamber at the moment , To Monsieur Laffitte , Banker , Rue d'Artois , Paris . 
He drew from his secretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and the passport of which he had made use that same year when he went to the elections . 
Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts , into which there entered such grave thought , would have had no suspicion of what was going on within him . 
Only occasionally did his lips move ; at other times he raised his head and fixed his gaze upon some point of the wall , as though there existed at that point something which he wished to elucidate or interrogate . 
When he had finished the letter to M. Laffitte , he put it into his pocket , together with the pocket-book , and began his walk once more . 
His revery had not swerved from its course . 
He continued to see his duty clearly , written in luminous letters , which flamed before his eyes and changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance : -- `` Go ! 
Tell your name ! 
Denounce yourself ! '' 
In the same way he beheld , as though they had passed before him in visible forms , the two ideas which had , up to that time , formed the double rule of his soul , -- the concealment of his name , the sanctification of his life . 
For the first time they appeared to him as absolutely distinct , and he perceived the distance which separated them . 
He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was , necessarily , good , while the other might become bad ; that the first was self-devotion , and that the other was personality ; that the one said , my neighbor , and that the other said , myself ; that one emanated from the light , and the other from darkness . 
They were antagonistic . 
He saw them in conflict . 
In proportion as he meditated , they grew before the eyes of his spirit . 
They had now attained colossal statures , and it seemed to him that he beheld within himself , in that infinity of which we were recently speaking , in the midst of the darkness and the lights , a goddess and a giant contending . 
He was filled with terror ; but it seemed to him that the good thought was getting the upper hand . 
He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of his conscience and of his destiny ; that the Bishop had marked the first phase of his new life , and that Champmathieu marked the second . 
After the grand crisis , the grand test . 
But the fever , allayed for an instant , gradually resumed possession of him . 
A thousand thoughts traversed his mind , but they continued to fortify him in his resolution . 
One moment he said to himself that he was , perhaps , taking the matter too keenly ; that , after all , this Champmathieu was not interesting , and that he had actually been guilty of theft . 
He answered himself : `` If this man has , indeed , stolen a few apples , that means a month in prison . 
It is a long way from that to the galleys . 
And who knows ? 
Did he steal ? 
