`` Well , my master ! 
If you had not the device which belongs to your sun , I would recommend you one which M. Conrart might translate into eclectic Latin , ` Calm with the lowly ; stormy with the strong . ' '' 
The king smiled , and passed into the next apartment , after having said to D'Artagnan , `` I give you the leave of absence you must want to put the affairs of your friend , the late M. du Vallon , in order . '' 
: Porthos 's Will . 
At Pierrefonds everything was in mourning . 
The courts were deserted - the stables closed - the parterres neglected . 
In the basins , the fountains , formerly so jubilantly fresh and noisy , had stopped of themselves . 
Along the roads around the chateau came a few grave personages mounted on mules or country nags . 
These were rural neighbors , cures and bailiffs of adjacent estates . 
All these people entered the chateau silently , handed their horses to a melancholy-looking groom , and directed their steps , conducted by a huntsman in black , to the great dining-room , where Mousqueton received them at the door . 
Mousqueton had become so thin in two days that his clothes moved upon him like an ill - fitting scabbard in which the sword-blade dances at each motion . 
His face , composed of red and white , like that of the Madonna of Vandyke , was furrowed by two silver rivulets which had dug their beds in his cheeks , as full formerly as they had become flabby since his grief began . 
At each fresh arrival , Mousqueton found fresh tears , and it was pitiful to see him press his throat with his fat hand to keep from bursting into sobs and lamentations . 
All these visits were for the purpose of hearing the reading of Porthos 's will , announced for that day , and at which all the covetous friends of the dead man were anxious to be present , as he had left no relations behind him . 
The visitors took their places as they arrived , and the great room had just been closed when the clock struck twelve , the hour fixed for the reading of the important document . 
Porthos 's procureur - and that was naturally the successor of Master Coquenard - commenced by slowly unfolding the vast parchment upon which the powerful hand of Porthos had traced his sovereign will . 
The seal broken - the spectacles put on - the preliminary cough having sounded - every one pricked up his ears . 
Mousqueton had squatted himself in a corner , the better to weep and the better to hear . 
All at once the folding-doors of the great room , which had been shut , were thrown open as if by magic , and a warlike figure appeared upon the threshold , resplendent in the full light of the sun . 
This was D'Artagnan , who had come alone to the gate , and finding nobody to hold his stirrup , had tied his horse to the knocker and announced himself . 
The splendor of daylight invading the room , the murmur of all present , and , more than all , the instinct of the faithful dog , drew Mousqueton from his reverie ; he raised his head , recognized the old friend of his master , and , screaming with grief , he embraced his knees , watering the floor with his tears . 
D'Artagnan raised the poor intendant , embraced him as if he had been a brother , and , having nobly saluted the assembly , who all bowed as they whispered to each other his name , he went and took his seat at the extremity of the great carved oak hall , still holding by the hand poor Mousqueton , who was suffocating with excess of woe , and sank upon the steps . 
Then the procureur , who , like the rest , was considerably agitated , commenced . 
Porthos , after a profession of faith of the most Christian character , asked pardon of his enemies for all the injuries he might have done them . 
At this paragraph , a ray of inexpressible pride beamed from the eyes of D'Artagnan . 
He recalled to his mind the old soldier ; all those enemies of Porthos brought to earth by his valiant hand ; he reckoned up the numbers of them , and said to himself that Porthos had acted wisely , not to enumerate his enemies or the injuries done to them , or the task would have been too much for the reader . 
Then came the following schedule of his extensive lands : `` I possess at this present time , by the grace of God - `` 1 . 
The domain of Pierrefonds , lands , woods , meadows , waters , and forests , surrounded by good walls . 
`` 2 . 
The domain of Bracieux , chateaux , forests , plowed lands , forming three farms . 
`` 3 . 
The little estate Du Vallon , so named because it is in the valley . '' 
-LRB- Brave Porthos ! -RRB- 
`` 4 . 
Fifty farms in Touraine , amounting to five hundred acres . 
`` 5 . 
Three mills upon the Cher , bringing in six hundred livres each . 
`` 6 . 
Three fish-pools in Berry , producing two hundred livres a year . 
`` As to my personal or movable property , so called because it can be moved , as is so well explained by my learned friend the bishop of Vannes - '' -LRB- D'Artagnan shuddered at the dismal remembrance attached to that name -RRB- - the procureur continued imperturbably - `` they consist - '' `` 1 . 
In goods which I can not detail here for want of room , and which furnish all my chateaux or houses , but of which the list is drawn up by my intendant . '' 
Every one turned his eyes towards Mousqueton , who was still lost in grief . 
`` 2 . 
In twenty horses for saddle and draught , which I have particularly at my chateau of Pierrefonds , and which are called - Bayard , Roland , Charlemagne , Pepin , Dunois , La Hire , Ogier , Samson , Milo , Nimrod , Urganda , Armida , Flastrade , Dalilah , Rebecca , Yolande , Finette , Grisette , Lisette , and Musette . 
`` 3 . 
In sixty dogs , forming six packs , divided as follows : the first , for the stag ; the second , for the wolf ; the third , for the wild boar ; the fourth , for the hare ; and the two others , for setters and protection . 
`` 4 . 
In arms for war and the chase contained in my gallery of arms . 
`` 5 . 
My wines of Anjou , selected for Athos , who liked them formerly ; my wines of Burgundy , Champagne , Bordeaux , and Spain , stocking eight cellars and twelve vaults , in my various houses . 
