`` I tell you he will do it . '' 
`` He may ; but I will go and help him . '' 
`` To be sure you will ; I reckoned upon you , and still further believe that when we are once at Toulon you will not let him depart alone . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Athos , shaking his head . 
`` Patience ! 
patience ! '' 
`` Monseigneur , permit us to take our leave . '' 
`` Begone , then , and may my good luck attend you . '' 
`` Adieu ! 
monseigneur ; and may your own good luck attend you likewise . '' 
`` Here is an expedition admirably commenced ! '' 
said Athos to his son . 
`` No provisions - no store flotilla ! 
What can be done , thus ? '' 
`` Humph ! '' 
murmured Raoul ; `` if all are going to do as I am , provisions will not be wanted . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied Athos , sternly , `` do not be unjust and senseless in your egotism , or your grief , whichever you please to call it . 
If you set out for this war solely with the intention of getting killed therein , you stand in need of nobody , and it was scarcely worth while to recommend you to M. de Beaufort . 
But when you have been introduced to the prime commandant - when you have accepted the responsibility of a post in his army , the question is no longer about you , but about all those poor soldiers , who , as well as you , have hearts and bodies , who will weep for their country and endure all the necessities of their condition . 
Remember , Raoul , that officers are ministers as useful to the world as priests , and that they ought to have more charity . '' 
`` Monsieur , I know it and have practiced it ; I would have continued to do so still , but - '' `` You forget also that you are of a country that is proud of its military glory ; go and die if you like , but do not die without honor and without advantage to France . 
Cheer up , Raoul ! 
do not let my words grieve you ; I love you , and wish to see you perfect . '' 
`` I love your reproaches , monsieur , '' said the young man , mildly ; `` they alone may cure me , because they prove to me that some one loves me still . '' 
`` And now , Raoul , let us be off ; the weather is so fine , the heavens so clear , those heavens which we always find above our heads , which you will see more clear still at Gigelli , and which will speak to you of me there , as they speak to me here of God . '' 
The two gentlemen , after having agreed on this point , talked over the wild freaks of the duke , convinced that France would be served in a very incomplete manner , as regarded both spirit and practice , in the ensuing expedition ; and having summed up the ducal policy under the one word vanity , they set forward , in obedience rather to their will than destiny . 
The sacrifice was half accomplished . 
: The Silver Dish . 
The journey passed off pretty well . 
Athos and his son traversed France at the rate of fifteen leagues per day ; sometimes more , sometimes less , according to the intensity of Raoul 's grief . 
It took them a fortnight to reach Toulon , and they lost all traces of D'Artagnan at Antibes . 
They were forced to believe that the captain of the musketeers was desirous of preserving an incognito on his route , for Athos derived from his inquiries an assurance that such a cavalier as he described had exchanged his horse for a well-closed carriage on quitting Avignon . 
Raoul was much affected at not meeting with D'Artagnan . 
His affectionate heart longed to take a farewell and received consolation from that heart of steel . 
Athos knew from experience that D'Artagnan became impenetrable when engaged in any serious affair , whether on his own account or on the service of the king . 
He even feared to offend his friend , or thwart him by too pressing inquiries . 
And yet when Raoul commenced his labor of classing the flotilla , and got together the chalands and lighters to send them to Toulon , one of the fishermen told the comte that his boat had been laid up to refit since a trip he had made on account of a gentleman who was in great haste to embark . 
Athos , believing that this man was telling a falsehood in order to be left at liberty to fish , and so gain more money when all his companions were gone , insisted upon having the details . 
The fisherman informed him that six days previously , a man had come in the night to hire his boat , for the purpose of visiting the island of St. Honnorat . 
The price was agreed upon , but the gentleman had arrived with an immense carriage case , which he insisted upon embarking , in spite of the many difficulties that opposed the operation . 
The fisherman wished to retract . 
He had even threatened , but his threats had procured him nothing but a shower of blows from the gentleman 's cane , which fell upon his shoulders sharp and long . 
Swearing and grumbling , he had recourse to the syndic of his brotherhood at Antibes , who administer justice among themselves and protect each other ; but the gentleman had exhibited a certain paper , at sight of which the syndic , bowing to the very ground , enjoined obedience from the fisherman , and abused him for having been refractory . 
They then departed with the freight . 
`` But all this does not tell us , '' said Athos , `` how you injured your boat . '' 
`` This is the way . 
I was steering towards St. Honnorat as the gentleman desired me ; but he changed his mind , and pretended that I could not pass to the south of the abbey . '' 
`` And why not ? '' 
`` Because , monsieur , there is in front of the square tower of the Benedictines , towards the southern point , the bank of the Moines . '' 
