`` 6 . 
My pictures and statues , which are said to be of great value , and which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight . 
`` 7 . 
My library , consisting of six thousand volumes , quite new , and have never been opened . 
`` 8 . 
My silver plate , which is perhaps a little worn , but which ought to weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds , for I had great trouble in lifting the coffer that contained it and could not carry it more than six times round my chamber . 
`` 9 . 
All these objects , in addition to the table and house linen , are divided in the residences I liked the best . '' 
Here the reader stopped to take breath . 
Every one sighed , coughed , and redoubled his attention . 
The procureur resumed : `` I have lived without having any children , and it is probable I never shall have any , which to me is a cutting grief . 
And yet I am mistaken , for I have a son , in common with my other friends ; that is , M. Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , the true son of M. le Comte de la Fere . 
`` This young nobleman appears to me extremely worthy to succeed the valiant gentleman of whom I am the friend and very humble servant . '' 
Here a sharp sound interrupted the reader . 
It was D'Artagnan 's sword , which , slipping from his baldric , had fallen on the sonorous flooring . 
Every one turned his eyes that way , and saw that a large tear had rolled from the thick lid of D'Artagnan , half-way down to his aquiline nose , the luminous edge of which shone like a little crescent moon . 
`` This is why , '' continued the procureur , `` I have left all my property , movable , or immovable , comprised in the above enumerations , to M. le Vicomte Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , son of M. le Comte de la Fere , to console him for the grief he seems to suffer , and enable him to add more luster to his already glorious name . '' 
A vague murmur ran through the auditory . 
The procureur continued , seconded by the flashing eye of D'Artagnan , which , glancing over the assembly , quickly restored the interrupted silence : `` On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do give to M. le Chevalier d'Artagnan , captain of the king 's musketeers , whatever the said Chevalier d'Artagnan may demand of my property . 
On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do pay a good pension to M. le Chevalier d'Herblay , my friend , if he should need it in exile . 
I leave to my intendant Mousqueton all of my clothes , of city , war , or chase , to the number of forty-seven suits , in the assurance that he will wear them till they are worn out , for the love of and in remembrance of his master . 
Moreover , I bequeath to M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne my old servant and faithful friend Mousqueton , already named , providing that the said vicomte shall so act that Mousqueton shall declare , when dying , he has never ceased to be happy . '' 
On hearing these words , Mousqueton bowed , pale and trembling ; his shoulders shook convulsively ; his countenance , compressed by a frightful grief , appeared from between his icy hands , and the spectators saw him stagger and hesitate , as if , though wishing to leave the hall , he did not know the way . 
`` Mousqueton , my good friend , '' said D'Artagnan , `` go and make your preparations . 
I will take you with me to Athos 's house , whither I shall go on leaving Pierrefonds . '' 
Mousqueton made no reply . 
He scarcely breathed , as if everything in that hall would from that time be foreign . 
He opened the door , and slowly disappeared . 
The procureur finished his reading , after which the greater part of those who had come to hear the last will of Porthos dispersed by degrees , many disappointed , but all penetrated with respect . 
As for D'Artagnan , thus left alone , after having received the formal compliments of the procureur , he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of the testator , who had so judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most necessitous and the most worthy , with a delicacy that neither nobleman nor courtier could have displayed more kindly . 
When Porthos enjoined Raoul de Bragelonne to give D'Artagnan all that he would ask , he knew well , our worthy Porthos , that D'Artagnan would ask or take nothing ; and in case he did demand anything , none but himself could say what . 
Porthos left a pension to Aramis , who , if he should be inclined to ask too much , was checked by the example of D'Artagnan ; and that word exile , thrown out by the testator , without apparent intention , was it not the mildest , most exquisite criticism upon that conduct of Aramis which had brought about the death of Porthos ? 
But there was no mention of Athos in the testament of the dead . 
Could the latter for a moment suppose that the son would not offer the best part to the father ? 
The rough mind of Porthos had fathomed all these causes , seized all these shades more clearly than law , better than custom , with more propriety than taste . 
`` Porthos had indeed a heart , '' said D'Artagnan to himself with a sigh . 
As he made this reflection , he fancied he hard a groan in the room above him ; and he thought immediately of poor Mousqueton , whom he felt it was a pleasing duty to divert from his grief . 
For this purpose he left the hall hastily to seek the worthy intendant , as he had not returned . 
He ascended the staircase leading to the first story , and perceived , in Porthos 's own chamber , a heap of clothes of all colors and materials , upon which Mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them all on the floor together . 
It was the legacy of the faithful friend . 
Those clothes were truly his own ; they had been given to him ; the hand of Mousqueton was stretched over these relics , which he was kissing with his lips , with all his face , and covered with his body . 
D'Artagnan approached to console the poor fellow . 
`` My God ! '' 
said he , `` he does not stir - he has fainted ! '' 
But D'Artagnan was mistaken . 
Mousqueton was dead ! 
Dead , like the dog who , having lost his master , crawls back to die upon his cloak . 
: The Old Age of Athos . 
While these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers , formerly bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble , Athos , left alone after the departure of Raoul , began to pay his tribute to that foretaste of death which is called the absence of those we love . 
Back in his house at Blois , no longer having even Grimaud to receive a poor smile as he passed through the parterre , Athos daily felt the decline of vigor of a nature which for so long a time had seemed impregnable . 
