And at this reflection , D'Artagnan 's brow became clouded with perplexity . 
The musketeer had certain scruples on the matter , it must be admitted . 
To deliver up to death -LRB- for not a doubt existed that Louis hated Fouquet mortally -RRB- the man who had just shown himself so delightful and charming a host in every way , was a real insult to one 's conscience . 
`` It almost seems , '' said D'Artagnan to himself , `` that if I am not a poor , mean , miserable fellow , I should let M. Fouquet know the opinion the king has about him . 
Yet , if I betray my master 's secret , I shall be a false - hearted , treacherous knave , a traitor , too , a crime provided for and punishable by military laws - so much so , indeed , that twenty times , in former days when wars were rife , I have seen many a miserable fellow strung up to a tree for doing , in but a small degree , what my scruples counsel me to undertake upon a great scale now . 
No , I think that a man of true readiness of wit ought to get out of this difficulty with more skill than that . 
And now , let us admit that I do possess a little readiness of invention ; it is not at all certain , though , for , after having for forty years absorbed so large a quantity , I shall be lucky if there were to be a pistole 's - worth left . '' 
D'Artagnan buried his head in his hands , tore at his mustache in sheer vexation , and added , `` What can be the reason of M. Fouquet 's disgrace ? 
There seem to be three good ones : the first , because M. Colbert does n't like him ; the second , because he wished to fall in love with Mademoiselle de la Valliere ; and lastly , because the king likes M. Colbert and loves Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
Oh ! 
he is lost ! 
But shall I put my foot on his neck , I , of all men , when he is falling a prey to the intrigues of a pack of women and clerks ? 
For shame ! 
If he be dangerous , I will lay him low enough ; if , however , he be only persecuted , I will look on . 
I have come to such a decisive determination , that neither king nor living man shall change my mind . 
If Athos were here , he would do as I have done . 
Therefore , instead of going , in cold blood , up to M. Fouquet , and arresting him off-hand and shutting him up altogether , I will try and conduct myself like a man who understands what good manners are . 
People will talk about it , of course ; but they shall talk well of it , I am determined . '' 
And D'Artagnan , drawing by a gesture peculiar to himself his shoulder-belt over his shoulder , went straight off to M. Fouquet , who , after he had taken leave of his guests , was preparing to retire for the night and to sleep tranquilly after the triumphs of the day . 
The air was still perfumed , or infected , whichever way it may be considered , with the odors of the torches and the fireworks . 
The wax-lights were dying away in their sockets , the flowers fell unfastened from the garlands , the groups of dancers and courtiers were separating in the salons . 
Surrounded by his friends , who complimented him and received his flattering remarks in return , the surintendant half-closed his wearied eyes . 
He longed for rest and quiet ; he sank upon the bed of laurels which had been heaped up for him for so many days past ; it might almost have been said that he seemed bowed beneath the weight of the new debts which he had incurred for the purpose of giving the greatest possible honor to this fete . 
Fouquet had just retired to his room , still smiling , but more than half - asleep . 
He could listen to nothing more , he could hardly keep his eyes open ; his bed seemed to possess a fascinating and irresistible attraction for him . 
The god Morpheus , the presiding deity of the dome painted by Lebrun , had extended his influence over the adjoining rooms , and showered down his most sleep-inducing poppies upon the master of the house . 
Fouquet , almost entirely alone , was being assisted by his valet de chambre to undress , when M. d'Artagnan appeared at the entrance of the room . 
D'Artagnan had never been able to succeed in making himself common at the court ; and notwithstanding he was seen everywhere and on all occasions , he never failed to produce an effect wherever and whenever he made his appearance . 
Such is the happy privilege of certain natures , which in that respect resemble either thunder or lightning ; every one recognizes them ; but their appearance never fails to arouse surprise and astonishment , and whenever they occur , the impression is always left that the last was the most conspicuous or most important . 
`` What ! 
M. d'Artagnan ? '' 
said Fouquet , who had already taken his right arm out of the sleeve of his doublet . 
`` At your service , '' replied the musketeer . 
`` Come in , my dear M. d'Artagnan . '' 
`` Thank you . '' 
`` Have you come to criticise the fete ? 
You are ingenious enough in your criticisms , I know . '' 
`` By no means . '' 
`` Are not your men looked after properly ? '' 
`` In every way . '' 
`` You are not comfortably lodged , perhaps ? '' 
`` Nothing could be better . '' 
`` In that case , I have to thank you for being so amiably disposed , and I must not fail to express my obligations to you for all your flattering kindness . '' 
These words were as much as to say , `` My dear D'Artagnan , pray go to bed , since you have a bed to lie down on , and let me do the same . '' 
D'Artagnan did not seem to understand it . 
`` Are you going to bed already ? '' 
he said to the superintendent . 
`` Yes ; have you anything to say to me ? '' 
`` Nothing , monsieur , nothing at all . 
You sleep in this room , then ? '' 
