` What letter ? ' 
she cried . '' 
` The letter you see down there ; the last letter from the queen . ' 
`` At this word I trembled . 
My tutor - he who passed for my father , he who was continually recommending me modesty and humility - in correspondence with the queen ! '' 
` The queen 's last letter ! ' 
cried Perronnette , without showing more astonishment than at seeing this letter at the bottom of the well ; ` but how came it there ? ' '' ' 
A chance , Dame Perronnette - a singular chance . 
I was entering my room , and on opening the door , the window , too , being open , a puff of air came suddenly and carried off this paper - this letter of her majesty 's ; I darted after it , and gained the window just in time to see it flutter a moment in the breeze and disappear down the well . ' '' 
` Well , ' said Dame Perronnette ; ` and if the letter has fallen into the well , 't is all the same as if it was burnt ; and as the queen burns all her letters every time she comes - ' `` And so you see this lady who came every month was the queen , '' said the prisoner . '' 
` Doubtless , doubtless , ' continued the old gentleman ; ` but this letter contained instructions - how can I follow them ? ' '' 
` Write immediately to her ; give her a plain account of the accident , and the queen will no doubt write you another letter in place of this . ' '' 
` Oh ! 
the queen would never believe the story , ' said the good gentleman , shaking his head ; ` she will imagine that I want to keep this letter instead of giving it up like the rest , so as to have a hold over her . 
She is so distrustful , and M. de Mazarin so - Yon devil of an Italian is capable of having us poisoned at the first breath of suspicion . ' '' 
Aramis almost imperceptibly smiled . '' 
` You know , Dame Perronnette , they are both so suspicious in all that concerns Philippe . ' 
`` Philippe was the name they gave me , '' said the prisoner . '' 
` Well , 't is no use hesitating , ' said Dame Perronnette , ` somebody must go down the well . ' '' 
` Of course ; so that the person who goes down may read the paper as he is coming up . ' '' 
` But let us choose some villager who can not read , and then you will be at ease . ' '' 
` Granted ; but will not any one who descends guess that a paper must be important for which we risk a man 's life ? 
However , you have given me an idea , Dame Perronnette ; somebody shall go down the well , but that somebody shall be myself . ' 
`` But at this notion Dame Perronnette lamented and cried in such a manner , and so implored the old nobleman , with tears in her eyes , that he promised her to obtain a ladder long enough to reach down , while she went in search of some stout-hearted youth , whom she was to persuade that a jewel had fallen into the well , and that this jewel was wrapped in a paper . 
` And as paper , ' remarked my preceptor , ` naturally unfolds in water , the young man would not be surprised at finding nothing , after all , but the letter wide open . ' '' 
` But perhaps the writing will be already effaced by that time , ' said Dame Perronnette . '' 
` No consequence , provided we secure the letter . 
On returning it to the queen , she will see at once that we have not betrayed her ; and consequently , as we shall not rouse the distrust of Mazarin , we shall have nothing to fear from him . ' 
`` Having come to this resolution , they parted . 
I pushed back the shutter , and , seeing that my tutor was about to re-enter , I threw myself on my couch , in a confusion of brain caused by all I had just heard . 
My governor opened the door a few moments after , and thinking I was asleep gently closed it again . 
As soon as ever it was shut , I rose , and , listening , heard the sound of retiring footsteps . 
Then I returned to the shutters , and saw my tutor and Dame Perronnette go out together . 
I was alone in the house . 
They had hardly closed the gate before I sprang from the window and ran to the well . 
Then , just as my governor had leaned over , so leaned I. Something white and luminous glistened in the green and quivering silence of the water . 
The brilliant disk fascinated and allured me ; my eyes became fixed , and I could hardly breathe . 
The well seemed to draw me downwards with its slimy mouth and icy breath ; and I thought I read , at the bottom of the water , characters of fire traced upon the letter the queen had touched . 
Then , scarcely knowing what I was about , and urged on by one of those instinctive impulses which drive men to destruction , I lowered the cord from the windlass of the well to within about three feet of the water , leaving the bucket dangling , at the same time taking infinite pains not to disturb that coveted letter , which was beginning to change its white tint for the hue of chrysoprase , - proof enough that it was sinking , - and then , with the rope weltering in my hands , slid down into the abyss . 
When I saw myself hanging over the dark pool , when I saw the sky lessening above my head , a cold shudder came over me , a chill fear got the better of me , I was seized with giddiness , and the hair rose on my head ; but my strong will still reigned supreme over all the terror and disquietude . 
I gained the water , and at once plunged into it , holding on by one hand , while I immersed the other and seized the dear letter , which , alas ! 
came in two in my grasp . 
I concealed the two fragments in my body-coat , and , helping myself with my feet against the sides of the pit , and clinging on with my hands , agile and vigorous as I was , and , above all , pressed for time , I regained the brink , drenching it as I touched it with the water that streamed off me . 
I was no sooner out of the well with my prize , than I rushed into the sunlight , and took refuge in a kind of shrubbery at the bottom of the garden . 
As I entered my hiding-place , the bell which resounded when the great gate was opened , rang . 
It was my preceptor come back again . 
I had but just time . 
I calculated that it would take ten minutes before he would gain my place of concealment , even if , guessing where I was , he came straight to it ; and twenty if he were obliged to look for me . 
But this was time enough to allow me to read the cherished letter , whose fragments I hastened to unite again . 
The writing was already fading , but I managed to decipher it all . 
