The king had expressed a wish not to walk in the park until after cards in the evening . 
In the interval between supper and the promenade , cards and dice were introduced . 
The king won a thousand pistoles , and , having won them , put them in his pocket , and then rose , saying , `` And now , gentlemen , to the park . '' 
He found the ladies of the court were already there . 
The king , we have before observed , had won a thousand pistoles , and had put them in his pocket ; but M. Fouquet had somehow contrived to lose ten thousand , so that among the courtiers there was still left a hundred and ninety thousand francs ' profit to divide , a circumstance which made the countenances of the courtiers and the officers of the king 's household the most joyous countenances in the world . 
It was not the same , however , with the king 's face ; for , notwithstanding his success at play , to which he was by no means insensible , there still remained a slight shade of dissatisfaction . 
Colbert was waiting for or upon him at the corner of one of the avenues ; he was most probably waiting there in consequence of a rendezvous which had been given him by the king , as Louis XIV. , who had avoided him , or who had seemed to avoid him , suddenly made him a sign , and they then struck into the depths of the park together . 
But La Valliere , too , had observed the king 's gloomy aspect and kindling glances ; she had remarked this - and as nothing which lay hidden or smoldering in his heart was hidden from the gaze of her affection , she understood that this repressed wrath menaced some one ; she prepared to withstand the current of his vengeance , and intercede like an angel of mercy . 
Overcome by sadness , nervously agitated , deeply distressed at having been so long separated from her lover , disturbed at the sight of the emotion she had divined , she accordingly presented herself to the king with an embarrassed aspect , which in his then disposition of mind the king interpreted unfavorably . 
Then , as they were alone - nearly alone , inasmuch as Colbert , as soon as he perceived the young girl approaching , had stopped and drawn back a dozen paces - the king advanced towards La Valliere and took her by the hand . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' he said to her , `` should I be guilty of an indiscretion if I were to inquire if you were indisposed ? 
for you seem to breathe as if you were oppressed by some secret cause of uneasiness , and your eyes are filled with tears . '' 
`` Oh ! 
sire , if I be indeed so , and if my eyes are indeed full of tears , I am sorrowful only at the sadness which seems to oppress your majesty . '' 
`` My sadness ? 
You are mistaken , mademoiselle ; no , it is not sadness I experience . '' 
`` What is it , then , sire ? '' 
`` Humiliation . '' 
`` Humiliation ? 
oh ! 
sire , what a word for you to use ! '' 
`` I mean , mademoiselle , that wherever I may happen to be , no one else ought to be the master . 
Well , then , look round you on every side , and judge whether I am not eclipsed - I , the king of France - before the monarch of these wide domains . 
Oh ! '' 
he continued , clenching his hands and teeth , `` when I think that this king - '' `` Well , sire ? '' 
said Louise , terrified . '' 
- That this king is a faithless , unworthy servant , who grows proud and self-sufficient upon the strength of property that belongs to me , and which he has stolen . 
And therefore I am about to change this impudent minister 's fete into sorrow and mourning , of which the nymph of Vaux , as the poets say , shall not soon lose the remembrance . '' 
`` Oh ! 
your majesty - '' `` Well , mademoiselle , are you about to take M. Fouquet 's part ? '' 
said Louis , impatiently . 
`` No , sire ; I will only ask whether you are well informed . 
Your majesty has more than once learned the value of accusations made at court . '' 
Louis XIV . 
made a sign for Colbert to approach . 
`` Speak , Monsieur Colbert , '' said the young prince , `` for I almost believe that Mademoiselle de la Valliere has need of your assistance before she can put any faith in the king 's word . 
Tell mademoiselle what M. Fouquet has done ; and you , mademoiselle , will perhaps have the kindness to listen . 
It will not be long . '' 
Why did Louis XIV . 
insist upon it in such a manner ? 
A very simple reason - his heart was not at rest , his mind was not thoroughly convinced ; he imagined there lay some dark , hidden , tortuous intrigue behind these thirteen millions of francs ; and he wished that the pure heart of La Valliere , which had revolted at the idea of theft or robbery , should approve - even were it only by a single word - the resolution he had taken , and which , nevertheless , he hesitated before carrying into execution . 
`` Speak , monsieur , '' said La Valliere to Colbert , who had advanced ; `` speak , since the king wishes me to listen to you . 
Tell me , what is the crime with which M. Fouquet is charged ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
not very heinous , mademoiselle , '' he returned , `` a mere abuse of confidence . '' 
`` Speak , speak , Colbert ; and when you have related it , leave us , and go and inform M. d'Artagnan that I have certain orders to give him . '' 
`` M. d'Artagnan , sire ! '' 
exclaimed La Valliere ; `` but why send for M. d'Artagnan ? 
I entreat you to tell me . '' 
`` Pardieu ! 
