`` Athos ! 
Athos ! 
my friend ! '' 
cried this voice , agitated even to tears . 
`` Monsieur le Chevalier d'Artagnan , '' faltered out Grimaud . 
`` Where is he ? 
Where is he ? '' 
continued the musketeer . 
Grimaud seized his arm in his bony fingers , and pointed to the bed , upon the sheets of which the livid tints of death already showed . 
A choked respiration , the opposite to a sharp cry , swelled the throat of D'Artagnan . 
He advanced on tip-toe , trembling , frightened at the noise his feet made on the floor , his heart rent by a nameless agony . 
He placed his ear to the breast of Athos , his face to the comte 's mouth . 
Neither noise , nor breath ! 
D'Artagnan drew back . 
Grimaud , who had followed him with his eyes , and for whom each of his movements had been a revelation , came timidly ; seated himself at the foot of the bed , and glued his lips to the sheet which was raised by the stiffened feet of his master . 
Then large drops began to flow from his red eyes . 
This old man in invincible despair , who wept , bent doubled without uttering a word , presented the most touching spectacle that D'Artagnan , in a life so filled with emotion , had ever met with . 
The captain resumed standing in contemplation before that smiling dead man , who seemed to have burnished his last thought , to give his best friend , the man he had loved next to Raoul , a gracious welcome even beyond life . 
And for reply to that exalted flattery of hospitality , D'Artagnan went and kissed Athos fervently on the brow , and with his trembling fingers closed his eyes . 
Then he seated himself by the pillow without dread of that dead man , who had been so kind and affectionate to him for five and thirty years . 
He was feeding his soul with the remembrances the noble visage of the comte brought to his mind in crowds - some blooming and charming as that smile - some dark , dismal , and icy as that visage with its eyes now closed to all eternity . 
All at once the bitter flood which mounted from minute to minute invaded his heart , and swelled his breast almost to bursting . 
Incapable of mastering his emotion , he arose , and tearing himself violently from the chamber where he had just found dead him to whom he came to report the news of the death of Porthos , he uttered sobs so heart-rending that the servants , who seemed only to wait for an explosion of grief , answered to it by their lugubrious clamors , and the dogs of the late comte by their lamentable howlings . 
Grimaud was the only one who did not lift up his voice . 
Even in the paroxysm of his grief he would not have dared to profane the dead , or for the first time disturb the slumber of his master . 
Had not Athos always bidden him be dumb ? 
At daybreak D'Artagnan , who had wandered about the lower hall , biting his fingers to stifle his sighs - D'Artagnan went up once more ; and watching the moments when Grimaud turned his head towards him , he made him a sign to come to him , which the faithful servant obeyed without making more noise than a shadow . 
D'Artagnan went down again , followed by Grimaud ; and when he had gained the vestibule , taking the old man 's hands , `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` I have seen how the father died ; now let me know about the son . '' 
Grimaud drew from his breast a large letter , upon the envelope of which was traced the address of Athos . 
He recognized the writing of M. de Beaufort , broke the seal , and began to read , while walking about in the first steel-chill rays of dawn , in the dark alley of old limes , marked by the still visible footsteps of the comte who had just died . 
: The Bulletin . 
The Duc de Beaufort wrote to Athos . 
The letter destined for the living only reached the dead . 
God had changed the address . 
`` MY DEAR COMTE , '' wrote the prince , in his large , school-boy 's hand , - `` a great misfortune has struck us amidst a great triumph . 
The king loses one of the bravest of soldiers . 
I lose a friend . 
You lose M. de Bragelonne . 
He has died gloriously , so gloriously that I have not the strength to weep as I could wish . 
Receive my sad compliments , my dear comte . 
Heaven distributes trials according to the greatness of our hearts . 
This is an immense one , but not above your courage . 
Your good friend , `` LE DUC DE BEAUFORT . '' 
The letter contained a relation written by one of the prince 's secretaries . 
It was the most touching recital , and the most true , of that dismal episode which unraveled two existences . 
D'Artagnan , accustomed to battle emotions , and with a heart armed against tenderness , could not help starting on reading the name of Raoul , the name of that beloved boy who had become a shade now - like his father . 
`` In the morning , '' said the prince 's secretary , `` monseigneur commanded the attack . 
Normandy and Picardy had taken positions in the rocks dominated by the heights of the mountain , upon the declivity of which were raised the bastions of Gigelli . 
`` The cannon opened the action ; the regiments marched full of resolution ; the pikemen with pikes elevated , the musket-bearers with their weapons ready . 
The prince followed attentively the march and movements of the troops , so as to be able to sustain them with a strong reserve . 
