murmured Aramis . 
`` Belle-Isle is as much mine for you , as Vaux is mine for the king . 
Go , D'Herblay , go ! 
as long as I live , not a hair of your head shall be injured . '' 
`` Thank you , '' said Aramis , with a cold irony of manner . 
`` Go at once , then , and give me your hand , before we both hasten away ; you to save your life , I to save my honor . '' 
Aramis withdrew from his breast the hand he had concealed there ; it was stained with his blood . 
He had dug his nails into his flesh , as if in punishment for having nursed so many projects , more vain , insensate , and fleeting than the life of the man himself . 
Fouquet was horror-stricken , and then his heart smote him with pity . 
He threw open his arms as if to embrace him . 
`` I had no arms , '' murmured Aramis , as wild and terrible in his wrath as the shade of Dido . 
And then , without touching Fouquet 's hand , he turned his head aside , and stepped back a pace or two . 
His last word was an imprecation , his last gesture a curse , which his blood-stained hand seemed to invoke , as it sprinkled on Fouquet 's face a few drops of blood which flowed from his breast . 
And both of them darted out of the room by the secret staircase which led down to the inner courtyard . 
Fouquet ordered his best horses , while Aramis paused at the foot of the staircase which led to Porthos 's apartment . 
He reflected profoundly and for some time , while Fouquet 's carriage left the courtyard at full gallop . 
`` Shall I go alone ? '' 
said Aramis to himself , `` or warn the prince ? 
Oh ! 
fury ! 
Warn the prince , and then - do what ? 
Take him with me ? 
To carry this accusing witness about with me everywhere ? 
War , too , would follow - civil war , implacable in its nature ! 
And without any resource save myself - it is impossible ! 
What could he do without me ? 
Oh ! 
without me he will be utterly destroyed . 
Yet who knows - let destiny be fulfilled - condemned he was , let him remain so then ! 
Good or evil Spirit - gloomy and scornful Power , whom men call the genius of humanity , thou art a power more restlessly uncertain , more baselessly useless , than wild mountain wind ! 
Chance , thou term ` st thyself , but thou art nothing ; thou inflamest everything with thy breath , crumblest mountains at thy approach , and suddenly art thyself destroyed at the presence of the Cross of dead wood behind which stand another Power invisible like thyself - whom thou deniest , perhaps , but whose avenging hand is on thee , and hurls thee in the dust dishonored and unnamed ! 
Lost ! 
- I am lost ! 
What can be done ? 
Flee to Belle-Isle ? 
Yes , and leave Porthos behind me , to talk and relate the whole affair to every one ! 
Porthos , too , who will have to suffer for what he has done . 
I will not let poor Porthos suffer . 
He seems like one of the members of my own frame ; and his grief or misfortune would be mine as well . 
Porthos shall leave with me , and shall follow my destiny . 
It must be so . '' 
And Aramis , apprehensive of meeting any one to whom his hurried movements might appear suspicious , ascended the staircase without being perceived . 
Porthos , so recently returned from Paris , was already in a profound sleep ; his huge body forgot its fatigue , as his mind forgot its thoughts . 
Aramis entered , light as a shadow , and placed his nervous grasp on the giant 's shoulder . 
`` Come , Porthos , '' he cried , `` come . '' 
Porthos obeyed , rose from his bed , opened his eyes , even before his intelligence seemed to be aroused . 
`` We leave immediately , '' said Aramis . 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned Porthos . 
`` We shall go mounted , and faster than we have ever gone in our lives . '' 
