Irritation , with this vigorous man , usually vented itself in impetuous attack , which few people , hitherto , were they king , were they giants , had been able to resist . 
Trembling with rage , he went straight to the castle , and asked an audience with the king . 
It might be about seven o'clock in the morning , and , since his arrival at Nantes , the king had been an early riser . 
But on arriving at the corridor with which we are acquainted , D'Artagnan found M. de Gesvres , who stopped him politely , telling him not to speak too loud and disturb the king . 
`` Is the king asleep ? '' 
said D'Artagnan . 
`` Well , I will let him sleep . 
But about what o'clock do you suppose he will rise ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
in about two hours ; his majesty has been up all night . '' 
D'Artagnan took his hat again , bowed to M. de Gesvres , and returned to his own apartments . 
He came back at half-past nine , and was told that the king was at breakfast . 
`` That will just suit me , '' said D'Artagnan . 
`` I will talk to the king while he is eating . '' 
M. de Brienne reminded D'Artagnan that the king would not see any one at meal-time . 
`` But , '' said D'Artagnan , looking askant at Brienne , `` you do not know , perhaps , monsieur , that I have the privilege of entree anywhere - and at any hour . '' 
Brienne took the captain 's hand kindly , and said , `` Not at Nantes , dear Monsieur d'Artagnan . 
The king , in this journey , has changed everything . '' 
D'Artagnan , a little softened , asked about what o'clock the king would have finished his breakfast . 
`` We do n't know . '' 
`` Eh ? 
- do n't know ! 
What does that mean ? 
You do n't know how much time the king devotes to eating ? 
It is generally an hour ; and , if we admit that the air of the Loire gives an additional appetite , we will extend it to an hour and a half ; that is enough , I think . 
I will wait where I am . '' 
`` Oh ! 
dear Monsieur d'Artagnan , the order of the day is not to allow any person to remain in this corridor ; I am on guard for that particular purpose . '' 
D'Artagnan felt his anger mounting to his brain a second time . 
He went out quickly , for fear of complicating the affair by a display of premature ill-humor . 
As soon as he was out he began to reflect . 
`` The king , '' said he , `` will not receive me , that is evident . 
The young man is angry ; he is afraid , beforehand , of the words that I may speak to him . 
Yes ; but in the meantime Belle-Isle is besieged , and my two friends by now probably taken or killed . 
Poor Porthos ! 
As to Master Aramis , he is always full of resources , and I am easy on his account . 
But , no , no ; Porthos is not yet an invalid , nor is Aramis in his dotage . 
The one with his arm , the other with his imagination , will find work for his majesty 's soldiers . 
Who knows if these brave men may not get up for the edification of his most Christian majesty a little bastion of Saint - Gervais ! 
I do n't despair of it . 
They have cannon and a garrison . 
And yet , '' continued D'Artagnan , `` I do n't know whether it would not be better to stop the combat . 
For myself alone I will not put up with either surly looks or insults from the king ; but for my friends I must put up with everything . 
Shall I go to M. Colbert ? 
Now , there is a man I must acquire the habit of terrifying . 
I will go to M. Colbert . '' 
And D'Artagnan set forward bravely to find M. Colbert , but was informed that he was working with the king , at the castle of Nantes . 
`` Good ! '' 
cried he , `` the times have come again in which I measured my steps from De Treville to the cardinal , from the cardinal to the queen , from the queen to Louis XIII . 
Truly is it said that men , in growing old , become children again ! 
