Saying these words , she again knelt down , softly and affectionately . 
`` Pardon me the last time , my affianced Raoul ! '' 
said she . 
`` I have broken our chain ; we are both destined to die of grief . 
It is thou who departest first ; fear nothing , I shall follow thee . 
See , only , that I have not been base , and that I have come to bid thee this last adieu . 
The Lord is my witness , Raoul , that if with my life I could have redeemed thine , I would have given that life without hesitation . 
I could not give my love . 
Once more , forgive me , dearest , kindest friend . '' 
She strewed a few sweet flowers on the freshly sodded earth ; then , wiping the tears from her eyes , the heavily stricken lady bowed to D'Artagnan , and disappeared . 
The captain watched the departure of the horses , horsemen , and carriage , then crossing his arms upon his swelling chest , `` When will it be my turn to depart ? '' 
said he , in an agitated voice . 
`` What is there left for man after youth , love , glory , friendship , strength , and wealth have disappeared ? 
That rock , under which sleeps Porthos , who possessed all I have named ; this moss , under which repose Athos and Raoul , who possessed much more ! '' 
He hesitated for a moment , with a dull eye ; then , drawing himself up , `` Forward ! 
still forward ! '' 
said he . 
`` When it is time , God will tell me , as he foretold the others . '' 
He touched the earth , moistened with the evening dew , with the ends of his fingers , signed himself as if he had been at the benitier in church , and retook alone - ever alone - the road to Paris . 
Epilogue . 
Four years after the scene we have just described , two horsemen , well mounted , traversed Blois early in the morning , for the purpose of arranging a hawking party the king had arranged to make in that uneven plain the Loire divides in two , which borders on the one side Meung , on the other Amboise . 
These were the keeper of the king 's harriers and the master of the falcons , personages greatly respected in the time of Louis XIII. , but rather neglected by his successor . 
The horsemen , having reconnoitered the ground , were returning , their observations made , when they perceived certain little groups of soldiers , here and there , whom the sergeants were placing at distances at the openings of the inclosures . 
These were the king 's musketeers . 
Behind them came , upon a splendid horse , the captain , known by his richly embroidered uniform . 
His hair was gray , his beard turning so . 
He seemed a little bent , although sitting and handling his horse gracefully . 
He was looking about him watchfully . 
`` M. d'Artagnan does not get any older , '' said the keeper of the harriers to his colleague the falconer ; `` with ten years more to carry than either of us , he has the seat of a young man on horseback . '' 
`` That is true , '' replied the falconer . 
`` I do n't see any change in him for the last twenty years . '' 
But this officer was mistaken ; D'Artagnan in the last four years had lived a dozen . 
Age had printed its pitiless claws at each angle of his eyes ; his brow was bald ; his hands , formerly brown and nervous , were getting white , as if the blood had half forgotten them . 
D'Artagnan accosted the officers with the shade of affability which distinguishes superiors , and received in turn for his courtesy two most respectful bows . 
`` Ah ! 
what a lucky chance to see you here , Monsieur d'Artagnan ! '' 
cried the falconer . 
`` It is rather I who should say that , messieurs , '' replied the captain , `` for nowadays , the king makes more frequent use of his musketeers than of his falcons . '' 
`` Ah ! 
it is not as it was in the good old times , '' sighed the falconer . 
`` Do you remember , Monsieur d'Artagnan , when the late king flew the pie in the vineyards beyond Beaugence ? 
Ah ! 
dame ! 
you were not the captain of the musketeers at that time , Monsieur d'Artagnan . '' 
-LRB- 7 -RRB- `` And you were nothing but under-corporal of the tiercelets , '' replied D'Artagnan , laughing . 
`` Never mind that , it was a good time , seeing that it is always a good time when we are young . 
Good day , monsieur the keeper of the harriers . '' 
`` You do me honor , monsieur le comte , '' said the latter . 
D'Artagnan made no reply . 
The title of comte had hardly struck him ; D'Artagnan had been a comte four years . 
