You were very near doing as he did , putting your dinner napkin in your portfolio , and wiping your mouth with your papers . 
Mordioux ! 
Monseigneur Fouquet , a man like you ought not to be dejected in this manner . 
Suppose your friends saw you ? '' 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan , '' returned the surintendant , with a smile full of gentleness , `` you do not understand me ; it is precisely because my friends are not looking on , that I am as you see me now . 
I do not live , exist even , isolated from others ; I am nothing when left to myself . 
Understand that throughout my whole life I have passed every moment of my time in making friends , whom I hoped to render my stay and support . 
In times of prosperity , all these cheerful , happy voices - rendered so through and by my means - formed in my honor a concert of praise and kindly actions . 
In the least disfavor , these humbler voices accompanied in harmonious accents the murmur of my own heart . 
Isolation I have never yet known . 
Poverty -LRB- a phantom I have sometimes beheld , clad in rags , awaiting me at the end of my journey through life -RRB- - poverty has been the specter with which many of my own friends have trifled for years past , which they poetize and caress , and which has attracted me towards them . 
Poverty ! 
I accept it , acknowledge it , receive it , as a disinherited sister ; for poverty is neither solitude , nor exile , nor imprisonment . 
Is it likely I shall ever be poor , with such friends as Pelisson , as La Fontaine , as Moliere ? 
with such a mistress as - Oh ! 
if you knew how utterly lonely and desolate I feel at this moment , and how you , who separate me from all I love , seem to resemble the image of solitude , of annihilation - death itself . '' 
`` But I have already told you , Monsieur Fouquet , '' replied D'Artagnan , moved to the depths of his soul , `` that you are woefully exaggerating . 
The king likes you . '' 
`` No , no , '' said Fouquet , shaking his head . 
`` M. Colbert hates you . '' 
`` M. Colbert ! 
What does that matter to me ? '' 
`` He will ruin you . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I defy him to do that , for I am ruined already . '' 
At this singular confession of the superintendent , D'Artagnan cast his glance all round the room ; and although he did not open his lips , Fouquet understood him so thoroughly , that he added : `` What can be done with such wealth of substance as surrounds us , when a man can no longer cultivate his taste for the magnificent ? 
Do you know what good the greater part of the wealth and the possessions which we rich enjoy , confer upon us ? 
merely to disgust us , by their very splendor even , with everything which does not equal it ! 
Vaux ! 
you will say , and the wonders of Vaux ! 
What of it ? 
What boot these wonders ? 
If I am ruined , how shall I fill with water the urns which my Naiads bear in their arms , or force the air into the lungs of my Tritons ? 
To be rich enough , Monsieur d'Artagnan , a man must be too rich . '' 
D'Artagnan shook his head . 
`` Oh ! 
I know very well what you think , '' replied Fouquet , quickly . 
`` If Vaux were yours , you would sell it , and would purchase an estate in the country ; an estate which should have woods , orchards , and land attached , so that the estate should be made to support its master . 
With forty millions you might - '' `` Ten millions , '' interrupted D'Artagnan . 
`` Not a million , my dear captain . 
No one in France is rich enough to give two millions for Vaux , and to continue to maintain it as I have done ; no one could do it , no one would know how . '' 
`` Well , '' said D'Artagnan , `` in any case , a million is not abject misery . '' 
`` It is not far from it , my dear monsieur . 
But you do not understand me . 
No ; I will not sell my residence at Vaux ; I will give it to you , if you like ; '' and Fouquet accompanied these words with a movement of the shoulders to which it would be impossible to do justice . 
`` Give it to the king ; you will make a better bargain . '' 
`` The king does not require me to give it to him , '' said Fouquet ; `` he will take it away from me with the most absolute ease and grace , if it pleases him to do so ; and that is the very reason I should prefer to see it perish . 
Do you know , Monsieur d'Artagnan , that if the king did not happen to be under my roof , I would take this candle , go straight to the dome , and set fire to a couple of huge chests of fusees and fireworks which are in reserve there , and would reduce my palace to ashes . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
said the musketeer , negligently . 
