As for Portugal , of which you and I have spoken , monsieur , I can assure you it will contribute with all its resources to assist the Most Christian King in his war . 
I beg you , Monsieur Colbert , to preserve your friendship and also to believe in my profound attachment , and to lay my respect at the feet of His Most Christian Majesty . 
Signed , `` LE DUC D'ALMEDA . '' 
-LRB- 13 -RRB- Aramis had performed more than he had promised ; it remained to be seen how the king , M. Colbert , and D'Artagnan would be faithful to each other . 
In the spring , as Colbert had predicted , the land army entered on its campaign . 
It preceded , in magnificent order , the court of Louis XIV. , who , setting out on horseback , surrounded by carriages filled with ladies and courtiers , conducted the elite of his kingdom to this sanguinary fete . 
The officers of the army , it is true , had no other music save the artillery of the Dutch forts ; but it was enough for a great number , who found in this war honor , advancement , fortune - or death . 
M. d'Artagnan set out commanding a body of twelve thousand men , cavalry , and infantry , with which he was ordered to take the different places which form knots of that strategic network called La Frise . 
Never was an army conducted more gallantly to an expedition . 
The officers knew that their leader , prudent and skillful as he was brave , would not sacrifice a single man , nor yield an inch of ground without necessity . 
He had the old habits of war , to live upon the country , keeping his soldiers singing and the enemy weeping . 
The captain of the king 's musketeers well knew his business . 
Never were opportunities better chosen , coups-de-main better supported , errors of the besieged more quickly taken advantage of . 
The army commanded by D'Artagnan took twelve small places within a month . 
He was engaged in besieging the thirteenth , which had held out five days . 
D'Artagnan caused the trenches to be opened without appearing to suppose that these people would ever allow themselves to be taken . 
The pioneers and laborers were , in the army of this man , a body full of ideas and zeal , because their commander treated them like soldiers , knew how to render their work glorious , and never allowed them to be killed if he could help it . 
It should have been seen with what eagerness the marshy glebes of Holland were turned over . 
Those turf-heaps , mounds of potter 's clay , melted at the word of the soldiers like butter in the frying-pans of Friesland housewives . 
M. d'Artagnan dispatched a courier to the king to give him an account of the last success , which redoubled the good humor of his majesty and his inclination to amuse the ladies . 
These victories of M. d'Artagnan gave so much majesty to the prince , that Madame de Montespan no longer called him anything but Louis the Invincible . 
So that Mademoiselle de la Valliere , who only called the king Louis the Victorious , lost much of his majesty 's favor . 
Besides , her eyes were frequently red , and to an Invincible nothing is more disagreeable than a mistress who weeps while everything is smiling round her . 
The star of Mademoiselle de la Valliere was being drowned in clouds and tears . 
But the gayety of Madame de Montespan redoubled with the successes of the king , and consoled him for every other unpleasant circumstance . 
It was to D'Artagnan the king owed this ; and his majesty was anxious to acknowledge these services ; he wrote to M. Colbert : `` MONSIEUR COLBERT , - We have a promise to fulfil with M. d'Artagnan , who so well keeps his . 
This is to inform you that the time is come for performing it . 
All provisions for this purpose you shall be furnished with in due time . 
LOUIS . '' 
In consequence of this , Colbert , detaining D'Artagnan 's envoy , placed in the hands of that messenger a letter from himself , and a small coffer of ebony inlaid with gold , not very important in appearance , but which , without doubt , was very heavy , as a guard of five men was given to the messenger , to assist him in carrying it . 
These people arrived before the place which D'Artagnan was besieging towards daybreak , and presented themselves at the lodgings of the general . 
They were told that M. d'Artagnan , annoyed by a sortie which the governor , an artful man , had made the evening before , and in which the works had been destroyed and seventy-seven men killed , and the reparation of the breaches commenced , had just gone with twenty companies of grenadiers to reconstruct the works . 
M. Colbert 's envoy had orders to go and seek M. d'Artagnan , wherever he might be , or at whatever hour of the day or night . 
He directed his course , therefore , towards the trenches , followed by his escort , all on horseback . 
They perceived M. d'Artagnan in the open plain , with his gold - laced hat , his long cane , and gilt cuffs . 
He was biting his white mustache , and wiping off , with his left hand , the dust which the passing balls threw up from the ground they plowed so near him . 
They also saw , amidst this terrible fire , which filled the air with whistling hisses , officers handling the shovel , soldiers rolling barrows , and vast fascines , rising by being either carried or dragged by from ten to twenty men , cover the front of the trench reopened to the center by this extraordinary effort of the general . 
In three hours , all was reinstated . 
D'Artagnan began to speak more mildly ; and he became quite calm when the captain of the pioneers approached him , hat in hand , to tell him that the trench was again in proper order . 
This man had scarcely finished speaking , when a ball took off one of his legs , and he fell into the arms of D'Artagnan . 
The latter lifted up his soldier , and quietly , with soothing words , carried him into the trench , amidst the enthusiastic applause of the regiments . 
From that time it was no longer a question of valor - the army was delirious ; two companies stole away to the advanced posts , which they instantly destroyed . 
When their comrades , restrained with great difficulty by D'Artagnan , saw them lodged upon the bastions , they rushed forward likewise ; and soon a furious assault was made upon the counterscarp , upon which depended the safety of the place . 
D'Artagnan perceived there was only one means left of checking his army - to take the place . 
He directed all his force to the two breaches , where the besieged were busy in repairing . 
The shock was terrible ; eighteen companies took part in it , and D'Artagnan went with the rest , within half cannon-shot of the place , to support the attack by echelons . 
The cries of the Dutch , who were being poniarded upon their guns by D'Artagnan 's grenadiers , were distinctly audible . 
The struggle grew fiercer with the despair of the governor , who disputed his position foot by foot . 
D'Artagnan , to put an end to the affair , and to silence the fire , which was unceasing , sent a fresh column , which penetrated like a very wedge ; and he soon perceived upon the ramparts , through the fire , the terrified flight of the besieged , pursued by the besiegers . 
At this moment the general , breathing feely and full of joy , heard a voice behind him , saying , `` Monsieur , if you please , from M. Colbert . '' 
