Whereupon the whole court began , on all sides , to devour the dishes spread before them with such enthusiasm that it looked as though a cloud of Egyptian locusts was settling down on green and growing crops . 
As soon , however , as his hunger was appeased , the king became morose and overgloomed again ; the more so in proportion to the satisfaction he fancied he had previously manifested , and particularly on account of the deferential manner which his courtiers had shown towards Fouquet . 
D'Artagnan , who ate a good deal and drank but little , without allowing it to be noticed , did not lose a single opportunity , but made a great number of observations which he turned to good profit . 
When the supper was finished , the king expressed a wish not to lose the promenade . 
The park was illuminated ; the moon , too , as if she had placed herself at the orders of the lord of Vaux , silvered the trees and lake with her own bright and quasi-phosphorescent light . 
The air was strangely soft and balmy ; the daintily shell-gravelled walks through the thickly set avenues yielded luxuriously to the feet . 
The fete was complete in every respect , for the king , having met La Valliere in one of the winding paths of the wood , was able to press her hand and say , `` I love you , '' without any one overhearing him except M. d'Artagnan , who followed , and M. Fouquet , who preceded him . 
The dreamy night of magical enchantments stole smoothly on . 
The king having requested to be shown to his room , there was immediately a movement in every direction . 
The queens passed to their own apartments , accompanied by them music of theorbos and lutes ; the king found his musketeers awaiting him on the grand flight of steps , for M. Fouquet had brought them on from Melun and had invited them to supper . 
D'Artagnan 's suspicions at once disappeared . 
He was weary , he had supped well , and wished , for once in his life , thoroughly to enjoy a fete given by a man who was in every sense of the word a king . 
`` M. Fouquet , '' he said , `` is the man for me . '' 
The king was conducted with the greatest ceremony to the chamber of Morpheus , of which we owe some cursory description to our readers . 
It was the handsomest and largest in the palace . 
Lebrun had painted on the vaulted ceiling the happy as well as the unhappy dreams which Morpheus inflicts on kings as well as on other men . 
Everything that sleep gives birth to that is lovely , its fairy scenes , its flowers and nectar , the wild voluptuousness or profound repose of the senses , had the painter elaborated on his frescoes . 
It was a composition as soft and pleasing in one part as dark and gloomy and terrible in another . 
The poisoned chalice , the glittering dagger suspended over the head of the sleeper ; wizards and phantoms with terrific masks , those half-dim shadows more alarming than the approach of fire or the somber face of midnight , these , and such as these , he had made the companions of his more pleasing pictures . 
No sooner had the king entered his room than a cold shiver seemed to pass through him , and on Fouquet asking him the cause of it , the king replied , as pale as death : `` I am sleepy , that is all . '' 
`` Does your majesty wish for your attendants at once ? '' 
`` No ; I have to talk with a few persons first , '' said the king . 
`` Will you have the goodness to tell M. Colbert I wish to see him . '' 
Fouquet bowed and left the room . 
: A Gascon , and a Gascon and a Half . 
D'Artagnan had determined to lose no time , and in fact he never was in the habit of doing so . 
After having inquired for Aramis , he had looked for him in every direction until he had succeeded in finding him . 
Besides , no sooner had the king entered Vaux , than Aramis had retired to his own room , meditating , doubtless , some new piece of gallant attention for his majesty 's amusement . 
D'Artagnan desired the servants to announce him , and found on the second story -LRB- in a beautiful room called the Blue Chamber , on account of the color of its hangings -RRB- the bishop of Vannes in company with Porthos and several of the modern Epicureans . 
Aramis came forward to embrace his friend , and offered him the best seat . 
As it was after awhile generally remarked among those present that the musketeer was reserved , and wished for an opportunity for conversing secretly with Aramis , the Epicureans took their leave . 
Porthos , however , did not stir ; for true it is that , having dined exceedingly well , he was fast asleep in his armchair ; and the freedom of conversation therefore was not interrupted by a third person . 
Porthos had a deep , harmonious snore , and people might talk in the midst of its loud bass without fear of disturbing him . 
D'Artagnan felt that he was called upon to open the conversation . 
`` Well , and so we have come to Vaux , '' he said . 
`` Why , yes , D'Artagnan . 
And how do you like the place ? '' 
`` Very much , and I like M. Fouquet , also . '' 
`` Is he not a charming host ? '' 
`` No one could be more so . '' 
`` I am told that the king began by showing great distance of manner towards M. Fouquet , but that his majesty grew much more cordial afterwards . '' 
`` You did not notice it , then , since you say you have been told so ? '' 
`` No ; I was engaged with the gentlemen who have just left the room about the theatrical performances and the tournaments which are to take place to-morrow . '' 
`` Ah , indeed ! 
you are the comptroller-general of the fetes here , then ? '' 
`` You know I am a friend of all kinds of amusement where the exercise of the imagination is called into activity ; I have always been a poet in one way or another . '' 
`` Yes , I remember the verses you used to write , they were charming . '' 
`` I have forgotten them , but I am delighted to read the verses of others , when those others are known by the names of Moliere , Pelisson , La Fontaine , etc. '' `` Do you know what idea occurred to me this evening , Aramis ? '' 
`` No ; tell me what it was , for I should never be able to guess it , you have so many . '' 
`` Well , the idea occurred to me , that the true king of France is not Louis XIV . '' 
