Athos , forgetful of both the admiral and the fleet , and of his own dignity as a strong man , opened his arms to his son , and pressed him convulsively to his heart . 
`` Accompany us on board , '' said the duke , very much affected ; `` you will gain a good half-hour . '' 
`` No , '' said Athos , `` my farewell has been spoken , I do not wish to voice a second . '' 
`` Then , vicomte , embark - embark quickly ! '' 
added the prince , wishing to spare the tears of these two men , whose hearts were bursting . 
And paternally , tenderly , very much as Porthos might have done , he took Raoul in his arms and placed him in the boat , the oars of which , at a signal , immediately were dipped in the waves . 
He himself , forgetful of ceremony , jumped into his boat , and pushed it off with a vigorous foot . 
`` Adieu ! '' 
cried Raoul . 
Athos replied only by a sign , but he felt something burning on his hand : it was the respectful kiss of Grimaud - the last farewell of the faithful dog . 
This kiss given , Grimaud jumped from the step of the mole upon the stem of a two-oared yawl , which had just been taken in tow by a chaland served by twelve galley-oars . 
Athos seated himself on the mole , stunned , deaf , abandoned . 
Every instant took from him one of the features , one of the shades of the pale face of his son . 
With his arms hanging down , his eyes fixed , his mouth open , he remained confounded with Raoul - in one same look , in one same thought , in one same stupor . 
The sea , by degrees , carried away boats and faces to that distance at which men become nothing but points , - loves , nothing but remembrances . 
Athos saw his son ascend the ladder of the admiral 's ship , he saw him lean upon the rail of the deck , and place himself in such a manner as to be always an object in the eye of his father . 
In vain the cannon thundered , in vain from the ship sounded the long and lordly tumult , responded to by immense acclamations from the shore ; in vain did the noise deafen the ear of the father , the smoke obscured the cherished object of his aspirations . 
Raoul appeared to him to the last moment ; and the imperceptible atom , passing from black to pale , from pale to white , from white to nothing , disappeared for Athos - disappeared very long after , to all the eyes of the spectators , had disappeared both gallant ships and swelling sails . 
Towards midday , when the sun devoured space , and scarcely the tops of the masts dominated the incandescent limit of the sea , Athos perceived a soft aerial shadow rise , and vanish as soon as seen . 
This was the smoke of a cannon , which M. de Beaufort ordered to be fired as a last salute to the coast of France . 
The point was buried in its turn beneath the sky , and Athos returned with slow and painful step to his deserted hostelry . 
: Among Women . 
D'Artagnan had not been able to hide his feelings from his friends so much as he would have wished . 
The stoical soldier , the impassive man-at - arms , overcome by fear and sad presentiments , had yielded , for a few moments , to human weakness . 
When , therefore , he had silenced his heart and calmed the agitation of his nerves , turning towards his lackey , a silent servant , always listening , in order to obey the more promptly : `` Rabaud , '' said he , `` mind , we must travel thirty leagues a day . '' 
`` At your pleasure , captain , '' replied Rabaud . 
And from that moment , D'Artagnan , accommodating his action to the pace of the horse , like a true centaur , gave up his thoughts to nothing - that is to say , to everything . 
He asked himself why the king had sent for him back ; why the Iron Mask had thrown the silver plate at the feet of Raoul . 
As to the first subject , the reply was negative ; he knew right well that the king 's calling him was from necessity . 
He still further knew that Louis XIV . 
must experience an imperious desire for a private conversation with one whom the possession of such a secret placed on a level with the highest powers of the kingdom . 
But as to saying exactly what the king 's wish was , D'Artagnan found himself completely at a loss . 
The musketeer had no doubts , either , upon the reason which had urged the unfortunate Philippe to reveal his character and birth . 
Philippe , buried forever beneath a mask of steel , exiled to a country where the men seemed little more than slaves of the elements ; Philippe , deprived even of the society of D'Artagnan , who had loaded him with honors and delicate attentions , had nothing more to see than odious specters in this world , and , despair beginning to devour him , he poured himself forth in complaints , in the belief that his revelations would raise up some avenger for him . 
The manner in which the musketeer had been near killing his two best friends , the destiny which had so strangely brought Athos to participate in the great state secret , the farewell of Raoul , the obscurity of the future which threatened to end in a melancholy death ; all this threw D'Artagnan incessantly back on lamentable predictions and forebodings , which the rapidity of his pace did not dissipate , as it used formerly to do . 
D'Artagnan passed from these considerations to the remembrance of the proscribed Porthos and Aramis . 
He saw them both , fugitives , tracked , ruined - laborious architects of fortunes they had lost ; and as the king called for his man of execution in hours of vengeance and malice , D'Artagnan trembled at the very idea of receiving some commission that would make his very soul bleed . 
Sometimes , ascending hills , when the winded horse breathed hard from his red nostrils , and heaved his flanks , the captain , left to more freedom of thought , reflected on the prodigious genius of Aramis , a genius of acumen and intrigue , a match to which the Fronde and the civil war had produced but twice . 
Soldier , priest , diplomatist ; gallant , avaricious , cunning ; Aramis had never taken the good things of this life except as stepping - stones to rise to giddier ends . 
Generous in spirit , if not lofty in heart , he never did ill but for the sake of shining even yet more brilliantly . 
Towards the end of his career , at the moment of reaching the goal , like the patrician Fuscus , he had made a false step upon a plank , and had fallen into the sea . 
But Porthos , good , harmless Porthos ! 
To see Porthos hungry , to see Mousqueton without gold lace , imprisoned , perhaps ; to see Pierrefonds , Bracieux , razed to the very stones , dishonored even to the timber , - these were so many poignant griefs for D'Artagnan , and every time that one of these griefs struck him , he bounded like a horse at the sting of a gadfly beneath the vaults of foliage where he has sought shady shelter from the burning sun . 
Never was the man of spirit subjected to ennui , if his body was exposed to fatigue ; never did the man of healthy body fail to find life light , if he had something to engage his mind . 
D'Artagnan , riding fast , thinking as constantly , alighted from his horse in Pairs , fresh and tender in his muscles as the athlete preparing for the gymnasium . 
The king did not expect him so soon , and had just departed for the chase towards Meudon . 
D'Artagnan , instead of riding after the king , as he would formerly have done , took off his boots , had a bath , and waited till his majesty should return dusty and tired . 
He occupied the interval of five hours in taking , as people say , the air of the house , and in arming himself against all ill chances . 
He learned that the king , during the last fortnight , had been gloomy ; that the queen-mother was ill and much depressed ; that Monsieur , the king 's brother , was exhibiting a devotional turn ; that Madame had the vapors ; and that M. de Guiche was gone to one of his estates . 
He learned that M. Colbert was radiant ; that M. Fouquet consulted a fresh physician every day , who still did not cure him , and that his principal complaint was one which physicians do not usually cure , unless they are political physicians . 
