said Monsieur , in a fright . 
`` I will tell you all about that , brother ; but it is strange that M. d'Herblay is not here ! '' 
He called out : `` Let M. Fouquet be informed that I wish to speak to him - oh ! 
before you , before you ; do not retire ! '' 
M. de Saint-Aignan returned , bringing satisfactory news of the queen , who only kept her bed from precaution , and to have strength to carry out the king 's wishes . 
Whilst everybody was seeking M. Fouquet and Aramis , the new king quietly continued his experiments , and everybody , family , officers , servants , had not the least suspicion of his identity , his air , his voice , and manners were so like the king 's . 
On his side , Philippe , applying to all countenances the accurate descriptions and key-notes of character supplied by his accomplice Aramis , conducted himself so as not to give birth to a doubt in the minds of those who surrounded him . 
Nothing from that time could disturb the usurper . 
With what strange facility had Providence just reversed the loftiest fortune of the world to substitute the lowliest in its stead ! 
Philippe admired the goodness of God with regard to himself , and seconded it with all the resources of his admirable nature . 
But he felt , at times , something like a specter gliding between him and the rays of his new glory . 
Aramis did not appear . 
The conversation had languished in the royal family ; Philippe , preoccupied , forgot to dismiss his brother and Madame Henrietta . 
The latter were astonished , and began , by degrees , to lose all patience . 
Anne of Austria stooped towards her son 's ear and addressed some words to him in Spanish . 
Philippe was completely ignorant of that language , and grew pale at this unexpected obstacle . 
But , as if the spirit of the imperturbable Aramis had covered him with his infallibility , instead of appearing disconcerted , Philippe rose . 
`` Well ! 
what ? '' 
said Anne of Austria . 
`` What is all that noise ? '' 
said Philippe , turning round towards the door of the second staircase . 
And a voice was heard saying , `` This way , this way ! 
A few steps more , sire ! '' 
`` The voice of M. Fouquet , '' said D'Artagnan , who was standing close to the queen-mother . 
`` Then M. d'Herblay can not be far off , '' added Philippe . 
But he then saw what he little thought to have beheld so near to him . 
All eyes were turned towards the door at which M. Fouquet was expected to enter ; but it was not M. Fouquet who entered . 
A terrible cry resounded from all corners of the chamber , a painful cry uttered by the king and all present . 
It is given to but few men , even those whose destiny contains the strangest elements , and accidents the most wonderful , to contemplate such a spectacle similar to that which presented itself in the royal chamber at that moment . 
The half-closed shutters only admitted the entrance of an uncertain light passing through thick violet velvet curtains lined with silk . 
In this soft shade , the eyes were by degrees dilated , and every one present saw others rather with imagination than with actual sight . 
There could not , however , escape , in these circumstances , one of the surrounding details ; and the new object which presented itself appeared as luminous as though it shone out in full sunlight . 
So it happened with Louis XIV. , when he showed himself , pale and frowning , in the doorway of the secret stairs . 
The face of Fouquet appeared behind him , stamped with sorrow and determination . 
The queen - mother , who perceived Louis XIV. , and who held the hand of Philippe , uttered a cry of which we have spoken , as if she beheld a phantom . 
Monsieur was bewildered , and kept turning his head in astonishment from one to the other . 
Madame made a step forward , thinking she was looking at the form of her brother-in-law reflected in a mirror . 
And , in fact , the illusion was possible . 
The two princes , both pale as death - for we renounce the hope of being able to describe the fearful state of Philippe - trembling , clenching their hands convulsively , measured each other with looks , and darted their glances , sharp as poniards , at each other . 
Silent , panting , bending forward , they appeared as if about to spring upon an enemy . 
The unheard-of resemblance of countenance , gesture , shape , height , even to the resemblance of costume , produced by chance -- for Louis XIV . 
had been to the Louvre and put on a violet-colored dress -- the perfect analogy of the two princes , completed the consternation of Anne of Austria . 
And yet she did not at once guess the truth . 
There are misfortunes in life so truly dreadful that no one will at first accept them ; people rather believe in the supernatural and the impossible . 
Louis had not reckoned on these obstacles . 
He expected that he had only to appear to be acknowledged . 
A living sun , he could not endure the suspicion of equality with any one . 
He did not admit that every torch should not become darkness at the instant he shone out with his conquering ray . 
At the aspect of Philippe , then , he was perhaps more terrified than any one round him , and his silence , his immobility were , this time , a concentration and a calm which precede the violent explosions of concentrated passion . 
