D'Artagnan , when the king had passed under the arch , directed his steps towards the house Fouquet was in ; but so slowly , and stopping so frequently to speak to his musketeers , drawn up like a hedge , that it might be said he was counting the seconds , or the steps , before accomplishing his object . 
Fouquet opened the window to speak to him in the court . 
`` Ah ! '' 
cried D'Artagnan , on perceiving him , `` are you still there , monseigneur ? '' 
And that word still completed the proof to Fouquet of how much information and how many useful counsels were contained in the first visit the musketeer had paid him . 
The surintendant sighed deeply . 
`` Good heavens ! 
yes , monsieur , '' replied he . 
`` The arrival of the king has interrupted me in the projects I had formed . '' 
`` Oh , then you know that the king has arrived ? '' 
`` Yes , monsieur , I have seen him ; and this time you come from him - '' `` To inquire after you , monseigneur ; and , if your health is not too bad , to beg you to have the kindness to repair to the castle . '' 
`` Directly , Monsieur d'Artagnan , directly ! '' 
`` Ah , mordioux ! '' 
said the captain , `` now the king is come , there is no more walking for anybody - no more free will ; the password governs all now , you as much as me , me as much as you . '' 
Fouquet heaved a last sigh , climbed with difficulty into his carriage , so great was his weakness , and went to the castle , escorted by D'Artagnan , whose politeness was not less terrifying this time than it had just before been consoling and cheerful . 
: How the King , Louis XIV. , Played His Little Part . 
As Fouquet was alighting from his carriage , to enter the castle of Nantes , a man of mean appearance went up to him with marks of the greatest respect , and gave him a letter . 
D'Artagnan endeavored to prevent this man from speaking to Fouquet , and pushed him away , but the message had been given to the surintendant . 
Fouquet opened the letter and read it , and instantly a vague terror , which D'Artagnan did not fail to penetrate , was painted on the countenance of the first minister . 
Fouquet put the paper into the portfolio which he had under his arm , and passed on towards the king 's apartments . 
D'Artagnan , through the small windows made at every landing of the donjon stairs , saw , as he went up behind Fouquet , the man who had delivered the note , looking round him on the place and making signs to several persons , who disappeared in the adjacent streets , after having themselves repeated the signals . 
Fouquet was made to wait for a moment on the terrace of which we have spoken , - a terrace which abutted on the little corridor , at the end of which the cabinet of the king was located . 
Here D'Artagnan passed on before the surintendant , whom , till that time , he had respectfully accompanied , and entered the royal cabinet . 
`` Well ? '' 
asked Louis XIV. , who , on perceiving him , threw on to the table covered with papers a large green cloth . 
`` The order is executed , sire . '' 
`` And Fouquet ? '' 
`` Monsieur le surintendant follows me , '' said D'Artagnan . 
`` In ten minutes let him be introduced , '' said the king , dismissing D'Artagnan again with a gesture . 
The latter retired ; but had scarcely reached the corridor at the extremity of which Fouquet was waiting for him , when he was recalled by the king 's bell . 
`` Did he not appear astonished ? '' 
asked the king . 
`` Who , sire ? '' 
`` Fouquet , '' replied the king , without saying monsieur , a peculiarity which confirmed the captain of the musketeers in his suspicions . 
`` No , sire , '' replied he . 
`` That 's well ! '' 
And a second time Louis dismissed D'Artagnan . 
Fouquet had not quitted the terrace where he had been left by his guide . 
He reperused his note , conceived thus : `` Something is being contrived against you . 
Perhaps they will not dare to carry it out at the castle ; it will be on your return home . 
The house is already surrounded by musketeers . 
Do not enter . 
A white horse is in waiting for you behind the esplanade ! '' 
Fouquet recognized the writing and zeal of Gourville . 
Not being willing that , if any evil happened to himself , this paper should compromise a faithful friend , the surintendant was busy tearing it into a thousand morsels , spread about by the wind from the balustrade of the terrace . 
D'Artagnan found him watching the snowflake fluttering of the last scraps in space . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` the king awaits you . '' 
Fouquet walked with a deliberate step along the little corridor , where MM . 
de Brienne and Rose were at work , whilst the Duc de Saint-Aignan , seated on a chair , likewise in the corridor , appeared to be waiting for orders , with feverish impatience , his sword between his legs . 
It appeared strange to Fouquet that MM . 
