my friend , whom , then , will you serve ? 
The times are past when you might have said , ' I belong to M. de Beaufort . ' 
No , nowadays , we all belong to the king , great or small . 
Therefore , if you serve on board my vessels , there can be nothing equivocal about it , my dear vicomte ; it will be the king you will serve . '' 
Athos waited with a kind of impatient joy for the reply about to be made to this embarrassing question by Raoul , the intractable enemy of the king , his rival . 
The father hoped that the obstacle would overcome the desire . 
He was thankful to M. de Beaufort , whose lightness or generous reflection had thrown an impediment in the way of the departure of a son , now his only joy . 
But Raoul , still firm and tranquil , replied : `` Monsieur le duc , the objection you make I have already considered in my mind . 
I will serve on board your vessels , because you do me the honor to take me with you ; but I shall there serve a more powerful master than the king : I shall serve God ! '' 
`` God ! 
how so ? '' 
said the duke and Athos together . 
`` My intention is to make profession , and become a knight of Malta , '' added Bragelonne , letting fall , one by one , words more icy than the drops which fall from the bare trees after the tempests of winter . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- Under this blow Athos staggered and the prince himself was moved . 
Grimaud uttered a heavy groan , and let fall the bottle , which was broken without anybody paying attention . 
M. de Beaufort looked the young man in the face , and read plainly , though his eyes were cast down , the fire of resolution before which everything must give way . 
As to Athos , he was too well acquainted with that tender , but inflexible soul ; he could not hope to make it deviate from the fatal road it had just chosen . 
He could only press the hand the duke held out to him . 
`` Comte , I shall set off in two days for Toulon , '' said M. de Beaufort . 
`` Will you meet me at Paris , in order that I may know your determination ? '' 
`` I will have the honor of thanking you there , mon prince , for all your kindness , '' replied the comte . 
`` And be sure to bring the vicomte with you , whether he follows me or does not follow me , '' added the duke ; `` he has my word , and I only ask yours . '' 
Having thrown a little balm upon the wound of the paternal heart , he pulled the ear of Grimaud , whose eyes sparkled more than usual , and regained his escort in the parterre . 
The horses , rested and refreshed , set off with spirit through the lovely night , and soon placed a considerable distance between their master and the chateau . 
Athos and Bragelonne were again face to face . 
Eleven o'clock was striking . 
The father and son preserved a profound silence towards each other , where an intelligent observer would have expected cries and tears . 
But these two men were of such a nature that all emotion following their final resolutions plunged itself so deep into their hearts that it was lost forever . 
They passed , then , silently and almost breathlessly , the hour that preceded midnight . 
The clock , by striking , alone pointed out to them how many minutes had lasted the painful journey made by their souls in the immensity of their remembrances of the past and fear of the future . 
Athos rose first , saying , `` it is late , then ... . 
Till to-morrow . '' 
Raoul rose , and in his turn embraced his father . 
The latter held him clasped to his breast , and said , in a tremulous voice , `` In two days , you will have left me , my son - left me forever , Raoul ! '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the young man , `` I had formed a determination , that of piercing my heart with my sword ; but you would have thought that cowardly . 
I have renounced that determination , and therefore we must part . '' 
`` You leave me desolate by going , Raoul . '' 
`` Listen to me again , monsieur , I implore you . 
If I do not go , I shall die here of grief and love . 
I know how long a time I have to live thus . 
Send me away quickly , monsieur , or you will see me basely die before your eyes - in your house - this is stronger than my will - stronger than my strength - you may plainly see that within one month I have lived thirty years , and that I approach the end of my life . '' 
`` Then , '' said Athos , coldly , `` you go with the intention of getting killed in Africa ? 
Oh , tell me ! 
do not lie ! '' 
Raoul grew deadly pale , and remained silent for two seconds , which were to his father two hours of agony . 
Then , all at once : `` Monsieur , '' said he , `` I have promised to devote myself to God . 
In exchange for the sacrifice I make of my youth and liberty , I will only ask of Him one thing , and that is , to preserve me for you , because you are the only tie which attaches me to this world . 
God alone can give me the strength not to forget that I owe you everything , and that nothing ought to stand in my esteem before you . '' 
Athos embraced his son tenderly , and said : `` You have just replied to me on the word of honor of an honest man ; in two days we shall be with M. de Beaufort at Paris , and you will then do what will be proper for you to do . 
You are free , Raoul ; adieu . '' 
