- off ! 
throw yourself off ! ' 
M. de Bragelonne was an officer much beloved in the army . 
Already had the vicomte arrived within pistol-shot of the ramparts , when a discharge was poured upon him that enshrouded him in fire and smoke . 
We lost sight of him ; the smoke dispersed ; he was on foot , upright ; his horse was killed . 
`` The vicomte was summoned to surrender by the Arabs , but he made them a negative sign with his head , and continued to march towards the palisades . 
This was a mortal imprudence . 
Nevertheless the entire army was pleased that he would not retreat , since ill-chance had led him so near . 
He marched a few paces further , and the two regiments clapped their hands . 
It was at this moment the second discharge shook the walls , and the Vicomte de Bragelonne again disappeared in the smoke ; but this time the smoke dispersed in vain ; we no longer saw him standing . 
He was down , with his head lower than his legs , among the bushes , and the Arabs began to think of leaving their intrenchments to come and cut off his head or take his body - as is the custom with the infidels . 
But Monseigneur le Duc de Beaufort had followed all this with his eyes , and the sad spectacle drew from him many painful sighs . 
He then cried aloud , seeing the Arabs running like white phantoms among the mastic-trees , ` Grenadiers ! 
lancers ! 
will you let them take that noble body ? ' 
`` Saying these words and waving his sword , he himself rode towards the enemy . 
The regiments , rushing in his steps , ran in their turn , uttering cries as terrible as those of the Arabs were wild . 
`` The combat commenced over the body of M. de Bragelonne , and with such inveteracy was it fought that a hundred and sixty Arabs were left upon the field , by the side of at least fifty of our troops . 
It was a lieutenant from Normandy who took the body of the vicomte on his shoulders and carried it back to the lines . 
The advantage was , however , pursued , the regiments took the reserve with them , and the enemy 's palisades were utterly destroyed . 
At three o'clock the fire of the Arabs ceased ; the hand-to-hand fight lasted two hours ; it was a massacre . 
At five o'clock we were victorious at all points ; the enemy had abandoned his positions , and M. le duc ordered the white flag to be planted on the summit of the little mountain . 
It was then we had time to think of M. de Bragelonne , who had eight large wounds in his body , through which almost all his blood had welled away . 
Still , however , he had breathed , which afforded inexpressible joy to monseigneur , who insisted on being present at the first dressing of the wounds and the consultation of the surgeons . 
There were two among them who declared M. de Bragelonne would live . 
Monseigneur threw his arms around their necks , and promised them a thousand louis each if they could save him . 
`` The vicomte heard these transports of joy , and whether he was in despair , or whether he suffered much from his wounds , he expressed by his countenance a contradiction , which gave rise to reflection , particularly in one of the secretaries when he had heard what follows . 
The third surgeon was the brother of Sylvain de Saint-Cosme , the most learned of them all . 
He probed the wounds in his turn , and said nothing . 
M. de Bragelonne fixed his eyes steadily upon the skillful surgeon , and seemed to interrogate his every movement . 
The latter , upon being questioned by monseigneur , replied that he saw plainly three mortal wounds out of eight , but so strong was the constitution of the wounded , so rich was he in youth , and so merciful was the goodness of God , that perhaps M. de Bragelonne might recover , particularly if he did not move in the slightest manner . 
Frere Sylvain added , turning towards his assistants , ` Above everything , do not allow him to move , even a finger , or you will kill him ; ' and we all left the tent in very low spirits . 
That secretary I have mentioned , on leaving the tent , thought he perceived a faint and sad smile glide over the lips of M. de Bragelonne when the duke said to him , in a cheerful , kind voice , ` We will save you , vicomte , we will save you yet . ' 
`` In the evening , when it was believed the wounded youth had taken some repose , one of the assistants entered his tent , but rushed out again immediately , uttering loud cries . 
We all ran up in disorder , M. le duc with us , and the assistant pointed to the body of M. de Bragelonne upon the ground , at the foot of his bed , bathed in the remainder of his blood . 
It appeared that he had suffered some convulsion , some delirium , and that he had fallen ; that the fall had accelerated his end , according to the prognosis of Frere Sylvain . 
We raised the vicomte ; he was cold and dead . 
He held a lock of fair hair in his right hand , and that hand was tightly pressed upon his heart . '' 
Then followed the details of the expedition , and of the victory obtained over the Arabs . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the account of the death of poor Raoul . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured he , `` unhappy boy ! 
a suicide ! '' 
And turning his eyes towards the chamber of the chateau , in which Athos slept in eternal sleep , `` They kept their words with each other , '' said he , in a low voice ; `` now I believe them to be happy ; they must be reunited . '' 
And he returned through the parterre with slow and melancholy steps . 
All the village - all the neighborhood - were filled with grieving neighbors relating to each other the double catastrophe , and making preparations for the funeral . 
: The Last Canto of the Poem . 
On the morrow , all the noblesse of the provinces , of the environs , and wherever messengers had carried the news , might have been seen arriving in detachments . 
D'Artagnan had shut himself up , without being willing to speak to anybody . 
Two such heavy deaths falling upon the captain , so closely after the death of Porthos , for a long time oppressed that spirit which had hitherto been so indefatigable and invulnerable . 
