And he slowly gained his bedroom . 
Raoul went down into the garden , and passed the night in the alley of limes . 
: Preparations for Departure . 
Athos lost no more time in combating this immutable resolution . 
He gave all his attention to preparing , during the two days the duke had granted him , the proper appointments for Raoul . 
This labor chiefly concerned Grimaud , who immediately applied himself to it with the good-will and intelligence we know he possessed . 
Athos gave this worthy servant orders to take the route to Paris when the equipments should be ready ; and , not to expose himself to the danger of keeping the duke waiting , or delaying Raoul , so that the duke should perceive his absence , he himself , the day after the visit of M. de Beaufort , set off for Paris with his son . 
For the poor young man it was an emotion easily to be understood , thus to return to Paris amongst all the people who had known and loved him . 
Every face recalled a pang to him who had suffered so much ; to him who had loved so much , some circumstance of his unhappy love . 
Raoul , on approaching Paris , felt as if he were dying . 
Once in Paris , he really existed no longer . 
When he reached Guiche 's residence , he was informed that Guiche was with Monsieur . 
Raoul took the road to the Luxembourg , and when arrived , without suspecting that he was going to the place where La Valliere had lived , he heard so much music and respired so many perfumes , he heard so much joyous laughter , and saw so many dancing shadows , that if it had not been for a charitable woman , who perceived him so dejected and pale beneath a doorway , he would have remained there a few minutes , and then would have gone away , never to return . 
But , as we have said , in the first ante-chamber he had stopped , solely for the sake of not mixing himself with all those happy beings he felt were moving around him in the adjacent salons . 
And as one of Monsieur 's servants , recognizing him , had asked him if he wished to see Monsieur or Madame , Raoul had scarcely answered him , but had sunk down upon a bench near the velvet doorway , looking at a clock , which had stopped for nearly an hour . 
The servant had passed on , and another , better acquainted with him , had come up , and interrogated Raoul whether he should inform M. de Guiche of his being there . 
This name did not even arouse the recollections of Raoul . 
The persistent servant went on to relate that De Guiche had just invented a new game of lottery , and was teaching it to the ladies . 
Raoul , opening his large eyes , like the absent man in Theophrastus , made no answer , but his sadness increased two shades . 
With his head hanging down , his limbs relaxed , his mouth half open for the escape of his sighs , Raoul remained , thus forgotten , in the ante-chamber , when all at once a lady 's robe passed , rubbing against the doors of a side salon , which opened on the gallery . 
A lady , young , pretty , and gay , scolding an officer of the household , entered by that way , and expressed herself with much vivacity . 
The officer replied in calm but firm sentences ; it was rather a little love pet than a quarrel of courtiers , and was terminated by a kiss on the fingers of the lady . 
Suddenly , on perceiving Raoul , the lady became silent , and pushing away the officer : `` Make your escape , Malicorne , '' said she ; `` I did not think there was any one here . 
I shall curse you , if they have either heard or seen us ! '' 
Malicorne hastened away . 
The young lady advanced behind Raoul , and stretching her joyous face over him as he lay : `` Monsieur is a gallant man , '' said she , `` and no doubt - '' She here interrupted herself by uttering a cry . 
`` Raoul ! '' 
said she , blushing . 
`` Mademoiselle de Montalais ! '' 
said Raoul , paler than death . 
He rose unsteadily , and tried to make his way across the slippery mosaic of the floor ; but she had comprehended that savage and cruel grief ; she felt that in the flight of Raoul there was an accusation of herself . 
A woman , ever vigilant , she did not think she ought to let the opportunity slip of making good her justification ; but Raoul , though stopped by her in the middle of the gallery , did not seem disposed to surrender without a combat . 
He took it up in a tone so cold and embarrassed , that if they had been thus surprised , the whole court would have no doubt about the proceedings of Mademoiselle de Montalais . 
`` Ah ! 
monsieur , '' said she with disdain , `` what you are doing is very unworthy of a gentleman . 
My heart inclines me to speak to you ; you compromise me by a reception almost uncivil ; you are wrong , monsieur ; and you confound your friends with enemies . 
Farewell ! '' 
Raoul had sworn never to speak of Louise , never even to look at those who might have seen Louise ; he was going into another world , that he might never meet with anything Louise had seen , or even touched . 
But after the first shock of his pride , after having had a glimpse of Montalais , the companion of Louise - Montalais , who reminded him of the turret of Blois and the joys of youth - all his reason faded away . 
`` Pardon me , mademoiselle ; it enters not , it can not enter into my thoughts to be uncivil . '' 
`` Do you wish to speak to me ? '' 
said she , with the smile of former days . 
`` Well ! 
come somewhere else ; for we may be surprised . '' 
`` Oh ! ' 
said he . 
She looked at the clock , doubtingly , then , having reflected : `` In my apartment , '' said she , `` we shall have an hour to ourselves . '' 
And taking her course , lighter than a fairy , she ran up to her chamber , followed by Raoul . 
Shutting the door , and placing in the hands of her cameriste the mantle she had held upon her arm : `` You were seeking M. de Guiche , were you not ? '' 
said she to Raoul . 
