is there an instant to be lost ? '' 
Madame Fouquet rushed downstairs , calling for her horses ; Madame de Belliere flew after her , catching her in her arms , and saying : `` Madame , in the name of his safety , do not betray anything , do not manifest alarm . '' 
Pelisson ran to have the horses put to the carriages . 
And , in the meantime , Gourville gathered in his hat all that the weeping friends were able to throw into it of gold and silver - the last offering , the pious alms made to misery by poverty . 
The surintendant , dragged along by some , carried by others , was shut up in his carriage . 
Gourville took the reins , and mounted the box . 
Pelisson supported Madame Fouquet , who had fainted . 
Madame de Belliere had more strength , and was well paid for it ; she received Fouquet 's last kiss . 
Pelisson easily explained this precipitate departure by saying that an order from the king had summoned the minister to Nantes . 
: In M. Colbert 's Carriage . 
As Gourville had seen , the king 's musketeers were mounting and following their captain . 
The latter , who did not like to be confined in his proceedings , left his brigade under the orders of a lieutenant , and set off on post horses , recommending his men to use all diligence . 
However rapidly they might travel , they could not arrive before him . 
He had time , in passing along the Rue des Petits-Champs , to see something which afforded him plenty of food for thought and conjecture . 
He saw M. Colbert coming out from his house to get into his carriage , which was stationed before the door . 
In this carriage D'Artagnan perceived the hoods of two women , and being rather curious , he wished to know the names of the ladies hid beneath these hoods . 
To get a glimpse at them , for they kept themselves closely covered up , he urged his horse so near the carriage , that he drove him against the step with such force as to shake everything containing and contained . 
The terrified women uttered , the one a faint cry , by which D'Artagnan recognized a young woman , the other an imprecation , in which he recognized the vigor and aplomb that half a century bestows . 
The hoods were thrown back : one of the women was Madame Vanel , the other the Duchesse de Chevreuse . 
D'Artagnan 's eyes were quicker than those of the ladies ; he had seen and known them , whilst they did not recognize him ; and as they laughed at their fright , pressing each other 's hands , - `` Humph ! '' 
said D'Artagnan , `` the old duchesse is no more inaccessible to friendship than formerly . 
She paying her court to the mistress of M. Colbert ! 
Poor M. Fouquet ! 
that presages you nothing good ! '' 
He rode on . 
M. Colbert got into his carriage and the distinguished trio commenced a sufficiently slow pilgrimage toward the wood of Vincennes . 
Madame de Chevreuse set down Madame Vanel at her husband 's house , and , left alone with M. Colbert , chatted upon affairs whilst continuing her ride . 
She had an inexhaustible fund of conversation , that dear duchesse , and as she always talked for the ill of others , though ever with a view to her own good , her conversation amused her interlocutor , and did not fail to leave a favorable impression . 
She taught Colbert , who , poor man ! 
was ignorant of the fact , how great a minister he was , and how Fouquet would soon become a cipher . 
She promised to rally around him , when he should become surintendant , all the old nobility of the kingdom , and questioned him as to the preponderance it would be proper to allow La Valliere . 
She praised him , she blamed him , she bewildered him . 
She showed him the secret of so many secrets that , for a moment , Colbert thought he was doing business with the devil . 
She proved to him that she held in her hand the Colbert of to - day , as she had held the Fouquet of yesterday ; and as he asked her very simply the reason of her hatred for the surintendant : `` Why do you yourself hate him ? '' 
said she . 
`` Madame , in politics , '' replied he , `` the differences of system oft bring about dissentions between men . 
M. Fouquet always appeared to me to practice a system opposed to the true interests of the king . '' 
She interrupted him . 
- `` I will say no more to you about M. Fouquet . 
The journey the king is about to take to Nantes will give a good account of him . 
M. Fouquet , for me , is a man gone by - and for you also . '' 
Colbert made no reply . 
`` On his return from Nantes , '' continued the duchesse , `` the king , who is only anxious for a pretext , will find that the States have not behaved well - that they have made too few sacrifices . 
The States will say that the imposts are too heavy , and that the surintendant has ruined them . 
The king will lay all the blame on M. Fouquet , and then - '' `` And then ? '' 
said Colbert . 
`` Oh ! 
he will be disgraced . 
Is not that your opinion ? '' 
Colbert darted a glance at the duchesse , which plainly said : `` If M. Fouquet be only disgraced , you will not be the cause of it . '' 
