Age , which had been kept back by the presence of the beloved object , arrived with that cortege of pains and inconveniences , which grows by geometrical accretion . 
Athos had no longer his son to induce him to walk firmly , with head erect , as a good example ; he had no longer , in those brilliant eyes of the young man , an ever-ardent focus at which to kindle anew the fire of his looks . 
And then , must it be said , that nature , exquisite in tenderness and reserve , no longer finding anything to understand its feelings , gave itself up to grief with all the warmth of common natures when they yield to joy . 
The Comte de la Fere , who had remained a young man to his sixty-second year ; the warrior who had preserved his strength in spite of fatigue ; his freshness of mind in spite of misfortune , his mild serenity of soul and body in spite of Milady , in spite of Mazarin , in spite of La Valliere ; Athos had become an old man in a week , from the moment at which he lost the comfort of his later youth . 
Still handsome , though bent , noble , but sad , he sought , since his solitude , the deeper glades where sunshine scarcely penetrated . 
He discontinued all the mighty exercises he had enjoyed through life , when Raoul was no longer with him . 
The servants , accustomed to see him stirring with the dawn at all seasons , were astonished to hear seven o'clock strike before their master quitted his bed . 
Athos remained in bed with a book under his pillow - but he did not sleep , neither did he read . 
Remaining in bed that he might no longer have to carry his body , he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from their envelope and return to his son , or to God . 
-LRB- 6 -RRB- His people were sometimes terrified to see him , for hours together , absorbed in silent reverie , mute and insensible ; he no longer heard the timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to watch the sleeping or waking of his master . 
It often occurred that he forgot the day had half passed away , that the hours for the two first meals were gone by . 
Then he was awakened . 
He rose , descended to his shady walk , then came out a little into the sun , as though to partake of its warmth for a minute in memory of his absent child . 
And then the dismal monotonous walk recommenced , until , exhausted , he regained the chamber and his bed , his domicile by choice . 
For several days the comte did not speak a single word . 
He refused to receive the visits that were paid him , and during the night he was seen to relight his lamp and pass long hours in writing , or examining parchments . 
Athos wrote one of these letters to Vannes , another to Fontainebleau ; they remained without answers . 
We know why : Aramis had quitted France , and D'Artagnan was traveling from Nantes to Paris , from Paris to Pierrefonds . 
His valet de chambre observed that he shortened his walk every day by several turns . 
The great alley of limes soon became too long for feet that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times a day . 
The comte walked feebly as far as the middle trees , seated himself upon a mossy bank that sloped towards a sidewalk , and there waited the return of his strength , or rather the return of night . 
Very shortly a hundred steps exhausted him . 
At length Athos refused to rise at all ; he declined all nourishment , and his terrified people , although he did not complain , although he wore a smile upon his lips , although he continued to speak with his sweet voice - his people went to Blois in search of the ancient physician of the late Monsieur , and brought him to the Comte de la Fere in such a fashion that he could see the comte without being himself seen . 
For this purpose , they placed him in a closet adjoining the chamber of the patient , and implored him not to show himself , for fear of displeasing their master , who had not asked for a physician . 
The doctor obeyed . 
Athos was a sort of model for the gentlemen of the country ; the Blaisois boasted of possessing this sacred relic of French glory . 
Athos was a great seigneur compared with such nobles as the king improvised by touching with his artificial scepter the parched-up trunks of the heraldic trees of the province . 
People respected Athos , we say , and they loved him . 
The physician could not bear to see his people weep , to see flock round him the poor of the canton , to whom Athos had so often given life and consolation by his kind words and his charities . 
He examined , therefore , from the depths of his hiding-place , the nature of that mysterious malady which bent and aged more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life and a desire to live . 
He remarked upon the cheeks of Athos the hectic hue of fever , which feeds upon itself ; slow fever , pitiless , born in a fold of the heart , sheltering itself behind that rampart , growing from the suffering it engenders , at once cause and effect of a perilous situation . 
The comte spoke to nobody ; he did not even talk to himself . 
His thought feared noise ; it approached to that degree of over-excitement which borders upon ecstasy . 
Man thus absorbed , though he does not yet belong to God , already appertains no longer to the earth . 
The doctor remained for several hours studying this painful struggle of the will against superior power ; he was terrified at seeing those eyes always fixed , ever directed on some invisible object ; was terrified at the monotonous beating of that heart from which never a sigh arose to vary the melancholy state ; for often pain becomes the hope of the physician . 
Half a day passed away thus . 
The doctor formed his resolution like a brave man ; he issued suddenly from his place of retreat , and went straight up to Athos , who beheld him without evincing more surprise than if he had understood nothing of the apparition . 
`` Monsieur le comte , I crave your pardon , '' said the doctor , coming up to the patient with open arms ; `` but I have a reproach to make you - you shall hear me . '' 
And he seated himself by the pillow of Athos , who had great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation . 
`` What is the matter , doctor ? '' 
asked the comte , after a silence . 
`` The matter is , you are ill , monsieur , and have had no advice . '' 
`` I ! 
ill ! '' 
said Athos , smiling . 
`` Fever , consumption , weakness , decay , monsieur le comte ! '' 
`` Weakness ! '' 
replied Athos ; `` is it possible ? 
I do not get up . '' 
`` Come , come ! 
