While saying these words , he fell upon his knees , but with his mighty hands he clung to the rocks , and raised himself up again . 
`` Quick ! 
quick ! '' 
repeated Aramis , bending forward towards the shore , as if to draw Porthos towards him with his arms . 
`` Here I am , '' stammered Porthos , collecting all his strength to make one step more . 
`` In the name of Heaven ! 
Porthos , make haste ! 
the barrel will blow up ! '' 
`` Make haste , monseigneur ! '' 
shouted the Bretons to Porthos , who was floundering as in a dream . 
But there was no time ; the explosion thundered , earth gaped , the smoke which hurled through the clefts obscured the sky ; the sea flowed back as though driven by the blast of flame which darted from the grotto as if from the jaws of some gigantic fiery chimera ; the reflux took the bark out twenty toises ; the solid rocks cracked to their base , and separated like blocks beneath the operation of the wedge ; a portion of the vault was carried up towards heaven , as if it had been built of cardboard ; the green and blue and topaz conflagration and black lava of liquefactions clashed and combated an instant beneath a majestic dome of smoke ; then oscillated , declined , and fell successively the mighty monoliths of rock which the violence of the explosion had not been able to uproot from the bed of ages ; they bowed to each other like grave and stiff old men , then prostrating themselves , lay down forever in their dusty tomb . 
This frightful shock seemed to restore Porthos the strength that he had lost ; he arose , a giant among granite giants . 
But at the moment he was flying between the double hedge of granite phantoms , these latter , which were no longer supported by the corresponding links , began to roll and totter round our Titan , who looked as if precipitated from heaven amidst rocks which he had just been launching . 
Porthos felt the very earth beneath his feet becoming jelly-tremulous . 
He stretched both hands to repulse the falling rocks . 
A gigantic block was held back by each of his extended arms . 
He bent his head , and a third granite mass sank between his shoulders . 
For an instant the power of Porthos seemed about to fail him , but this new Hercules united all his force , and the two walls of the prison in which he was buried fell back slowly and gave him place . 
For an instant he appeared , in this frame of granite , like the angel of chaos , but in pushing back the lateral rocks , he lost his point of support , for the monolith which weighed upon his shoulders , and the boulder , pressing upon him with all its weight , brought the giant down upon his knees . 
The lateral rocks , for an instant pushed back , drew together again , and added their weight to the ponderous mass which would have been sufficient to crush ten men . 
The hero fell without a groan - he fell while answering Aramis with words of encouragement and hope , for , thanks to the powerful arch of his hands , for an instant he believed that , like Enceladus , he would succeed in shaking off the triple load . 
But by degrees Aramis beheld the block sink ; the hands , strung for an instant , the arms stiffened for a last effort , gave way , the extended shoulders sank , wounded and torn , and the rocks continued to gradually collapse . 
`` Porthos ! 
Porthos ! '' 
cried Aramis , tearing his hair . 
`` Porthos ! 
where are you ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Here , here , '' murmured Porthos , with a voice growing evidently weaker , `` patience ! 
patience ! '' 
Scarcely had he pronounced these words , when the impulse of the fall augmented the weight ; the enormous rock sank down , pressed by those others which sank in from the sides , and , as it were , swallowed up Porthos in a sepulcher of badly jointed stones . 
On hearing the dying voice of his friend , Aramis had sprung to land . 
Two of the Bretons followed him , with each a lever in his hand - one being sufficient to take care of the bark . 
The dying rattle of the valiant gladiator guided them amidst the ruins . 
Aramis , animated , active and young as at twenty , sprang towards the triple mass , and with his hands , delicate as those of a woman , raised by a miracle of strength the corner-stone of this great granite grave . 
Then he caught a glimpse , through the darkness of that charnel-house , of the still brilliant eye of his friend , to whom the momentary lifting of the mass restored a momentary respiration . 
The two men came rushing up , grasped their iron levers , united their triple strength , not merely to raise it , but sustain it . 
All was useless . 
They gave way with cries of grief , and the rough voice of Porthos , seeing them exhaust themselves in a useless struggle , murmured in an almost cheerful tone those supreme words which came to his lips with the last respiration , `` Too heavy ! '' 
After which his eyes darkened and closed , his face grew ashy pale , the hands whitened , and the colossus sank quite down , breathing his last sigh . 
With him sank the rock , which , even in his dying agony he had still held up . 
The three men dropped the levers , which rolled upon the tumulary stone . 
Then , breathless , pale , his brow covered with sweat , Aramis listened , his breast oppressed , his heart ready to break . 
Nothing more . 
The giant slept the eternal sleep , in the sepulcher which God had built about him to his measure . 
: Porthos 's Epitaph . 
Aramis , silent and sad as ice , trembling like a timid child , arose shivering from the stone . 
A Christian does not walk on tombs . 
But , though capable of standing , he was not capable of walking . 
It might be said that something of dead Porthos had just died within him . 
