: High Treason . 
The ungovernable fury which took possession of the king at the sight and at the perusal of Fouquet 's letter to La Valliere by degrees subsided into a feeling of pain and extreme weariness . 
Youth , invigorated by health and lightness of spirits , requiring soon that what it loses should be immediately restored - youth knows not those endless , sleepless nights which enable us to realize the fable of the vulture unceasingly feeding on Prometheus . 
In cases where the man of middle life , in his acquired strength of will and purpose , and the old , in their state of natural exhaustion , find incessant augmentation of their bitter sorrow , a young man , surprised by the sudden appearance of misfortune , weakens himself in sighs , and groans , and tears , directly struggling with his grief , and is thereby far sooner overthrown by the inflexible enemy with whom he is engaged . 
Once overthrown , his struggles cease . 
Louis could not hold out more than a few minutes , at the end of which he had ceased to clench his hands , and scorch in fancy with his looks the invisible objects of his hatred ; he soon ceased to attack with his violent imprecations not M. Fouquet alone , but even La Valliere herself ; from fury he subsided into despair , and from despair to prostration . 
After he had thrown himself for a few minutes to and fro convulsively on his bed , his nerveless arms fell quietly down ; his head lay languidly on his pillow ; his limbs , exhausted with excessive emotion , still trembled occasionally , agitated by muscular contractions ; while from his breast faint and infrequent sighs still issued . 
Morpheus , the tutelary deity of the apartment , towards whom Louis raised his eyes , wearied by his anger and reconciled by his tears , showered down upon him the sleep-inducing poppies with which his hands are ever filled ; so presently the monarch closed his eyes and fell asleep . 
Then it seemed to him , as it often happens in that first sleep , so light and gentle , which raises the body above the couch , and the soul above the earth - it seemed to him , we say , as if the god Morpheus , painted on the ceiling , looked at him with eyes resembling human eyes ; that something shone brightly , and moved to and fro in the dome above the sleeper ; that the crowd of terrible dreams which thronged together in his brain , and which were interrupted for a moment , half revealed a human face , with a hand resting against the mouth , and in an attitude of deep and absorbed meditation . 
And strange enough , too , this man bore so wonderful a resemblance to the king himself , that Louis fancied he was looking at his own face reflected in a mirror ; with the exception , however , that the face was saddened by a feeling of the profoundest pity . 
Then it seemed to him as if the dome gradually retired , escaping from his gaze , and that the figures and attributes painted by Lebrun became darker and darker as the distance became more and more remote . 
A gentle , easy movement , as regular as that by which a vessel plunges beneath the waves , had succeeded to the immovableness of the bed . 
Doubtless the king was dreaming , and in this dream the crown of gold , which fastened the curtains together , seemed to recede from his vision , just as the dome , to which it remained suspended , had done , so that the winged genius which , with both its hand , supported the crown , seemed , though vainly so , to call upon the king , who was fast disappearing from it . 
The bed still sunk . 
Louis , with his eyes open , could not resist the deception of this cruel hallucination . 
At last , as the light of the royal chamber faded away into darkness and gloom , something cold , gloomy , and inexplicable in its nature seemed to infect the air . 
No paintings , nor gold , nor velvet hangings , were visible any longer , nothing but walls of a dull gray color , which the increasing gloom made darker every moment . 
And yet the bed still continued to descend , and after a minute , which seemed in its duration almost an age to the king , it reached a stratum of air , black and chill as death , and then it stopped . 
The king could no longer see the light in his room , except as from the bottom of a well we can see the light of day . 
`` I am under the influence of some atrocious dream , '' he thought . 
`` It is time to awaken from it . 
Come ! 
let me wake . '' 
Every one has experienced the sensation the above remark conveys ; there is hardly a person who , in the midst of a nightmare whose influence is suffocating , has not said to himself , by the help of that light which still burns in the brain when every human light is extinguished , `` It is nothing but a dream , after all . '' 
This was precisely what Louis XIV . 
said to himself ; but when he said , `` Come , come ! 
wake up , '' he perceived that not only was he already awake , but still more , that he had his eyes open also . 
And then he looked all round him . 
On his right hand and on his left two armed men stood in stolid silence , each wrapped in a huge cloak , and the face covered with a mask ; one of them held a small lamp in his hand , whose glimmering light revealed the saddest picture a king could look upon . 
Louis could not help saying to himself that his dream still lasted , and that all he had to do to cause it to disappear was to move his arms or to say something aloud ; he darted from his bed , and found himself upon the damp , moist ground . 
Then , addressing himself to the man who held the lamp in his hand , he said : `` What is this , monsieur , and what is the meaning of this jest ? '' 
`` It is no jest , '' replied in a deep voice the masked figure that held the lantern . 
`` Do you belong to M. Fouquet ? '' 
inquired the king , greatly astonished at his situation . 
`` It matters very little to whom we belong , '' said the phantom ; `` we are your masters now , that is sufficient . '' 
The king , more impatient than intimidated , turned to the other masked figure . 
`` If this is a comedy , '' he said , `` you will tell M. Fouquet that I find it unseemly and improper , and that I command it should cease . '' 
The second masked person to whom the king had addressed himself was a man of huge stature and vast circumference . 
He held himself erect and motionless as any block of marble . 
`` Well ! '' 
added the king , stamping his foot , `` you do not answer ! '' 
`` We do not answer you , my good monsieur , '' said the giant , in a stentorian voice , `` because there is nothing to say . '' 
`` At least , tell me what you want , '' exclaimed Louis , folding his arms with a passionate gesture . 
`` You will know by and by , '' replied the man who held the lamp . 
`` In the meantime tell me where I am . '' 
`` Look . '' 
Louis looked all round him ; but by the light of the lamp which the masked figure raised for the purpose , he could perceive nothing but the damp walls which glistened here and there with the slimy traces of the snail . 
`` Oh - oh ! 
- a dungeon , '' cried the king . 
`` No , a subterranean passage . '' 
