Immediately outside the gates of Nantes two white roads were seen diverging like separate fingers of a gigantic hand . 
D'Artagnan , who had taken in all the panorama at a glance by crossing the terrace , was led by the line of the Rue aux Herbes to the mouth of one of those roads which took its rise under the gates of Nantes . 
One step more , and he was about to descend the stairs , take his trellised carriage , and go towards the lodgings of M. Fouquet . 
But chance decreed , at the moment of plunging into the staircase , that he was attracted by a moving point then gaining ground upon that road . 
`` What is that ? '' 
said the musketeer to himself ; `` a horse galloping , - a runaway horse , no doubt . 
What a rate he is going at ! '' 
The moving point became detached from the road , and entered into the fields . 
`` A white horse , '' continued the captain , who had just observed the color thrown luminously against the dark ground , `` and he is mounted ; it must be some boy whose horse is thirsty and has run away with him . '' 
These reflections , rapid as lightning , simultaneous with visual perception , D'Artagnan had already forgotten when he descended the first steps of the staircase . 
Some morsels of paper were spread over the stairs , and shone out white against the dirty stones . 
`` Eh ! 
eh ! '' 
said the captain to himself , `` here are some of the fragments of the note torn by M. Fouquet . 
Poor man ! 
he has given his secret to the wind ; the wind will have no more to do with it , and brings it back to the king . 
Decidedly , Fouquet , you play with misfortune ! 
the game is not a fair one , - fortune is against you . 
The star of Louis XIV . 
obscures yours ; the adder is stronger and more cunning than the squirrel . '' 
D'Artagnan picked up one of these morsels of paper as he descended . 
`` Gourville 's pretty little hand ! '' 
cried he , whilst examining one of the fragments of the note ; `` I was not mistaken . '' 
And he read the word `` horse . '' 
`` Stop ! '' 
said he ; and he examined another , upon which there was not a letter traced . 
Upon a third he read the word `` white ; '' `` white horse , '' repeated he , like a child that is spelling . 
`` Ah , mordioux ! '' 
cried the suspicious spirit , `` a white horse ! '' 
And , like that grain of powder which , burning , dilates into ten thousand times its volume , D'Artagnan , enlightened by ideas and suspicions , rapidly reascended the stairs towards the terrace . 
The white horse was still galloping in the direction of the Loire , at the extremity of which , melting into the vapors of the water , a little sail appeared , wave-balanced like a water-butterfly . 
`` Oh ! '' 
cried the musketeer , `` only a man who wants to fly would go at that pace across plowed lands ; there is but one Fouquet , a financier , to ride thus in open day upon a white horse ; there is no one but the lord of Belle-Isle who would make his escape towards the sea , while there are such thick forests on land , and there is but one D'Artagnan in the world to catch M. Fouquet , who has half an hour 's start , and who will have gained his boat within an hour . '' 
This being said , the musketeer gave orders that the carriage with the iron trellis should be taken immediately to a thicket situated just outside the city . 
He selected his best horse , jumped upon his back , galloped along the Rue aux Herbes , taking , not the road Fouquet had taken , but the bank itself of the Loire , certain that he should gain ten minutes upon the total distance , and , at the intersection of the two lines , come up with the fugitive , who could have no suspicion of being pursued in that direction . 
In the rapidity of the pursuit , and with the impatience of the avenger , animating himself as in war , D'Artagnan , so mild , so kind towards Fouquet , was surprised to find himself become ferocious - almost sanguinary . 
For a long time he galloped without catching sight of the white horse . 
His rage assumed fury , he doubted himself , - he suspected that Fouquet had buried himself in some subterranean road , or that he had changed the white horse for one of those famous black ones , as swift as the wind , which D'Artagnan , at Saint - Mande , had so frequently admired and envied for their vigor and their fleetness . 
At such moments , when the wind cut his eyes so as to make the tears spring from them , when the saddle had become burning hot , when the galled and spurred horse reared with pain , and threw behind him a shower of dust and stones , D'Artagnan , raising himself in his stirrups , and seeing nothing on the waters , nothing beneath the trees , looked up into the air like a madman . 
He was losing his senses . 
In the paroxysms of eagerness he dreamt of aerial ways , - the discovery of following century ; he called to his mind Daedalus and the vast wings that had saved him from the prisons of Crete . 
A hoarse sigh broke from his lips , as he repeated , devoured by the fear of ridicule , `` I ! 
I ! 
duped by a Gourville ! 
I ! 
They will say that I am growing old , - they will say I have received a million to allow Fouquet to escape ! '' 
And he again dug his spurs into the sides of his horse : he had ridden astonishingly fast . 
Suddenly , at the extremity of some open pasture-ground , behind the hedges , he saw a white form which showed itself , disappeared , and at last remained distinctly visible against the rising ground . 
D'Artagnan 's heart leaped with joy . 
He wiped the streaming sweat from his brow , relaxed the tension of his knees , - by which the horse breathed more freely , - and , gathering up his reins , moderated the speed of the vigorous animal , his active accomplice on this man-hunt . 
