Aramis pressed the arm of Porthos with both his hands , and fell back to the outlet of the cavern where the three rowers awaited him . 
Porthos , left alone , applied the spark bravely to the match . 
The spark - a feeble spark , first principle of conflagration - shone in the darkness like a glow-worm , then was deadened against the match which it set fire to , Porthos enlivening the flame with his breath . 
The smoke was a little dispersed , and by the light of the sparkling match objects might , for two seconds , be distinguished . 
It was a brief but splendid spectacle , that of this giant , pale , bloody , his countenance lighted by the fire of the match burning in surrounding darkness ! 
The soldiers saw him , they saw the barrel he held in his hand - they at once understood what was going to happen . 
Then , these men , already choked with horror at the sight of what had been accomplished , filled with terror at thought of what was about to be accomplished , gave out a simultaneous shriek of agony . 
Some endeavored to fly , but they encountered the third brigade , which barred their passage ; others mechanically took aim and attempted to fire their discharged muskets ; others fell instinctively upon their knees . 
Two or three officers cried out to Porthos to promise him his liberty if he would spare their lives . 
The lieutenant of the third brigade commanded his men to fire ; but the guards had before them their terrified companions , who served as a living rampart for Porthos . 
We have said that the light produced by the spark and the match did not last more than two seconds ; but during these two seconds this is what it illumined : in the first place , the giant , enlarged in the darkness ; then , at ten paces off , a heap of bleeding bodies , crushed , mutilated , in the midst of which some still heaved in the last agony , lifting the mass as a last respiration inflating the sides of some old monster dying in the night . 
Every breath of Porthos , thus vivifying the match , sent towards this heap of bodies a phosphorescent aura , mingled with streaks of purple . 
In addition to this principal group scattered about the grotto , as the chances of death or surprise had stretched them , isolated bodies seemed to be making ghastly exhibitions of their gaping wounds . 
Above ground , bedded in pools of blood , rose , heavy and sparkling , the short , thick pillars of the cavern , of which the strongly marked shades threw out the luminous particles . 
And all this was seen by the tremulous light of a match attached to a barrel of powder , that is to say , a torch which , whilst throwing a light on the dead past , showed death to come . 
As I have said , this spectacle did not last above two seconds . 
During this short space of time an officer of the third brigade got together eight men armed with muskets , and , through an opening , ordered them to fire upon Porthos . 
But they who received the order to fire trembled so that three guards fell by the discharge , and the five remaining balls hissed on to splinter the vault , plow the ground , or indent the pillars of the cavern . 
A burst of laughter replied to this volley ; then the arm of the giant swung round ; then was seen whirling through the air , like a falling star , the train of fire . 
The barrel , hurled a distance of thirty feet , cleared the barricade of dead bodies , and fell amidst a group of shrieking soldiers , who threw themselves on their faces . 
The officer had followed the brilliant train in the air ; he endeavored to precipitate himself upon the barrel and tear out the match before it reached the powder it contained . 
Useless ! 
The air had made the flame attached to the conductor more active ; the match , which at rest might have burnt five minutes , was consumed in thirty seconds , and the infernal work exploded . 
Furious vortices of sulphur and nitre , devouring shoals of fire which caught every object , the terrible thunder of the explosion , this is what the second which followed disclosed in that cavern of horrors . 
The rocks split like planks of deal beneath the axe . 
A jet of fire , smoke , and debris sprang from the middle of the grotto , enlarging as it mounted . 
The large walls of silex tottered and fell upon the sand , and the sand itself , an instrument of pain when launched from its hard bed , riddled the faces with its myriad cutting atoms . 
Shrieks , imprecations , human life , dead bodies - all were engulfed in one terrific crash . 
The three first compartments became one sepulchral sink into which fell grimly back , in the order of their weight , every vegetable , mineral , or human fragment . 
Then the lighter sand and ash came down in turn , stretching like a winding sheet and smoking over the dismal scene . 
And now , in this burning tomb , this subterranean volcano , seek the king 's guards with their blue coats laced with silver . 
Seek the officers , brilliant in gold , seek for the arms upon which they depended for their defense . 
One single man has made of all of those things a chaos more confused , more shapeless , more terrible than the chaos which existed before the creation of the world . 
There remained nothing of the three compartments - nothing by which God could have recognized His handiwork . 
As for Porthos , after having hurled the barrel of powder amidst his enemies , he had fled , as Aramis had directed him to do , and had gained the last compartment , into which air , light , and sunshine penetrated through the opening . 
Scarcely had he turned the angle which separated the third compartment from the fourth when he perceived at a hundred paces from him the bark dancing on the waves . 
There were his friends , there liberty , there life and victory . 
Six more of his formidable strides , and he would be out of the vault ; out of the vault ! 
a dozen of his vigorous leaps and he would reach the canoe . 
Suddenly he felt his knees give way ; his knees seemed powerless , his legs to yield beneath him . 
`` Oh ! 
oh ! '' 
murmured he , `` there is my weakness seizing me again ! 
I can walk no further ! 
What is this ? '' 
Aramis perceived him through the opening , and unable to conceive what could induce him to stop thus - `` Come on , Porthos ! 
come on , '' he cried ; `` come quickly ! '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
replied the giant , making an effort that contorted every muscle of his body - `` oh ! 
but I can not . '' 
