The master looked him straight between the eyes , and said to him `` Beware of the prison . '' 
There , again , he considered that he had been robbed . 
Society , the State , by diminishing his hoard , had robbed him wholesale . 
Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail . 
Liberation is not deliverance . 
One gets free from the galleys , but not from the sentence . 
That is what happened to him at Grasse . 
We have seen in what manner he was received at D -- As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning , Jean Valjean awoke . 
What woke him was that his bed was too good . 
It was nearly twenty years since he had slept in a bed , and , although he had not undressed , the sensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers . 
He had slept more than four hours . 
His fatigue had passed away . 
He was accustomed not to devote many hours to repose . 
He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him ; then he closed them again , with the intention of going to sleep once more . 
When many varied sensations have agitated the day , when various matters preoccupy the mind , one falls asleep once , but not a second time . 
Sleep comes more easily than it returns . 
This is what happened to Jean Valjean . 
He could not get to sleep again , and he fell to thinking . 
He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one 's mind are troubled . 
There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain . 
His memories of the olden time and of the immediate present floated there pell-mell and mingled confusedly , losing their proper forms , becoming disproportionately large , then suddenly disappearing , as in a muddy and perturbed pool . 
Many thoughts occurred to him ; but there was one which kept constantly presenting itself afresh , and which drove away all others . 
We will mention this thought at once : he had observed the six sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire had placed on the table . 
Those six sets of silver haunted him . 
-- They were there . 
-- A few paces distant . 
-- Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one in which he then was , the old servant-woman had been in the act of placing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed . 
-- He had taken careful note of this cupboard . 
-- On the right , as you entered from the dining-room . 
-- They were solid . 
-- And old silver . 
-- From the ladle one could get at least two hundred francs . 
-- Double what he had earned in nineteen years . 
-- It is true that he would have earned more if `` the administration had not robbed him . '' 
His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was certainly mingled some struggle . 
Three o'clock struck . 
He opened his eyes again , drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture , stretched out his arm and felt of his knapsack , which he had thrown down on a corner of the alcove ; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed , and placed his feet on the floor , and thus found himself , almost without knowing it , seated on his bed . 
He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude , which would have been suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him thus in the dark , the only person awake in that house where all were sleeping . 
All of a sudden he stooped down , removed his shoes and placed them softly on the mat beside the bed ; then he resumed his thoughtful attitude , and became motionless once more . 
Throughout this hideous meditation , the thoughts which we have above indicated moved incessantly through his brain ; entered , withdrew , re-entered , and in a manner oppressed him ; and then he thought , also , without knowing why , and with the mechanical persistence of revery , of a convict named Brevet , whom he had known in the galleys , and whose trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton . 
The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind . 
He remained in this situation , and would have so remained indefinitely , even until daybreak , had not the clock struck one -- the half or quarter hour . 
It seemed to him that that stroke said to him , `` Come on ! '' 
He rose to his feet , hesitated still another moment , and listened ; all was quiet in the house ; then he walked straight ahead , with short steps , to the window , of which he caught a glimpse . 
The night was not very dark ; there was a full moon , across which coursed large clouds driven by the wind . 
This created , outdoors , alternate shadow and gleams of light , eclipses , then bright openings of the clouds ; and indoors a sort of twilight . 
This twilight , sufficient to enable a person to see his way , intermittent on account of the clouds , resembled the sort of livid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar , before which the passersby come and go . 
On arriving at the window , Jean Valjean examined it . 
It had no grating ; it opened in the garden and was fastened , according to the fashion of the country , only by a small pin . 
He opened it ; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated the room abruptly , he closed it again immediately . 
He scrutinized the garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks . 
The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall , easy to climb . 
Far away , at the extremity , he perceived tops of trees , spaced at regular intervals , which indicated that the wall separated the garden from an avenue or lane planted with trees . 
Having taken this survey , he executed a movement like that of a man who has made up his mind , strode to his alcove , grasped his knapsack , opened it , fumbled in it , pulled out of it something which he placed on the bed , put his shoes into one of his pockets , shut the whole thing up again , threw the knapsack on his shoulders , put on his cap , drew the visor down over his eyes , felt for his cudgel , went and placed it in the angle of the window ; then returned to the bed , and resolutely seized the object which he had deposited there . 
It resembled a short bar of iron , pointed like a pike at one end . 
It would have been difficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bit of iron could have been designed . 
Perhaps it was a lever ; possibly it was a club . 
In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing more than a miner 's candlestick . 
Convicts were , at that period , sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which environ Toulon , and it was not rare for them to have miners ' tools at their command . 
These miners ' candlesticks are of massive iron , terminated at the lower extremity by a point , by means of which they are stuck into the rock . 
He took the candlestick in his right hand ; holding his breath and trying to deaden the sound of his tread , he directed his steps to the door of the adjoining room , occupied by the Bishop , as we already know . 
On arriving at this door , he found it ajar . 
The Bishop had not closed it . 
Jean Valjean listened . 
Not a sound . 
He gave the door a push . 
He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger , lightly , with the furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering . 
The door yielded to this pressure , and made an imperceptible and silent movement , which enlarged the opening a little . 
He waited a moment ; then gave the door a second and a bolder push . 
It continued to yield in silence . 
The opening was now large enough to allow him to pass . 
But near the door there stood a little table , which formed an embarrassing angle with it , and barred the entrance . 
Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty . 
It was necessary , at any cost , to enlarge the aperture still further . 
He decided on his course of action , and gave the door a third push , more energetic than the two preceding . 
This time a badly oiled hinge suddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry . 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
The noise of the hinge rang in his ears with something of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Day of Judgment . 
In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined that that hinge had just become animated , and had suddenly assumed a terrible life , and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one , and warn and to wake those who were asleep . 
He halted , shuddering , bewildered , and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels . 
He heard the arteries in his temples beating like two forge hammers , and it seemed to him that his breath issued from his breast with the roar of the wind issuing from a cavern . 
It seemed impossible to him that the horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed the entire household , like the shock of an earthquake ; the door , pushed by him , had taken the alarm , and had shouted ; the old man would rise at once ; the two old women would shriek out ; people would come to their assistance ; in less than a quarter of an hour the town would be in an uproar , and the gendarmerie on hand . 
For a moment he thought himself lost . 
He remained where he was , petrified like the statue of salt , not daring to make a movement . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
The door had fallen wide open . 
He ventured to peep into the next room . 
Nothing had stirred there . 
He lent an ear . 
Nothing was moving in the house . 
The noise made by the rusty hinge had not awakened any one . 
This first danger was past ; but there still reigned a frightful tumult within him . 
Nevertheless , he did not retreat . 
Even when he had thought himself lost , he had not drawn back . 
His only thought now was to finish as soon as possible . 
He took a step and entered the room . 
This room was in a state of perfect calm . 
Here and there vague and confused forms were distinguishable , which in the daylight were papers scattered on a table , open folios , volumes piled upon a stool , an arm-chair heaped with clothing , a prie-Dieu , and which at that hour were only shadowy corners and whitish spots . 
Jean Valjean advanced with precaution , taking care not to knock against the furniture . 
He could hear , at the extremity of the room , the even and tranquil breathing of the sleeping Bishop . 
He suddenly came to a halt . 
He was near the bed . 
He had arrived there sooner than he had thought for . 
Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our actions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness , as though she desired to make us reflect . 
For the last half-hour a large cloud had covered the heavens . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front of the bed , this cloud parted , as though on purpose , and a ray of light , traversing the long window , suddenly illuminated the Bishop 's pale face . 
He was sleeping peacefully . 
He lay in his bed almost completely dressed , on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps , in a garment of brown wool , which covered his arms to the wrists . 
His head was thrown back on the pillow , in the careless attitude of repose ; his hand , adorned with the pastoral ring , and whence had fallen so many good deeds and so many holy actions , was hanging over the edge of the bed . 
His whole face was illumined with a vague expression of satisfaction , of hope , and of felicity . 
It was more than a smile , and almost a radiance . 
He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection of a light which was invisible . 
The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a mysterious heaven . 
A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop . 
It was , at the same time , a luminous transparency , for that heaven was within him . 
That heaven was his conscience . 
At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself , so to speak , upon that inward radiance , the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory . 
It remained , however , gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light . 
That moon in the sky , that slumbering nature , that garden without a quiver , that house which was so calm , the hour , the moment , the silence , added some solemn and unspeakable quality to the venerable repose of this man , and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that white hair , those closed eyes , that face in which all was hope and all was confidence , that head of an old man , and that slumber of an infant . 
There was something almost divine in this man , who was thus august , without being himself aware of it . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadow , and stood motionless , with his iron candlestick in his hand , frightened by this luminous old man . 
Never had he beheld anything like this . 
This confidence terrified him . 
The moral world has no grander spectacle than this : a troubled and uneasy conscience , which has arrived on the brink of an evil action , contemplating the slumber of the just . 
That slumber in that isolation , and with a neighbor like himself , had about it something sublime , of which he was vaguely but imperiously conscious . 
No one could have told what was passing within him , not even himself . 
In order to attempt to form an idea of it , it is necessary to think of the most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle . 
Even on his visage it would have been impossible to distinguish anything with certainty . 
It was a sort of haggard astonishment . 
He gazed at it , and that was all . 
But what was his thought ? 
It would have been impossible to divine it . 
What was evident was , that he was touched and astounded . 
But what was the nature of this emotion ? 
His eye never quitted the old man . 
The only thing which was clearly to be inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange indecision . 
One would have said that he was hesitating between the two abysses , -- the one in which one loses one 's self and that in which one saves one 's self . 
He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kiss that hand . 
At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards his brow , and he took off his cap ; then his arm fell back with the same deliberation , and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more , his cap in his left hand , his club in his right hand , his hair bristling all over his savage head . 
The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifying gaze . 
The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over the chimney-piece , which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them , with a benediction for one and pardon for the other . 
Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow ; then stepped rapidly past the bed , without glancing at the Bishop , straight to the cupboard , which he saw near the head ; he raised his iron candlestick as though to force the lock ; the key was there ; he opened it ; the first thing which presented itself to him was the basket of silverware ; he seized it , traversed the chamber with long strides , without taking any precautions and without troubling himself about the noise , gained the door , re-entered the oratory , opened the window , seized his cudgel , bestrode the window-sill of the ground-floor , put the silver into his knapsack , threw away the basket , crossed the garden , leaped over the wall like a tiger , and fled . 
The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling in his garden . 
Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation . 
`` Monseigneur , Monseigneur ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` does your Grace know where the basket of silver is ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` Jesus the Lord be blessed ! '' 
she resumed ; `` I did not know what had become of it . '' 
The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed . 
He presented it to Madame Magloire . 
`` Here it is . '' 
`` Well ! '' 
said she . 
`` Nothing in it ! 
And the silver ? '' 
`` Ah , '' returned the Bishop , `` so it is the silver which troubles you ? 
I do n't know where it is . '' 
`` Great , good God ! 
It is stolen ! 
That man who was here last night has stolen it . '' 
In a twinkling , with all the vivacity of an alert old woman , Madame Magloire had rushed to the oratory , entered the alcove , and returned to the Bishop . 
The Bishop had just bent down , and was sighing as he examined a plant of cochlearia des Guillons , which the basket had broken as it fell across the bed . 
He rose up at Madame Magloire 's cry . 
`` Monseigneur , the man is gone ! 
The silver has been stolen ! '' 
As she uttered this exclamation , her eyes fell upon a corner of the garden , where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible . 
The coping of the wall had been torn away . 
`` Stay ! 
yonder is the way he went . 
He jumped over into Cochefilet Lane . 
Ah , the abomination ! 
He has stolen our silver ! '' 
The Bishop remained silent for a moment ; then he raised his grave eyes , and said gently to Madame Magloire : -- `` And , in the first place , was that silver ours ? '' 
Madame Magloire was speechless . 
Another silence ensued ; then the Bishop went on : -- `` Madame Magloire , I have for a long time detained that silver wrongfully . 
It belonged to the poor . 
Who was that man ? 
A poor man , evidently . '' 
`` Alas ! 
Jesus ! '' 
returned Madame Magloire . 
`` It is not for my sake , nor for Mademoiselle 's . 
It makes no difference to us . 
But it is for the sake of Monseigneur . 
What is Monseigneur to eat with now ? '' 
The Bishop gazed at her with an air of amazement . 
`` Ah , come ! 
Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons ? '' 
Madame Magloire shrugged her shoulders . 
`` Pewter has an odor . '' 
`` Iron forks and spoons , then . '' 
Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace . 
`` Iron has a taste . '' 
`` Very well , '' said the Bishop ; `` wooden ones then . '' 
A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean Valjean had sat on the previous evening . 
As he ate his breakfast , Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister , who said nothing , and to Madame Magloire , who was grumbling under her breath , that one really does not need either fork or spoon , even of wood , in order to dip a bit of bread in a cup of milk . 
`` A pretty idea , truly , '' said Madame Magloire to herself , as she went and came , `` to take in a man like that ! 
and to lodge him close to one 's self ! 
And how fortunate that he did nothing but steal ! 
Ah , mon Dieu ! 
it makes one shudder to think of it ! '' 
As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table , there came a knock at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
The door opened . 
A singular and violent group made its appearance on the threshold . 
Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar . 
The three men were gendarmes ; the other was Jean Valjean . 
A brigadier of gendarmes , who seemed to be in command of the group , was standing near the door . 
He entered and advanced to the Bishop , making a military salute . 
`` Monseigneur -- '' said he . 
At this word , Jean Valjean , who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed , raised his head with an air of stupefaction . 
`` Monseigneur ! '' 
he murmured . 
`` So he is not the cure ? '' 
`` Silence ! '' 
said the gendarme . 
`` He is Monseigneur the Bishop . '' 
In the meantime , Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as his great age permitted . 
`` Ah ! 
here you are ! '' 
he exclaimed , looking at Jean Valjean . 
`` I am glad to see you . 
Well , but how is this ? 
I gave you the candlesticks too , which are of silver like the rest , and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs . 
Why did you not carry them away with your forks and spoons ? '' 
Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide , and stared at the venerable Bishop with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of . 
`` Monseigneur , '' said the brigadier of gendarmes , `` so what this man said is true , then ? 
We came across him . 
He was walking like a man who is running away . 
We stopped him to look into the matter . 
He had this silver -- '' `` And he told you , '' interposed the Bishop with a smile , `` that it had been given to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he had passed the night ? 
I see how the matter stands . 
And you have brought him back here ? 
It is a mistake . '' 
`` In that case , '' replied the brigadier , `` we can let him go ? '' 
`` Certainly , '' replied the Bishop . 
The gendarmes released Jean Valjean , who recoiled . 
`` Is it true that I am to be released ? '' 
he said , in an almost inarticulate voice , and as though he were talking in his sleep . 
`` Yes , thou art released ; dost thou not understand ? '' 
said one of the gendarmes . 
`` My friend , '' resumed the Bishop , `` before you go , here are your candlesticks . 
Take them . '' 
He stepped to the chimney-piece , took the two silver candlesticks , and brought them to Jean Valjean . 
The two women looked on without uttering a word , without a gesture , without a look which could disconcert the Bishop . 
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb . 
He took the two candlesticks mechanically , and with a bewildered air . 
`` Now , '' said the Bishop , `` go in peace . 
By the way , when you return , my friend , it is not necessary to pass through the garden . 
You can always enter and depart through the street door . 
It is never fastened with anything but a latch , either by day or by night . '' 
Then , turning to the gendarmes : -- `` You may retire , gentlemen . '' 
The gendarmes retired . 
Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting . 
The Bishop drew near to him , and said in a low voice : -- `` Do not forget , never forget , that you have promised to use this money in becoming an honest man . '' 
Jean Valjean , who had no recollection of ever having promised anything , remained speechless . 
The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered them . 
He resumed with solemnity : -- `` Jean Valjean , my brother , you no longer belong to evil , but to good . 
It is your soul that I buy from you ; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the spirit of perdition , and I give it to God . '' 
Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it . 
He set out at a very hasty pace through the fields , taking whatever roads and paths presented themselves to him , without perceiving that he was incessantly retracing his steps . 
He wandered thus the whole morning , without having eaten anything and without feeling hungry . 
He was the prey of a throng of novel sensations . 
He was conscious of a sort of rage ; he did not know against whom it was directed . 
He could not have told whether he was touched or humiliated . 
There came over him at moments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life . 
This state of mind fatigued him . 
He perceived with dismay that the sort of frightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred upon him was giving way within him . 
He asked himself what would replace this . 
At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison with the gendarmes , and that things should not have happened in this way ; it would have agitated him less . 
Although the season was tolerably far advanced , there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here and there , whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled to him memories of his childhood . 
These memories were almost intolerable to him , it was so long since they had recurred to him . 
Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long . 
As the sun declined to its setting , casting long shadows athwart the soil from every pebble , Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a large ruddy plain , which was absolutely deserted . 
There was nothing on the horizon except the Alps . 
Not even the spire of a distant village . 
Jean Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D -- A path which intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush . 
In the middle of this meditation , which would have contributed not a little to render his rags terrifying to any one who might have encountered him , a joyous sound became audible . 
He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard , about ten years of age , coming up the path and singing , his hurdy-gurdy on his hip , and his marmot-box on his back , One of those gay and gentle children , who go from land to land affording a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers . 
Without stopping his song , the lad halted in his march from time to time , and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his hand -- his whole fortune , probably . 
Among this money there was one forty-sou piece . 
The child halted beside the bush , without perceiving Jean Valjean , and tossed up his handful of sous , which , up to that time , he had caught with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand . 
This time the forty-sou piece escaped him , and went rolling towards the brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean set his foot upon it . 
In the meantime , the child had looked after his coin and had caught sight of him . 
He showed no astonishment , but walked straight up to the man . 
The spot was absolutely solitary . 
As far as the eye could see there was not a person on the plain or on the path . 
The only sound was the tiny , feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage , which was traversing the heavens at an immense height . 
The child was standing with his back to the sun , which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' said the little Savoyard , with that childish confidence which is composed of ignorance and innocence , `` my money . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Little Gervais , sir . '' 
`` Go away , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' resumed the child , `` give me back my money . '' 
Jean Valjean dropped his head , and made no reply . 
The child began again , `` My money , sir . '' 
Jean Valjean 's eyes remained fixed on the earth . 
`` My piece of money ! '' 
cried the child , `` my white piece ! 
my silver ! '' 
It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him . 
The child grasped him by the collar of his blouse and shook him . 
At the same time he made an effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his treasure . 
`` I want my piece of money ! 
my piece of forty sous ! '' 
The child wept . 
Jean Valjean raised his head . 
He still remained seated . 
His eyes were troubled . 
He gazed at the child , in a sort of amazement , then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a terrible voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
`` I , sir , '' replied the child . 
`` Little Gervais ! 
I ! 
Give me back my forty sous , if you please ! 
Take your foot away , sir , if you please ! '' 
Then irritated , though he was so small , and becoming almost menacing : -- `` Come now , will you take your foot away ? 
Take your foot away , or we 'll see ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
It 's still you ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , and rising abruptly to his feet , his foot still resting on the silver piece , he added : -- `` Will you take yourself off ! '' 
The frightened child looked at him , then began to tremble from head to foot , and after a few moments of stupor he set out , running at the top of his speed , without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry . 
Nevertheless , lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain distance , and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing , in the midst of his own revery . 
At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared . 
The sun had set . 
The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean . 
He had eaten nothing all day ; it is probable that he was feverish . 
He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the child 's flight . 
The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular intervals . 
His gaze , fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him , seemed to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient fragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass . 
All at once he shivered ; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening . 
He settled his cap more firmly on his brow , sought mechanically to cross and button his blouse , advanced a step and stopped to pick up his cudgel . 
At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece , which his foot had half ground into the earth , and which was shining among the pebbles . 
It was as though he had received a galvanic shock . 
`` What is this ? '' 
he muttered between his teeth . 
He recoiled three paces , then halted , without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which his foot had trodden but an instant before , as though the thing which lay glittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him . 
At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the silver coin , seized it , and straightened himself up again and began to gaze afar off over the plain , at the same time casting his eyes towards all points of the horizon , as he stood there erect and shivering , like a terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge . 
He saw nothing . 
Night was falling , the plain was cold and vague , great banks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight . 
He said , `` Ah ! '' 
and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child had disappeared . 
After about thirty paces he paused , looked about him and saw nothing . 
Then he shouted with all his might : -- `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
He paused and waited . 
There was no reply . 
The landscape was gloomy and deserted . 
He was encompassed by space . 
There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was lost , and a silence which engulfed his voice . 
An icy north wind was blowing , and imparted to things around him a sort of lugubrious life . 
The bushes shook their thin little arms with incredible fury . 
One would have said that they were threatening and pursuing some one . 
He set out on his march again , then he began to run ; and from time to time he halted and shouted into that solitude , with a voice which was the most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to hear , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
Assuredly , if the child had heard him , he would have been alarmed and would have taken good care not to show himself . 
But the child was no doubt already far away . 
He encountered a priest on horseback . 
He stepped up to him and said : -- `` Monsieur le Cure , have you seen a child pass ? '' 
`` No , '' said the priest . 
`` One named Little Gervais ? '' 
`` I have seen no one . '' 
He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the priest . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , this is for your poor people . 
Monsieur le Cure , he was a little lad , about ten years old , with a marmot , I think , and a hurdy-gurdy . 
One of those Savoyards , you know ? '' 
`` I have not seen him . '' 
`` Little Gervais ? 
There are no villages here ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
`` If he is like what you say , my friend , he is a little stranger . 
Such persons pass through these parts . 
We know nothing of them . '' 
Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence , and gave them to the priest . 
`` For your poor , '' he said . 
Then he added , wildly : -- `` Monsieur l'Abbe , have me arrested . 
I am a thief . '' 
The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste , much alarmed . 
Jean Valjean set out on a run , in the direction which he had first taken . 
In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance , gazing , calling , shouting , but he met no one . 
Two or three times he ran across the plain towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being reclining or crouching down ; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood or rocks nearly on a level with the earth . 
At length , at a spot where three paths intersected each other , he stopped . 
The moon had risen . 
He sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
His shout died away in the mist , without even awakening an echo . 
He murmured yet once more , `` Little Gervais ! '' 
but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice . 
It was his last effort ; his legs gave way abruptly under him , as though an invisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil conscience ; he fell exhausted , on a large stone , his fists clenched in his hair and his face on his knees , and he cried , `` I am a wretch ! '' 
Then his heart burst , and he began to cry . 
It was the first time that he had wept in nineteen years . 
When Jean Valjean left the Bishop 's house , he was , as we have seen , quite thrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto . 
He could not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him . 
He hardened himself against the angelic action and the gentle words of the old man . 
`` You have promised me to become an honest man . 
I buy your soul . 
I take it away from the spirit of perversity ; I give it to the good God . '' 
