And he began asking after Pere Tellier , the proprietor of the `` Cafe Francais , '' whom Monsieur Bovary was then attending . 
`` What 's the matter with Pere Tellier ? 
He coughs so that he shakes his whole house , and I 'm afraid he 'll soon want a deal covering rather than a flannel vest . 
He was such a rake as a young man ! 
Those sort of people , madame , have not the least regularity ; he 's burnt up with brandy . 
Still it 's sad , all the same , to see an acquaintance go off . '' 
And while he fastened up his box he discoursed about the doctor 's patients . 
`` It 's the weather , no doubt , '' he said , looking frowningly at the floor , `` that causes these illnesses . 
I , too , do n't feel the thing . 
One of these days I shall even have to consult the doctor for a pain I have in my back . 
Well , good-bye , Madame Bovary . 
At your service ; your very humble servant . '' 
And he closed the door gently . 
Emma had her dinner served in her bedroom on a tray by the fireside ; she was a long time over it ; everything was well with her . 
`` How good I was ! '' 
she said to herself , thinking of the scarves . 
She heard some steps on the stairs . 
It was Leon . 
She got up and took from the chest of drawers the first pile of dusters to be hemmed . 
When he came in she seemed very busy . 
The conversation languished ; Madame Bovary gave it up every few minutes , whilst he himself seemed quite embarrassed . 
Seated on a low chair near the fire , he turned round in his fingers the ivory thimble-case . 
She stitched on , or from time to time turned down the hem of the cloth with her nail . 
She did not speak ; he was silent , captivated by her silence , as he would have been by her speech . 
`` Poor fellow ! '' 
she thought . 
`` How have I displeased her ? '' 
he asked himself . 
At last , however , Leon said that he should have , one of these days , to go to Rouen on some office business . 
`` Your music subscription is out ; am I to renew it ? '' 
`` No , '' she replied . 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because -- '' And pursing her lips she slowly drew a long stitch of grey thread . 
This work irritated Leon . 
It seemed to roughen the ends of her fingers . 
A gallant phrase came into his head , but he did not risk it . 
`` Then you are giving it up ? '' 
he went on . 
`` What ? '' 
she asked hurriedly . 
`` Music ? 
Ah ! 
yes ! 
Have I not my house to look after , my husband to attend to , a thousand things , in fact , many duties that must be considered first ? '' 
She looked at the clock . 
Charles was late . 
Then , she affected anxiety . 
Two or three times she even repeated , `` He is so good ! '' 
The clerk was fond of Monsieur Bovary . 
But this tenderness on his behalf astonished him unpleasantly ; nevertheless he took up on his praises , which he said everyone was singing , especially the chemist . 
`` Ah ! 
he is a good fellow , '' continued Emma . 
`` Certainly , '' replied the clerk . 
And he began talking of Madame Homais , whose very untidy appearance generally made them laugh . 
`` What does it matter ? '' 
interrupted Emma . 
`` A good housewife does not trouble about her appearance . '' 
Then she relapsed into silence . 
It was the same on the following days ; her talks , her manners , everything changed . 
She took interest in the housework , went to church regularly , and looked after her servant with more severity . 
She took Berthe from nurse . 
When visitors called , Felicite brought her in , and Madame Bovary undressed her to show off her limbs . 
She declared she adored children ; this was her consolation , her joy , her passion , and she accompanied her caresses with lyrical outburst which would have reminded anyone but the Yonville people of Sachette in `` Notre Dame de Paris . '' 
When Charles came home he found his slippers put to warm near the fire . 
His waistcoat now never wanted lining , nor his shirt buttons , and it was quite a pleasure to see in the cupboard the night-caps arranged in piles of the same height . 
She no longer grumbled as formerly at taking a turn in the garden ; what he proposed was always done , although she did not understand the wishes to which she submitted without a murmur ; and when Leon saw him by his fireside after dinner , his two hands on his stomach , his two feet on the fender , his two cheeks red with feeding , his eyes moist with happiness , the child crawling along the carpet , and this woman with the slender waist who came behind his arm-chair to kiss his forehead : `` What madness ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` And how to reach her ! '' 
And thus she seemed so virtuous and inaccessible to him that he lost all hope , even the faintest . 
But by this renunciation he placed her on an extraordinary pinnacle . 
To him she stood outside those fleshly attributes from which he had nothing to obtain , and in his heart she rose ever , and became farther removed from him after the magnificent manner of an apotheosis that is taking wing . 
It was one of those pure feelings that do not interfere with life , that are cultivated because they are rare , and whose loss would afflict more than their passion rejoices . 
Emma grew thinner , her cheeks paler , her face longer . 
With her black hair , her large eyes , her aquiline nose , her birdlike walk , and always silent now , did she not seem to be passing through life scarcely touching it , and to bear on her brow the vague impress of some divine destiny ? 
She was so sad and so calm , at once so gentle and so reserved , that near her one felt oneself seized by an icy charm , as we shudder in churches at the perfume of the flowers mingling with the cold of the marble . 
The others even did not escape from this seduction . 
The chemist said -- `` She is a woman of great parts , who would n't be misplaced in a sub-prefecture . '' 
The housewives admired her economy , the patients her politeness , the poor her charity . 
But she was eaten up with desires , with rage , with hate . 
That dress with the narrow folds hid a distracted fear , of whose torment those chaste lips said nothing . 
She was in love with Leon , and sought solitude that she might with the more ease delight in his image . 
The sight of his form troubled the voluptuousness of this mediation . 
Emma thrilled at the sound of his step ; then in his presence the emotion subsided , and afterwards there remained to her only an immense astonishment that ended in sorrow . 
Leon did not know that when he left her in despair she rose after he had gone to see him in the street . 
She concerned herself about his comings and goings ; she watched his face ; she invented quite a history to find an excuse for going to his room . 
The chemist 's wife seemed happy to her to sleep under the same roof , and her thoughts constantly centered upon this house , like the `` Lion d'Or '' pigeons , who came there to dip their red feet and white wings in its gutters . 
But the more Emma recognised her love , the more she crushed it down , that it might not be evident , that she might make it less . 
She would have liked Leon to guess it , and she imagined chances , catastrophes that should facilitate this . 
What restrained her was , no doubt , idleness and fear , and a sense of shame also . 
She thought she had repulsed him too much , that the time was past , that all was lost . 
Then , pride , and joy of being able to say to herself , `` I am virtuous , '' and to look at herself in the glass taking resigned poses , consoled her a little for the sacrifice she believed she was making . 
Then the lusts of the flesh , the longing for money , and the melancholy of passion all blended themselves into one suffering , and instead of turning her thoughts from it , she clave to it the more , urging herself to pain , and seeking everywhere occasion for it . 
She was irritated by an ill-served dish or by a half-open door ; bewailed the velvets she had not , the happiness she had missed , her too exalted dreams , her narrow home . 
What exasperated her was that Charles did not seem to notice her anguish . 
His conviction that he was making her happy seemed to her an imbecile insult , and his sureness on this point ingratitude . 
For whose sake , then was she virtuous ? 
Was it not for him , the obstacle to all felicity , the cause of all misery , and , as it were , the sharp clasp of that complex strap that bucked her in on all sides . 
On him alone , then , she concentrated all the various hatreds that resulted from her boredom , and every effort to diminish only augmented it ; for this useless trouble was added to the other reasons for despair , and contributed still more to the separation between them . 
Her own gentleness to herself made her rebel against him . 
Domestic mediocrity drove her to lewd fancies , marriage tenderness to adulterous desires . 
She would have liked Charles to beat her , that she might have a better right to hate him , to revenge herself upon him . 
She was surprised sometimes at the atrocious conjectures that came into her thoughts , and she had to go on smiling , to hear repeated to her at all hours that she was happy , to pretend to be happy , to let it be believed . 
Yet she had loathing of this hypocrisy . 
She was seized with the temptation to flee somewhere with Leon to try a new life ; but at once a vague chasm full of darkness opened within her soul . 
`` Besides , he no longer loves me , '' she thought . 
`` What is to become of me ? 
What help is to be hoped for , what consolation , what solace ? '' 
She was left broken , breathless , inert , sobbing in a low voice , with flowing tears . 
`` Why do n't you tell master ? '' 
the servant asked her when she came in during these crises . 
`` It is the nerves , '' said Emma . 
`` Do not speak to him of it ; it would worry him . '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' Felicite went on , `` you are just like La Guerine , Pere Guerin 's daughter , the fisherman at Pollet , that I used to know at Dieppe before I came to you . 
She was so sad , so sad , to see her standing upright on the threshold of her house , she seemed to you like a winding-sheet spread out before the door . 
Her illness , it appears , was a kind of fog that she had in her head , and the doctors could not do anything , nor the priest either . 
When she was taken too bad she went off quite alone to the sea-shore , so that the customs officer , going his rounds , often found her lying flat on her face , crying on the shingle . 
Then , after her marriage , it went off , they say . '' 
`` But with me , '' replied Emma , `` it was after marriage that it began . '' 
One evening when the window was open , and she , sitting by it , had been watching Lestiboudois , the beadle , trimming the box , she suddenly heard the Angelus ringing . 
It was the beginning of April , when the primroses are in bloom , and a warm wind blows over the flower-beds newly turned , and the gardens , like women , seem to be getting ready for the summer fetes . 
Through the bars of the arbour and away beyond the river seen in the fields , meandering through the grass in wandering curves . 
The evening vapours rose between the leafless poplars , touching their outlines with a violet tint , paler and more transparent than a subtle gauze caught athwart their branches . 
In the distance cattle moved about ; neither their steps nor their lowing could be heard ; and the bell , still ringing through the air , kept up its peaceful lamentation . 
With this repeated tinkling the thoughts of the young woman lost themselves in old memories of her youth and school-days . 
She remembered the great candlesticks that rose above the vases full of flowers on the altar , and the tabernacle with its small columns . 
She would have liked to be once more lost in the long line of white veils , marked off here and there by the stuff black hoods of the good sisters bending over their prie-Dieu . 
At mass on Sundays , when she looked up , she saw the gentle face of the Virgin amid the blue smoke of the rising incense . 
Then she was moved ; she felt herself weak and quite deserted , like the down of a bird whirled by the tempest , and it was unconsciously that she went towards the church , included to no matter what devotions , so that her soul was absorbed and all existence lost in it . 
On the Place she met Lestivoudois on his way back , for , in order not to shorten his day 's labour , he preferred interrupting his work , then beginning it again , so that he rang the Angelus to suit his own convenience . 
Besides , the ringing over a little earlier warned the lads of catechism hour . 
Already a few who had arrived were playing marbles on the stones of the cemetery . 
Others , astride the wall , swung their legs , kicking with their clogs the large nettles growing between the little enclosure and the newest graves . 
This was the only green spot . 
All the rest was but stones , always covered with a fine powder , despite the vestry-broom . 
The children in list shoes ran about there as if it were an enclosure made for them . 
The shouts of their voices could be heard through the humming of the bell . 
This grew less and less with the swinging of the great rope that , hanging from the top of the belfry , dragged its end on the ground . 
Swallows flitted to and fro uttering little cries , cut the air with the edge of their wings , and swiftly returned to their yellow nests under the tiles of the coping . 
At the end of the church a lamp was burning , the wick of a night-light in a glass hung up . 
Its light from a distance looked like a white stain trembling in the oil . 
A long ray of the sun fell across the nave and seemed to darken the lower sides and the corners . 
`` Where is the cure ? '' 
asked Madame Bovary of one of the lads , who was amusing himself by shaking a swivel in a hole too large for it . 
`` He is just coming , '' he answered . 
And in fact the door of the presbytery grated ; Abbe Bournisien appeared ; the children , pell-mell , fled into the church . 
`` These young scamps ! '' 
murmured the priest , `` always the same ! '' 
Then , picking up a catechism all in rags that he had struck with is foot , `` They respect nothing ! '' 
But as soon as he caught sight of Madame Bovary , `` Excuse me , '' he said ; `` I did not recognise you . '' 
He thrust the catechism into his pocket , and stopped short , balancing the heavy vestry key between his two fingers . 
The light of the setting sun that fell full upon his face paled the lasting of his cassock , shiny at the elbows , unravelled at the hem . 
Grease and tobacco stains followed along his broad chest the lines of the buttons , and grew more numerous the farther they were from his neckcloth , in which the massive folds of his red chin rested ; this was dotted with yellow spots , that disappeared beneath the coarse hair of his greyish beard . 
He had just dined and was breathing noisily . 
`` How are you ? '' 
he added . 
`` Not well , '' replied Emma ; `` I am ill . '' 
`` Well , and so am I , '' answered the priest . 
`` These first warm days weaken one most remarkably , do n't they ? 
But , after all , we are born to suffer , as St. Paul says . 
But what does Monsieur Bovary think of it ? '' 
`` He ! '' 
she said with a gesture of contempt . 
`` What ! '' 
replied the good fellow , quite astonished , `` does n't he prescribe something for you ? '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Emma , `` it is no earthly remedy I need . '' 
But the cure from time to time looked into the church , where the kneeling boys were shouldering one another , and tumbling over like packs of cards . 
`` I should like to know -- '' she went on . 
`` You look out , Riboudet , '' cried the priest in an angry voice ; `` I 'll warm your ears , you imp ! '' 
Then turning to Emma , `` He 's Boudet the carpenter 's son ; his parents are well off , and let him do just as he pleases . 
Yet he could learn quickly if he would , for he is very sharp . 
And so sometimes for a joke I call him Riboudet -LRB- like the road one takes to go to Maromme -RRB- and I even say ` Mon Riboudet . ' 
Ha ! 
Ha ! 
` Mont Riboudet . ' 
The other day I repeated that just to Monsignor , and he laughed at it ; he condescended to laugh at it . 
And how is Monsieur Bovary ? '' 
She seemed not to hear him . 
And he went on -- `` Always very busy , no doubt ; for he and I are certainly the busiest people in the parish . 
But he is doctor of the body , '' he added with a thick laugh , `` and I of the soul . '' 
She fixed her pleading eyes upon the priest . 
`` Yes , '' she said , `` you solace all sorrows . '' 
`` Ah ! 
do n't talk to me of it , Madame Bovary . 
This morning I had to go to Bas-Diauville for a cow that was ill ; they thought it was under a spell . 
All their cows , I do n't know how it is -- But pardon me ! 
Longuemarre and Boudet ! 
Bless me ! 
Will you leave off ? '' 
And with a bound he ran into the church . 
The boys were just then clustering round the large desk , climbing over the precentor 's footstool , opening the missal ; and others on tiptoe were just about to venture into the confessional . 
But the priest suddenly distributed a shower of cuffs among them . 
Seizing them by the collars of their coats , he lifted them from the ground , and deposited them on their knees on the stones of the choir , firmly , as if he meant planting them there . 
`` Yes , '' said he , when he returned to Emma , unfolding his large cotton handkerchief , one corner of which he put between his teeth , `` farmers are much to be pitied . '' 
`` Others , too , '' she replied . 
`` Assuredly . 
Town-labourers , for example . '' 
`` It is not they -- '' `` Pardon ! 
I 've there known poor mothers of families , virtuous women , I assure you , real saints , who wanted even bread . '' 
`` But those , '' replied Emma , and the corners of her mouth twitched as she spoke , `` those , Monsieur le Cure , who have bread and have no -- '' `` Fire in the winter , '' said the priest . 
`` Oh , what does that matter ? '' 
`` What ! 
What does it matter ? 
It seems to me that when one has firing and food -- for , after all -- '' `` My God ! 
my God ! '' 
she sighed . 
`` It is indigestion , no doubt ? 
You must get home , Madame Bovary ; drink a little tea , that will strengthen you , or else a glass of fresh water with a little moist sugar . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
And she looked like one awaking from a dream . 
`` Well , you see , you were putting your hand to your forehead . 
I thought you felt faint . '' 
Then , bethinking himself , `` But you were asking me something ? 
What was it ? 
I really do n't remember . '' 
`` I ? 
Nothing ! 
nothing ! '' 
repeated Emma . 
And the glance she cast round her slowly fell upon the old man in the cassock . 
They looked at one another face to face without speaking . 
`` Then , Madame Bovary , '' he said at last , `` excuse me , but duty first , you know ; I must look after my good-for-nothings . 
The first communion will soon be upon us , and I fear we shall be behind after all . 
So after Ascension Day I keep them recta * an extra hour every Wednesday . 
Poor children ! 
One can not lead them too soon into the path of the Lord , as , moreover , he has himself recommended us to do by the mouth of his Divine Son . 
Good health to you , madame ; my respects to your husband . '' 
* On the straight and narrow path . 
And he went into the church making a genuflexion as soon as he reached the door . 
Emma saw him disappear between the double row of forms , walking with a heavy tread , his head a little bent over his shoulder , and with his two hands half-open behind him . 
Then she turned on her heel all of one piece , like a statue on a pivot , and went homewards . 
But the loud voice of the priest , the clear voices of the boys still reached her ears , and went on behind her . 
`` Are you a Christian ? '' 
`` Yes , I am a Christian . '' 
`` What is a Christian ? '' 
`` He who , being baptized-baptized-baptized -- '' She went up the steps of the staircase holding on to the banisters , and when she was in her room threw herself into an arm-chair . 
The whitish light of the window-panes fell with soft undulations . 
The furniture in its place seemed to have become more immobile , and to lose itself in the shadow as in an ocean of darkness . 
The fire was out , the clock went on ticking , and Emma vaguely marvelled at this calm of all things while within herself was such tumult . 
But little Berthe was there , between the window and the work-table , tottering on her knitted shoes , and trying to come to her mother to catch hold of the ends of her apron-strings . 
`` Leave me alone , '' said the latter , putting her from her with her hand . 
The little girl soon came up closer against her knees , and leaning on them with her arms , she looked up with her large blue eyes , while a small thread of pure saliva dribbled from her lips on to the silk apron . 
`` Leave me alone , '' repeated the young woman quite irritably . 
Her face frightened the child , who began to scream . 
`` Will you leave me alone ? '' 
she said , pushing her with her elbow . 
Berthe fell at the foot of the drawers against the brass handle , cutting her cheek , which began to bleed , against it . 
Madame Bovary sprang to lift her up , broke the bell-rope , called for the servant with all her might , and she was just going to curse herself when Charles appeared . 
It was the dinner-hour ; he had come home . 
`` Look , dear ! '' 
said Emma , in a calm voice , `` the little one fell down while she was playing , and has hurt herself . '' 
Charles reassured her ; the case was not a serious one , and he went for some sticking plaster . 
Madame Bovary did not go downstairs to the dining-room ; she wished to remain alone to look after the child . 
Then watching her sleep , the little anxiety she felt gradually wore off , and she seemed very stupid to herself , and very good to have been so worried just now at so little . 
Berthe , in fact , no longer sobbed . 
Her breathing now imperceptibly raised the cotton covering . 
Big tears lay in the corner of the half-closed eyelids , through whose lashes one could see two pale sunken pupils ; the plaster stuck on her cheek drew the skin obliquely . 
`` It is very strange , '' thought Emma , `` how ugly this child is ! '' 
When at eleven o'clock Charles came back from the chemist 's shop , whither he had gone after dinner to return the remainder of the sticking-plaster , he found his wife standing by the cradle . 
`` I assure you it 's nothing . '' 
he said , kissing her on the forehead . 
`` Do n't worry , my poor darling ; you will make yourself ill . '' 
He had stayed a long time at the chemist 's . 
Although he had not seemed much moved , Homais , nevertheless , had exerted himself to buoy him up , to `` keep up his spirits . '' 
Then they had talked of the various dangers that threaten childhood , of the carelessness of servants . 
Madame Homais knew something of it , having still upon her chest the marks left by a basin full of soup that a cook had formerly dropped on her pinafore , and her good parents took no end of trouble for her . 
The knives were not sharpened , nor the floors waxed ; there were iron gratings to the windows and strong bars across the fireplace ; the little Homais , in spite of their spirit , could not stir without someone watching them ; at the slightest cold their father stuffed them with pectorals ; and until they were turned four they all , without pity , had to wear wadded head-protectors . 
This , it is true , was a fancy of Madame Homais ' ; her husband was inwardly afflicted at it . 
Fearing the possible consequences of such compression to the intellectual organs . 
He even went so far as to say to her , `` Do you want to make Caribs or Botocudos of them ? '' 
Charles , however , had several times tried to interrupt the conversation . 
`` I should like to speak to you , '' he had whispered in the clerk 's ear , who went upstairs in front of him . 
`` Can he suspect anything ? '' 
Leon asked himself . 
His heart beat , and he racked his brain with surmises . 
At last , Charles , having shut the door , asked him to see himself what would be the price at Rouen of a fine daguerreotypes . 
It was a sentimental surprise he intended for his wife , a delicate attention -- his portrait in a frock-coat . 
But he wanted first to know `` how much it would be . '' 
The inquiries would not put Monsieur Leon out , since he went to town almost every week . 
Why ? 
Monsieur Homais suspected some `` young man 's affair '' at the bottom of it , an intrigue . 
But he was mistaken . 
Leon was after no love-making . 
He was sadder than ever , as Madame Lefrancois saw from the amount of food he left on his plate . 
To find out more about it she questioned the tax-collector . 
Binet answered roughly that he `` was n't paid by the police . '' 
All the same , his companion seemed very strange to him , for Leon often threw himself back in his chair , and stretching out his arms , complained vaguely of life . 
`` It 's because you do n't take enough recreation , '' said the collector . 
`` What recreation ? '' 
`` If I were you I 'd have a lathe . '' 
`` But I do n't know how to turn , '' answered the clerk . 
`` Ah ! 
that 's true , '' said the other , rubbing his chin with an air of mingled contempt and satisfaction . 
Leon was weary of loving without any result ; moreover he was beginning to feel that depression caused by the repetition of the same kind of life , when no interest inspires and no hope sustains it . 
He was so bored with Yonville and its inhabitants , that the sight of certain persons , of certain houses , irritated him beyond endurance ; and the chemist , good fellow though he was , was becoming absolutely unbearable to him . 
Yet the prospect of a new condition of life frightened as much as it seduced him . 
This apprehension soon changed into impatience , and then Paris from afar sounded its fanfare of masked balls with the laugh of grisettes . 
As he was to finish reading there , why not set out at once ? 
What prevented him ? 
And he began making home-preparations ; he arranged his occupations beforehand . 
He furnished in his head an apartment . 
He would lead an artist 's life there ! 
He would take lessons on the guitar ! 
He would have a dressing-gown , a Basque cap , blue velvet slippers ! 
He even already was admiring two crossed foils over his chimney-piece , with a death 's head on the guitar above them . 
The difficulty was the consent of his mother ; nothing , however , seemed more reasonable . 
Even his employer advised him to go to some other chambers where he could advance more rapidly . 
Taking a middle course , then , Leon looked for some place as second clerk at Rouen ; found none , and at last wrote his mother a long letter full of details , in which he set forth the reasons for going to live at Paris immediately . 
She consented . 
He did not hurry . 
Every day for a month Hivert carried boxes , valises , parcels for him from Yonville to Rouen and from Rouen to Yonville ; and when Leon had packed up his wardrobe , had his three arm-chairs restuffed , bought a stock of neckties , in a word , had made more preparations than for a voyage around the world , he put it off from week to week , until he received a second letter from his mother urging him to leave , since he wanted to pass his examination before the vacation . 
When the moment for the farewells had come , Madame Homais wept , Justin sobbed ; Homais , as a man of nerve , concealed his emotion ; he wished to carry his friend 's overcoat himself as far as the gate of the notary , who was taking Leon to Rouen in his carriage . 
The latter had just time to bid farewell to Monsieur Bovary . 
When he reached the head of the stairs , he stopped , he was so out of breath . 
As he came in , Madame Bovary arose hurriedly . 
`` It is I again ! '' 
said Leon . 
`` I was sure of it ! '' 
She bit her lips , and a rush of blood flowing under her skin made her red from the roots of her hair to the top of her collar . 
She remained standing , leaning with her shoulder against the wainscot . 
`` The doctor is not here ? '' 
he went on . 
`` He is out . '' 
She repeated , `` He is out . '' 
Then there was silence . 
They looked at one another and their thoughts , confounded in the same agony , clung close together like two throbbing breasts . 
`` I should like to kiss Berthe , '' said Leon . 
Emma went down a few steps and called Felicite . 
He threw one long look around him that took in the walls , the decorations , the fireplace , as if to penetrate everything , carry away everything . 
But she returned , and the servant brought Berthe , who was swinging a windmill roof downwards at the end of a string . 
Leon kissed her several times on the neck . 
`` Good-bye , poor child ! 
good-bye , dear little one ! 
good-bye ! '' 
And he gave her back to her mother . 
`` Take her away , '' she said . 
They remained alone -- Madame Bovary , her back turned , her face pressed against a window-pane ; Leon held his cap in his hand , knocking it softly against his thigh . 
`` It is going to rain , '' said Emma . 
`` I have a cloak , '' he answered . 
`` Ah ! '' 
She turned around , her chin lowered , her forehead bent forward . 
The light fell on it as on a piece of marble , to the curve of the eyebrows , without one 's being able to guess what Emma was seeing on the horizon or what she was thinking within herself . 
`` Well , good-bye , '' he sighed . 
She raised her head with a quick movement . 
`` Yes , good-bye -- go ! '' 
They advanced towards each other ; he held out his hand ; she hesitated . 
`` In the English fashion , then , '' she said , giving her own hand wholly to him , and forcing a laugh . 
Leon felt it between his fingers , and the very essence of all his being seemed to pass down into that moist palm . 
Then he opened his hand ; their eyes met again , and he disappeared . 
When he reached the market-place , he stopped and hid behind a pillar to look for the last time at this white house with the four green blinds . 
He thought he saw a shadow behind the window in the room ; but the curtain , sliding along the pole as though no one were touching it , slowly opened its long oblique folds that spread out with a single movement , and thus hung straight and motionless as a plaster wall . 
Leon set off running . 
From afar he saw his employer 's gig in the road , and by it a man in a coarse apron holding the horse . 
Homais and Monsieur Guillaumin were talking . 
They were waiting for him . 
`` Embrace me , '' said the druggist with tears in his eyes . 
`` Here is your coat , my good friend . 
Mind the cold ; take care of yourself ; look after yourself . '' 
`` Come , Leon , jump in , '' said the notary . 
Homais bent over the splash-board , and in a voice broken by sobs uttered these three sad words -- `` A pleasant journey ! '' 
`` Good-night , '' said Monsieur Guillaumin . 
`` Give him his head . '' 
They set out , and Homais went back . 
Madame Bovary had opened her window overlooking the garden and watched the clouds . 
They gathered around the sunset on the side of Rouen and then swiftly rolled back their black columns , behind which the great rays of the sun looked out like the golden arrows of a suspended trophy , while the rest of the empty heavens was white as porcelain . 
But a gust of wind bowed the poplars , and suddenly the rain fell ; it pattered against the green leaves . 
Then the sun reappeared , the hens clucked , sparrows shook their wings in the damp thickets , and the pools of water on the gravel as they flowed away carried off the pink flowers of an acacia . 
`` Ah ! 
how far off he must be already ! '' 
she thought . 
Monsieur Homais , as usual , came at half-past six during dinner . 
`` Well , '' said he , `` so we 've sent off our young friend ! '' 
`` So it seems , '' replied the doctor . 
Then turning on his chair ; `` Any news at home ? '' 
`` Nothing much . 
Only my wife was a little moved this afternoon . 
You know women -- a nothing upsets them , especially my wife . 
And we should be wrong to object to that , since their nervous organization is much more malleable than ours . '' 
`` Poor Leon ! '' 
said Charles . 
`` How will he live at Paris ? 
Will he get used to it ? '' 
Madame Bovary sighed . 
`` Get along ! '' 
said the chemist , smacking his lips . 
`` The outings at restaurants , the masked balls , the champagne -- all that 'll be jolly enough , I assure you . '' 
`` I do n't think he 'll go wrong , '' objected Bovary . 
`` Nor do I , '' said Monsieur Homais quickly ; `` although he 'll have to do like the rest for fear of passing for a Jesuit . 
And you do n't know what a life those dogs lead in the Latin quarter with actresses . 
Besides , students are thought a great deal of in Paris . 
Provided they have a few accomplishments , they are received in the best society ; there are even ladies of the Faubourg Saint-Germain who fall in love with them , which subsequently furnishes them opportunities for making very good matches . '' 
`` But , '' said the doctor , `` I fear for him that down there -- '' `` You are right , '' interrupted the chemist ; `` that is the reverse of the medal . 
And one is constantly obliged to keep one 's hand in one 's pocket there . 
Thus , we will suppose you are in a public garden . 
An individual presents himself , well dressed , even wearing an order , and whom one would take for a diplomatist . 
He approaches you , he insinuates himself ; offers you a pinch of snuff , or picks up your hat . 
Then you become more intimate ; he takes you to a cafe , invites you to his country-house , introduces you , between two drinks , to all sorts of people ; and three-fourths of the time it 's only to plunder your watch or lead you into some pernicious step . 
`` That is true , '' said Charles ; `` but I was thinking especially of illnesses -- of typhoid fever , for example , that attacks students from the provinces . '' 
Emma shuddered . 
