`` Ah ! 
it will keep on , '' he said to Julien with an air of satisfaction . 
`` Do you mind going a little way off ? '' 
Then the bishop went very quickly to the centre of the room , then approached the mirror , again resumed his angry manner , and gravely began to give blessings . 
Julien was motionless with astonishment . 
He was tempted to understand , but did not dare . 
The bishop stopped , and suddenly abandoning his grave manner looked at him and said : `` What do you think of my mitre , monsieur , is it on right ? '' 
`` Quite right , Monseigneur . '' 
`` It is not too far back ? 
That would look a little silly , but I must n't on the other hand wear it down over the eyes like an officer 's shako . '' 
`` It seems to me to be on quite right . '' 
`` The King of -- is accustomed to a venerable clergy who are doubtless very solemn . 
I should not like to appear lacking in dignity , especially by reason of my youth . '' 
And the bishop started again to walk about and give benedictions . 
`` It is quite clear , '' said Julien , daring to understand at last , `` He is practising giving his benediction . '' 
`` I am ready , '' the bishop said after a few moments . 
`` Go , Monsieur , and advise the senior and the gentlemen of the chapter . '' 
Soon M. Chélan , followed by the two oldest curés , entered by a big magnificently sculptured door , which Julien had not previously noticed . 
But this time he remained in his place quite at the back , and was only able to see the bishop over the shoulders of ecclesiastics who were pressing at the door in crowds . 
The bishop began slowly to traverse the hall . 
When he reached the threshold , the curés formed themselves into a procession . 
After a short moment of confusion , the procession began to march intoning the psalm . 
The bishop , who was between M. Chélan and a very old curé , was the last to advance . 
Julien being in attendance on the abbé Chélan managed to get quite near Monseigneur . 
They followed the long corridors of the abbey of Bray-le-Haut . 
In spite of the brilliant sun they were dark and damp . 
They arrived finally at the portico of the cloister . 
Julien was dumbfounded with admiration for so fine a ceremony . 
His emotions were divided between thoughts of his own ambition which had been reawakened by the bishop 's youth and thoughts of the latter 's refinement and exquisite politeness . 
This politeness was quite different to that of M. de Rênal , even on his good days . 
`` The higher you lift yourself towards the first rank of society , '' said Julien to himself , `` the more charming manners you find . '' 
They entered the church by a side door ; suddenly an awful noise made the ancient walls echo . 
Julien thought they were going to crumble . 
It was the little piece of artillery again . 
It had been drawn at a gallop by eight horses and had just arrived . 
Immediately on its arrival it had been run out by the Leipsic cannoneers and fired five shots a minute as though the Prussians had been the target . 
But this admirable noise no longer produced any effect on Julien . 
He no longer thought of Napoleon and military glory . 
`` To be bishop of Agde so young , '' he thought . 
`` But where is Agde ? 
How much does it bring in ? 
Two or three hundred thousand francs , perhaps . '' 
Monseigneur 's lackeys appeared with a magnificent canopy . 
M. Chélan took one of the poles , but as a matter of fact it was Julien who carried it . 
The bishop took his place underneath . 
He had really succeeded in looking old ; and our hero 's admiration was now quite unbounded . 
`` What ca n't one accomplish with skill , '' he thought . 
The king entered . 
Julien had the good fortune to see him at close quarters . 
The bishop began to harangue him with unction , without forgetting a little nuance of very polite anxiety for his Majesty . 
We will not repeat a description of the ceremony of Bray-le-Haut . 
They filled all the columns of the journals of the department for a fortnight on end . 
Julien learnt from the bishop that the king was descended from Charles the Bold . 
At a later date , it was one of Julien 's duties to check the accounts of the cost of this ceremony . 
M. de la Mole , who had succeeded in procuring a bishopric for his nephew , had wished to do him the favour of being himself responsible for all the expenses . 
The ceremony alone of Bray-le-Haute cost three thousand eight hundred francs . 
After the speech of the bishop , and the answer of the king , his Majesty took up a position underneath the canopy , and then knelt very devoutly on a cushion near the altar . 
The choir was surrounded by stalls , and the stalls were raised two steps from the pavement . 
It was at the bottom of these steps that Julien sat at the feet of M. de Chélan almost like a train-bearer sitting next to his cardinal in the Sixtine chapel at Rome . 
There was a Te Deum , floods of incense , innumerable volleys of musketry and artillery ; the peasants were drunk with happiness and piety . 
A day like this undoes the work of a hundred numbers of the Jacobin papers . 
Julien was six paces from the king , who was really praying with devotion . 
He noticed for the first time a little man with a witty expression , who wore an almost plain suit . 
But he had a sky-blue ribbon over this very simple suit . 
He was nearer the king than many other lords , whose clothes were embroidered with gold to such an extent that , to use Julien 's expression , it was impossible to see the cloth . 
He learnt some minutes later that it was Monsieur de la Mole . 
He thought he looked haughty , and even insolent . 
`` I 'm sure this marquis is not so polite as my pretty bishop , '' he thought . 
`` Ah , the ecclesiastical calling makes men mild and good . 
But the king has come to venerate the relic , and I do n't see a trace of the relic . 
Where has Saint Clement got to ? '' 
A little priest who sat next to him informed him that the venerable relic was at the top of the building in a chapelle ardente . 
`` What is a chapelle ardente , '' said Julien to himself . 
But he was reluctant to ask the meaning of this word . 
He redoubled his attention . 
The etiquette on the occasion of a visit of a sovereign prince is that the canons do not accompany the bishop . 
But , as he started on his march to the chapelle ardente , my lord bishop of Agde called the abbé Chélan . 
Julien dared to follow him . 
Having climbed up a long staircase , they reached an extremely small door whose Gothic frame was magnificently gilded . 
This work looked as though it had been constructed the day before . 
Twenty-four young girls belonging to the most distinguished families in Verrières were assembled in front of the door . 
The bishop knelt down in the midst of these pretty maidens before he opened the door . 
While he was praying aloud , they seemed unable to exhaust their admiration for his fine lace , his gracious mien , and his young and gentle face . 
This spectacle deprived our hero of his last remnants of reason . 
At this moment he would have fought for the Inquisition , and with a good conscience . 
The door suddenly opened . 
The little chapel was blazing with light . 
More than a thousand candles could be seen before the altar , divided into eight lines and separated from each other by bouquets of flowers . 
The suave odour of the purest incense eddied out from the door of the sanctuary . 
The chapel , which had been newly gilded , was extremely small but very high . 
Julien noticed that there were candles more than fifteen feet high upon the altar . 
The young girls could not restrain a cry of admiration . 
Only the twenty-four young girls , the two curés and Julien had been admitted into the little vestibule of the chapel . 
Soon the king arrived , followed by Monsieur de la Mole and his great Chamberlain . 
The guards themselves remained outside kneeling and presenting arms . 
His Majesty precipitated , rather than threw himself , on to the stool . 
It was only then that Julien , who was keeping close to the gilded door , perceived over the bare arm of a young girl , the charming statue of St. Clement . 
It was hidden under the altar , and bore the dress of a young Roman soldier . 
It had a large wound on its neck , from which the blood seemed to flow . 
The artist had surpassed himself . 
The eyes , which though dying were full of grace , were half closed . 
A budding moustache adored that charming mouth which , though half closed , seemed notwithstanding to be praying . 
The young girl next to Julien wept warm tears at the sight . 
One of her tears fell on Julien 's hand . 
After a moment of prayer in the profoundest silence , that was only broken by the distant sound of the bells of all the villages within a radius of ten leagues , the bishop of Agde asked the king 's permission to speak . 
He finished a short but very touching speech with a passage , the very simplicity of which assured its effectiveness : `` Never forget , young Christian women , that you have seen one of the greatest kings of the world on his knees before the servants of this Almighty and terrible God . 
These servants , feeble , persecuted , assassinated as they were on earth , as you can see by the still bleeding wounds of Saint Clement , will triumph in Heaven . 
You will remember them , my young Christian women , will you not , this day for ever , and will detest the infidel . 
You will be for ever faithful to this God who is so great , so terrible , but so good ? '' 
With these words the bishop rose authoritatively . 
`` You promise me ? '' 
he said , lifting up his arm with an inspired air . 
`` We promise , '' said the young girls melting into tears . 
`` I accept your promise in the name of the terrible God , '' added the bishop in a thunderous voice , and the ceremony was at an end . 
The king himself was crying . 
It was only a long time afterwards that Julien had sufficient self-possession to enquire `` where were the bones of the Saint that had been sent from Rome to Philip the Good , Duke of Burgundy ? '' 
He was told that they were hidden in the charming waxen figure . 
His Majesty deigned to allow the young ladies who had accompanied him into the chapel to wear a red ribbon on which were embroidered these words , `` HATE OF THE INFIDEL . 
PERPETUAL ADORATION . '' 
Monsieur de la Mole had ten thousand bottles of wine distributed among the peasants . 
In the evening at Verrières , the Liberals made a point of having illuminations which were a hundred times better than those of the Royalists . 
Before leaving , the king paid a visit to M. de Moirod . 
The grotesqueness of every-day events conceals the real unhappiness of the passions . 
-- Barnave . 
As he was replacing the usual furniture in the room which M. de la Mole had occupied , Julien found a piece of very strong paper folded in four . 
He read at the bottom of the first page `` To His Excellency M. le Marquis de la Mole , peer of France , Chevalier of the Orders of the King , etc. etc. '' It was a petition in the rough hand-writing of a cook . 
`` Monsieur le Marquis , I have had religious principles all my life . 
I was in Lyons exposed to the bombs at the time of the siege , in '93 of execrable memory . 
I communicate , I go to Mass every Sunday in the parochial church . 
I have never missed the paschal duty , even in '93 of execrable memory . 
My cook used to keep servants before the revolution , my cook fasts on Fridays . 
I am universally respected in Verrières , and I venture to say I deserve to be so . 
I walk under the canopy in the processions at the side of the curé and of the mayor . 
On great occasions I carry a big candle , bought at my own expense . 
`` I ask Monsieur the marquis for the lottery appointment of Verrières , which in one way or another is bound to be vacant shortly as the beneficiary is very ill , and moreover votes on the wrong side at elections , etc. . 
De Cholin . '' 
In the margin of this petition was a recommendation signed `` de Moirod '' which began with this line , `` I have had the honour , the worthy person who makes this request . '' 
`` So even that imbecile de Cholin shows me the way to go about things , '' said Julien to himself . 
Eight days after the passage of the King of -- through Verrières , the one question which predominated over the innumerable falsehoods , foolish conjectures , and ridiculous discussions , etc. , etc. , which had had successively for their object the king , the Marquis de la Mole , the ten thousand bottles of wine , the fall of poor de Moirod , who , hoping to win a cross , only left his room a week after his fall , was the absolute indecency of having foisted Julien Sorel , a carpenter 's son , into the Guard of Honour . 
You should have heard on this point the rich manufacturers of printed calico , the very persons who used to bawl themselves hoarse in preaching equality , morning and evening in the café . 
That haughty woman , Madame de Rênal , was of course responsible for this abomination . 
The reason ? 
The fine eyes and fresh complexion of the little abbé Sorel explained everything else . 
A short time after their return to Vergy , Stanislas , the youngest of the children , caught the fever ; Madame de Rênal was suddenly attacked by an awful remorse . 
For the first time she reproached herself for her love with some logic . 
She seemed to understand as though by a miracle the enormity of the sin into which she had let herself be swept . 
Up to that moment , although deeply religious , she had never thought of the greatness of her crime in the eyes of God . 
In former times she had loved God passionately in the Convent of the Sacred Heart ; in the present circumstances , she feared him with equal intensity . 
The struggles which lacerated her soul were all the more awful in that her fear was quite irrational . 
Julien found that the least argument irritated instead of soothing her . 
She saw in the illness the language of hell . 
Moreover , Julien was himself very fond of the little Stanislas . 
It soon assumed a serious character . 
Then incessant remorse deprived Madame de Rênal of even her power of sleep . 
She ensconced herself in a gloomy silence : if she had opened her mouth , it would only have been to confess her crime to God and mankind . 
`` I urge you , '' said Julien to her , as soon as they got alone , `` not to speak to anyone . 
Let me be the sole confidant of your sufferings . 
If you still love me , do not speak . 
Your words will not be able to take away our Stanislas ' fever . '' 
But his consolations produced no effect . 
He did not know that Madame de Rênal had got it into her head that , in order to appease the wrath of a jealous God , it was necessary either to hate Julien , or let her son die . 
It was because she felt she could not hate her lover that she was so unhappy . 
`` Fly from me , '' she said one day to Julien . 
`` In the name of God leave this house . 
It is your presence here which kills my son . 
God punishes me , '' she added in a low voice . 
`` He is just . 
I admire his fairness . 
My crime is awful , and I was living without remorse , '' she exclaimed . 
`` That was the first sign of my desertion of God : I ought to be doubly punished . '' 
Julien was profoundly touched . 
He could see in this neither hypocrisy nor exaggeration . 
`` She thinks that she is killing her son by loving me , and all the same the unhappy woman loves me more than her son . 
I can not doubt it . 
It is remorse for that which is killing her . 
Those sentiments of hers have real greatness . 
But how could I have inspired such a love , I who am so poor , so badly-educated , so ignorant , and sometimes so coarse in my manners ? '' 
One night the child was extremely ill . 
At about two o'clock in the morning , M. de Rênal came to see it . 
The child consumed by fever , and extremely flushed , could not recognise its father . 
Suddenly Madame de Rênal threw herself at her husband 's feet ; Julien saw that she was going to confess everything and ruin herself for ever . 
Fortunately this extraordinary proceeding annoyed M. de Rênal . 
`` Adieu ! 
Adieu ! '' 
he said , going away . 
`` No , listen to me , '' cried his wife on her knees before him , trying to hold him back . 
`` Hear the whole truth . 
It is I who am killing my son . 
I gave him life , and I am taking it back . 
Heaven is punishing me . 
In the eyes of God I am guilty of murder . 
It is necessary that I should ruin and humiliate myself . 
Perhaps that sacrifice will appease the the Lord . '' 
If M. de Rênal had been a man of any imagination , he would then have realized everything . 
`` Romantic nonsense , '' he cried , moving his wife away as she tried to embrace his knees . 
`` All that is romantic nonsense ! 
Julien , go and fetch the doctor at daybreak , '' and he went back to bed . 
Madame de Rênal fell on her knees half-fainting , repelling Julien 's help with a hysterical gesture . 
Julien was astonished . 
`` So this is what adultery is , '' he said to himself . 
`` Is it possible that those scoundrels of priests should be right , that they who commit so many sins themselves should have the privilege of knowing the true theory of sin ? 
How droll ! '' 
For twenty minutes after M. de Rênal had gone back to bed , Julien saw the woman he loved with her head resting on her son 's little bed , motionless , and almost unconscious . 
`` There , '' he said to himself , `` is a woman of superior temperament brought to the depths of unhappiness simply because she has known me . '' 
`` Time moves quickly . 
What can I do for her ? 
I must make up my mind . 
I have not got simply myself to consider now . 
What do I care for men and their buffooneries ? 
What can I do for her ? 
Leave her ? 
But I should be leaving her alone and a prey to the most awful grief . 
That automaton of a husband is more harm to her than good . 
He is so coarse that he is bound to speak harshly to her . 
She may go mad and throw herself out of the window . '' 
`` If I leave her , if I cease to watch over her , she will confess everything , and who knows , in spite of the legacy which she is bound to bring him , he will create a scandal . 
She may confess everything -LRB- great God -RRB- to that scoundrel of an abbé who makes the illness of a child of six an excuse for not budging from this house , and not without a purpose either . 
In her grief and her fear of God , she forgets all she knows of the man ; she only sees the priest . '' 
`` Go away , '' said Madame de Rênal suddenly to him , opening her eyes . 
`` I would give my life a thousand times to know what could be of most use to you , '' answered Julien . 
`` I have never loved you so much , my dear angel , or rather it is only from this last moment that I begin to adore you as you deserve to be adored . 
What would become of me far from you , and with the consciousness that you are unhappy owing to what I have done ? 
But do n't let my suffering come into the matter . 
I will go -- yes , my love ! 
But if I leave you , dear ; if I cease to watch over you , to be incessantly between you and your husband , you will tell him everything . 
You will ruin yourself . 
Remember that he will hound you out of his house in disgrace . 
Besançon will talk of the scandal . 
You will be said to be absolutely in the wrong . 
You will never lift up your head again after that shame . '' 
`` That 's what I ask , '' she cried , standing up . 
`` I shall suffer , so much the better . '' 
`` But you will also make him unhappy through that awful scandal . '' 
`` But I shall be humiliating myself , throwing myself into the mire , and by those means , perhaps , I shall save my son . 
Such a humiliation in the eyes of all is perhaps to be regarded as a public penitence . 
So far as my weak judgment goes , is it not the greatest sacrifice that I can make to God ? 
-- perhaps He will deign to accept my humiliation , and to leave me my son . 
Show me another sacrifice which is more painful and I will rush to it . '' 
`` Let me punish myself . 
I too am guilty . 
Do you wish me to retire to the Trappist Monastery ? 
The austerity of that life may appease your God . 
Oh , heaven , why can not I take Stanislas 's illness upon myself ? '' 
`` Ah , do you love him then , '' said Madame de Rênal , getting up and throwing herself in his arms . 
At the same time she repelled him with horror . 
`` I believe you ! 
I believe you ! 
Oh , my one friend , '' she cried falling on her knees again . 
`` Why are you not the father of Stanislas ? 
In that case it would not be a terrible sin to love you more than your son . '' 
`` Wo n't you allow me to stay and love you henceforth like a brother ? 
It is the only rational atonement . 
It may appease the wrath of the Most High . '' 
`` Am I , '' she cried , getting up and taking Julien 's head between her two hands , and holding it some distance from her . 
`` Am I to love you as if you were a brother ? 
Is it in my power to love you like that ? '' 
Julien melted into tears . 
`` I will obey you , '' he said , falling at her feet . 
`` I will obey you in whatever you order me . 
That is all there is left for me to do . 
My mind is struck with blindness . 
I do not see any course to take . 
If I leave you you will tell your husband everything . 
You will ruin yourself and him as well . 
He will never be nominated deputy after incurring such ridicule . 
If I stay , you will think I am the cause of your son 's death , and you will die of grief . 
Do you wish to try the effect of my departure . 
If you wish , I will punish myself for our sin by leaving you for eight days . 
I will pass them in any retreat you like . 
In the abbey of Bray-le-Haut , for instance . 
But swear that you will say nothing to your husband during my absence . 
Remember that if you speak I shall never be able to come back . '' 
She promised and he left , but was called back at the end of two days . 
`` It is impossible for me to keep my oath without you . 
I shall speak to my husband if you are not constantly there to enjoin me to silence by your looks . 
Every hour of this abominable life seems to last a day . '' 
Finally heaven had pity on this unfortunate mother . 
Little by little Stanislas got out of danger . 
But the ice was broken . 
Her reason had realised the extent of her sin . 
She could not recover her equilibrium again . 
Her pangs of remorse remained , and were what they ought to have been in so sincere a heart . 
Her life was heaven and hell : hell when she did not see Julien ; heaven when she was at his feet . 
`` I do not deceive myself any more , '' she would say to him , even during the moments when she dared to surrender herself to his full love . 
`` I am damned , irrevocably damned . 
You are young , heaven may forgive you , but I , I am damned . 
I know it by a certain sign . 
I am afraid , who would not be afraid at the sight of hell ? 
but at the bottom of my heart I do not repent at all . 
I would commit my sin over again if I had the opportunity . 
If heaven will only forbear to punish me in this world and through my children , I shall have more than I deserve . 
But you , at any rate , my Julien , '' she would cry at other moments , `` are you happy ? 
Do you think I love you enough ? '' 
The suspiciousness and morbid pride of Julien , who needed , above all , a self-sacrificing love , altogether vanished when he saw at every hour of the day so great and indisputable a sacrifice . 
He adored Madame de Rênal . 
`` It makes no difference her being noble , and my being a labourer 's son . 
She loves me ... . 
she does not regard me as a valet charged with the functions of a lover . '' 
That fear once dismissed , Julien fell into all the madness of love , into all its deadly uncertainties . 
`` At any rate , '' she would cry , seeing his doubts of her love , `` let me feel quite happy during the three days we still have together . 
Let us make haste ; perhaps to-morrow will be too late . 
If heaven strikes me through my children , it will be in vain that I shall try only to live to love you , and to be blind to the fact that it is my crime which has killed them . 
I could not survive that blow . 
Even if I wished I could not ; I should go mad . '' 
`` Ah , if only I could take your sin on myself as you so generously offered to take Stanislas ' burning fever ! '' 
This great moral crisis changed the character of the sentiment which united Julien and his mistress . 
His love was no longer simply admiration for her beauty , and the pride of possessing her . 
Henceforth their happiness was of a quite superior character . 
The flame which consumed them was more intense . 
They had transports filled with madness . 
Judged by the worldly standard their happiness would have appeared intensified . 
But they no longer found that delicious serenity , that cloudless happiness , that facile joy of the first period of their love , when Madame de Rênal 's only fear was that Julien did not love her enough . 
Their happiness had at times the complexion of crime . 
In their happiest and apparently their most tranquil moments , Madame de Rênal would suddenly cry out , `` Oh , great God , I see hell , '' as she pressed Julien 's hand with a convulsive grasp . 
`` What horrible tortures ! 
I have well deserved them . '' 
She grasped him and hung on to him like ivy onto a wall . 
Julien would try in vain to calm that agitated soul . 
She would take his hand , cover it with kisses . 
Then , relapsing into a gloomy reverie , she would say , `` Hell itself would be a blessing for me . 
I should still have some days to pass with him on this earth , but hell on earth , the death of my children . 
Still , perhaps my crime will be forgiven me at that price . 
Oh , great God , do not grant me my pardon at so great a price . 
These poor children have in no way transgressed against You . 
I , I am the only culprit . 
I love a man who is not my husband . '' 
Julien subsequently saw Madame de Rênal attain what were apparently moments of tranquillity . 
She was endeavouring to control herself ; she did not wish to poison the life of the man she loved . 
They found the days pass with the rapidity of lightning amid these alternating moods of love , remorse , and voluptuousness . 
Julien lost the habit of reflecting . 
Mademoiselle Elisa went to attend to a little lawsuit which she had at Verrières . 
She found Valenod very piqued against Julien . 
She hated the tutor and would often speak about him . 
`` You will ruin me , Monsieur , if I tell the truth , '' she said one day to Valenod . 
`` All masters have an understanding amongst themselves with regard to matters of importance . 
There are certain disclosures which poor servants are never forgiven . '' 
After these stereotyped phrases , which his curiosity managed to cut short , Monsieur Valenod received some information extremely mortifying to his self-conceit . 
This woman , who was the most distinguished in the district , the woman on whom he had lavished so much attention in the last six years , and made no secret of it , more was the pity , this woman who was so proud , whose disdain had put him to the blush times without number , had just taken for her lover a little workman masquerading as a tutor . 
And to fill the cup of his jealousy , Madame de Rênal adored that lover . 
`` And , '' added the housemaid with a sigh , `` Julien did not put himself out at all to make his conquest , his manner was as cold as ever , even with Madame . '' 
Elisa had only become certain in the country , but she believed that this intrigue dated from much further back . 
`` That is no doubt the reason , '' she added spitefully , `` why he refused to marry me . 
And to think what a fool I was when I went to consult Madame de Rênal and begged her to speak to the tutor . '' 
The very same evening , M. de Rênal received from the town , together with his paper , a long anonymous letter which apprised him in the greatest detail of what was taking place in his house . 
Julien saw him pale as he read this letter written on blue paper , and look at him with a malicious expression . 
During all that evening the mayor failed to throw off his trouble . 
It was in vain that Julien paid him court by asking for explanations about the genealogy of the best families in Burgundy . 
Do not give dalliance Too much the rein ; the strongest oaths are straw To the fire i ' the blood . 
-- Tempest . 
As they left the drawing-room about midnight , Julien had time to say to his love , `` Do n't let us see each other to-night . 
Your husband has suspicions . 
I would swear that that big letter he read with a sigh was an anonymous letter . '' 
Fortunately , Julien locked himself into his room . 
Madame de Rênal had the mad idea that this warning was only a pretext for not seeing her . 
She absolutely lost her head , and came to his door at the accustomed hour . 
Julien , who had heard the noise in the corridor , immediately blew out his lamp . 
Someone was trying to open the door . 
Was it Madame de Rênal ? 
Was it a jealous husband ? 
Very early next morning the cook , who liked Julien , brought him a book , on the cover of which he read these words written in Italian : Guardate alla pagina 130 . 
Julien shuddered at the imprudence , looked for page 130 , and found pinned to it the following letter hastily written , bathed with tears , and full of spelling mistakes . 
Madame de Rênal was usually very correct . 
He was touched by this circumstance , and somewhat forgot the awfulness of the indiscretion . 
`` So you did not want to receive me to-night ? 
There are moments when I think that I have never read down to the depths of your soul . 
Your looks frighten me . 
I am afraid of you . 
Great God ! 
perhaps you have never loved me ? 
In that case let my husband discover my love , and shut me up in a prison in the country far away from my children . 
Perhaps God wills it so . 
I shall die soon , but you will have proved yourself a monster . 
`` Do you not love me ? 
Are you tired of my fits of folly and of remorse , you wicked man ? 
Do you wish to ruin me ? 
I will show you an easy way . 
Go and show this letter to all Verrières , or rather show it to M. Valenod . 
Tell him that I love you , nay , do not utter such a blasphemy , tell him I adore you , that it was only on the day I saw you that my life commenced ; that even in the maddest moments of my youth I never even dreamt of the happiness that I owe to you , that I have sacrificed my life to you and that I am sacrificing my soul . 
You know that I am sacrificing much more . 
But does that man know the meaning of sacrifice ? 
Tell him , I say , simply to irritate him , that I will defy all evil tongues , that the only misfortune for me in the whole world would be to witness any change in the only man who holds me to life . 
What a happiness it would be to me to lose my life , to offer it up as a sacrifice and to have no longer any fear for my children . 
`` Have no doubt about it , dear one , if it is an anonymous letter , it comes from that odious being who has persecuted me for the last six years with his loud voice , his stories about his jumps on horseback , his fatuity , and the never ending catalogue of all his advantages . 
`` Is there an anonymous letter ? 
I should like to discuss that question with you , you wicked man ; but no , you acted rightly . 
Clasping you in my arms perhaps for the last time , I should never have been able to argue as coldly as I do , now that I am alone . 
From this moment our happiness will no longer be so easy . 
Will that be a vexation for you ? 
Yes , on those days when you have n't received some amusing book from M. Fouqué . 
The sacrifice is made ; to-morrow , whether there is or whether there is not any anonymous letter , I myself will tell my husband I have received an anonymous letter and that it is necessary to give you a golden bridge at once , find some honourable excuse , and send you back to your parents without delay . 
`` Alas , dear one , we are going to be separated for a fortnight , perhaps a month ! 
Go , I will do you justice , you will suffer as much as I , but anyway , this is the only means of disposing of this anonymous letter . 
It is not the first that my husband has received , and on my score too . 
Alas ! 
how I used to laugh over them ! 
`` My one aim is to make my husband think that the letter comes from M. Valenod ; I have no doubt that he is its author . 
If you leave the house , make a point of establishing yourself at Verrières ; I will manage that my husband should think of passing a fortnight there in order to prove to the fools there was no coldness between him and me . 
Once at Verrières , establish ties of friendship with everyone , even with the Liberals . 
I am sure that all their ladies will seek you out . 
`` Do not quarrel with M. Valenod , or cut off his ears , as you said you would one day . 
