`` We have need of firmness , my dear . '' 
She cut off a strand of her hair . 
`` I do no know what I shall do , '' she said to him , `` but promise me if I die , never to forget my children . 
Whether you are far or near , try to make them into honest men . 
If there is a new revolution , all the nobles will have their throats cut . 
Their father will probably emigrate , because of that peasant on the roof who got killed . 
Watch over my family . 
Give me your hand . 
Adieu , my dear . 
These are our last moments . 
Having made this great sacrifice , I hope I shall have the courage to consider my reputation in public . '' 
Julien had been expecting despair . 
The simplicity of this farewell touched him . 
`` No , I am not going to receive your farewell like this . 
I will leave you now , as you yourself wish it . 
But three days after my departure I will come back to see you at night . '' 
Madame de Rênal 's life was changed . 
So Julien really loved her , since of his own accord he had thought of seeing her again . 
Her awful grief became changed into one of the keenest transports of joy which she had felt in her whole life . 
Everything became easy for her . 
The certainty of seeing her lover deprived these last moments of their poignancy . 
From that moment , both Madame de Rênal 's demeanour and the expression of her face were noble , firm , and perfectly dignified . 
M. de Rênal soon came back . 
He was beside himself . 
He eventually mentioned to his wife the anonymous letter which he had received two months before . 
`` I will take it to the Casino , and shew everybody that it has been sent by that brute Valenod , whom I took out of the gutter and made into one of the richest tradesmen in Verrières . 
I will disgrace him publicly , and then I will fight him . 
This is too much . '' 
`` Great Heavens ! 
I may become a widow , '' thought Madame de Rênal , and almost at the same time she said to herself , `` If I do not , as I certainly can , prevent this duel , I shall be the murderess of my own husband . '' 
She had never expended so much skill in honoring his vanity . 
Within two hours she made him see , and always by virtue of reasons which he discovered himself , that it was necessary to show more friendship than ever to M. Valenod , and even to take Elisa back into the household . 
Madame de Rênal had need of courage to bring herself to see again the girl who was the cause of her unhappiness . 
But this idea was one of Julien 's . 
Finally , having been put on the track three or four times , M. de Rênal arrived spontaneously at the conclusion , disagreeable though it was from the financial standpoint , that the most painful thing that could happen to him would be that Julien , in the middle of the effervescence of popular gossip throughout Verrières , should stay in the town as the tutor of Valenod 's children . 
It was obviously to Julien 's interest to accept the offer of the director of the workhouse . 
Conversely , it was essential for M. de Rênal 's prestige that Julien should leave Verrières to enter the seminary of Besançon or that of Dijon . 
But how to make him decide on that course ? 
And then how is he going to live ? 
M. de Rênal , seeing a monetary sacrifice looming in the distance , was in deeper despair than his wife . 
As for her , she felt after this interview in the position of a man of spirit who , tired of life , has taken a dose of stramonium . 
He only acts mechanically so to speak , and takes no longer any interest in anything . 
In this way , Louis XIV . 
came to say on his death-bed , `` When I was king . '' 
An admirable epigram . 
Next morning , M. de Rênal received quite early an anonymous letter . 
It was written in a most insulting style , and the coarsest words applicable to his position occurred on every line . 
It was the work of some jealous subordinate . 
This letter made him think again of fighting a duel with Valenod . 
Soon his courage went as far as the idea of immediate action . 
He left the house alone , went to the armourer 's and got some pistols which he loaded . 
`` Yes , indeed , '' he said to himself , `` even though the strict administration of the Emperor Napoleon were to become fashionable again , I should not have one sou 's worth of jobbery to reproach myself with ; at the outside , I have shut my eyes , and I have some good letters in my desk which authorise me to do so . '' 
Madame de Rênal was terrified by her husband 's cold anger . 
It recalled to her the fatal idea of widowhood which she had so much trouble in repelling . 
She closeted herself with him . 
For several hours she talked to him in vain . 
The new anonymous letter had decided him . 
Finally she succeeded in transforming the courage which had decided him to box Valenod 's ears , into the courage of offering six hundred francs to Julien , which would keep him for one year in a seminary . 
M. de Rênal cursed a thousand times the day that he had had the ill-starred idea of taking a tutor into his house , and forgot the anonymous letter . 
He consoled himself a little by an idea which he did not tell his wife . 
With the exercise of some skill , and by exploiting the romantic ideas of the young man , he hoped to be able to induce him to refuse M. Valenod 's offer at a cheaper price . 
Madame de Rênal had much more trouble in proving to Julien that inasmuch as he was sacrificing the post of six hundred francs a year in order to enable her husband to keep up appearances , he need have no shame about accepting the compensation . 
But Julien would say each time , `` I have never thought for a moment of accepting that offer . 
You have made me so used to a refined life that the coarseness of those people would kill me . '' 
Cruel necessity bent Julien 's will with its iron hand . 
His pride gave him the illusion that he only accepted the sum offered by M. de Rênal as a loan , and induced him to give him a promissory note , repayable in five years with interest . 
Madame de Rênal had , of course , many thousands of francs which had been concealed in the little mountain cave . 
She offered them to him all a tremble , feeling only too keenly that they would be angrily refused . 
`` Do you wish , '' said Julien to her , `` to make the memory of our love loathsome ? '' 
Finally Julien left Verrières . 
M. de Rênal was very happy , but when the fatal moment came to accept money from him the sacrifice proved beyond Julien 's strength . 
He refused point blank . 
M. de Rênal embraced him around the neck with tears in his eyes . 
Julien had asked him for a testimonial of good conduct , and his enthusiasm could find no terms magnificent enough in which to extol his conduct . 
Our hero had five louis of savings and he reckoned on asking Fouqué for an equal sum . 
He was very moved . 
But one league from Verrières , where he left so much that was dear to him , he only thought of the happiness of seeing the capital of a great military town like Besançon . 
During the short absence of three days , Madame de Rênal was the victim of one of the cruellest deceptions to which love is liable . 
Her life was tolerable , because between her and extreme unhappiness there was still that last interview which she was to have with Julien . 
Finally during the night of the third day , she heard from a distance the preconcerted signal . 
Julien , having passed through a thousand dangers , appeared before her . 
In this moment she only had one thought -- `` I see him for the last time . '' 
Instead of answering the endearments of her lover , she seemed more dead than alive . 
If she forced herself to tell him that she loved him , she said it with an embarrassed air which almost proved the contrary . 
Nothing could rid her of the cruel idea of eternal separation . 
The suspicious Julien thought for the moment that he was already forgotten . 
His pointed remarks to this effect were only answered by great tears which flowed down in silence , and by some hysterical pressings of the hand . 
`` But , '' Julien would answer his mistress 's cold protestations , `` Great Heavens ! 
How can you expect me to believe you ? 
You would show one hundred times more sincere affection to Madame Derville to a mere acquaintance . '' 
Madame de Rênal was petrified , and at a loss for an answer . 
`` It is impossible to be more unhappy . 
I hope I am going to die . 
I feel my heart turn to ice . '' 
Those were the longest answers which he could obtain . 
When the approach of day rendered it necessary for him to leave Madame de Rênal , her tears completely ceased . 
She saw him tie a knotted rope to the window without saying a word , and without returning her kisses . 
It was in vain that Julien said to her . 
`` So now we have reached the state of affairs which you wished for so much . 
Henceforward you will live without remorse . 
The slightest indisposition of your children will no longer make you see them in the tomb . '' 
`` I am sorry that you can not kiss Stanislas , '' she said coldly . 
Julien finished by being profoundly impressed by the cold embraces of this living corpse . 
He could think of nothing else for several leagues . 
His soul was overwhelmed , and before passing the mountain , and while he could still see the church tower of Verrières he turned round frequently . 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- C'est pigeon qui vole . 
A reference to a contemporary animal game with a pun on the word `` vole . '' 
What a noise , what busy people ! 
What ideas for the future in a brain of twenty ! 
What distraction offered by love . 
-- Barnave . 
Finally he saw some black walls near a distant mountain . 
It was the citadel of Besançon . 
`` How different it would be for me , '' he said with a sigh , `` if I were arriving at this noble military town to be sub-lieutenant in one of the regiments entrusted with its defence . '' 
Besançon is not only one of the prettiest towns in France , it abounds in people of spirit and brains . 
But Julien was only a little peasant , and had no means of approaching distinguished people . 
He had taken a civilian suit at Fouqué 's , and it was in this dress that he passed the drawbridge . 
Steeped as he was in the history of the siege of 1674 , he wished to see the ramparts of the citadel before shutting himself up in the seminary . 
He was within an ace two or three times of getting himself arrested by the sentinel . 
He was penetrating into places which military genius forbids the public to enter , in order to sell twelve or fifteen francs worth of corn every year . 
The height of the walls , the depth of the ditches , the terrible aspect of the cannons had been engrossing him for several hours when he passed before the great café on the boulevard . 
He was motionless with wonder ; it was in vain that he read the word café , written in big characters above the two immense doors . 
He could not believe his eyes . 
He made an effort to overcome his timidity . 
He dared to enter , and found himself in a hall twenty or thirty yards long , and with a ceiling at least twenty feet high . 
To-day , everything had a fascination for him . 
Two games of billiards were in progress . 
The waiters were crying out the scores . 
The players ran round the tables encumbered by spectators . 
Clouds of tobacco smoke came from everybody 's mouth , and enveloped them in a blue haze . 
The high stature of these men , their rounded shoulders , their heavy gait , their enormous whiskers , the long tailed coats which covered them , everything combined to attract Julien 's attention . 
These noble children of the antique Bisontium only spoke at the top of their voice . 
They gave themselves terrible martial airs . 
Julien stood still and admired them . 
He kept thinking of the immensity and magnificence of a great capital like Besançon . 
He felt absolutely devoid of the requisite courage to ask one of those haughty looking gentlemen , who were crying out the billiard scores , for a cup of coffee . 
But the young lady at the bar had noticed the charming face of this young civilian from the country , who had stopped three feet from the stove with his little parcel under his arm , and was looking at the fine white plaster bust of the king . 
This young lady , a big Franc-comtoise , very well made , and dressed with the elegance suitable to the prestige of the café , had already said two or three times in a little voice not intended to be heard by any one except Julien , `` Monsieur , Monsieur . '' 
Julien 's eyes encountered big blue eyes full of tenderness , and saw that he was the person who was being spoken to . 
He sharply approached the bar and the pretty girl , as though he had been marching towards the enemy . 
In this great manœuvre the parcel fell . 
What pity will not our provincial inspire in the young lycée scholars of Paris , who , at the early age of fifteen , know already how to enter a café with so distinguished an air ? 
But these children who have such style at fifteen turn commonplace at eighteen . 
The impassioned timidity which is met with in the provinces , sometimes manages to master its own nervousness , and thus trains the will . 
`` I must tell her the truth , '' thought Julien , who was becoming courageous by dint of conquering his timidity as he approached this pretty girl , who deigned to address him . 
`` Madame , this is the first time in my life that I have come to Besançon . 
I should like to have some bread and a cup of coffee in return for payment . '' 
The young lady smiled a little , and then blushed . 
She feared the ironic attention and the jests of the billiard players might be turned against this pretty young man . 
He would be frightened and would not appear there again . 
`` Sit here near me , '' she said to him , showing him a marble table almost completely hidden by the enormous mahogany counter which extended into the hall . 
The young lady leant over the counter , and had thus an opportunity of displaying a superb figure . 
Julien noticed it . 
All his ideas changed . 
The pretty young lady had just placed before him a cup , some sugar , and a little roll . 
She hesitated to call a waiter for the coffee , as she realised that his arrival would put an end to her tête-à-tête with Julien . 
Julien was pensively comparing this blonde and merry beauty with certain memories which would often thrill him . 
The thought of the passion of which he had been the object , nearly freed him from all his timidity . 
The pretty young woman had only one moment to save the situation . 
She read it in Julien 's looks . 
`` This pipe smoke makes you cough ; come and have breakfast to-morrow before eight o'clock in the morning . 
I am practically alone then . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said Julien , with the caressing smile of happy timidity . 
`` Amanda Binet . '' 
`` Will you allow me to send you within an hour 's time a little parcel about as big as this ? '' 
The beautiful Amanda reflected a little . 
`` I am watched . 
What you ask may compromise me . 
All the same , I will write my address on a card , which you will put on your parcel . 
Send it boldly to me . '' 
`` My name is Julien Sorel , '' said the young man . 
`` I have neither relatives nor acquaintances at Besançon . '' 
`` Ah , I understand , '' she said joyfully . 
`` You come to study law . '' 
`` Alas , no , '' answered Julien , `` I am being sent to the Seminary . '' 
The most complete discouragement damped Amanda 's features . 
She called a waiter . 
She had courage now . 
The waiter poured out some coffee for Julien without looking at him . 
Amanda was receiving money at the counter . 
Julien was proud of having dared to speak : a dispute was going on at one of the billiard tables . 
The cries and the protests of the players resounded over the immense hall , and made a din which astonished Julien . 
Amanda was dreamy , and kept her eyes lowered . 
`` If you like , Mademoiselle , '' he said to her suddenly with assurance , `` I will say that I am your cousin . '' 
This little air of authority pleased Amanda . 
`` He 's not a mere nobody , '' she thought . 
She spoke to him very quickly , without looking at him , because her eye was occupied in seeing if anybody was coming near the counter . 
`` I come from Genlis , near Dijon . 
Say that you are also from Genlis and are my mother 's cousin . '' 
`` I shall not fail to do so . '' 
`` All the gentlemen who go to the Seminary pass here before the café every Thursday in the summer at five o'clock . '' 
`` If you think of me when I am passing , have a bunch of violets in your hand . '' 
Amanda looked at him with an astonished air . 
This look changed Julien 's courage into audacity . 
Nevertheless , he reddened considerably , as he said to her . 
`` I feel that I love you with the most violent love . '' 
`` Speak in lower tones , '' she said to him with a frightened air . 
Julien was trying to recollect phrases out of a volume of the Nouvelle Héloise which he had found at Vergy . 
His memory served him in good stead . 
For ten minutes he recited the Nouvelle Héloise to the delighted Mademoiselle Amanda . 
He was happy on the strength of his own bravery , when suddenly the beautiful Franc-contoise assumed an icy air . 
One of her lovers had appeared at the café door . 
He approached the bar , whistling , and swaggering his shoulders . 
He looked at Julien . 
The latter 's imagination , which always indulged in extremes , suddenly brimmed over with ideas of a duel . 
He paled greatly , put down his cup , assumed an assured demeanour , and considered his rival very attentively . 
As this rival lowered his head , while he familiarly poured out on the counter a glass of brandy for himself , Amanda ordered Julien with a look to lower his eyes . 
He obeyed , and for two minutes kept motionless in his place , pale , resolute , and only thinking of what was going to happen . 
He was truly happy at this moment . 
The rival had been astonished by Julien 's eyes . 
Gulping down his glass of brandy , he said a few words to Amanda , placed his two hands in the pockets of his big tail coat , and approached the billiard table , whistling , and looking at Julien . 
The latter got up transported with rage , but he did not know what to do in order to be offensive . 
He put down his little parcel , and walked towards the billiard table with all the swagger he could muster . 
It was in vain that prudence said to him , `` but your ecclesiastical career will be ruined by a duel immediately on top of your arrival at Besançon . '' 
`` What does it matter . 
It shall never be said that I let an insolent fellow go scot free . '' 
Amanda saw his courage . 
It contrasted prettily with the simplicity of his manners . 
She instantly preferred him to the big young man with the tail coat . 
She got up , and while appearing to be following with her eye somebody who was passing in the street , she went and quickly placed herself between him and the billiard table . 
`` Take care not to look askance at that gentleman . 
He is my brother-in-law . '' 
`` What does it matter ? 
He looked at me . '' 
`` Do you want to make me unhappy ? 
No doubt he looked at you , why it may be he is going to speak to you . 
I told him that you were a relative of my mother , and that you had arrived from Genlis . 
He is a Franc-contois , and has never gone beyond Dôleon the Burgundy Road , so say what you like and fear nothing . '' 
Julien was still hesitating . 
Her barmaid 's imagination furnished her with an abundance of lies , and she quickly added . 
`` No doubt he looked at you , but it was at a moment when he was asking me who you were . 
He is a man who is boorish with everyone . 
He did not mean to insult you . '' 
Julien 's eye followed the pretended brother-in-law . 
He saw him buy a ticket for the pool , which they were playing at the further of the two billiard tables . 
Julien heard his loud voice shouting out in a threatening tone , `` My turn to play . '' 
He passed sharply before Madame Amanda , and took a step towards the billiard table . 
Amanda seized him by the arm . 
`` Come and pay me first , '' she said to him . 
`` That is right , '' thought Julien . 
`` She is frightened that I shall leave without paying . '' 
Amanda was as agitated as he was , and very red . 
She gave him the change as slowly as she could , while she repeated to him , in a low voice , `` Leave the café this instant , or I shall love you no more , and yet I do love you very much . '' 
Julien did go out , but slowly . 
`` Am I not in duty bound , '' he repeated to himself , `` to go and stare at that coarse person in my turn ? '' 
This uncertainty kept him on the boulevard in the front of the café for an hour ; he kept looking if his man was coming out . 
He did not come out , and Julien went away . 
He had only been at Besançon some hours , and already he had overcome one pang of remorse . 
The old surgeon-major had formerly given him some fencing lessons , in spite of his gout . 
That was all the science which Julien could enlist in the service of his anger . 
But this embarrassment would have been nothing if he had only known how to vent his temper otherwise than by the giving of a blow , for if it had come to a matter of fisticuffs , his enormous rival would have beaten him and then cleared out . 
`` There is not much difference between a seminary and a prison , '' said Julien to himself , `` for a poor devil like me , without protectors and without money . 
I must leave my civilian clothes in some inn , where I can put my black suit on again . 
If I ever manage to get out of the seminary for a few hours , I shall be able to see Mdlle . 
Amanda again in my lay clothes . '' 
This reasoning was all very fine . 
Though Julien passed in front of all the inns , he did not dare to enter a single one . 
Finally , as he was passing again before the Hôtel des Ambassadeurs , his anxious eyes encountered those of a big woman , still fairly young , with a high colour , and a gay and happy air . 
He approached her and told his story . 
`` Certainly , my pretty little abbé , '' said the hostess of the Ambassadeurs to him , `` I will keep your lay clothes for you , and I will even have them regularly brushed . 
In weather like this , it is not good to leave a suit of cloth without touching it . '' 
She took a key , and conducted him herself to a room , and advised him to make out a note of what he was leaving . 
`` Good heavens . 
How well you look like that , M. the abbé Sorel , '' said the big woman to him when he came down to the kitchen . 
I will go and get a good dinner served up to you , and she added in a low voice , `` It will only cost twenty sous instead of the fifty which everybody else pays , for one must really take care of your little purse strings . '' 
`` I have ten louis , '' Julien replied with certain pride . 
`` Oh , great heavens , '' answered the good hostess in alarm . 
`` Do n't talk so loud , there are quite a lot of bad characters in Besançon . 
They 'll steal all that from you in less than no time , and above all , never go into the café s , they are filled with bad characters . '' 
`` Indeed , '' said Julien , to whom those words gave food for thought . 
`` Do n't go anywhere else , except to my place . 
I will make coffee for you . 
Remember that you will always find a friend here , and a good dinner for twenty sous . 
So now you understand , I hope . 
Go and sit down at table , I will serve you myself . '' 
`` I sha n't be able to eat , '' said Julien to her . 
`` I am too upset . 
I am going to enter the seminary , as I leave you . '' 
The good woman , would not allow him to leave before she had filled his pockets with provisions . 
Finally Julien took his road towards the terrible place . 
The hostess was standing at the threshold , and showed him the way . 
Three hundred and thirty-six dinners at eighty-five centimes . 
Three hundred and thirty-six suppers at fifty centimes . 
Chocolate to those who are entitled to it . 
How much profit can be made on the contract ? 
-- Valenod of Besançon . 
He saw in the distance the iron gilt cross on the door . 
He approached slowly . 
His legs seemed to give way beneath him . 
`` So here is this hell upon earth which I shall be unable to leave . '' 
Finally he made up his mind to ring . 
The noise of the bell reverberated as though through a solitude . 
At the end of ten minutes a pale man , clothed in black , came and opened the door . 
Julien looked at him , and immediately lowered his eyes . 
This porter had a singular physiognomy . 
The green projecting pupils of his eyes were as round as those of a cat . 
The straight lines of his eyebrows betokened the impossibility of any sympathy . 
His thin lips came round in a semicircle over projecting teeth . 
None the less , his physiognomy did not so much betoken crime as rather that perfect callousness which is so much more terrifying to the young . 
The one sentiment which Julien 's rapid gaze surmised in this long and devout face was a profound contempt for every topic of conversation which did not deal with things celestial . 
Julien raised his eyes with an effort , and in a voice rendered quavering by the beating of his heart explained that he desired to speak to M. Pirard , the director of the Seminary . 
Without saying a word the man in black signed to him to follow . 
They ascended two stories by a large staircase with a wooden rail , whose warped stairs inclined to the side opposite the wall , and seemed on the point of falling . 
A little door with a big cemetery cross of white wood painted black at the top was opened with difficulty , and the porter made him enter a dark low room , whose whitewashed walls were decorated with two big pictures blackened by age . 
In this room Julien was left alone . 
He was overwhelmed . 
His heart was beating violently . 
He would have been happy to have ventured to cry . 
A silence of death reigned over the whole house . 
At the end of a quarter of an hour , which seemed a whole day to him , the sinister looking porter reappeared on the threshold of a door at the other end of the room , and without vouchsafing a word , signed to him to advance . 
He entered into a room even larger than the first , and very badly lighted . 
The walls also were whitened , but there was no furniture . 
Only in a corner near the door Julien saw as he passed a white wooden bed , two straw chairs , and a little pinewood armchair without any cushions . 
He perceived at the other end of the room , near a small window with yellow panes decorated with badly kept flower vases , a man seated at a table , and covered with a dilapidated cassock . 
He appeared to be in a temper , and took one after the other a number of little squares of paper , which he arranged on his table after he had written some words on them . 
He did not notice Julien 's presence . 
The latter did not move , but kept standing near the centre of the room in the place where the porter , who had gone out and shut the door , had left him . 
Ten minutes passed in this way : the badly dressed man kept on writing all the time . 
Julien 's emotion and terror were so great that he thought he was on the point of falling . 
A philosopher would have said , possibly wrongly , `` It is a violent impression made by ugliness on a soul intended by nature to love the beautiful . '' 
The man who was writing lifted up his head . 
Julien only perceived it after a moment had passed , and even after seeing it , he still remained motionless , as though struck dead by the terrible look of which he was the victim . 
Julien 's troubled eyes just managed to make out a long face , all covered with red blotches except the forehead , which manifested a mortal pallor . 
Two little black eyes , calculated to terrify the most courageous , shone between these red cheeks and that white forehead . 
The vast area of his forehead was bounded by thick , flat , jet black hair . 
`` Will you come near , yes or no ? '' 
said the man at last , impatiently . 
Julien advanced with an uneasy step , and at last , paler than he had ever been in his life and on the point of falling , stopped three paces from the little white wooden table which was covered with the squares of paper . 
`` Nearer , '' said the man . 
Julien advanced still further , holding out his hand , as though trying to lean on something . 
`` Your name ? '' 
`` Julien Sorel . '' 
`` You are certainly very late , '' said the man to him , as he rivetted again on him that terrible gaze . 
Julien could not endure this look . 
Holding out his hand as though to support himself , he fell all his length along the floor . 
The man rang . 
Julien had only lost the use of his eyes and the power of movement . 
He heard steps approaching . 
He was lifted up and placed on the little armchair of white wood . 
He heard the terrible man saying to the porter , `` He has had an epileptic fit apparently , and this is the finishing touch . '' 
When Julien was able to open his eyes , the man with the red face was going on with his writing . 
The porter had disappeared . 
`` I must have courage , '' said our hero to himself , `` and above all , hide what I feel . '' 
He felt violently sick . 
`` If anything happens to me , God knows what they will think of me . '' 
Finally the man stopped writing and looked sideways at Julien . 
`` Are you in a fit state to answer me ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said Julien in an enfeebled voice . 
`` Ah , that 's fortunate . '' 
The man in black had half got up , and was looking impatiently for a letter in the drawer of his pinewood table , which opened with a grind . 
He found it , sat down slowly , and looking again at Julien in a manner calculated to suck out of him the little life which he still possessed , said , `` You have been recommended to me by M. Chélan . 
He was the best curé in the diocese ; he was an upright man if there ever was one , and my friend for thirty years . '' 
`` Oh . 
It 's to M. Pirard then that I have the honour of speaking ? '' 
said Julien in a dying voice . 
`` Apparently , '' replied the director of the seminary , as he looked at him disagreeably . 
The glitter of his little eyes doubled and was followed by an involuntary movement of the muscles of the corner of the mouth . 
It was the physiognomy of the tiger savouring in advance the pleasure of devouring its prey . 
`` Chélan 's letter is short , '' he said , as though speaking to himself . '' 
Intelligenti pauca . 
In the present time it is impossible to write too little . '' 
He read aloud : -- `` I recommend to you Julien Sorel of this parish , whom I baptized nearly twenty years ago , the son of a rich carpenter who gives him nothing . 
Julien will be a remarkable worker in the vineyard of the Lord . 
He lacks neither memory nor intelligence ; he has some faculty for reflection . 
Will he persevere in his calling ? 
Is he sincere ? '' 
`` Sincere , '' repeated the abbé Pirard with an astonished air , looking at Julien . 
But the abbé 's look was already less devoid of all humanity . 
`` Sincere , '' he repeated , lowering his voice , and resuming his reading : -- `` I ask you for a stipend for Julien Sorel . 
He will earn it by passing the necessary examinations . 
I have taught him a little theology , that old and good theology of the Bossuets , the Arnaults , and the Fleury 's . 
If the person does not suit you , send him back to me . 
The director of the workhouse , whom you know well , offers him eight hundred to be tutor to his children . 
My inner self is tranquil , thanks to God . 
I am accustoming myself to the terrible blow , ` Vale et me ama . ' '' 
The abbé Pirard , speaking more slowly as he read the signature , pronounced with a sigh the word , `` Chélan . '' 
`` He is tranquil , '' he said , `` in fact his righteousness deserves such a recompense . 
May God grant it to me in such a case . '' 
He looked up to heaven and made the sign of the cross . 
At the sight of that sacred sign Julien felt an alleviation of the profound horror which had frozen him since his entry into the house . 
`` I have here three hundred and twenty-one aspirants for the most holy state , '' said the abbé Pirard at last , in a tone , which though severe , was not malicious ; `` only seven or eight have been recommended to me by such men as the abbé Chélan ; so you will be the ninth of these among the three hundred and twenty-one . 
But my protection means neither favour nor weakness , it means doubled care , and doubled severity against vice . 
Go and lock that door . '' 
Julian made an effort to walk , and managed not to fall . 
He noticed that a little window near the entrance door looked out on to the country . 
He saw the trees ; that sight did him as much good as the sight of old friends . '' 
` Loquerisne linquam latinam ? ' '' 
-LRB- Do you speak Latin ? -RRB- 
said the abbé Pirard to him as he came back . '' 
` Ita , pater optime , ' '' -LRB- Yes , excellent Father -RRB- answered Julien , recovering himself a little . 
But it was certain that nobody in the world had ever appeared to him less excellent than had M. Pirard for the last half hour . 
The conversation continued in Latin . 
The expression in the abbé 's eyes softened . 
Julien regained some self-possession . 
`` How weak I am , '' he thought , `` to let myself be imposed on by these appearances of virtue . 
The man is probably nothing more than a rascal , like M. Maslon , '' and Julien congratulated himself on having hidden nearly all his money in his boots . 
The abbé Pirard examined Julien in theology ; he was surprised at the extent of his knowledge , but his astonishment increased when he questioned him in particular on sacred scriptures . 
But when it came to questions of the doctrines of the Fathers , he perceived that Julien scarcely even knew the names of Saint Jerome , Saint Augustin , Saint Bonaventure , Saint Basile , etc. , etc. . 
`` As a matter of fact , '' thought the abbé Pirard , `` this is simply that fatal tendency to Protestantism for which I have always reproached Chélan . 
