Steps drew near . 
`` Go and meet your men , '' said Aramis to Baisemeaux . 
The governor obeyed . 
The sergeant and turnkeys disappeared . 
Baisemeaux re-entered , followed by a prisoner . 
Aramis had placed himself in the shade ; he saw without being seen . 
Baisemeaux , in an agitated tone of voice , made the young man acquainted with the order which set him at liberty . 
The prisoner listened , without making a single gesture or saying a word . 
`` You will swear -LRB- 't is the regulation that requires it -RRB- , '' added the governor , `` never to reveal anything that you have seen or heard in the Bastile . '' 
The prisoner perceived a crucifix ; he stretched out his hands and swore with his lips . 
`` And now , monsieur , you are free . 
Whither do you intend going ? '' 
The prisoner turned his head , as if looking behind him for some protection , on which he ought to rely . 
Then was it that Aramis came out of the shade : `` I am here , '' he said , `` to render the gentleman whatever service he may please to ask . '' 
The prisoner slightly reddened , and , without hesitation , passed his arm through that of Aramis . 
`` God have you in his holy keeping , '' he said , in a voice the firmness of which made the governor tremble as much as the form of the blessing astonished him . 
Aramis , on shaking hands with Baisemeaux , said to him ; `` Does my order trouble you ? 
Do you fear their finding it here , should they come to search ? '' 
`` I desire to keep it , monseigneur , '' said Baisemeaux . 
`` If they found it here , it would be a certain indication I should be lost , and in that case you would be a powerful and a last auxiliary for me . '' 
`` Being your accomplice , you mean ? '' 
answered Aramis , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Adieu , Baisemeaux , '' said he . 
The horses were in waiting , making each rusty spring reverberate the carriage again with their impatience . 
Baisemeaux accompanied the bishop to the bottom of the steps . 
Aramis caused his companion to mount before him , then followed , and without giving the driver any further order , `` Go on , '' said he . 
The carriage rattled over the pavement of the courtyard . 
An officer with a torch went before the horses , and gave orders at every post to let them pass . 
During the time taken in opening all the barriers , Aramis barely breathed , and you might have heard his `` sealed heart knock against his ribs . '' 
The prisoner , buried in a corner of the carriage , made no more sign of life than his companion . 
At length , a jolt more sever than the others announced to them that they had cleared the last watercourse . 
Behind the carriage closed the last gate , that in the Rue St. Antoine . 
No more walls either on the right or the left ; heaven everywhere , liberty everywhere , and life everywhere . 
The horses , kept in check by a vigorous hand , went quietly as far as the middle of the faubourg . 
There they began to trot . 
Little by little , whether they were warming to their work , or whether they were urged , they gained in swiftness , and once past Bercy , the carriage seemed to fly , so great was the ardor of the coursers . 
The horses galloped thus as far as Villeneuve St. George 's , where relays were waiting . 
Then four instead of two whirled the carriage away in the direction of Melun , and pulled up for a moment in the middle of the forest of Senart . 
No doubt the order had been given the postilion beforehand , for Aramis had no occasion even to make a sign . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked the prisoner , as if waking from a long dream . 
`` The matter is , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , `` that before going further , it is necessary your royal highness and I should converse . '' 
`` I will await an opportunity , monsieur , '' answered the young prince . 
`` We could not have a better , monseigneur . 
We are in the middle of a forest , and no one can hear us . '' 
`` The postilion ? '' 
`` The postilion of this relay is deaf and dumb , monseigneur . '' 
`` I am at your service , M. d'Herblay . '' 
`` Is it your pleasure to remain in the carriage ? '' 
`` Yes ; we are comfortably seated , and I like this carriage , for it has restored me to liberty . '' 
`` Wait , monseigneur ; there is yet a precaution to be taken . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` We are here on the highway ; cavaliers or carriages traveling like ourselves might pass , and seeing us stopping , deem us in some difficulty . 
Let us avoid offers of assistance , which would embarrass us . '' 
`` Give the postilion orders to conceal the carriage in one of the side avenues . '' '' 
'T is exactly what I wished to do , monseigneur . '' 
Aramis made a sign to the deaf and dumb driver of the carriage , whom he touched on the arm . 
The latter dismounted , took the leaders by the bridle , and led them over the velvet sward and the mossy grass of a winding alley , at the bottom of which , on this moonless night , the deep shades formed a curtain blacker than ink . 
This done , the man lay down on a slope near his horses , who , on either side , kept nibbling the young oak shoots . 
`` I am listening , '' said the young prince to Aramis ; `` but what are you doing there ? '' 
`` I am disarming myself of my pistols , of which we have no further need , monseigneur . '' 
`` My prince , '' said Aramis , turning in the carriage towards his companion , `` weak creature as I am , so unpretending in genius , so low in the scale of intelligent beings , it has never yet happened to me to converse with a man without penetrating his thoughts through that living mask which has been thrown over our mind , in order to retain its expression . 
But to-night , in this darkness , in the reserve which you maintain , I can read nothing on your features , and something tells me that I shall have great difficulty in wresting from you a sincere declaration . 
I beseech you , then , not for love of me , for subjects should never weigh as anything in the balance which princes hold , but for love of yourself , to retain every syllable , every inflexion which , under the present most grave circumstances , will all have a sense and value as important as any every uttered in the world . '' 
`` I listen , '' replied the young prince , `` decidedly , without either eagerly seeking or fearing anything you are about to say to me . '' 
And he buried himself still deeper in the thick cushions of the carriage , trying to deprive his companion not only of the sight of him , but even of the very idea of his presence . 
Black was the darkness which fell wide and dense from the summits of the intertwining trees . 
The carriage , covered in by this prodigious roof , would not have received a particle of light , not even if a ray could have struggled through the wreaths of mist that were already rising in the avenue . 
`` Monseigneur , '' resumed Aramis , `` you know the history of the government which to-day controls France . 
The king issued from an infancy imprisoned like yours , obscure as yours , and confined as yours ; only , instead of ending , like yourself , this slavery in a prison , this obscurity in solitude , these straightened circumstances in concealment , he was fain to bear all these miseries , humiliations , and distresses , in full daylight , under the pitiless sun of royalty ; on an elevation flooded with light , where every stain appears a blemish , every glory a stain . 
The king has suffered ; it rankles in his mind ; and he will avenge himself . 
He will be a bad king . 
I say not that he will pour out his people 's blood , like Louis XI. , or Charles IX. ; for he has no mortal injuries to avenge ; but he will devour the means and substance of his people ; for he has himself undergone wrongs in his own interest and money . 
In the first place , then , I acquit my conscience , when I consider openly the merits and the faults of this great prince ; and if I condemn him , my conscience absolves me . '' 
Aramis paused . 
It was not to listen if the silence of the forest remained undisturbed , but it was to gather up his thoughts from the very bottom of his soul -- to leave the thoughts he had uttered sufficient time to eat deeply into the mind of his companion . 
`` All that Heaven does , Heaven does well , '' continued the bishop of Vannes ; `` and I am so persuaded of it that I have long been thankful to have been chosen depositary of the secret which I have aided you to discover . 
To a just Providence was necessary an instrument , at once penetrating , persevering , and convinced , to accomplish a great work . 
I am this instrument . 
I possess penetration , perseverance , conviction ; I govern a mysterious people , who has taken for its motto , the motto of God , ' Patiens quia oeternus . ' '' 
The prince moved . 
`` I divine , monseigneur , why you are raising your head , and are surprised at the people I have under my command . 
You did not know you were dealing with a king -- oh ! 
monseigneur , king of a people very humble , much disinherited ; humble because they have no force save when creeping ; disinherited , because never , almost never in this world , do my people reap the harvest they sow , nor eat the fruit they cultivate . 
They labor for an abstract idea ; they heap together all the atoms of their power , so from a single man ; and round this man , with the sweat of their labor , they create a misty halo , which his genius shall , in turn , render a glory gilded with the rays of all the crowns in Christendom . 
Such is the man you have beside you , monseigneur . 
It is to tell you that he has drawn you from the abyss for a great purpose , to raise you above the powers of the earth -- above himself . '' 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- The prince lightly touched Aramis 's arm . 
`` You speak to me , '' he said , `` of that religious order whose chief you are . 
For me , the result of your words is , that the day you desire to hurl down the man you shall have raised , the event will be accomplished ; and that you will keep under your hand your creation of yesterday . '' 
`` Undeceive yourself , monseigneur , '' replied the bishop . 
`` I should not take the trouble to play this terrible game with your royal highness , if I had not a double interest in gaining it . 
The day you are elevated , you are elevated forever ; you will overturn the footstool , as you rise , and will send it rolling so far , that not even the sight of it will ever again recall to you its right to simple gratitude . '' 
`` Oh , monsieur ! '' 
`` Your movement , monseigneur , arises from an excellent disposition . 
I thank you . 
Be well assured , I aspire to more than gratitude ! 
I am convinced that , when arrived at the summit , you will judge me still more worthy to be your friend ; and then , monseigneur , we two will do such great deeds , that ages hereafter shall long speak of them . '' 
`` Tell me plainly , monsieur -- tell me without disguise -- what I am to-day , and what you aim at my being to-morrow . '' 
`` You are the son of King Louis XIII. , brother of Louis XIV. , natural and legitimate heir to the throne of France . 
In keeping you near him , as Monsieur has been kept -- Monsieur , your younger brother -- the king reserved to himself the right of being legitimate sovereign . 
The doctors only could dispute his legitimacy . 
But the doctors always prefer the king who is to the king who is not . 
Providence has willed that you should be persecuted ; this persecution to-day consecrates you king of France . 
You had , then , a right to reign , seeing that it is disputed ; you had a right to be proclaimed seeing that you have been concealed ; and you possess royal blood , since no one has dared to shed yours , as that of your servants has been shed . 
Now see , then , what this Providence , which you have so often accused of having in every way thwarted you , has done for you . 
It has given you the features , figure , age , and voice of your brother ; and the very causes of your persecution are about to become those of your triumphant restoration . 
To-morrow , after to-morrow -- from the very first , regal phantom , living shade of Louis XIV. , you will sit upon his throne , whence the will of Heaven , confided in execution to the arm of man , will have hurled him , without hope of return . '' 
`` I understand , '' said the prince , `` my brother 's blood will not be shed , then . '' 
`` You will be sole arbiter of his fate . '' 
`` The secret of which they made an evil use against me ? '' 
`` You will employ it against him . 
What did he do to conceal it ? 
He concealed you . 
Living image of himself , you will defeat the conspiracy of Mazarin and Anne of Austria . 
You , my prince , will have the same interest in concealing him , who will , as a prisoner , resemble you , as you will resemble him as a king . '' 
`` I fall back on what I was saying to you . 
Who will guard him ? '' 
`` Who guarded you ? '' 
`` You know this secret -- you have made use of it with regard to myself . 
Who else knows it ? '' 
`` The queen-mother and Madame de Chevreuse . '' 
`` What will they do ? '' 
`` Nothing , if you choose . '' 
`` How is that ? '' 
`` How can they recognize you , if you act in such a manner that no one can recognize you ? '' '' 
'T is true ; but there are grave difficulties . '' 
`` State them , prince . '' 
`` My brother is married ; I can not take my brother 's wife . '' 
`` I will cause Spain to consent to a divorce ; it is in the interest of your new policy ; it is human morality . 
All that is really noble and really useful in this world will find its account therein . '' 
`` The imprisoned king will speak . '' 
`` To whom do you think he will speak -- to the walls ? '' 
`` You mean , by walls , the men in whom you put confidence . '' 
`` If need be , yes . 
And besides , your royal highness -- '' `` Besides ? '' 
`` I was going to say , that the designs of Providence do not stop on such a fair road . 
Every scheme of this caliber is completed by its results , like a geometrical calculation . 
The king , in prison , will not be for you the cause of embarrassment that you have been for the king enthroned . 
His soul is naturally proud and impatient ; it is , moreover , disarmed and enfeebled , by being accustomed to honors , and by the license of supreme power . 
The same Providence which has willed that the concluding step in the geometrical calculation I have had the honor of describing to your royal highness should be your ascension to the throne , and the destruction of him who is hurtful to you , has also determined that the conquered one shall soon end both his own and your sufferings . 
Therefore , his soul and body have been adapted for but a brief agony . 
Put into prison as a private individual , left alone with your doubts , deprived of everything , you have exhibited the most sublime , enduring principle of life in withstanding all this . 
But your brother , a captive , forgotten , and in bonds , will not long endure the calamity ; and Heaven will resume his soul at the appointed time -- that is to say , soon . '' 
At this point in Aramis 's gloomy analysis , a bird of night uttered from the depths of the forest that prolonged and plaintive cry which makes every creature tremble . 
`` I will exile the deposed king , '' said Philippe , shuddering ; '' ` twill be more human . '' 
`` The king 's good pleasure will decide the point , '' said Aramis . 
`` But has the problem been well put ? 
Have I brought out of the solution according to the wishes or the foresight of your royal highness ? '' 
`` Yes , monsieur , yes ; you have forgotten nothing -- except , indeed , two things . '' 
`` The first ? '' 
`` Let us speak of it at once , with the same frankness we have already conversed in . 
Let us speak of the causes which may bring about the ruin of all the hopes we have conceived . 
Let us speak of the risks we are running . '' 
`` They would be immense , infinite , terrific , insurmountable , if , as I have said , all things did not concur to render them of absolutely no account . 
There is no danger either for you or for me , if the constancy and intrepidity of your royal highness are equal to that perfection of resemblance to your brother which nature has bestowed upon you . 
I repeat it , there are no dangers , only obstacles ; a word , indeed , which I find in all languages , but have always ill-understood , and , were I king , would have obliterated as useless and absurd . '' 
`` Yes , indeed , monsieur ; there is a very serious obstacle , an insurmountable danger , which you are forgetting . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Aramis . 
`` There is conscience , which cries aloud ; remorse , that never dies . '' 
`` True , true , '' said the bishop ; `` there is a weakness of heart of which you remind me . 
You are right , too , for that , indeed , is an immense obstacle . 
The horse afraid of the ditch , leaps into the middle of it , and is killed ! 
The man who trembling crosses his sword with that of another leaves loopholes whereby his enemy has him in his power . '' 
`` Have you a brother ? '' 
said the young man to Aramis . 
`` I am alone in the world , '' said the latter , with a hard , dry voice . 
`` But , surely , there is some one in the world whom you love ? '' 
added Philippe . 
`` No one ! 
-- Yes , I love you . '' 
The young man sank into so profound a silence , that the mere sound of his respiration seemed like a roaring tumult for Aramis . 
`` Monseigneur , '' he resumed , `` I have not said all I had to say to your royal highness ; I have not offered you all the salutary counsels and useful resources which I have at my disposal . 
It is useless to flash bright visions before the eyes of one who seeks and loves darkness : useless , too , is it to let the magnificence of the cannon 's roar make itself heard in the ears of one who loves repose and the quiet of the country . 
Monseigneur , I have your happiness spread out before me in my thoughts ; listen to my words ; precious they indeed are , in their import and their sense , for you who look with such tender regard upon the bright heavens , the verdant meadows , the pure air . 
I know a country instinct with delights of every kind , an unknown paradise , a secluded corner of the world -- where alone , unfettered and unknown , in the thick covert of the woods , amidst flowers , and streams of rippling water , you will forget all the misery that human folly has so recently allotted you . 
Oh ! 
listen to me , my prince . 
I do not jest . 
I have a heart , and mind , and soul , and can read your own , -- aye , even to its depths . 
I will not take you unready for your task , in order to cast you into the crucible of my own desires , of my caprice , or my ambition . 
Let it be all or nothing . 
You are chilled and galled , sick at heart , overcome by excess of the emotions which but one hour 's liberty has produced in you . 
For me , that is a certain and unmistakable sign that you do not wish to continue at liberty . 
Would you prefer a more humble life , a life more suited to your strength ? 
Heaven is my witness , that I wish your happiness to be the result of the trial to which I have exposed you . '' 
`` Speak , speak , '' said the prince , with a vivacity which did not escape Aramis . 
`` I know , '' resumed the prelate , `` in the Bas-Poitou , a canton , of which no one in France suspects the existence . 
Twenty leagues of country is immense , is it not ? 
Twenty leagues , monseigneur , all covered with water and herbage , and reeds of the most luxuriant nature ; the whole studded with islands covered with woods of the densest foliage . 
These large marshes , covered with reeds as with a thick mantle , sleep silently and calmly beneath the sun 's soft and genial rays . 
A few fishermen with their families indolently pass their lives away there , with their great living-rafts of poplar and alder , the flooring formed of reeds , and the roof woven out of thick rushes . 
These barks , these floating-houses , are wafted to and fro by the changing winds . 
Whenever they touch a bank , it is but by chance ; and so gently , too , that the sleeping fisherman is not awakened by the shock . 
Should he wish to land , it is merely because he has seen a large flight of landrails or plovers , of wild ducks , teal , widgeon , or woodchucks , which fall an easy pray to net or gun . 
Silver shad , eels , greedy pike , red and gray mullet , swim in shoals into his nets ; he has but to choose the finest and largest , and return the others to the waters . 
Never yet has the food of the stranger , be he soldier or simple citizen , never has any one , indeed , penetrated into that district . 
The sun 's rays there are soft and tempered : in plots of solid earth , whose soil is swart and fertile , grows the vine , nourishing with generous juice its purple , white , and golden grapes . 
Once a week , a boat is sent to deliver the bread which has been baked at an oven -- the common property of all . 
There -- like the seigneurs of early days -- powerful in virtue of your dogs , your fishing-lines , your guns , and your beautiful reed-built house , would you live , rich in the produce of the chase , in plentitude of absolute secrecy . 
There would years of your life roll away , at the end of which , no longer recognizable , for you would have been perfectly transformed , you would have succeeded in acquiring a destiny accorded to you by Heaven . 
There are a thousand pistoles in this bag , monseigneur -- more , far more , than sufficient to purchase the whole marsh of which I have spoken ; more than enough to live there as many years as you have days to live ; more than enough to constitute you the richest , the freest , and the happiest man in the country . 
Accept it , as I offer it you -- sincerely , cheerfully . 
Forthwith , without a moment 's pause , I will unharness two of my horses , which are attached to the carriage yonder , and they , accompanied by my servant -- my deaf and dumb attendant -- shall conduct you -- traveling throughout the night , sleeping during the day -- to the locality I have described ; and I shall , at least , have the satisfaction of knowing that I have rendered to my prince the major service he himself preferred . 
I shall have made one human being happy ; and Heaven for that will hold me in better account than if I had made one man powerful ; the former task is far more difficult . 
And now , monseigneur , your answer to this proposition ? 
Here is the money . 
Nay , do not hesitate . 
At Poitou , you can risk nothing , except the chance of catching the fevers prevalent there ; and even of them , the so-called wizards of the country will cure you , for the sake of your pistoles . 
If you play the other game , you run the chance of being assassinated on a throne , strangled in a prison-cell . 
Upon my soul , I assure you , now I begin to compare them together , I myself should hesitate which lot I should accept . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the young prince , `` before I determine , let me alight from this carriage , walk on the ground , and consult that still voice within me , which Heaven bids us all to hearken to . 
Ten minutes is all I ask , and then you shall have your answer . '' 
`` As you please , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , bending before him with respect , so solemn and august in tone and address had sounded these strange words . 
Aramis was the first to descend from the carriage ; he held the door open for the young man . 
He saw him place his foot on the mossy ground with a trembling of the whole body , and walk round the carriage with an unsteady and almost tottering step . 
It seemed as if the poor prisoner was unaccustomed to walk on God 's earth . 
It was the 15th of August , about eleven o'clock at night ; thick clouds , portending a tempest , overspread the heavens , and shrouded every light and prospect underneath their heavy folds . 
The extremities of the avenues were imperceptibly detached from the copse , by a lighter shadow of opaque gray , which , upon closer examination , became visible in the midst of the obscurity . 
But the fragrance which ascended from the grass , fresher and more penetrating than that which exhaled from the trees around him ; the warm and balmy air which enveloped him for the first time for many years past ; the ineffable enjoyment of liberty in an open country , spoke to the prince in so seductive a language , that notwithstanding the preternatural caution , we would almost say dissimulation of his character , of which we have tried to give an idea , he could not restrain his emotion , and breathed a sigh of ecstasy . 
Then , by degrees , he raised his aching head and inhaled the softly scented air , as it was wafted in gentle gusts to his uplifted face . 
Crossing his arms on his chest , as if to control this new sensation of delight , he drank in delicious draughts of that mysterious air which interpenetrates at night the loftiest forests . 
The sky he was contemplating , the murmuring waters , the universal freshness -- was not all this reality ? 
Was not Aramis a madman to suppose that he had aught else to dream of in this world ? 
Those exciting pictures of country life , so free from fears and troubles , the ocean of happy days that glitters incessantly before all young imaginations , are real allurements wherewith to fascinate a poor , unhappy prisoner , worn out by prison cares , emaciated by the stifling air of the Bastile . 
It was the picture , it will be remembered , drawn by Aramis , when he offered the thousand pistoles he had with him in the carriage to the prince , and the enchanted Eden which the deserts of Bas-Poitou hid from the eyes of the world . 
Such were the reflections of Aramis as he watched , with an anxiety impossible to describe , the silent progress of the emotions of Philippe , whom he perceived gradually becoming more and more absorbed in his meditations . 
The young prince was offering up an inward prayer to Heaven , to be divinely guided in this trying moment , upon which his life or death depended . 
It was an anxious time for the bishop of Vannes , who had never before been so perplexed . 
His iron will , accustomed to overcome all obstacles , never finding itself inferior or vanquished on any occasion , to be foiled in so vast a project from not having foreseen the influence which a view of nature in all its luxuriance would have on the human mind ! 
Aramis , overwhelmed by anxiety , contemplated with emotion the painful struggle that was taking place in Philippe 's mind . 
This suspense lasted the whole ten minutes which the young man had requested . 
During this space of time , which appeared an eternity , Philippe continued gazing with an imploring and sorrowful look towards the heavens ; Aramis did not remove the piercing glance he had fixed on Philippe . 
Suddenly the young man bowed his head . 
His thought returned to the earth , his looks perceptibly hardened , his brow contracted , his mouth assuming an expression of undaunted courage ; again his looks became fixed , but this time they wore a worldly expression , hardened by covetousness , pride , and strong desire . 
Aramis 's look immediately became as soft as it had before been gloomy . 
Philippe , seizing his hand in a quick , agitated manner , exclaimed : `` Lead me to where the crown of France is to be found . '' 
`` Is this your decision , monseigneur ? '' 
asked Aramis . 
`` It is . '' 
`` Irrevocably so ? '' 
Philippe did not even deign to reply . 
He gazed earnestly at the bishop , as if to ask him if it were possible for a man to waver after having once made up his mind . 
`` Such looks are flashes of the hidden fire that betrays men 's character , '' said Aramis , bowing over Philippe 's hand ; `` you will be great , monseigneur , I will answer for that . '' 
`` Let us resume our conversation . 
I wished to discuss two points with you ; in the first place the dangers , or the obstacles we may meet with . 
That point is decided . 
The other is the conditions you intend imposing on me . 
It is your turn to speak , M. d'Herblay . '' 
`` The conditions , monseigneur ? '' 
`` Doubtless . 
You will not allow so mere a trifle to stop me , and you will not do me the injustice to suppose that I think you have no interest in this affair . 
Therefore , without subterfuge or hesitation , tell me the truth -- '' `` I will do so , monseigneur . 
Once a king -- '' `` When will that be ? '' 
`` To-morrow evening -- I mean in the night . '' 
`` Explain yourself . '' 
`` When I shall have asked your highness a question . '' 
`` Do so . '' 
`` I sent to your highness a man in my confidence with instructions to deliver some closely written notes , carefully drawn up , which will thoroughly acquaint your highness with the different persons who compose and will compose your court . '' 
`` I perused those notes . '' 
`` Attentively ? '' 
`` I know them by heart . '' 
`` And understand them ? 
Pardon me , but I may venture to ask that question of a poor , abandoned captive of the Bastile ? 
In a week 's time it will not be requisite to further question a mind like yours . 
You will then be in full possession of liberty and power . '' 
`` Interrogate me , then , and I will be a scholar representing his lesson to his master . '' 
`` We will begin with your family , monseigneur . '' 
`` My mother , Anne of Austria ! 
all her sorrows , her painful malady . 
Oh ! 
I know her -- I know her . '' 
`` Your second brother ? '' 
asked Aramis , bowing . 
`` To these notes , '' replied the prince , `` you have added portraits so faithfully painted , that I am able to recognize the persons whose characters , manners , and history you have so carefully portrayed . 
Monsieur , my brother , is a fine , dark young man , with a pale face ; he does not love his wife , Henrietta , whom I , Louis XIV. , loved a little , and still flirt with , even although she made me weep on the day she wished to dismiss Mademoiselle de la Valliere from her service in disgrace . '' 
`` You will have to be careful with regard to the watchfulness of the latter , '' said Aramis ; `` she is sincerely attached to the actual king . 
The eyes of a woman who loves are not easily deceived . '' 
`` She is fair , has blue eyes , whose affectionate gaze reveals her identity . 
She halts slightly in her gait ; she writes a letter every day , to which I have to send an answer by M. de Saint-Aignan . '' 
`` Do you know the latter ? '' 
`` As if I saw him , and I know the last verses he composed for me , as well as those I composed in answer to his . '' 
`` Very good . 
Do you know your ministers ? '' 
`` Colbert , an ugly , dark-browed man , but intelligent enough , his hair covering his forehead , a large , heavy , full head ; the mortal enemy of M. Fouquet . '' 
`` As for the latter , we need not disturb ourselves about him . '' 
`` No ; because necessarily you will not require me to exile him , I suppose ? '' 
Aramis , struck with admiration at the remark , said , `` You will become very great , monseigneur . '' 
`` You see , '' added the prince , `` that I know my lesson by heart , and with Heaven 's assistance , and yours afterwards , I shall seldom go wrong . '' 
`` You have still an awkward pair of eyes to deal with , monseigneur . '' 
`` Yes , the captain of the musketeers , M. d'Artagnan , your friend . '' 
`` Yes ; I can well say ` my friend . ' '' 
`` He who escorted La Valliere to Le Chaillot ; he who delivered up Monk , cooped in an iron box , to Charles II. ; he who so faithfully served my mother ; he to whom the crown of France owes so much that it owes everything . 
Do you intend to ask me to exile him also ? '' 
`` Never , sire . 
D'Artagnan is a man to whom , at a certain given time , I will undertake to reveal everything ; but be on your guard with him , for if he discovers our plot before it is revealed to him , you or I will certainly be killed or taken . 
He is a bold and enterprising man . '' 
`` I will think it over . 
Now tell me about M. Fouquet ; what do you wish to be done with regard to him ? '' 
`` One moment more , I entreat you , monseigneur ; and forgive me , if I seem to fail in respect to questioning you further . '' 
`` It is your duty to do so , nay , more than that , your right . '' 
`` Before we pass to M. Fouquet , I should very much regret forgetting another friend of mine . '' 
`` M. du Vallon , the Hercules of France , you mean ; oh ! 
as far as he is concerned , his interests are more than safe . '' 
`` No ; it is not he whom I intended to refer to . '' 
`` The Comte de la Fere , then ? '' 
`` And his son , the son of all four of us . '' 
`` That poor boy who is dying of love for La Valliere , whom my brother so disloyally bereft him of ? 
Be easy on that score . 
I shall know how to rehabilitate his happiness . 
Tell me only one thing , Monsieur d'Herblay ; do men , when they love , forget the treachery that has been shown them ? 
Can a man ever forgive the woman who has betrayed him ? 
Is that a French custom , or is it one of the laws of the human heart ? '' 
`` A man who loves deeply , as deeply as Raoul loves Mademoiselle de la Valliere , finishes by forgetting the fault or crime of the woman he loves ; but I do not yet know whether Raoul will be able to forget . '' 
`` I will see after that . 
Have you anything further to say about your friend ? '' 
`` No ; that is all . '' 
`` Well , then , now for M. Fouquet . 
What do you wish me to do for him ? '' 
`` To keep him on as surintendant , in the capacity in which he has hitherto acted , I entreat you . '' 
`` Be it so ; but he is the first minister at present . '' 
`` Not quite so . '' 
`` A king , ignorant and embarrassed as I shall be , will , as a matter of course , require a first minister of state . '' 
`` Your majesty will require a friend . '' 
`` I have only one , and that is yourself . '' 
`` You will have many others by and by , but none so devoted , none so zealous for your glory . '' 
`` You shall be my first minister of state . '' 
`` Not immediately , monseigneur , for that would give rise to too much suspicion and astonishment . '' 
`` M. de Richelieu , the first minister of my grandmother , Marie de Medici , was simply bishop of Lucon , as you are bishop of Vannes . '' 
`` I perceive that your royal highness has studied my notes to great advantage ; your amazing perspicacity overpowers me with delight . '' 
`` I am perfectly aware that M. de Richelieu , by means of the queen 's protection , soon became cardinal . '' 
`` It would be better , '' said Aramis , bowing , `` that I should not be appointed first minister until your royal highness has procured my nomination as cardinal . '' 
`` You shall be nominated before two months are past , Monsieur d'Herblay . 
But that is a matter of very trifling moment ; you would not offend me if you were to ask more than that , and you would cause me serious regret if you were to limit yourself to that . '' 
`` In that case , I have something still further to hope for , monseigneur . '' 
`` Speak ! 
speak ! '' 
`` M. Fouquet will not keep long at the head of affairs , he will soon get old . 
He is fond of pleasure , consistently , I mean , with all his labors , thanks to the youthfulness he still retains ; but this protracted youth will disappear at the approach of the first serious annoyance , or at the first illness he may experience . 
We will spare him the annoyance , because he is an agreeable and noble-hearted man ; but we can not save him from ill-health . 
So it is determined . 
When you shall have paid all M. Fouquet 's debts , and restored the finances to a sound condition , M. Fouquet will be able to remain the sovereign ruler in his little court of poets and painters , -- we shall have made him rich . 
When that has been done , and I have become your royal highness 's prime minister , I shall be able to think of my own interests and yours . '' 
The young man looked at his interrogator . 
`` M. de Richelieu , of whom we were speaking just now , was very much to blame in the fixed idea he had of governing France alone , unaided . 
He allowed two kings , King Louis XIII . 
and himself , to be seated on the self-same throne , whilst he might have installed them more conveniently upon two separate and distinct thrones . '' 
`` Upon two thrones ? '' 
said the young man , thoughtfully . 
`` In fact , '' pursued Aramis , quietly , `` a cardinal , prime minister of France , assisted by the favor and by the countenance of his Most Christian Majesty the King of France , a cardinal to whom the king his master lends the treasures of the state , his army , his counsel , such a man would be acting with twofold injustice in applying these mighty resources to France alone . 
Besides , '' added Aramis , `` you will not be a king such as your father was , delicate in health , slow in judgment , whom all things wearied ; you will be a king governing by your brain and by your sword ; you will have in the government of the state no more than you will be able to manage unaided ; I should only interfere with you . 
Besides , our friendship ought never to be , I do not say impaired , but in any degree affected , by a secret thought . 
I shall have given you the throne of France , you will confer on me the throne of St. Peter . 
Whenever your loyal , firm , and mailed hand should joined in ties of intimate association the hand of a pope such as I shall be , neither Charles V. , who owned two-thirds of the habitable globe , nor Charlemagne , who possessed it entirely , will be able to reach to half your stature . 
I have no alliances , I have no predilections ; I will not throw you into persecutions of heretics , nor will I cast you into the troubled waters of family dissension ; I will simply say to you : The whole universe is our own ; for me the minds of men , for you their bodies . 
And as I shall be the first to die , you will have my inheritance . 
What do you say of my plan , monseigneur ? '' 
`` I say that you render me happy and proud , for no other reason than that of having comprehended you thoroughly . 
Monsieur d'Herblay , you shall be cardinal , and when cardinal , my prime minister ; and then you will point out to me the necessary steps to be taken to secure your election as pope , and I will take them . 
You can ask what guarantees from me you please . '' 
`` It is useless . 
Never shall I act except in such a manner that you will be the gainer ; I shall never ascend the ladder of fortune , fame , or position , until I have first seen you placed upon the round of the ladder immediately above me ; I shall always hold myself sufficiently aloof from you to escape incurring your jealousy , sufficiently near to sustain your personal advantage and to watch over your friendship . 
All the contracts in the world are easily violated because the interests included in them incline more to one side than to another . 
With us , however , this will never be the case ; I have no need of any guarantees . '' 
`` And so -- my dear brother -- will disappear ? '' 
`` Simply . 
We will remove him from his bed by means of a plank which yields to the pressure of the finger . 
Having retired to rest a crowned sovereign , he will awake a captive . 
Alone you will rule from that moment , and you will have no interest dearer and better than that of keeping me near you . '' 
`` I believe it . 
There is my hand on it , Monsieur d'Herblay . '' 
`` Allow me to kneel before you , sire , most respectfully . 
We will embrace each other on the day we shall have upon our temples , you the crown , I the tiara . '' 
`` Still embrace me this very day also , and be , for and towards me , more than great , more than skillful , more than sublime in genius ; be kind and indulgent -- be my father ! '' 
Aramis was almost overcome as he listened to his voice ; he fancied he detected in his own heart an emotion hitherto unknown ; but this impression was speedily removed . 
`` His father ! '' 
he thought ; `` yes , his Holy Father . '' 
And they resumed their places in the carriage , which sped rapidly along the road leading to Vaux-le-Vicomte . 
The chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte , situated about a league from Melun , had been built by Fouquet in 1655 , at a time when there was a scarcity of money in France ; Mazarin had taken all that there was , and Fouquet expended the remainder . 
However , as certain men have fertile , false , and useful vices , Fouquet , in scattering broadcast millions of money in the construction of this palace , had found a means of gathering , as the result of his generous profusion , three illustrious men together : Levau , the architect of the building ; Lenotre , the designer of the gardens ; and Lebrun , the decorator of the apartments . 
If the Chateau de Vaux possessed a single fault with which it could be reproached , it was its grand , pretentious character . 
It is even at the present day proverbial to calculate the number of acres of roofing , the restoration of which would , in our age , be the ruin of fortunes cramped and narrowed as the epoch itself . 
Vaux-le-Vicomte , when its magnificent gates , supported by caryatides , have been passed through , has the principal front of the main building opening upon a vast , so-called , court of honor , inclosed by deep ditches , bordered by a magnificent stone balustrade . 
Nothing could be more noble in appearance than the central forecourt raised upon the flight of steps , like a king upon his throne , having around it four pavilions at the angles , the immense Ionic columns of which rose majestically to the whole height of the building . 
The friezes ornamented with arabesques , and the pediments which crowned the pilasters , conferred richness and grace on every part of the building , while the domes which surmounted the whole added proportion and majesty . 
This mansion , built by a subject , bore a far greater resemblance to those royal residences which Wolsey fancied he was called upon to construct , in order to present them to his master from the fear of rendering him jealous . 
But if magnificence and splendor were displayed in any one particular part of this palace more than another , -- if anything could be preferred to the wonderful arrangement of the interior , to the sumptuousness of the gilding , and to the profusion of the paintings and statues , it would be the park and gardens of Vaux . 
The jets d'eau , which were regarded as wonderful in 1653 , are still so , even at the present time ; the cascades awakened the admiration of kings and princes ; and as for the famous grotto , the theme of so many poetical effusions , the residence of that illustrious nymph of Vaux , whom Pelisson made converse with La Fontaine , we must be spared the description of all its beauties . 
We will do as Despreaux did , -- we will enter the park , the trees of which are of eight years ' growth only -- that is to say , in their present position -- and whose summits even yet , as they proudly tower aloft , blushingly unfold their leaves to the earliest rays of the rising sun . 
Lenotre had hastened the pleasure of the Maecenas of his period ; all the nursery-grounds had furnished trees whose growth had been accelerated by careful culture and the richest plant-food . 
Every tree in the neighborhood which presented a fair appearance of beauty or stature had been taken up by its roots and transplanted to the park . 
Fouquet could well afford to purchase trees to ornament his park , since he had bought up three villages and their appurtenances -LRB- to use a legal word -RRB- to increase its extent . 
M. de Scudery said of this palace , that , for the purpose of keeping the grounds and gardens well watered , M. Fouquet had divided a river into a thousand fountains , and gathered the waters of a thousand fountains into torrents . 
This same Monsieur de Scudery said a great many other things in his `` Clelie , '' about this palace of Valterre , the charms of which he describes most minutely . 
We should be far wiser to send our curious readers to Vaux to judge for themselves , than to refer them to `` Clelie ; '' and yet there are as many leagues from Paris to Vaux , as there are volumes of the `` Clelie . '' 
This magnificent palace had been got ready for the reception of the greatest reigning sovereign of the time . 
M. Fouquet 's friends had transported thither , some their actors and their dresses , others their troops of sculptors and artists ; not forgetting others with their ready-mended pens , -- floods of impromptus were contemplated . 
The cascades , somewhat rebellious nymphs though they were , poured forth their waters brighter and clearer than crystal : they scattered over the bronze triton and nereids their waves of foam , which glistened like fire in the rays of the sun . 
An army of servants were hurrying to and fro in squadrons in the courtyard and corridors ; while Fouquet , who had only that morning arrived , walked all through the palace with a calm , observant glance , in order to give his last orders , after his intendants had inspected everything . 
