`` I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging on a nail in the wall . '' 
On Alyosha 's inquiring whether she had informed the police , she answered that she had told no one , `` but I flew straight to you , I 've run all the way . '' 
She seemed perfectly crazy , Alyosha reported , and was shaking like a leaf . 
When Alyosha ran with her to the cottage , he found Smerdyakov still hanging . 
On the table lay a note : `` I destroy my life of my own will and desire , so as to throw no blame on anyone . '' 
Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the police captain and told him all about it . 
`` And from him I 've come straight to you , '' said Alyosha , in conclusion , looking intently into Ivan 's face . 
He had not taken his eyes off him while he told his story , as though struck by something in his expression . 
`` Brother , '' he cried suddenly , `` you must be terribly ill . 
You look and do n't seem to understand what I tell you . '' 
`` It 's a good thing you came , '' said Ivan , as though brooding , and not hearing Alyosha 's exclamation . 
`` I knew he had hanged himself . '' 
`` From whom ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
But I knew . 
Did I know ? 
Yes , he told me . 
He told me so just now . '' 
Ivan stood in the middle of the room , and still spoke in the same brooding tone , looking at the ground . 
`` Who is he ? '' 
asked Alyosha , involuntarily looking round . 
`` He 's slipped away . '' 
Ivan raised his head and smiled softly . 
`` He was afraid of you , of a dove like you . 
You are a ` pure cherub . ' 
Dmitri calls you a cherub . 
Cherub ! 
... the thunderous rapture of the seraphim . 
What are seraphim ? 
Perhaps a whole constellation . 
But perhaps that constellation is only a chemical molecule . 
There 's a constellation of the Lion and the Sun . 
Do n't you know it ? '' 
`` Brother , sit down , '' said Alyosha in alarm . 
`` For goodness ' sake , sit down on the sofa ! 
You are delirious ; put your head on the pillow , that 's right . 
Would you like a wet towel on your head ? 
Perhaps it will do you good . '' 
`` Give me the towel : it 's here on the chair . 
I just threw it down there . '' 
`` It 's not here . 
Do n't worry yourself . 
I know where it is - here , '' said Alyosha , finding a clean towel , folded up and unused , by Ivan 's dressing-table in the other corner of the room . 
Ivan looked strangely at the towel : recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant . 
`` Stay '' - he got up from the sofa - `` an hour ago I took that new towel from there and wetted it . 
I wrapped it round my head and threw it down here ... How is it it 's dry ? 
There was no other . '' 
`` You put that towel on your head ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , and walked up and down the room an hour ago ... Why have the candles burnt down so ? 
What 's the time ? '' 
`` Nearly twelve '' `` No , no , no ! '' 
Ivan cried suddenly . 
`` It was not a dream . 
He was here ; he was sitting here , on that sofa . 
When you knocked at the window , I threw a glass at him ... this one . 
Wait a minute . 
I was asleep last time , but this dream was not a dream . 
It has happened before . 
I have dreams now , Alyosha ... yet they are not dreams , but reality . 
I walk about , talk and see ... though I am asleep . 
But he was sitting here , on that sofa there ... . 
He is frightfully stupid , Alyosha , frightfully stupid . '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly and began pacing about the room . 
`` Who is stupid ? 
Of whom are you talking , brother ? '' 
Alyosha asked anxiously again . 
`` The devil ! 
He 's taken to visiting me . 
He 's been here twice , almost three times . 
He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and not Satan , with scorched wings , in thunder and lightning . 
But he is not Satan : that 's a lie . 
He is an impostor . 
He is simply a devil - a paltry , trivial devil . 
He goes to the baths . 
If you undressed him , you 'd be sure to find he had a tail , long and smooth like a Danish dog 's , a yard long , dun colour ... . 
Alyosha , you are cold . 
You 've been in the snow . 
Would you like some tea ? 
What ? 
Is it cold ? 
Shall I tell her to bring some ? 
C'est a ne pas mettre un chien dehors ... '' Alyosha ran to the washing-stand , wetted the towel , persuaded Ivan to sit down again , and put the wet towel round his head . 
He sat down beside him . 
`` What were you telling me just now about Lise ? '' 
Ivan began again . 
-LRB- He was becoming very talkative . -RRB- 
`` I like Lise . 
I said something nasty about her . 
It was a lie . 
I like her ... I am afraid for Katya to-morrow . 
I am more afraid of her than of anything . 
On account of the future . 
She will cast me off to-morrow and trample me under foot . 
She thinks that I am ruining Mitya from jealousy on her account ! 
Yes , she thinks that ! 
But it 's not so . 
To-morrow the cross , but not the gallows . 
No , I sha n't hang myself . 
Do you know , I can never commit suicide , Alyosha . 
Is it because I am base ? 
I am not a coward . 
Is it from love of life ? 
How did I know that Smerdyakov had hanged himself ? 
Yes , it was he told me so . '' 
`` And you are quite convinced that there has been someone here ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , on that sofa in the corner . 
You would have driven him away . 
You did drive him away : he disappeared when you arrived . 
I love your face , Alyosha . 
Did you know that I loved your face ? 
And he is myself , Alyosha . 
All that 's base in me , all that 's mean and contemptible . 
Yes , I am a romantic . 
He guessed it ... though it 's a libel . 
He is frightfully stupid ; but it 's to his advantage . 
He has cunning , animal cunning - he knew how to infuriate me . 
He kept taunting me with believing in him , and that was how he made me listen to him . 
He fooled me like a boy . 
He told me a great deal that was true about myself , though . 
I should never have owned it to myself . 
Do you know , Alyosha , '' Ivan added in an intensely earnest and confidential tone , `` I should be awfully glad to think that it was he and not I. '' `` He has worn you out , '' said Alyosha , looking compassionately at his brother . 
`` He 's been teasing me . 
And you know he does it so cleverly , so cleverly . 
` Conscience ! 
What is conscience ? 
I make it up for myself . 
Why am I tormented by it ? 
From habit . 
From the universal habit of mankind for the seven thousand years . 
So let us give it up , and we shall be gods . ' 
It was he said that , it was he said that ! '' 
`` And not you , not you ? '' 
Alyosha could not help crying , looking frankly at his brother . 
`` Never mind him , anyway ; have done with him and forget him . 
And let him take with him all that you curse now , and never come back ! '' 
`` Yes , but he is spiteful . 
He laughed at me . 
He was impudent , Alyosha , '' Ivan said , with a shudder of offence . 
`` But he was unfair to me , unfair to me about lots of things . 
He told lies about me to my face . 
` Oh , you are going to perform an act of heroic virtue : to confess you murdered your father , that the valet murdered him at your instigation . ' '' 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha interposed , `` restrain yourself . 
It was not you murdered him . 
It 's not true ! '' 
`` That 's what he says , he , and he knows it . 
` You are going to perform an act of heroic virtue , and you do n't believe in virtue ; that 's what tortures you and makes you angry , that 's why you are so vindictive . ' 
He said that to me about me and he knows what he says . '' 
`` It 's you say that , not he , '' exclaimed Alyosha mournfully , `` and you say it because you are ill and delirious , tormenting yourself . '' 
`` No , he knows what he says . 
` You are going from pride , ' he says . 
` You 'll stand up and say it was I killed him , and why do you writhe with horror ? 
You are lying ! 
I despise your opinion , I despise your horror ! ' 
He said that about me . 
` And do you know you are longing for their praise - `` he is a criminal , a murderer , but what a generous soul ; he wanted to save his brother and he confessed . '' 
That 's a lie Alyosha ! '' 
Ivan cried suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I do n't want the low rabble to praise me , I swear I do n't ! 
That 's a lie ! 
That 's why I threw the glass at him and it broke against his ugly face . '' 
`` Brother , calm yourself , stop ! '' 
Alyosha entreated him . 
`` Yes , he knows how to torment one . 
He 's cruel , '' Ivan went on , unheeding . 
`` I had an inkling from the first what he came for . 
` Granting that you go through pride , still you had a hope that Smerdyakov might be convicted and sent to Siberia , and Mitya would be acquitted , while you would only be punished , with moral condemnation ' -LRB- ` Do you hear ? ' 
he laughed then -RRB- - ` and some people will praise you . 
But now Smerdyakov 's dead , he has hanged himself , and who 'll believe you alone ? 
But yet you are going , you are going , you 'll go all the same , you 've decided to go . 
What are you going for now ? ' 
That 's awful , Alyosha . 
I ca n't endure such questions . 
Who dare ask me such questions ? '' 
`` Brother , '' interposed Alyosha - his heart sank with terror , but he still seemed to hope to bring Ivan to reason - `` how could he have told you of Smerdyakov 's death before I came , when no one knew of it and there was no time for anyone to know of it ? '' 
`` He told me , '' said Ivan firmly , refusing to admit a doubt . 
`` It was all he did talk about , if you come to that . 
` And it would be all right if you believed in virtue , ' he said . 
` No matter if they disbelieve you , you are going for the sake of principle . 
But you are a little pig like Fyodor Pavlovitch , and what do you want with virtue ? 
Why do you want to go meddling if your sacrifice is of no use to anyone ? 
Because you do n't know yourself why you go ! 
Oh , you 'd give a great deal to know yourself why you go ! 
And can you have made up your mind ? 
You 've not made up your mind . 
You 'll sit all night deliberating whether to go or not . 
But you will go ; you know you 'll go . 
You know that whichever way you decide , the decision does not depend on you . 
You 'll go because you wo n't dare not to go . 
Why wo n't you dare ? 
You must guess that for yourself . 
That 's a riddle for you ! ' 
He got up and went away . 
You came and he went . 
He called me a coward , Alyosha ! 
Le mot de l'enigme is that I am a coward . 
` It is not for such eagles to soar above the earth . 
` It was he added that - he ! 
And Smerdyakov said the same . 
He must be killed ! 
Katya despises me . 
I 've seen that for a month past . 
Even Lise will begin to despise me ! 
` You are going in order to be praised . ' 
That 's a brutal lie ! 
And you despise me too , Alyosha . 
Now I am going to hate you again ! 
And I hate the monster , too ! 
I hate the monster ! 
I do n't want to save the monster . 
Let him rot in Siberia ! 
He 's begun singing a hymn ! 
Oh , to-morrow I 'll go , stand before them , and spit in their faces ! '' 
He jumped up in a frenzy , flung off the towel , and fell to pacing up and down the room again . 
Alyosha recalled what he had just said . 
`` I seem to be sleeping awake ... I walk , I speak , I see , but I am asleep . '' 
It seemed to be just like that now . 
Alyosha did not leave him . 
The thought passed through his mind to run for a doctor , but he was afraid to leave his brother alone : there was no one to whom he could leave him . 
By degrees Ivan lost consciousness completely at last . 
He still went on talking , talking incessantly , but quite incoherently , and even articulated his words with difficulty . 
Suddenly he staggered violently ; but Alyosha was in time to support him . 
Ivan let him lead him to his bed . 
Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed . 
He sat watching over him for another two hours . 
The sick man slept soundly , without stirring , breathing softly and evenly . 
Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa , without undressing . 
As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan . 
He began to understand Ivan 's illness . 
`` The anguish of a proud determination . 
An earnest conscience ! '' 
God , in Whom he disbelieved , and His truth were gaining mastery over his heart , which still refused to submit . 
`` Yes , '' the thought floated through Alyosha 's head as it lay on the pillow , `` yes , if Smerdyakov is dead , no one will believe Ivan 's evidence ; but he will go and give it . '' 
Alyosha smiled softly . 
`` God will conquer ! '' 
he thought . 
`` He will either rise up in the light of truth , or ... he 'll perish in hate , revenging on himself and on everyone his having served the cause he does not believe in , '' Alyosha added bitterly , and again he prayed for Ivan . 
A Judicial Error The Fatal Day AT ten o'clock in the morning of the day following the events I have described , the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court . 
I hasten to emphasise the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capable of reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail , or even in the actual order of events . 
I imagine that to mention everything with full explanation would fill a volume , even a very large one . 
And so I trust I may not be reproached , for confining myself to what struck me . 
I may have selected as of most interest what was of secondary importance , and may have omitted the most prominent and essential details . 
But I see I shall do better not to apologise . 
I will do my best and the reader will see for himself that I have done all I can . 
And , to begin with , before entering the court , I will mention what surprised me most on that day . 
Indeed , as it appeared later , everyone was surprised at it , too . 
We all knew that the affair had aroused great interest , that everyone was burning with impatience for the trial to begin , that it had been a subject of talk , conjecture , exclamation and surmise for the last two months in local society . 
Everyone knew , too , that the case had become known throughout Russia , but yet we had not imagined that it had aroused such burning , such intense , interest in everyone , not only among ourselves , but all over Russia . 
This became evident at the trial this day . 
Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province , but from several other Russian towns , as well as from Moscow and Petersburg . 
Among them were lawyers , ladies , and even several distinguished personages . 
Every ticket of admission had been snatched up . 
A special place behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for the most distinguished and important of the men visitors ; a row of arm-chairs had been placed there - something exceptional , which had never been allowed before . 
A large proportion not less than half of the public - were ladies . 
There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did not know where to seat them , for every ticket had long since been eagerly sought for and distributed . 
I saw at the end of the room , behind the platform , a special partition hurriedly put up , behind which all these lawyers were admitted , and they thought themselves lucky to have standing room there , for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space , and the crowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed , shoulder to shoulder . 
Some of the ladies , especially those who came from a distance , made their appearance in the gallery very smartly dressed , but the majority of the ladies were oblivious even of dress . 
Their faces betrayed hysterical , intense , almost morbid , curiosity . 
A peculiar fact - established afterwards by many observations - was that almost all the ladies , or , at least the vast majority of them , were on Mitya 's side and in favour of his being acquitted . 
This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conqueror of female hearts . 
It was known that two women rivals were to appear in the case . 
One of them - Katerina Ivanovna - was an object of general interest . 
All sorts of extraordinary tales were told about her , amazing anecdotes of her passion for Mitya , in spite of his crime . 
Her pride and `` aristocratic connections '' were particularly insisted upon -LRB- she had called upon scarcely anyone in the town -RRB- . 
People said she intended to petition the Government for leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to him somewhere in the mines . 
The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaited with no less impatience . 
The public was looking forward with anxious curiosity to the meeting of the two rivals - the proud aristocratic girl and `` the hetaira . '' 
But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies of the district than Katerina Ivanovna . 
They had already seen `` the woman who had ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son , '' and all , almost without exception , wondered how father and son could be so in love with `` such a very common , ordinary Russian girl , who was not even pretty . '' 
In brief , there was a great deal of talk . 
I know for a fact that there were several serious family quarrels on Mitya 's account in our town . 
Many ladies quarrelled violently with their husbands over differences of opinion about the dreadful case , and it was that the husbands of these ladies , far from being favourably disposed to the prisoner , should enter the court bitterly prejudiced against him . 
In fact , one may say pretty certainly that the masculine , as distinguished from the feminine , part of the audience was biased against the prisoner . 
There were numbers of severe , frowning , even vindictive faces . 
Mitya , indeed , had managed to offend many people during his stay in the town . 
Some of the visitors were , of course , in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate of Mitya personally . 
But all were interested in the trial , and the majority of the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal , except perhaps the lawyers , who were more interested in the legal than in the moral aspect of the case . 
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer , Fetyukovitch . 
His talent was well known , and this was not the first time he had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces . 
And if he defended them , such cases became celebrated and long remembered all over Russia . 
There were stories , too , about our prosecutor and about the President of the Court . 
It was said that Ippolit Kirillovitch was in a tremor at meeting Fetyukovitch , and that they had been enemies from the beginning of their careers in Petersburg , that though our sensitive prosecutor , who always considered that he had been aggrieved by someone in Petersburg because his talents had not been properly appreciated , was keenly excited over the Karamazov case , and was even dreaming of rebuilding his flagging fortunes by means of it , Fetyukovitch , they said , was his one anxiety . 
But these rumours were not quite just . 
Our prosecutor was not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger . 
On the contrary , his self-confidence increased with the increase of danger . 
It must be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidly impressionable . 
He would put his whole soul into some case and work at it as though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result . 
This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world , for just by this characteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could have been expected from his modest position . 
People laughed particularly at his passion for psychology . 
In my opinion , they were wrong , and our prosecutor was , I believe , a character of greater depth than was generally supposed . 
But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outset of his career and had never made up for it later . 
As for the President of our Court , I can only say that he was a humane and cultured man , who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressive views . 
He was rather ambitious , but did not concern himself greatly about his future career . 
The great aim of his life was to be a man of advanced ideas . 
He was , too , a man of connections and property . 
He felt , as we learnt afterwards , rather strongly about the Karamazov case , but from a social , not from a personal standpoint . 
He was interested in it as a social phenomenon , in its classification and its character as a product of our social conditions , as typical of the national character , and so on , and so on . 
His attitude to the personal aspect of the case , to its tragic significance and the persons involved in it , including the prisoner , was rather indifferent and abstract , as was perhaps fitting , indeed . 
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made their appearance . 
Our court is the best hall in the town - spacious , lofty , and good for sound . 
On the right of the judges , who were on a raised platform , a table and two rows of chairs had been put ready for the jury . 
On the left was the place for the prisoner and the counsel for the defence . 
In the middle of the court , near the judges , was a table with the `` material proofs . '' 
On it lay Fyodor Pavlovitch 's white silk dressing-gown , stained with blood ; the fatal brass pestle with which the supposed murder had been committed ; Mitya 's shirt , with a blood-stained sleeve ; his coat , stained with blood in patches over the pocket in which he had put his handkerchief ; the handkerchief itself , stiff with blood and by now quite yellow ; the pistol loaded by Mitya at Perhotin 's with a view to suicide , and taken from him on the sly at Mokroe by Trifon Borrissovitch ; the envelope in which the three thousand roubles had been put ready for Grushenka , the narrow pink ribbon with which it had been tied , and many other articles I do n't remember . 
In the body of the hall , at some distance , came the seats for the public . 
But in front of the balustrade a few chairs had been placed for witnesses who remained in the court after giving their evidence . 
At ten o'clock the three judges arrived - the President , one honorary justice of the peace , and one other . 
The prosecutor , of course , entered immediately after . 
The President was a short , stout , thick-set man of fifty , with a dyspeptic complexion , dark hair turning grey and cut short , and a red ribbon , of what Order I do n't remember . 
The prosecutor struck me and the others , too , as looking particularly pale , almost green . 
His face seemed to have grown suddenly thinner , perhaps in a single night , for I had seen him looking as usual only two days before . 
The President began with asking the court whether all the jury were present . 
But I see I ca n't go on like this , partly because some things I did not hear , others I did not notice , and others I have forgotten , but most of all because , as I have said before , I have literally no time or space to mention everything that was said and done . 
I only know that neither side objected to very many of the jurymen . 
I remember the twelve jurymen - four were petty officials of the town , two were merchants , and six peasants and artisans of the town . 
I remember , long before the trial , questions were continually asked with some surprise , especially by ladies : `` Can such a delicate , complex and psychological case be submitted for decision to petty officials and even peasants ? '' 
and `` What can an official , still more a peasant , understand in such an affair ? '' 
All the four officials in the jury were , in fact , men of no consequence and of low rank . 
Except one who was rather younger , they were grey-headed men , little known in society , who had vegetated on a pitiful salary , and who probably had elderly , unpresentable wives and crowds of children , perhaps even without shoes and stockings . 
At most , they spent their leisure over cards and , of course , had never read a single book . 
The two merchants looked respectable , but were strangely silent and stolid . 
One of them was close-shaven , and was dressed in European style ; the other had a small , grey beard , and wore a red ribbon with some sort of a medal upon it on his neck . 
There is no need to speak of the artisans and the peasants . 
The artisans of Skotoprigonyevsk are almost peasants , and even work on the land . 
Two of them also wore European dress , and , perhaps for that reason , were dirtier and more uninviting-looking than the others . 
So that one might well wonder , as I did as soon as I had looked at them , `` what men like that could possibly make of such a case ? '' 
Yet their faces made a strangely imposing , almost menacing , impression ; they were stern and frowning . 
At last the President opened the case of the murder of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov . 
I do n't quite remember how he described him . 
The court usher was told to bring in the prisoner , and Mitya made his appearance . 
There was a hush through the court . 
One could have heard a fly . 
I do n't know how it was with others , but Mitya made a most unfavourable impression on me . 
He looked an awful dandy in a brand-new frock-coat . 
I heard afterwards that he had ordered it in Moscow expressly for the occasion from his own tailor , who had his measure . 
He wore immaculate black kid gloves and exquisite linen . 
He walked in with his yard-long strides , looking stiffly straight in front of him , and sat down in his place with a most unperturbed air . 
At the same moment the counsel for defence , the celebrated Fetyukovitch , entered , and a sort of subdued hum passed through the court . 
He was a tall , spare man , with long thin legs , with extremely long , thin , pale fingers , clean-shaven face , demurely brushed , rather short hair , and thin lips that were at times curved into something between a sneer and a smile . 
He looked about forty . 
His face would have been pleasant , if it had not been for his eyes , which , in themselves small and inexpressive , were set remarkably close together , with only the thin , long nose as a dividing line between them . 
In fact , there was something strikingly birdlike about his face . 
He was in evening dress and white tie . 
I remember the President 's first questions to Mitya , about his name , his calling , and so on . 
Mitya answered sharply , and his voice was so unexpectedly loud that it made the President start and look at the prisoner with surprise . 
Then followed a list of persons who were to take part in the proceedings - that is , of the witnesses and experts . 
It was a long list . 
Four of the witnesses were not present - Miusov , who had given evidence at the preliminary inquiry , but was now in Paris ; Madame Hohlakov and Maximov , who were absent through illness ; and Smerdyakov , through his sudden death , of which an official statement from the police was presented . 
The news of Smerdyakov 's death produced a sudden stir and whisper in the court . 
Many of the audience , of course , had not heard of the sudden suicide . 
What struck people most was Mitya 's sudden outburst . 
As soon as the statement of Smerdyakov 's death was made , he cried out aloud from his place : `` He was a dog and died like a dog ! '' 
I remember how his counsel rushed to him , and how the President addressed him , threatening to take stern measures , if such an irregularity were repeated . 
Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several times abruptly to his counsel , with no show of regret : `` I wo n't again , I wo n't . 
It escaped me . 
I wo n't do it again . '' 
And , of course , this brief episode did him no good with the jury or the public . 
His character was displayed , and it spoke for itself . 
It was under the influence of this incident that the opening statement was read . 
It was rather short , but circumstantial . 
It only stated the chief reasons why he had been arrested , why he must be tried , and so on . 
Yet it made a great impression on me . 
The clerk read it loudly and distinctly . 
The whole tragedy was suddenly unfolded before us , concentrated , in bold relief , in a fatal and pitiless light . 
I remember how , immediately after it had been read , the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice : `` Prisoner , do you plead guilty ? '' 
Mitya suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation , '' he exclaimed , again in a startling , almost frenzied , voice , `` to idleness and debauchery . 
I meant to become an honest man for good , just at the moment when I was struck down by fate . 
But I am not guilty of the death of that old man , my enemy and my father . 
No , no , I am not guilty of robbing him ! 
I could not be . 
Dmitri Karamazov is a scoundrel , but not a thief . '' 
He sat down again , visibly trembling all over . 
The President again briefly , but impressively , admonished him to answer only what was asked , and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations . 
Then he ordered the case to proceed . 
All the witnesses were led up to take the oath . 
Then I saw them all together . 
The brothers of the prisoner were , however , allowed to give evidence without taking the oath . 
After an exhortation from the priest and the President , the witnesses were led away and were made to sit as far as possible apart from one another . 
Then they began calling them up one by one . 
Dangerous Witnesses I DO NOT know whether the witnesses for the defence and for the prosecution were separated into groups by the President , and whether it was arranged to call them in a certain order . 
But no doubt it was so . 
I only know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first . 
I repeat I do n't intend to describe all the questions step by step . 
Besides , my account would be to some extent superfluous , because in the speeches for the prosecution and for the defence the whole course of the evidence was brought together and set in a strong and significant light , and I took down parts of those two remarkable speeches in full , and will quote them in due course , together with one extraordinary and quite unexpected episode , which occurred before the final speeches , and undoubtedly influenced the sinister and fatal outcome of the trial . 
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiar characteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all , that is , the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with the arguments the defence had to rely upon . 
Everyone realised it from the first moment that the facts began to group themselves round a single point , and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed . 
Everyone , perhaps , felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute , that there was no doubt about it , that there could be really no discussion , and that the defence was only a matter of form , and that the prisoner was guilty , obviously and conclusively guilty . 
I imagine that even the ladies , who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of the interesting prisoner , were at the same time , without exception , convinced of his guilt . 
What 's more , I believe they would have been mortified if his guilt had not been so firmly established , as that would have lessened the effect of the closing scene of the criminal 's acquittal . 
That he would be acquitted , all the ladies , strange to say , were firmly persuaded up to the very last moment . 
`` He is guilty , but he will be acquitted , from motives of humanity , in accordance with the new ideas , the new sentiments that had come into fashion , '' and so on , and so on . 
And that was why they had crowded into the court so impatiently . 
The men were more interested in the contest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch . 
All were wondering and asking themselves what could even a talent like Fetyukovitch 's make of such a desperate case ; and so they followed his achievements , step by step , with concentrated attention . 
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end , up to his speech . 
Persons of experience suspected that he had some design , that he was working towards some object , but it was almost impossible to guess what it was . 
His confidence and self-reliance were unmistakable , however . 
Everyone noticed with pleasure , moreover , that he , after so short a stay , not more than three days , perhaps , among us , had so wonderfully succeeded in mastering the case and `` had studied it to a nicety . '' 
People described with relish , afterwards , how cleverly he had `` taken down '' all the witnesses for the prosecution , and as far as possible perplexed them and , what 's more , had aspersed their reputation and so depreciated the value of their evidence . 
But it was supposed that he did this rather by way of sport , so to speak , for professional glory , to show nothing had been omitted of the accepted methods , for all were convinced that he could do no real good by such disparagement of the witnesses , and probably was more aware of this than anyone , having some idea of his own in the background , some concealed weapon of defence , which he would suddenly reveal when the time came . 
But meanwhile , conscious of his strength , he seemed to be diverting himself . 
So , for instance , when Grigory , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's old servant , who had given the most damning piece of evidence about the open door , was examined , the counsel for the defence positively fastened upon him when his turn came to question him . 
It must be noted that Grigory entered the trial with a composed and almost stately air , not the least disconcerted by the majesty of the court or the vast audience listening to him . 
He gave evidence with as much confidence as though he had been talking with his Marfa , only perhaps more respectfully . 
It was impossible to make him contradict himself . 
The prosecutor questioned him first in detail about the family life of the Karamazovs . 
The family picture stood out in lurid colours . 
It was plain to ear and eye that the witness was guileless and impartial . 
In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of his deceased master , he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and `` had n't brought up his children as he should . 
He 'd have been devoured by lice when he was little , if it had n't been for me , '' he added , describing Mitya 's early childhood . 
`` It was n't fair either of the father to wrong his son over his mother 's property , which was by right his . '' 
In reply to the prosecutor 's question what grounds he had for asserting that Fyodor Pavlovitch had wronged his son in their money relations , Grigory , to the surprise of everyone , had no proof at all to bring forward , but he still persisted that the arrangement with the son was `` unfair , '' and that he ought `` to have paid him several thousand roubles more . '' 
I must note , by the way , that the prosecutor asked this question -LRB- whether Fyodor Pavlovitch had really kept back part of Mitya 's inheritance -RRB- with marked persistence of all the witnesses who could be asked it , not excepting Alyosha and Ivan , but he obtained no exact information from anyone ; all alleged that it was so , but were unable to bring forward any distinct proof . 
Grigory 's description of the scene at the dinner-table , when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father , threatening to come back to kill him , made a sinister impression on the court , especially as the old servant 's composure in telling it , his parsimony of words , and peculiar phraseology were as effective as eloquence . 
He observed that he was not angry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face ; he had forgiven him long ago , he said . 
Of the deceased Smerdyakov he observed , crossing himself , that he was a lad of ability , but stupid and afflicted , and , worse still , an infidel , and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitch and his elder son who had taught him to be so . 
But he defended Smerdyakov 's honesty almost with warmth , and related how Smerdyakov had once found the master 's money in the yard , and , instead of concealing it , had taken it to his master , who had rewarded him with a `` gold piece '' for it , and trusted him implicitly from that time forward . 
He maintained obstinately that the door into the garden had been open . 
But he was asked so many questions that I ca n't recall them all . 
At last the counsel for the defence began to cross-examine him , and the first question he asked was about the envelope in which Fyodor Pavlovitch was supposed to have put three thousand roubles for `` a certain person . '' 
`` Have you ever seen it , you , who were for so many years in close attendance on your master ? '' 
Grigory answered that he had not seen it and had never heard of the money from anyone `` till everybody was talking about it . '' 
This question about the envelope Fetyukovitch put to everyone who could conceivably have known of it , as persistently as the prosecutor asked his question about Dmitri 's inheritance , and got the same answer from all , that no one had seen the envelope , though many had heard of it . 
From the beginning everyone noticed Fetyukovitch 's persistence on this subject . 
`` Now , with your permission I 'll ask you a question , '' Fetyukovitch said , suddenly and unexpectedly . 
`` Of what was that balsam , or , rather , decoction , made , which , as we learn from the preliminary inquiry , you used on that evening to rub your lumbago , in the hope of curing it ? '' 
Grigory looked blankly at the questioner , and after a brief silence muttered , `` There was saffron in it . '' 
`` Nothing but saffron ? 
Do n't you remember any other ingredient ? '' 
`` There was milfoil in it , too . '' 
`` And pepper perhaps ? '' 
Fetyukovitch queried . 
`` Yes , there was pepper , too . '' 
`` Etcetera . 
And all dissolved in vodka ? '' 
`` In spirit . '' 
There was a faint sound of laughter in the court . 
`` You see , in spirit . 
After rubbing your back , I believe , you drank what was left in the bottle with a certain pious prayer , only known to your wife ? '' 
`` I did . '' 
`` Did you drink much ? 
Roughly speaking , a wine-glass or two ? '' 
`` It might have been a tumbler-full . '' 
`` A tumbler-full , even . 
Perhaps a tumbler and a half ? '' 
Grigory did not answer . 
He seemed to see what was meant . 
`` A glass and a half of neat spirit - is not at all bad , do n't you think ? 
You might see the gates of heaven open , not only the door into the garden ? '' 
Grigory remained silent . 
There was another laugh in the court . 
The President made a movement . 
`` Do you know for a fact , '' Fetyukovitch persisted , `` whether you were awake or not when you saw the open door ? '' 
`` I was on my legs . '' 
`` That 's not a proof that you were awake . '' 
-LRB- There was again laughter in the court . -RRB- 
`` Could you have answered at that moment , if anyone had asked you a question - for instance , what year it is ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` And what year is it , Anno Domini , do you know ? '' 
Grigory stood with a perplexed face , looking straight at his tormentor . 
Strange to say , it appeared he really did not know what year it was . 
`` But perhaps you can tell me how many fingers you have on your hands ? '' 
`` I am a servant , '' Grigory said suddenly , in a loud and distinct voice . 
`` If my betters think fit to make game of me , it is my duty to suffer it . '' 
Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback , and the President intervened , reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions . 
Fetyukovitch bowed with dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
The public and the jury , of course , were left with a grain of doubt in their minds as to the evidence of a man who might , while undergoing a certain cure , have seen `` the gates of heaven , '' and who did not even know what year he was living in . 
But before Grigory left the box another episode occurred . 
The President , turning to the prisoner , asked him whether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the last witness . 
`` Except about the door , all he has said is true , '' cried Mitya , in a loud voice . 
`` For combing the lice off me , I thank him ; for forgiving my blows , I thank him . 
The old man has been honest all his life and as faithful to my father as seven hundred poodles . '' 
`` Prisoner , be careful in your language , '' the President admonished him . 
`` I am not a poodle , '' Grigory muttered . 
`` All right , it 's I am a poodle myself , '' cried Mitya . 
`` If it 's an insult , I take it to myself and I beg his pardon . 
I was a beast and cruel to him . 
I was cruel to Aesop too . '' 
`` What Aesop ? '' 
the President asked sternly again . 
`` Oh , Pierrot ... my father , Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very sternly to be more careful in his language . 
`` You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges . '' 
The counsel for the defence was equally clever in dealing with the evidence of Rakitin . 
I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leading witnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance . 
It appeared that he knew everything ; his knowledge was amazing , he had been everywhere , seen everything , talked to everybody , knew every detail of the biography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs . 
Of the envelope , it is true , he had only heard from Mitya himself . 
But he described minutely Mitya 's exploits in the Metropolis , all his compromising doings and sayings , and told the story of Captain Snegiryov 's `` wisp of tow . '' 
But even Rakitin could say nothing positive about Mitya 's inheritance , and confined himself to contemptuous generalities . 
`` Who could tell which of them was to blame , and which was in debt to the other , with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no one could make head or tail of it ? '' 
He attributed the tragic crime to the habits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia , due to the lack of appropriate institutions . 
He was , in fact , allowed some latitude of speech . 
This was the first occasion on which Rakitin showed what he could do , and attracted notice . 
The prosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a magazine article on the case , and afterwards in his speech , as we shall see later , quoted some ideas from the article , showing that he had seen it already . 
The picture drawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister one , and greatly strengthened the case for the prosecution . 
Altogether , Rakatin 's discourse fascinated the public by its independence and the extraordinary nobility of its ideas . 
There were even two or three outbreaks of applause when he spoke of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia . 
But Rakitin , in his youthful ardour , made a slight blunder , of which the counsel for the defence at once adroitly took advantage . 
Answering certain questions about Grushenka and carried away by the loftiness of his own sentiments and his success , of which he was , of course , conscious , he went so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as `` the kept mistress of Samsonov . '' 
He would have given a good deal to take back his words afterwards , for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it at once . 
And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer having been able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so short a time . 
`` Allow me to ask , '' began the counsel for the defence , with the most affable and even respectful smile , `` you are , of course , the same Mr. Rakitin whose pamphlet , The Life of the Deceased Elder , Father Zossima , published by the diocesan authorities , full of profound and religious reflections and preceded by an excellent and devout dedication to the bishop , I have just read with such pleasure ? '' 
`` I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards , '' muttered Rakitin , for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almost ashamed . 
`` Oh , that 's excellent ! 
A thinker like you can , and indeed ought to , take the widest view of every social question . 
Your most instructive pamphlet has been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop , and has been of appreciable service ... . 
But this is the chief thing I should like to learn from you . 
You stated just now that you were very intimately acquainted with Madame Svyetlov . '' 
-LRB- It must be noted that Grushenka 's surname was Svyetlov . 
I heard it for the first time that day , during the case . -RRB- 
`` I can not answer for all my acquaintances ... . 
I am a young man ... and who can be responsible for everyone he meets ? '' 
cried Rakitin , flushing all over . 
`` I understand , I quite understand , '' cried Fetyukovitch ; as though he , too , were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself . 
`` You , like any other , might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautiful woman who would readily entertain the elite of the youth of the neighbourhood , but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to my knowledge , that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of months ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and promised you twenty-five roubles , if you would bring him to her in his monastic dress . 
And that actually took place on the evening of the day on which the terrible crime , which is the subject of the present investigation , was committed . 
You brought Alexey Karamazov to Madame Svyetlov , and did you receive the twenty-five roubles from Madame Svyetlov as a reward , that 's what I wanted to hear from you ? '' 
`` It was a joke ... . 
I do n't , see of what interest that can be to you ... . 
I took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later ... '' `` Then you did take - but you have not given it back yet ... or have you ? '' 
`` That 's of no consequence , '' muttered Rakitin , `` I refuse to answer such questions ... . 
Of course , I shall give it back . '' 
The President intervened , but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
Mr. Rakitin left the witness-box not absolutely without a stain upon his character . 
The effect left by the lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred , and Fetyukovitch 's expression , as he watched him walk away , seemed to suggest to the public `` this is a specimen of the lofty-minded persons who accuse him . '' 
I remember that this incident , too , did not pass off without an outbreak from Mitya . 
Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred to Grushenka , he suddenly shouted `` Bernard ! '' 
When , after Rakitin 's cross-examination , the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say , Mitya cried loudly : `` Since I 've been arrested , he has borrowed money from me ! 
He is a contemptible Bernard and opportunist , and he does n't believe in God ; he took the bishop in ! '' 
Mitya of course , was pulled up again for the intemperance of his language , but Rakitin was done for . 
Captain Snegiryov 's evidence was a failure , too , but from quite a different reason . 
He appeared in ragged and dirty clothes , muddy boots , and in spite of the vigilance and expert observation of the police officers , he turned out to be hopelessly drunk . 
On being asked about Mitya 's attack upon him , he refused to answer . 
`` God bless him . 
Ilusha told me not to . 
God will make it up to me yonder . '' 
`` Who told you not to tell ? 
Of whom are you talking ? '' 
`` Ilusha , my little son . 
` Father , father , how he insulted you ! ' 
He said that at the stone . 
Now he is dying ... '' The captain suddenly began sobbing , and plumped down on His knees before the President . 
He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of the public . 
The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all . 
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity , and amazed people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case . 
Thus , for example , Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression , of course , very prejudicial to Mitya . 
He calculated almost on his fingers that on his first visit to Mokroe , Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles , `` or very little less . 
Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girls alone ! 
And as for our lousy peasants , it was n't a case of flinging half a rouble in the street , he made them presents of twenty-five roubles each , at least , he did n't give them less . 
And what a lot of money was simply stolen from him ! 
And if anyone did steal , he did not leave a receipt . 
How could one catch the thief when he was flinging his money away all the time ? 
Our peasants are robbers , you know ; they have no care for their souls . 
And the way he went on with the girls , our village girls ! 
They 're completely set up since then , I tell you , they used to be poor . '' 
He recalled , in fact , every item of expense and added it all up . 
So the theory that only fifteen hundred had been spent and the rest had been put aside in a little bag seemed inconceivable . 
`` I saw three thousand as clear as a penny in his hands , I saw it with my own eyes ; I should think I ought to know how to reckon money , '' cried Trifon Borissovitch , doing his best to satisfy `` his betters . '' 
When Fetyukovitch had to cross-examine him , he scarcely tried to refute his evidence , but began asking him about an incident at the first carousal at Mokroe , a month before the arrest , when Timofey and another peasant called Akim had picked up on the floor in the passage a hundred roubles dropped by Mitya when he was drunk , and had given them to Trifon Borissovitch and received a rouble each from him for doing so . 
`` Well , '' asked the lawyer , '' did you give that hundred roubles back to Mr. Karamazov ? '' 
Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain ... . 
He was obliged , after the peasants had been examined , to admit the finding of the hundred roubles , only adding that he had religiously returned it all to Dmitri Fyodorovitch `` in perfect honesty , and it 's only because his honour was in liquor at the time , he would n't remember it . '' 
But , as he had denied the incident of the hundred roubles till the peasants had been called to prove it , his evidence as to returning the money to Mitya was naturally regarded with great suspicion . 
So one of the most dangerous witnesses brought forward by the prosecution was again discredited . 
The same thing happened with the Poles . 
They took up an attitude of pride and independence ; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in the service of the Crown , and that `` Pan Mitya '' had offered them three thousand `` to buy their honour , '' and that they had seen a large sum of money in his hands . 
Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words into his sentences , and seeing that this only increased his consequence in the eyes of the President and the prosecutor , grew more and more pompous , and ended by talking in Polish altogether . 
But Fetyukovitch caught them , too , in his snares . 
Trifon Borissovitch , recalled , was forced , in spite of his evasions , to admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of cards for the one he had provided , and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated during the game . 
Kalgonov confirmed this , and both the Poles left the witness-box with damaged reputations , amidst laughter from the public . 
Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous witnesses . 
Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them , and dismissing them with a certain derision . 
The lawyers and experts were lost in admiration , and were only at a loss to understand what good purpose could be served by it , for all , I repeat , felt that the case for the prosecution could not be refuted , but was growing more and more tragically overwhelming . 
But from the confidence of the `` great magician '' they saw that he was serene , and they waited , feeling that `` such a man '' had not come from Petersburg for nothing , and that he was not a man to return unsuccessful . 
The Medical Experts and a Pound of Nuts THE evidence of the medical experts , too , was of little use to the prisoner . 
And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned much upon it . 
The medical line of defence had only been taken up through the insistence of Katerina Ivanovna , who had sent for a celebrated doctor from Moscow on purpose . 
The case for the defence could , of course , lose nothing by it and might , with luck , gain something from it . 
There was , however , an element of comedy about it , through the difference of opinion of the doctors . 
The medical experts were the famous doctor from Moscow , our doctor , Herzenstube , and the young doctor , Varvinsky . 
The two latter appeared also as witnesses for the prosecution . 
The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor Herzenstube . 
He was a grey and bald old man of seventy , of middle height and sturdy build . 
He was much esteemed and respected by everyone in the town . 
He was a conscientious doctor and an excellent and pious man , a Hernguter or Moravian brother , I am not quite sure which . 
He had been living amongst us for many years and behaved with wonderful dignity . 
He was a kind-hearted and humane man . 
He treated the sick poor and peasants for nothing , visited them in their slums and huts , and left money for medicine , but he was as obstinate as a mule . 
If once he had taken an idea into his head , there was no shaking it . 
Almost everyone in the town was aware , by the way , that the famous doctor had , within the first two or three days of his presence among us , uttered some extremely offensive allusions to Doctor Herzenstube 's qualifications . 
Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty-five roubles for a visit , several people in the town were glad to take advantage of his arrival , and rushed to consult him regardless of expense . 
All these had , of course , been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube , and the celebrated doctor had criticised his treatment with extreme harshness . 
Finally , he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them , `` Well , who has been cramming you with nostrums ? 
Herzenstube ? 
He he ! '' 
Doctor Herzenstube , of course , heard all this , and now all the three doctors made their appearance , one after another , to be examined . 
Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the prisoner 's mental faculties was self-evident . 
Then giving his grounds for this opinion , which I omit here , he added that the abnormality was not only evident in many of the prisoner 's actions in the past , but was apparent even now at this very moment . 
When he was asked to explain how it was apparent now at this moment , the old doctor , with simple-hearted directness , pointed out that the prisoner had `` an extraordinary air , remarkable in the circumstances '' ; that he had `` marched in like a soldier , looking straight before him , though it would have been more natural for him to look to the left where , among the public , the ladies were sitting , seeing that he was a great admirer of the fair sex and must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying of him now , '' the old man concluded in his peculiar language . 
I must add that he spoke Russian readily , but every phrase was formed in German style , which did not , however , trouble him , for it had always been a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly , better indeed than Russians . 
And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs , always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and most expressive sayings in the whole world . 
I may remark , too , that in conversation , through absent-mindedness he often forgot the most ordinary words , which sometimes went out of his head , though he knew them perfectly . 
The same thing happened , though , when he spoke German , and at such times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying to catch the lost word , and no one could induce him to go on speaking till he had found the missing word . 
His remark that the prisoner ought to have looked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in the audience . 
All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor ; they knew , too , that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplary conduct , he looked upon women as lofty creatures . 
And so his unexpected observation struck everyone as very queer . 
The Moscow doctor , being questioned in his turn , definitely and emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner 's mental condition abnormal in the highest degree . 
He talked at length and with erudition of `` aberration '' and `` mania , '' and argued that , from all the facts collected , the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of aberration for several days before his arrest , and , if the crime had been committed by him , it must , even if he were conscious of it , have been almost involuntary , as he had not the power to control the morbid impulse that possessed him . 
But apart from temporary aberration , the doctor diagnosed mania , which promised , in his words , to lead to complete insanity in the future . 
-LRB- It must be noted that I report this in my own words , the doctor made use of very learned and professional language . -RRB- 
`` All his actions are in contravention of common sense and logic , '' he continued . 
`` Not to refer to what I have not seen , that is , the crime itself and the whole catastrophe , the day before yesterday , while he was talking to me , he had an unaccountably fixed look in his eye . 
He laughed unexpectedly when there was nothing to laugh at . 
He showed continual and inexplicable irritability , using strange words , ` Bernard ! ' 
` Ethics ! ' 
and others equally inappropriate . '' 
But the doctor detected mania , above all , in the fact that the prisoner could not even speak of the three thousand roubles , of which he considered himself to have been cheated , without extraordinary irritation , though he could speak comparatively lightly of other misfortunes and grievances . 
According to all accounts , he had even in the past , whenever the subject of the three thousand roubles was touched on , flown into a perfect frenzy , and yet he was reported to be a disinterested and not grasping man . 
`` As to the opinion of my learned colleague , '' the Moscow doctor added ironically in conclusion `` that the prisoner would , entering the court , have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him , I will only say that , apart from the playfulness of this theory , it is radically unsound . 
For though I fully agree that the prisoner , on entering the court where his fate will be decided , would not naturally look straight before him in that fixed way , and that that may really be a sign of his abnormal mental condition , at the same time I maintain that he would naturally not look to the left at the ladies , but , on the contrary , to the right to find his legal adviser , on whose help all his hopes rest and on whose defence all his future depends . '' 
The doctor expressed his opinion positively and emphatically . 
But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last touch of comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts . 
In his opinion the prisoner was now , and had been all along , in a perfectly normal condition , and , although he certainly must have been in a nervous and exceedingly excited state before his arrest , this might have been due to several perfectly obvious causes , jealousy , anger , continual drunkenness , and so on . 
But this nervous condition would not involve the mental abberation of which mention had just been made . 
As to the question whether the prisoner should have looked to the left or to the right on entering the court , `` in his modest opinion , '' the prisoner would naturally look straight before him on entering the court , as he had in fact done , as that was where the judges , on whom his fate depended , were sitting . 
So that it was just by looking straight before him that he showed his perfectly normal state of mind at the present . 
The young doctor concluded his `` modest '' testimony with some heat . 
`` Bravo , doctor ! '' 
cried Mitya , from his seat , `` just so ! '' 
Mitya , of course , was checked , but the young doctor 's opinion had a decisive influence on the judges and on the public , and , as appeared afterwards , everyone agreed with him . 
But Doctor Herzenstube , when called as a witness , was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya . 
As an old resident in the town , who had known the Karamazov family for years , he furnished some facts of great value for the prosecution , and suddenly , as though recalling something , he added : `` But the poor young man might have had a very different life , for he had a good heart both in childhood and after childhood , that I know . 
But the Russian proverb says , ` If a man has one head , it 's good , but if another clever man comes to visit him , it would be better still , for then there will be two heads and not only one . '' ' 
`` One head is good , but two are better , '' the prosecutor put in impatiently . 
He knew the old man 's habit of talking slowly and deliberately , regardless of the impression he was making and of the delay he was causing , and highly prizing his flat , dull and always gleefully complacent German wit . 
The old man was fond of making jokes . 
`` Oh , yes , that 's what I say , '' he went on stubbornly . 
`` One head is good , but two are much better , but he did not meet another head with wits , and his wits went . 
Where did they go ? 
I 've forgotten the word . '' 
He went on , passing his hand before his eyes , `` Oh , yes , spazieren . '' 
* * Promenading . 
`` Wandering ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , wandering , that 's what I say . 
Well , his wits went wandering and fell in such a deep hole that he lost himself . 
And yet he was a grateful and sensitive boy . 
Oh , I remember him very well , a little chap so high , left neglected by his father in the back yard , when he ran about without boots on his feet , and his little breeches hanging by one button . '' 
A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old man 's voice . 
Fetyukovitch positively started , as though scenting something , and caught at it instantly . 
`` Oh , yes , I was a young man then ... . 
I was ... well , I was forty-five then , and had only just come here . 
And I was so sorry for the boy then ; I asked myself why should n't I buy him a pound of ... a pound of what ? 
I 've forgotten what it 's called . 
A pound of what children are very fond of , what is it , what is it ? '' 
The doctor began waving his hands again . 
`` It grows on a tree and is gathered and given to everyone ... '' `` Apples ? '' 
`` Oh , no , no . 
You have a dozen of apples , not a pound ... . 
No , there are a lot of them , and call little . 
You put them in the mouth and crack . '' 
`` Quite so , nuts , I say so . '' 
The doctor repeated in the calmest way as though he had been at no loss for a word . 
`` And I bought him a pound of nuts , for no one had ever bought the boy a pound of nuts before . 
And I lifted my finger and said to him , ` Boy , Gott der Vater . ' 
He laughed and said , ` Gott der Vater ' ... ` Gott der Sohn . ' 
He laughed again and lisped ` Gott der Sohn . ' 
` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
Then he laughed and said as best he could , ` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
I went away , and two days after I happened to be passing , and he shouted to me of himself , ` Uncle , Gott der Vater , Gott der Sohn , ' and he had only forgotten ` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
But I reminded him of it and I felt very sorry for him again . 
But he was taken away , and I did not see him again . 
Twenty-three years passed . 
I am sitting one morning in my study , a white-haired old man , when there walks into the room a blooming young man , whom I should never have recognised , but he held up his finger and said , laughing , ` Gott der Vater , Gott der Sohn , and Gott der heilige Geist . 
I have just arrived and have come to thank you for that pound of nuts , for no one else ever bought me a pound of nuts ; you are the only one that ever did . ' 
then I remembered my happy youth and the poor child in the yard , without boots on his feet , and my heart was touched and I said , ` You are a grateful young man , for you have remembered all your life the pound of nuts I bought you in your childhood . ' 
And I embraced him and blessed him . 
And I shed tears . 
He laughed , but he shed tears , too ... for the Russian often laughs when he ought to be weeping . 
But he did weep ; I saw it . 
And now , alas ! 
... '' `` And I am weeping now , German , I am weeping now , too , you saintly man , '' Mitya cried suddenly . 
In any case the anecdote made a certain favourable impression on the public . 
But the chief sensation in Mitya 's favour was created by the evidence of Katerina Ivanovna , which I will describe directly . 
Indeed , when the witnesses a decharge , that is , called the defence , began giving evidence , fortune seemed all at once markedly more favourable to Mitya , and what was particularly striking , this was a surprise even to the counsel for the defence . 
But before Katerina Ivanovna was called , Alyosha was examined , and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish positive evidence against one important point made by the prosecution . 
Fortune Smiles on Mitya IT came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself . 
He was not required to take the oath , and I remember that both sides addressed him very gently and sympathetically . 
It was evident that his reputation for goodness had preceded him . 
Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with restraint , but his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was unmistakable . 
In answer to one question , he sketched his brother 's character as that of a man , violent-tempered perhaps and carried away by his passions , but at the same time honourable , proud and generous , capable of self-sacrifice , if necessary . 
He admitted , however , that , through his passion for Grushenka and his rivalry with his father , his brother had been of late in an intolerable position . 
But he repelled with indignation the suggestion that his brother might have committed a murder for the sake of gain , though he recognised that the three thousand roubles had become almost an obsession with Mitya ; that upon them as part of the inheritance he had been cheated of by his father , and that , indifferent as he was to money as a rule , he could not even speak of that three thousand without fury . 
As for the rivalry of the two `` ladies , '' as the prosecutor expressed it - that is , of Grushenka and Katya - he answered evasively and was even unwilling to answer one or two questions altogether . 
`` Did your brother tell you , anyway , that he intended to kill your father ? '' 
asked the prosecutor . 
`` You can refuse to answer if you think necessary , '' he added . 
`` He did not tell me so directly , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` How so ? 
Did he indirectly ? '' 
`` He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and his fear that at an extreme moment ... at a moment of fury , he might perhaps murder him . '' 
`` And you believed him ? '' 
`` I am afraid to say that I did . 
But I never doubted that some higher feeling would always save him at that fatal moment , as it has indeed saved him , for it was not he killed my father , '' Alyosha said firmly , in a loud voice that was heard throughout the court . 
The prosecutor started like a war-horse at the sound of a trumpet . 
`` Let me assure you that I fully believe in the complete sincerity of your conviction and do not explain it by or identify it with your affection for your unhappy brother . 
Your peculiar view of the whole tragic episode is known to us already from the preliminary investigation . 
I wo n't attempt to conceal from you that it is highly individual and contradicts all the other evidence collected by the prosecution . 
And so I think it essential to press you to tell me what facts have led you to this conviction of your brother 's innocence and of the guilt of another person against whom you gave evidence at the preliminary inquiry ? '' 
`` I only answered the questions asked me at the preliminary inquiry , '' replied Alyosha , slowly and calmly . 
`` I made no accusation against Smerdyakov of myself . '' 
`` Yet you gave evidence against him ? '' 
`` I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri 's words . 
I was told what took place at his arrest and how he had pointed to Smerdyakov before I was examined . 
I believe absolutely that my brother is innocent , and if he did n't commit the murder , then - '' `` Then Smerdyakov ? 
Why Smerdyakov ? 
And why are you so completely persuaded of your brother 's innocence ? '' 
`` I can not help believing my brother . 
I know he would n't lie to me . 
I saw from his face he was n't lying . '' 
`` Only from his face ? 
Is that all the proof you have ? '' 
`` I have no other proof . '' 
`` And of Smerdyakov 's guilt you have no proof whatever but your brother 's word and the expression of his face ? '' 
`` No , I have no other proof . '' 
The prosecutor dropped the examination at this point . 
The impression left by Alyosha 's evidence on the public was most disappointing . 
There had been talk about Smerdyakov before the trial ; someone had heard something , someone had pointed out something else , it was said that Alyosha had gathered together some extraordinary proofs of his brother 's innocence and Smerdyakov 's guilt , and after all there was nothing , no evidence except certain moral convictions so natural in a brother . 
But Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
On his asking Alyosha when it was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his father and that he might kill him , and whether he had heard it , for instance , at their last meeting before the catastrophe , Alyosha started as he answered , as though only just recollecting and understanding something . 
`` I remember one circumstance now which I 'd quite forgotten myself . 
It was n't clear to me at the time , but now - '' And , obviously only now for the first time struck by an idea , he recounted eagerly how , at his last interview with Mitya that evening under the tree , on the road to the monastery , Mitya had struck himself on the breast , `` the upper part of the breast , '' and had repeated several times that he had a means of regaining his honour , that that means was here , here on his breast . 
`` I thought , when he struck himself on the breast , he meant that it was in his heart , '' Alyosha continued , `` that he might find in his heart strength to save himself from some awful disgrace which was awaiting him and which he did not dare confess even to me . 
I must confess I did think at the time that he was speaking of our father , and that the disgrace he was shuddering at was the thought of going to our father and doing some violence to him . 
Yet it was just then that he pointed to something on his breast , so that I remember the idea struck me at the time that the heart is not on that part of the breast , but below , and that he struck himself much too high , just below the neck , and kept pointing to that place . 
My idea seemed silly to me at the time , but he was perhaps pointing then to that little bag in which he had fifteen hundred roubles ! '' 
`` Just so , Mitya cried from his place . 
`` That 's right , Alyosha , it was the little bag I struck with my fist . '' 
Fetyukovitch flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet , and at the same instant pounced on Alyosha . 
Alyosha , carried away himself by his recollection , warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace was probably just that fifteen hundred roubles on him , which he might have returned to Katerina Ivanovna as half of what he owed her , but which he had yet determined not to repay her and to use for another purpose - namely , to enable him to elope with Grushenka , if she consented . 
`` It is so , it must be so , '' exclaimed Alyosha , in sudden excitement . 
`` My brother cried several times that half of the disgrace , half of it -LRB- he said half several times -RRB- he could free himself from at once , but that he was so unhappy in his weakness of will that he would n't do it ... that he knew beforehand he was incapable of doing it ! '' 
`` And you clearly , confidently remember that he struck himself just on this part of the breast ? '' 
Fetyukovitch asked eagerly . 
`` Clearly and confidently , for I thought at the time , ` Why does he strike himself up there when the heart is lower down ? ' 
and the thought seemed stupid to me at the time ... I remember its seeming stupid ... it flashed through my mind . 
That 's what brought it back to me just now . 
How could I have forgotten it till now ? 
It was that little bag he meant when he said he had the means but would n't give back that fifteen hundred . 
And when he was arrested at Mokroe he cried out - I know , I was told it - that he considered it the most disgraceful act of his life that when he had the means of repaying Katerina Ivanovna half -LRB- half , note ! -RRB- 
what he owed her , he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than part with it . 
And what torture , what torture that debt has been to him ! '' 
Alyosha exclaimed in conclusion . 
The prosecutor , of course , intervened . 
He asked Alyosha to describe once more how it had all happened , and several times insisted on the question , `` Had the prisoner seemed to point to anything ? 
Perhaps he had simply struck himself with his fist on the breast ? '' 
`` But it was not with his fist , '' cried Alyosha ; `` he pointed with his fingers and pointed here , very high up ... . 
How could I have so completely forgotten it till this moment ? '' 
The President asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness 's evidence . 
Mitya confirmed it , saying that he had been pointing to the fifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast , just below the neck , and that that was , of course , the disgrace , `` A disgrace I can not deny , the most shameful act of my whole life , '' cried Mitya . 
`` I might have repaid it and did n't repay it . 
I preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than give it back . 
And the most shameful part of it was that I knew beforehand I should n't give it back ! 
You are right , Alyosha ! 
Thanks , Alyosha ! '' 
So Alyosha 's cross-examination ended . 
What was important and striking about it was that one fact at least had been found , and even though this were only one tiny bit of evidence , a mere hint at evidence , it did go some little way towards proving that the bag had existed and had contained fifteen hundred roubles and that the prisoner had not been lying at the preliminary inquiry when he alleged at Mokroe that those fifteen hundred roubles were `` his own . '' 
Alyosha was glad . 
With a flushed face he moved away to the seat assigned to him . 
He kept repeating to himself : `` How was it I forgot ? 
How could I have forgotten it ? 
And what made it come back to me now ? '' 
Katerina Ivanovna was called to the witness-box . 
As she entered something extraordinary happened in the court . 
The ladies clutched their lorgnettes and opera-glasses . 
There was a stir among the men : some stood up to get a better view . 
Everybody alleged afterwards that Mitya had turned `` white as a sheet '' on her entrance . 
All in black , she advanced modestly , almost timidly . 
It was impossible to tell from her face that she was agitated ; but there was a resolute gleam in her dark and gloomy eyes . 
I may remark that many people mentioned that she looked particularly handsome at that moment . 
She spoke softly but clearly , so that she was heard all over the court . 
She expressed herself with composure , or at least tried to appear composed . 
The President began his examination discreetly and very respectfully , as though afraid to touch on `` certain chords , '' and showing consideration for her great unhappiness . 
But in answer to one of the first questions Katerina Ivanovna replied firmly that she had been formerly betrothed to the prisoner , `` until he left me of his own accord ... '' she added quietly . 
When they asked her about the three thousand she had entrusted to Mitya to post to her relations , she said firmly , `` I did n't give him the money simply to send it off . 
I felt at the time that he was in great need of money ... . 
I gave him the three thousand on the understanding that he should post it within the month if he cared to . 
There was no need for him to worry himself about that debt afterwards . '' 
I will not repeat all the questions asked her and all her answers in detail . 
I will only give the substance of her evidence . 
`` I was firmly convinced that he would send off that sum as soon as he got money from his father , '' she went on . 
`` I have never doubted his disinterestedness and his honesty ... his scrupulous honesty ... in money matters . 
He felt quite certain that he would receive the money from his father , and spoke to me several times about it . 
I knew he had a feud with his father and have always believed that he had been unfairly treated by his father . 
I do n't remember any threat uttered by him against his father . 
He certainly never uttered any such threat before me . 
If he had come to me at that time , I should have at once relieved his anxiety about that unlucky three thousand roubles , but he had given up coming to see me ... and I myself was put in such a position ... that I could not invite him ... . 
And I had no right , indeed , to be exacting as to that money , she added suddenly , and there was a ring of resolution in her voice . 
`` I was once indebted to him for assistance in money for more than three thousand , and I took it , although I could not at that time foresee that I should ever be in a position to repay my debt . '' 
There was a note of defiance in her voice . 
It was then Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
`` Did that take place not here , but at the beginning of your acquaintance ? '' 
Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously , feeling his way , instantly scenting something favourable . 
I must mention in parenthesis that , though Fetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance of Katerina Ivanovna herself , he knew nothing about the episode of the four thousand roubles given her by Mitya , and of her `` bowing to the ground to him . '' 
She concealed this from him and said nothing about it , and that was strange . 
It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in the court , and waited for the inspiration of the moment . 
No , I can never forget those moments . 
She began telling her story . 
She told everything , the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha , and her bowing to the ground , and her reason . 
She told about her father and her going to Mitya , and did not in one word , in a single hint , suggest that Mitya had himself , through her sister , proposed they should `` send him Katerina Ivanovna '' to fetch the money . 
She generously concealed that and was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse run to the young officer , relying on something ... to beg him for the money . 
It was something tremendous ! 
I turned cold and trembled as I listened . 
The court was hushed , trying to catch each word . 
It was something unexampled . 
Even from such a self-willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was , such an extremely frank avowal , such sacrifice , such self-immolation , seemed incredible . 
And for what , for whom ? 
To save the man who had deceived and insulted her and to help , in however small a degree , in saving him , by creating a strong impression in his favour . 
And , indeed , the figure of the young officer who , with a respectful bow to the innocent girl , handed her his last four thousand roubles - all he had in the world - was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light , but ... I had a painful misgiving at heart ! 
I felt that calumny might come of it later -LRB- and it did , in fact , it did -RRB- . 
It was repeated all over the town afterwards with spiteful laughter that was perhaps not quite complete - that is , in the statement that the officer had let the young lady depart `` with nothing but a respectful bow . '' 
It was hinted that something was here omitted . 
`` And even if nothing had been omitted , if this were the whole story , '' the most highly respected of our ladies maintained , `` even then it 's very doubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way , even for the sake of saving her father . '' 
And can Katerina Ivanovna , with her intelligence , her morbid sensitiveness , have failed to understand that people would talk like that ? 
She must have understood it , yet she made up her mind to tell everything . 
Of course , all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her story only arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed by it . 
As for the judges and the lawyers , they listened in reverent , almost shamefaced silence to Katerina Ivanovna . 
The prosecutor did not venture upon even one question on the subject . 
Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her . 
Oh , he was almost triumphant ! 
Much ground had been gained . 
For a man to give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the same man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand - the idea seemed too incongruous . 
Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge of theft , at least , was as good as disproved . 
`` The case '' was thrown into quite a different light . 
There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya . 
As for him ... . 
I was told that once or twice , while Katerina Ivanovna was giving her evidence , he jumped up from his seat , sank back again , and hid his face in his hands . 
But when she had finished , he suddenly cried in a sobbing voice : `` Katya , why have you ruined me ? '' 
and his sobs were audible all over the court . 
But he instantly restrained himself , and cried again : `` Now I am condemned ! '' 
Then he sat rigid in his place , with his teeth clenched and his arms across his chest . 
Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down in her place . 
She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down . 
Those who were sitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over as though in a fever . 
Grushenka was called . 
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final cause of Mitya 's ruin . 
For I am convinced , so is everyone - all the lawyers said the same afterwards - that if the episode had not occurred , the prisoner would at least have been recommended to mercy . 
But of that later . 
A few words first about Grushenka . 
She , too , was dressed entirely in black , with her magnificent black shawl on her shoulders . 
She walked to the witness-box with her smooth , noiseless tread , with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure . 
She looked steadily at the President , turning her eyes neither to the right nor to the left . 
To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment , and not at all pale , as the ladies alleged afterwards . 
They declared , too , that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression . 
I believe that she was simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and inquisitive eyes of our scandal-loving public . 
She was proud and could not stand contempt . 
She was one of those people who flare up , angry and eager to retaliate , at the mere suggestion of contempt . 
There was an element of timidity , too , of course , and inward shame at her own timidity , so it was not strange that her tone kept changing . 
At one moment it was angry , contemptuous and rough , and at another there was a sincere note of self-condemnation . 
Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperate plunge ; as though she felt , `` I do n't care what happens , I 'll say it ... '' Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch , she remarked curtly , `` That 's all nonsense , and was it my fault that he would pester me ? '' 
But a minute later she added , `` It was all my fault . 
I was laughing at them both - at the old man and at him , too - and I brought both of them to this . 
It was all on account of me it happened . '' 
Samsonov 's name came up somehow . 
`` That 's nobody 's business , '' she snapped at once , with a sort of insolent defiance . 
`` He was my benefactor ; he took me when I had n't a shoe to my foot , when my family had turned me out . '' 
The President reminded her , though very politely , that she must answer the questions directly , without going off into irrelevant details . 
Grushenka crimsoned and her eyes flashed . 
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen , but had only heard from `` that wicked wretch '' that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope with notes for three thousand in it . 
`` But that was all foolishness . 
I was only laughing . 
I would n't have gone to him for anything . '' 
`` To whom are you referring as ` that wicked wretch ' ? '' 
inquired the prosecutor . 
`` The lackey , Smerdyakov , who murdered his master and hanged himself last night . '' 
She was , of course , at once asked what ground she had for such a definite accusation ; but it appeared that she , too , had no grounds for it . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself ; you can believe him . 
The woman who came between us has ruined him ; she is the cause of it all , let me tell you , '' Grushenka added . 
She seemed to be quivering with hatred , and there was a vindictive note in her voice . 
She was again asked to whom she was referring . 
`` The young lady , Katerina Ivanovna there . 
She sent for me , offered me chocolate , tried to fascinate me . 
There 's not much true shame about her , I can tell you that ... '' At this point the President checked her sternly , begging her to moderate her language . 
But the jealous woman 's heart was burning , and she did not care what she did . 
`` When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe , '' the prosecutor asked , `` everyone saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out : ` It 's all my fault . 
We 'll go to Siberia together ! ' 
So you already believed him to have murdered his father ? '' 
`` I do n't remember what I felt at the time , '' answered Grushenka . 
`` Everyone was crying out that he had killed his father , and I felt that it was my fault , that it was on my account he had murdered him . 
But when he said he was n't guilty , I believed him at once , and I believe him now and always shall believe him . 
He is not the man to tell a lie . '' 
Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
I remember that among other things he asked about Rakitin and the twenty-five roubles `` you paid him for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you . '' 
`` There was nothing strange about his taking the money , '' sneered Grushenka , with angry contempt . 
`` He was always coming to me for money : he used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me , chiefly for luxuries : he had enough to keep him without my help . '' 
`` What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin ? '' 
Fetyukovitch asked , in spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President . 
`` Why , he is my cousin . 
His mother was my mother 's sister . 
But he 's always besought me not to tell anyone here of it , he is so dreadfully ashamed of me . '' 
This fact was a complete surprise to everyone ; no one in the town nor in the monastery , not even Mitya , knew of it . 
I was told that Rakitin turned purple with shame where he sat . 
Grushenka had somehow heard before she came into the court that he had given evidence against Mitya , and so she was angry . 
The whole effect on the public , of Rakitin 's speech , of his noble sentiments , of his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorder of Russia , was this time finally ruined . 
Fetyukovitch was satisfied : it was another godsend . 
Grushenka 's cross-examination did not last long and , of course , there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence . 
She left a very disagreeable impression on the public ; hundreds of contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her , as she finished giving her evidence and sat down again in the court , at a good distance from Katerina Ivanovna . 
Mitya was silent throughout her evidence . 
He sat as though turned to stone , with his eyes fixed on the ground . 
Ivan was called to give evidence . 
A Sudden Catastrophe I MAY note that he had been called before Alyosha . 
But the usher of the court announced to the President that , owing to an attack of illness or some sort of fit , the witness could not appear at the moment , but was ready to give his evidence as soon as he recovered . 
But no one seemed to have heard it and it only came out later . 
His entrance was for the first moment almost unnoticed . 
The principal witnesses , especially the two rival ladies , had already been questioned . 
Curiosity was satisfied for the time ; the public was feeling almost fatigued . 
Several more witnesses were still to be heard , who probably had little information to give after all that had been given . 
Time was passing . 
Ivan walked up with extraordinary slowness , looking at no one , and with his head bowed , as though plunged in gloomy thought . 
He was irreproachably dressed , but his face made a painful impression , on me at least : there was an earthy look in it , a look like a dying man 's . 
His eyes were lustreless ; he raised them and looked slowly round the court . 
Alyosha jumped up from his seat and moaned `` Ah ! '' 
I remember that , but it was hardly noticed . 
The President began by informing him that he was a witness not on oath , that he might answer or refuse to answer , but that , of course , he must bear witness according to his conscience , and so on , and so on . 
Ivan listened and looked at him blankly , but his face gradually relaxed into a smile , and as soon as the President , looking at him in astonishment , finished , he laughed outright . 
`` Well , and what else ? '' 
he asked in a loud voice . 
There was a hush in the court ; there was a feeling of something strange . 
The President showed signs of uneasiness . 
`` You ... are perhaps still unwell ? '' 
he began , looking everywhere for the usher . 
`` Do n't trouble yourself , your excellency , I am well enough and can tell you something interesting , '' Ivan answered with sudden calmness and respectfulness . 
`` You have some special communication to make ? '' 
the President went on , still mistrustfully . 
Ivan looked down , waited a few seconds and , raising his head , answered , almost stammering : `` No ... I have n't . 
I have nothing particular . '' 
They began asking him questions . 
He answered , as it were , reluctantly , with extreme brevity , with a sort of disgust which grew more and more marked , though he answered rationally . 
To many questions he answered that he did not know . 
He knew nothing of his father 's money relations with Dmitri . 
`` I was n't interested in the subject , '' he added . 
Threats to murder his father he had heard from the prisoner . 
Of the money in the envelope he had heard from Smerdyakov . 
`` The same thing over and over again , '' he interrupted suddenly , with a look of weariness . 
`` I have nothing particular to tell the court . '' 
`` I see you are unwell and understand your feelings , '' the President began . 
He turned to the prosecutor and the counsel for the defence to invite them to examine the witness , if necessary , when Ivan suddenly asked in an exhausted voice : `` Let me go , your excellency , I feel very ill . '' 
And with these words , without waiting for permission , he turned to walk out of the court . 
But after taking four steps he stood still , as though he had reached a decision , smiled slowly , and went back . 
`` I am like the peasant girl , your excellency ... you know . 
How does it go ? 
` I 'll stand up if I like , and I wo n't if I do n't . ' 
They were trying to put on her sarafan to take her to church to be married , and she said , ` I 'll stand up if I like , and I wo n't if I do n't . ' 
... It 's in some book about the peasantry . '' 
`` What do you mean by that ? '' 
the President asked severely . 
`` Why , this , '' Ivan suddenly pulled out a roll of notes . 
`` Here 's the money ... the notes that lay in that envelope '' -LRB- he nodded towards the table on which lay the material evidence -RRB- , `` for the sake of which our father was murdered . 
Where shall I put them ? 
Mr. Superintendent , take them . '' 
The usher of the court took the whole roll and handed it to the President . 
`` How could this money have come into your possession if it is the same money ? '' 
the President asked wonderingly . 
`` I got them from Smerdyakov , from the murderer , yesterday ... . 
I was with him just before he hanged himself . 
It was he , not my brother , killed our father . 
He murdered him and I incited him to do it ... Who does n't desire his father 's death ? '' 
`` Are you in your right mind ? '' 
broke involuntarily from the President . 
`` I should think I am in my right mind ... in the same nasty mind as all of you ... as all these ... ugly faces . '' 
He turned suddenly to the audience . 
`` My father has been murdered and they pretend they are horrified , '' he snarled , with furious contempt . 
`` They keep up the sham with one another . 
Liars ! 
They all desire the death of their fathers . 
One reptile devours another ... . 
If there had n't been a murder , they 'd have been angry and gone home ill-humoured . 
It 's a spectacle they want ! 
Panem et circenses . 
* Though I am one to talk ! 
Have you any water ? 
Give me a drink for Christ 's sake ! '' 
He suddenly clutched his head . 
* Bread and circuses . 
The usher at once approached him . 
Alyosha jumped up and cried , `` He is ill . 
Do n't believe him : he has brain fever . '' 
Katerina Ivanovna rose impulsively from her seat and , rigid with horror , gazed at Ivan . 
Mitya stood up and greedily looked at his brother and listened to him with a wild , strange smile . 
`` Do n't disturb yourselves . 
I am not mad , I am only a murderer , '' Ivan began again . 
`` You ca n't expect eloquence from a murderer , '' he added suddenly for some reason and laughed a queer laugh . 
The prosecutor bent over to the President in obvious dismay . 
The two other judges communicated in agitated whispers . 
Fetyukovitch pricked up his ears as he listened : the hall was hushed in expectation . 
The President seemed suddenly to recollect himself . 
`` Witness , your words are incomprehensible and impossible here . 
Calm yourself , if you can , and tell your story ... if you really have something to tell . 
How can you confirm your statement ... if indeed you are not delirious ? '' 
