Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same solitary cell seven years previously . 
It was simply a peasant 's hut , though it looked like a chapel , for it contained an extraordinary number of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them - which men brought to the monastery as offerings to God . 
Father Ferapont had been appointed to look after them and keep the lamps burning . 
It was said -LRB- and indeed it was true -RRB- that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days . 
The beekeeper , who lived close by the apiary , used to bring him the bread every three days , and even to this man who waited upon him , Father Ferapont rarely uttered a word . 
The four pounds of bread , together with the sacrament bread , regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father Superior , made up his weekly rations . 
The water in his jug was changed every day . 
He rarely appeared at mass . 
Visitors who came to do him homage saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round . 
If he addressed them , he was brief , abrupt , strange , and almost always rude . 
On very rare occasions , however , he would talk to visitors , but for the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete riddle , and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in explanation . 
He was not a priest , but a simple monk . 
There was a strange belief , chiefly , however , among the most ignorant , that Father Ferapont had communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them , and so was silent with men . 
The monk from Obdorsk , having been directed to the apiary by the beekeeper , who was also a very silent and surly monk , went to the corner where Father Ferapont 's cell stood . 
`` Maybe he will speak as you are a stranger and maybe you 'll get nothing out of him , '' the beekeeper had warned him . 
The monk , as he related afterwards , approached in the utmost apprehension . 
It was rather late in the evening . 
Father Ferapont was sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench . 
A huge old elm was lightly rustling overhead . 
There was an evening freshness in the air . 
The monk from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing . 
`` Do you want me to bow down to you , monk ? '' 
said Father Ferapont . 
`` Get up ! '' 
The monk got up . 
`` Blessing , be blessed ! 
Sit beside me . 
Where have you come from ? '' 
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict fasting and great age , Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man . 
He was tall , held himself erect , and had a thin , but fresh and healthy face . 
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength . 
He was of athletic build . 
In spite of his great age he was not even quite grey , and still had very thick hair and a full beard , both of which had once been black . 
His eyes were grey , large and luminous , but strikingly prominent . 
He spoke with a broad accent . 
He was dressed in a peasant 's long reddish coat of coarse convict cloth -LRB- as it used to be called -RRB- and had a stout rope round his waist . 
His throat and chest were bare . 
Beneath his coat , his shirt of the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt , not having been changed for months . 
They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his coat . 
His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to pieces . 
`` From the little Obdorsk monastery , from St. Sylvester , '' the monk answered humbly , whilst his keen and inquisitive , but rather frightened little eyes kept watch on the hermit . 
`` I have been at your Sylvester 's . 
I used to stay there . 
Is Sylvester well ? '' 
The monk hesitated . 
`` You are a senseless lot ! 
How do you keep the fasts ? '' 
`` Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules . 
During Lent there are no meals provided for Monday , Wednesday , and Friday . 
For Tuesday and Thursday we have white bread , stewed fruit with honey , wild berries , or salt cabbage and whole meal stirabout . 
On Saturday white cabbage soup , noodles with peas , kasha , all with hemp oil . 
On weekdays we have dried fish and kasha with the cabbage soup . 
From Monday till Saturday evening , six whole days in Holy Week , nothing is cooked , and we have only bread and water , and that sparingly ; if possible not taking food every day , just the same as is ordered for first week in Lent . 
On Good Friday nothing is eaten . 
In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o'clock , and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine . 
On Holy Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or not cooked at all , inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for Holy Thursday : `` It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday to dishonour the whole of Lent ! '' 
This is how we keep the fast . 
But what is that compared with you , holy Father , '' added the monk , growing more confident , `` for all the year round , even at Easter , you take nothing but bread and water , and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven . 
It 's truly marvellous - your great abstinence . '' 
`` And mushrooms ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , suddenly . 
`` Mushrooms ? '' 
repeated the surprised monk . 
`` Yes . 
I can give up their bread , not needing it at all , and go away into the forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries , but they ca n't give up their bread here , wherefore they are in bondage to the devil . 
Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting . 
Haughty and unclean is their judgment . '' 
`` Och , true , '' sighed the monk . 
`` And have you seen devils among them ? '' 
asked Ferapont . 
`` Among them ? 
Among whom ? '' 
asked the monk , timidly . 
`` I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year , I have n't been since . 
I saw a devil sitting on one man 's chest hiding under his cassock , only his horns poked out ; another had one peeping out of his pocket with such sharp eyes , he was afraid of me ; another settled in the unclean belly of one , another was hanging round a man 's neck , and so he was carrying him about without seeing him . '' 
`` You - can see spirits ? '' 
the monk inquired . 
`` I tell you I can see , I can see through them . 
When I was coming out from the Superior 's I saw one hiding from me behind the door , and a big one , a yard and a half or more high , with a thick long grey tail , and the tip of his tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed the door , pinching his tail in it . 
He squealed and began to struggle , and I made the sign of the cross over him three times . 
And he died on the spot like a crushed spider . 
He must have rotted there in the corner and be stinking , but they do n't see , they do n't smell it . 
It 's a year since I have been there . 
I reveal it to you , as you are a stranger . '' 
`` Your words are terrible ! 
But , holy and blessed father , '' said the monk , growing bolder and bolder , `` is it true , as they noise abroad even to distant lands about you , that you are in continual communication with the Holy Ghost ? '' 
`` He does fly down at times . '' 
`` How does he fly down ? 
In what form ? '' 
`` As a bird . '' 
`` The Holy Ghost in the form of a dove ? '' 
`` There 's the Holy Ghost and there 's the Holy Spirit . 
The Holy Spirit can appear as other birds - sometimes as a swallow , sometimes a goldfinch and sometimes as a blue-tit . '' 
`` How do you know him from an ordinary tit ? '' 
`` He speaks . '' 
`` How does he speak , in what language ? '' 
`` Human language . '' 
`` And what does he tell you ? '' 
`` Why , to-day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask me unseemly questions . 
You want to know too much , monk . '' 
`` Terrible are your words , most holy and blessed Father , '' the monk shook his head . 
But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes . 
`` Do you see this tree ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , after a pause . 
`` I do , blessed Father . '' 
`` You think it 's an elm , but for me it has another shape . '' 
`` What sort of shape ? '' 
inquired the monk , after a pause of vain expectation . 
`` It happens at night . 
You see those two branches ? 
In the night it is Christ holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms , I see it clearly and tremble . 
It 's terrible , terrible ! '' 
`` What is there terrible if it 's Christ Himself ? '' 
`` Why , He 'll snatch me up and carry me away . '' 
`` Alive ? '' 
`` In the spirit and glory of Elijah , have n't you heard ? 
He will take me in His arms and bear me away . '' 
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the brothers , in considerable perplexity of mind , he still cherished at heart a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima . 
He was strongly in favour of fasting , and it was not strange that one who kept so rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should `` see marvels . '' 
His words seemed certainly queer , but God only could tell what was hidden in those words , and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God ? 
The pinching of the devil 's tail he was ready and eager to believe , and not only in the figurative sense . 
Besides he had , before visiting the monastery , a strong prejudice against the institution of `` elders , '' which he only knew of by hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation . 
Before he had been long at the monastery , he had detected the secret murmurings of some shallow brothers who disliked the institution . 
He was , besides , a meddlesome , inquisitive man , who poked his nose into everything . 
This was why the news of the fresh `` miracle '' performed by Father Zossima reduced him to extreme perplexity . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards how their inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro from one group to another , listening and asking questions among the monks that were crowding within and without the elder 's cell . 
But he did not pay much attention to him at the time , and only recollected it afterwards . 
He had no thought to spare for it indeed , for when Father Zossima , feeling tired again , had gone back to bed , he thought of Alyosha as he was closing his eyes , and sent for him . 
Alyosha ran at once . 
There was no one else in the cell but Father Paissy , Father Iosif , and the novice Porfiry . 
The elder , opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha , asked him suddenly : `` Are your people expecting you , my son ? '' 
Alyosha hesitated . 
`` Have n't they need of you ? 
Did n't you promise someone yesterday to see them to-day ? '' 
`` I did promise - to my father - my brothers - others too . '' 
`` You see , you must go . 
Do n't grieve . 
Be sure I shall not die without your being by to hear my last word . 
To you I will say that word , my son , it will be my last gift to you . 
To you , dear son , because you love me . 
But now go to keep your promise . '' 
Alyosha immediately obeyed , though it was hard to go . 
But the promise that he should hear his last word on earth , that it should be the last gift to him , Alyosha , sent a thrill of rapture through his soul . 
He made haste that he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly . 
Father Paissy , too , uttered some words of exhortation which moved and surprised him greatly . 
He spoke as they left the cell together . 
`` Remember , young man , unceasingly , '' Father Paissy began , without preface , `` that the science of this world , which has become a great power , has , especially in the last century , analysed everything divine handed down to us in the holy books . 
After this cruel analysis the learned of this world have nothing left of all that was sacred of old . 
But they have only analysed the parts and overlooked the whole , and indeed their blindness is marvellous . 
Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . 
Has it not lasted nineteen centuries , is it not still a living , a moving power in the individual soul and in the masses of people ? 
It is still as strong and living even in the souls of atheists , who have destroyed everything ! 
For even those who have renounced Christianity and attack it , in their inmost being still follow the Christian ideal , for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardour of their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue than the ideal given by Christ of old . 
When it has been attempted , the result has been only grotesque . 
Remember this especially , young man , since you are being sent into the world by your departing elder . 
Maybe , remembering this great day , you will not forget my words , uttered from the heart for your guidance , seeing you are young , and the temptations of the world are great and beyond your strength to endure . 
Well , now go , my orphan . '' 
With these words Father Paissy blessed him . 
As Alyosha left the monastery and thought them over , he suddenly realised that he had met a new and unexpected friend , a warmly loving teacher , in this austere monk who had hitherto treated him sternly . 
It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his death , and `` perhaps that 's just what had passed between them , '' Alyosha thought suddenly . 
The philosophic reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Paissy 's heart . 
He was in haste to arm the boy 's mind for conflict with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defence he could imagine . 
At His Father 's FIRST of all , Alyosha went to his father . 
On the way he remembered that his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his brother Ivan seeing him . 
`` Why so ? '' 
Alyosha wondered suddenly . 
`` Even if my father has something to say to me alone , why should I go in unseen ? 
Most likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different , '' he decided . 
Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna , who opened the garden gate to him -LRB- Grigory , it appeared , was ill in bed in the lodge -RRB- , told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two hours ago . 
`` And my father ? '' 
`` He is up , taking his coffee , '' Marfa answered somewhat drily . 
Alyosha went in . 
The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing slippers and a little old overcoat . 
He was amusing himself by looking through some accounts , rather inattentively however . 
He was quite alone in the house , for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing . 
Though he had got up early and was trying to put a bold face on it , he looked tired and weak . 
His forehead , upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the night , was bandaged with a red handkerchief ; his nose too was swollen terribly in the night , and some smaller bruises covered it in patches , giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look . 
The old man was aware of this , and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he came in . 
`` The coffee is cold , '' he cried harshly ; `` I wo n't offer you any . 
I 've ordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to-day , and I do n't invite anyone to share it . 
Why have you come ? '' 
`` To find out how you are , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Yes . 
Besides , I told you to come yesterday . 
It 's all of no consequence . 
You need not have troubled . 
But I knew you 'd come poking in directly . '' 
He said this with almost hostile feeling . 
At the same time he got up and looked anxiously in the looking-glass -LRB- perhaps for the fortieth time that morning -RRB- at his nose . 
He began , too , binding his red handkerchief more becomingly on his forehead . 
`` Red 's better . 
It 's just like the hospital in a white one , '' he observed sententiously . 
`` Well , how are things over there ? 
How is your elder ? '' 
`` He is very bad ; he may die to-day , '' answered Alyosha . 
But his father had not listened , and had forgotten his own question at once . 
`` Ivan 's gone out , '' he said suddenly . 
`` He is doing his utmost to carry off Mitya 's betrothed . 
That 's what he is staying here for , '' he added maliciously , and , twisting his mouth , looked at Alyosha . 
`` Surely he did not tell you so ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , he did , long ago . 
Would you believe it , he told me three weeks ago ? 
You do n't suppose he too came to murder me , do you ? 
He must have had some object in coming . '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
Why do you say such things ? '' 
said Alyosha , troubled . 
`` He does n't ask for money , it 's true , but yet he wo n't get a farthing from me . 
I intend living as long as possible , you may as well know , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , and so I need every farthing , and the longer I live , the more I shall need it , '' he continued , pacing from one corner of the room to the other , keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy overcoat made of yellow cotton material . 
`` I can still pass for a man at five and fifty , but I want to pass for one for another twenty years . 
As I get older , you know , I sha n't be a pretty object . 
The wenches wo n't come to me of their own accord , so I shall want my money . 
So I am saving up more and more , simply for myself , my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
You may as well know . 
For I mean to go on in my sins to the end , let me tell you . 
For sin is sweet ; all abuse it , but all men live in it , only others do it on the sly , and I openly . 
And so all the other sinners fall upon me for being so simple . 
And your paradise , Alexey Fyodorovitch , is not to my taste , let me tell you that ; and it 's not the proper place for a gentleman , your paradise , even if it exists . 
I believe that I fall asleep and do n't wake up again , and that 's all . 
You can pray for my soul if you like . 
And if you do n't want to , do n't , damn you ! 
That 's my philosophy . 
Ivan talked well here yesterday , though we were all drunk . 
Ivan is a conceited coxcomb , but he has no particular learning ... nor education either . 
He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking - that 's what pulls him through . '' 
Alyosha listened to him in silence . 
`` Why wo n't he talk to me ? 
If he does speak , he gives himself airs . 
Your Ivan is a scoundrel ! 
And I 'll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to . 
For if you 've money , Alexey Fyodorovitch , you have only to want a thing and you can have it . 
That 's what Ivan is afraid of , he is on the watch to prevent me getting married and that 's why he is egging on Mitya to marry Grushenka himself . 
He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that -LRB- as though I should leave him my money if I do n't marry her ! -RRB- . 
Besides if Mitya marries Grushenka , Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed , that 's what he 's reckoning on ! 
He is a scoundrel , your Ivan ! '' 
`` How cross you are ! 
It 's because of yesterday ; you had better lie down , '' said Alyosha . 
`` There ! 
you say that , '' the old man observed suddenly , as though it had struck him for the first time , `` and I am not angry with you . 
But if Ivan said it , I should be angry with him . 
It is only with you I have good moments , else you know I am an ill-natured man . '' 
`` You are not ill-natured , but distorted , '' said Alyosha with a smile . 
`` Listen . 
I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and I do n't know now what I shall decide about it . 
Of course in these fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice , but even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the hair , to kick him in the face in his own house , and brag of murdering him outright - all in the presence of witnesses . 
If I liked , I could crush him and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday . '' 
`` Then you do n't mean to take proceedings ? '' 
`` Ivan has dissuaded me . 
I should n't care about Ivan , but there 's another thing . '' 
And bending down to Alyosha , he went on in a confidential half-whisper . 
`` If I send the ruffian to prison , she 'll hear of it and run to see him at once . 
But if she hears that he has beaten me , a weak old man , within an inch of my life , she may give him up and come to me ... For that 's her way , everything by contraries . 
I know her through and through ! 
Wo n't you have a drop of brandy ? 
Take some cold coffee and I 'll pour a quarter of a glass of brandy into it , it 's delicious , my boy . '' 
`` No , thank you . 
I 'll take that roll with me if I may , '' said Alyosha , and taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock . 
`` And you 'd better not have brandy , either , '' he suggested apprehensively , looking into the old man 's face . 
`` You are quite right , it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them . 
Only one little glass . 
I 'll get it out of the cupboard . '' 
He unlocked the cupboard , poured out a glass , drank it , then locked the cupboard and put the key back in his pocket . 
`` That 's enough . 
One glass wo n't kill me . '' 
`` You see you are in a better humour now , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Um ! 
I love you even without the brandy , but with scoundrels I am a scoundrel . 
Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya - why is that ? 
He wants to spy how much I give Grushenka if she comes . 
They are all scoundrels ! 
But I do n't recognise Ivan , I do n't know him at all . 
Where does he come from ? 
He is not one of us in soul . 
As though I 'd leave him anything ! 
I sha n't leave a will at all , you may as well know . 
And I 'll crush Mitya like a beetle . 
I squash black-beetles at night with my slipper ; they squelch when you tread on them . 
And your Mitya will squelch too . 
Your Mitya , for you love him . 
Yes you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him . 
But if Ivan loved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him . 
But Ivan loves nobody . 
Ivan is not one of us . 
People like Ivan are not our sort , my boy . 
They are like a cloud of dust . 
When the wind blows , the dust will be gone ... . 
I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to-day ; I wanted to find out from you about Mitya . 
If I were to hand him over a thousand or maybe two now , would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself off altogether for five years or , better still , thirty-five , and without Grushenka , and give her up once for all , eh ? '' 
`` I - I 'll ask him , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` If you would give him three thousand , perhaps he - '' `` That 's nonsense ! 
You need n't ask him now , no need ! 
I 've changed my mind . 
It was a nonsensical idea of mine . 
I wo n't give him anything , not a penny , I want my money myself , '' cried the old man , waving his hand . 
`` I 'll crush him like a beetle without it . 
Do n't say anything to him or else he will begin hoping . 
There 's nothing for you to do here , you need n't stay . 
Is that betrothed of his , Katerina Ivanovna , whom he has kept so carefully hidden from me all this time , going to marry him or not ? 
You went to see her yesterday , I believe ? '' 
`` Nothing will induce her to abandon him . '' 
`` There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and a scoundrel . 
They are poor creatures I tell you , those pale young ladies , very different from - Ah , if I had his youth and the looks I had then -LRB- for I was better-looking than he at eight and twenty -RRB- I 'd have been a conquering hero just as he is . 
He is a low cad ! 
But he sha n't have Grushenka , anyway , he sha n't ! 
I 'll crush him ! '' 
His anger had returned with the last words . 
`` You can go . 
There 's nothing for you to do here to-day , '' he snapped harshly . 
Alyosha went up to say good-bye to him , and kissed him on the shoulder . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
The old man was a little surprised . 
`` We shall see each other again , or do you think we sha n't ? '' 
`` Not at all , I did n't mean anything . '' 
`` Nor did I , I did not mean anything , '' said the old man , looking at him . 
`` Listen , listen , '' he shouted after him , `` make haste and come again and I 'll have a fish soup for you , a fine one , not like to-day . 
Be sure to come ! 
Come to-morrow , do you hear , to-morrow ! '' 
And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door , he went to the cupboard again and poured out another half-glass . 
`` I wo n't have more ! '' 
he muttered , clearing his throat , and again he locked the cupboard and put the key in his pocket . 
Then he went into his bedroom , lay down on the bed , exhausted , and in one minute he was asleep . 
A Meeting with the Schoolboys `` THANK goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka , '' thought Alyosha , as he left his father 's house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov 's , `` or I might have had to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday . '' 
Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed their energies , and that their hearts had grown hard again . 
`` Father is spiteful and angry , he 's made some plan and will stick to it . 
And what of Dmitri ? 
He too will be harder than yesterday , he too must be spiteful and angry , and he too , no doubt , has made some plan . 
Oh , I must succeed in finding him to-day , whatever happens . '' 
But Alyosha had not long to meditate . 
An incident occurred on the road , which , though apparently of little consequence , made a great impression on him . 
just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming out into Mihailovsky Street , which is divided by a small ditch from the High Street -LRB- our whole town is intersected by ditches -RRB- , he saw a group of schoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve , at the bridge . 
They were going home from school , some with their bags on their shoulders , others with leather satchels slung across them , some in short jackets , others in little overcoats . 
Some even had those high boots with creases round the ankles , such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear . 
The whole group was talking eagerly about something , apparently holding a council . 
Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children without taking notice of them , and although he was particularly fond of children of three or thereabout , he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too . 
And so , anxious as he was to-day , he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them . 
He looked into their excited rosy faces , and noticed at once that all the boys had stones in their hands . 
Behind the ditch some thirty paces away , there was another schoolboy standing by a fence . 
He too had a satchel at his side . 
He was about ten years old , pale , delicate-looking and with sparkling black eyes . 
He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other six , obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school , but with whom he had evidently had a feud . 
Alyosha went up and , addressing a fair , curly-headed , rosy boy in a black jacket , observed : `` When I used to wear a satchel like yours , I always used to carry it on my left side , so as to have my right hand free , but you 've got yours on your right side . 
So it will be awkward for you to get at it . '' 
Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practical remark . 
But it is the only way for a grown-up person to get at once into confidential relations with a child , or still more with a group of children . 
One must begin in a serious , businesslike way so as to be on a perfectly equal footing . 
Alyosha understood it by instinct . 
`` But he is left-handed , '' another , a fine healthy-looking boy of eleven , answered promptly . 
All the others stared at Alyosha . 
`` He even throws stones with his left hand , '' observed a third . 
At that instant a stone flew into the group , but only just grazed the left-handed boy , though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boy standing on the other side of the ditch . 
`` Give it him , hit him back , Smurov , '' they all shouted . 
But Smurov , the left-handed boy , needed no telling , and at once revenged himself ; he threw a stone , but it missed the boy and hit the ground . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch , the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones , flung another stone at the group ; this time it flew straight at Alyosha and hit him painfully on the shoulder . 
`` He aimed it at you , he meant it for you . 
You are Karamazov , Karamazov ! '' 
the boys shouted laughing , `` Come , all throw at him at once ! '' 
and six stones flew at the boy . 
One struck the boy on the head and he fell down , but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire . 
Both sides threw stones incessantly . 
Many of the group had their pockets full too . 
`` What are you about ! 
Are n't you ashamed ? 
Six against one ! 
Why , you 'll kill him , '' cried Alyosha . 
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy . 
Three or four ceased throwing for a minute . 
`` He began first ! '' 
cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice . 
`` He is a beast , he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a penknife . 
It bled . 
Krassotkin would n't tell tales , but he must be thrashed . '' 
`` But what for ? 
I suppose you tease him . '' 
`` There , he sent a stone in your back again , he knows you , '' cried the children . 
`` It 's you he is throwing at now , not us . 
Come , all of you , at him again , do n't miss , Smurov ! '' 
and again a fire of stones , and a very vicious one , began . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch was hit in the chest ; he screamed , began to cry and ran away uphill towards Mihailovsky Street . 
They all shouted : `` Aha , he is funking , he is running away . 
Wisp of tow ! '' 
`` You do n't know what a beast he is , Karamazov , killing is too good for him , '' said the boy in the jacket , with flashing eyes . 
He seemed to be the eldest . 
`` What 's wrong with him ? '' 
asked Alyosha , `` Is he a tell-tale or what ? '' 
The boys looked at one another as though derisively . 
`` Are you going that way , to Mihailovsky ? '' 
the same boy went on . 
`` Catch him up ... . 
You see he 's stopped again , he is waiting and looking at you . '' 
`` He is looking at you , '' the other boys chimed in . 
`` You ask him , does he like a dishevelled wisp of tow . 
Do you hear , ask him that ! '' 
There was a general burst of laughter . 
Alyosha looked at them , and they at him . 
`` Do n't go near him , he 'll hurt you , '' cried Smurov in a warning voice . 
`` I sha n't ask him about the wisp of tow , for I expect you tease him with that question somehow . 
But I 'll find out from him why you hate him so . '' 
`` Find out then , find out , '' cried the boys laughing . 
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence , straight towards the boy . 
`` You 'd better look out , '' the boys called after him ; `` he wo n't be afraid of you . 
He will stab you in a minute , on the sly , as he did Krassotkin . '' 
The boy waited for him without budging . 
Coming up to him , Alyosha saw facing him a child of about nine years old . 
He was an undersized weakly boy with a thin pale face , with large dark eyes that gazed at him vindictively . 
He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat , which he had monstrously outgrown . 
His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves . 
There was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers , and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather , carefully blackened with ink . 
Both the pockets of his greatcoat were weighed down with stones . 
Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him , looking inquiringly at him , The boy , seeing at once from Alyosha 's eyes that he would n't beat him , became less defiant , and addressed him first . 
`` I am alone , and there are six of them . 
I 'll beat them all , alone ! '' 
he said suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` But I hit Smurov on the head ! '' 
cried the boy . 
`` They told me that you know me , and that you threw a stone at me on purpose , '' said Alyosha . 
The boy looked darkly at him . 
`` I do n't know you . 
Do you know me ? '' 
Alyosha continued . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
the boy cried irritably ; but he did not move , as though he were expecting something , and again there was a vindictive light in his eyes . 
`` Very well , I am going , '' said Alyosha ; `` only I do n't know you and I do n't tease you . 
They told me how they tease you , but I do n't want to tease you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Monk in silk trousers ! '' 
cried the boy , following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant expression , and he threw himself into an attitude of defence , feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him ; but Alyosha turned , looked at him , and walked away . 
He had not gone three steps before the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in the back . 
`` So you 'll hit a man from behind ! 
They tell the truth , then , when they say that you attack on the sly , '' said Alyosha , turning round again . 
This time the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha 's face ; but Alyosha just had time to guard himself , and the stone struck him on the elbow . 
`` Are n't you ashamed ? 
What have I done to you ? '' 
he cried . 
The boy waited in silent defiance , certain that now Alyosha would attack him . 
Seeing that even now he would not , his rage was like a little wild beast 's ; he flew at Alyosha himself , and before Alyosha had time to move , the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his middle finger . 
He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before he let go . 
Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with all his might . 
The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance . 
Alyosha 's finger had been badly bitten to the bone , close to the nail ; it began to bleed . 
Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly round his injured hand . 
He was a full minute bandaging it . 
The boy stood waiting all the time . 
At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked at him . 
`` Very well , '' he said , `` You see how badly you 've bitten me . 
That 's enough , is n't it ? 
Now tell me , what have I done to you ? '' 
The boy stared in amazement . 
`` Though I do n't know you and it 's the first time I 've seen you , '' Alyosha went on with the same serenity , `` yet I must have done something to you - you would n't have hurt me like this for nothing . 
So what have I done ? 
How have I wronged you , tell me ? '' 
Instead of answering , the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away . 
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street , and for a long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever , not turning his head and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail . 
He made up his mind to find him out as soon as he had time , and to solve this mystery . 
just now he had not the time . 
At the Hohlakovs ' ALYOSHA soon reached Madame Hohlakov 's house , a handsome stone house of two stories , one of the finest in our town . 
Though Madame Hohlakov spent most of her time in another province where she had an estate , or in Moscow , where she had a house of her own , yet she had a house in our town too , inherited from her forefathers . 
The estate in our district was the largest of her three estates , yet she had been very little in our province before this time . 
She ran out to Alyosha in the hall . 
`` Did you get my letter about the new miracle ? '' 
She spoke rapidly and nervously . 
`` Yes '' `` Did you show it to everyone ? 
He restored the son to his mother ! '' 
`` He is dying to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I have heard , I know , oh , how I long to talk to you , to you or someone , about all this . 
No , to you , to you ! 
And how sorry I am I ca n't see him ! 
The whole town is in excitement , they are all suspense . 
But now - do you know Katerina Ivanovna is here now ? '' 
`` Ah , that 's lucky , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Then I shall see her here . 
She told me yesterday to be sure to come and see her to-day . '' 
`` I know , I know all . 
I 've heard exactly what happened yesterday - and the atrocious behaviour of that - creature . 
C'est tragique , and if I 'd been in her place I do n't know what I should have done . 
And your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , what do you think of him ? 
- my goodness ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am forgetting , only fancy ; your brother is in there with her , not that dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday , but the other , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he is sitting with her talking ; they are having a serious conversation . 
If you could only imagine what 's passing between them now - it 's awful , I tell you it 's lacerating , it 's like some incredible tale of horror . 
They are ruining their lives for no reason anyone can see . 
They both recognise it and revel in it . 
I 've been watching for you ! 
I 've been thirsting for you ! 
It 's too much for me . 
that 's the worst of it . 
I 'll tell you all about it presently , but now I must speak of something else , the most important thing - I had quite forgotten what 's most important . 
Tell me , why has Lise been in hysterics ? 
As soon as she heard you were here , she began to be hysterical ! '' 
`` Maman , it 's you who are hysterical now , not I , '' Lise 's voice carolled through a tiny crack of the door at the side . 
Her voice sounded as though she wanted to laugh , but was doing her utmost to control it . 
Alyosha at once noticed the crack , and no doubt Lise was peeping through it , but that he could not see . 
`` And no wonder , Lise , no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical too . 
But she is so ill , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she has been so ill all night , feverish and moaning ! 
I could hardly wait for the morning and for Herzenstube to come . 
He says that he can make nothing of it , that we must wait . 
Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it . 
As soon as you approached the house , she screamed , fell into hysterics , and insisted on being wheeled back into this room here . '' 
`` Mamma , I did n't know he had come . 
It was n't on his account I wanted to be wheeled into this room . '' 
`` That 's not true , Lise , Yulia ran to tell you that Alexey Fyodorovitch was coming . 
She was on the lookout for you . '' 
`` My darling mamma , it 's not at all clever of you . 
But if you want to make up for it and say something very clever , dear mamma , you 'd better tell our honoured visitor , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that he has shown his want of wit by venturing to us after what happened yesterday and although everyone is laughing at him . '' 
`` Lise , you go too far . 
I declare I shall have to be severe . 
Who laughs at him ? 
I am so glad he has come , I need him , I ca n't do without him . 
Oh , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am exceedingly unhappy ! '' 
`` But what 's the matter with you , mamma , darling ? '' 
`` Ah , your caprices , Lise , your fidgetiness , your illness , that awful night of fever , that awful everlasting Herzenstube , everlasting , everlasting , that 's the worst of it ! 
Everything , in fact , everything ... . 
Even that miracle , too ! 
Oh , how it has upset me , how it has shattered me , that miracle , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
And that tragedy in the drawing-room , it 's more than I can bear , I warn you . 
I ca n't bear it . 
A comedy , perhaps , not a tragedy . 
Tell me , will Father Zossima live till to-morrow , will he ? 
Oh , my God ! 
What is happening to me ? 
Every minute I close my eyes and see that it 's all nonsense , all nonsense . '' 
`` I should be very grateful , '' Alyosha interrupted suddenly , `` if you could give me a clean rag to bind up my finger with . 
I have hurt it , and it 's very painful . '' 
Alyosha unbound his bitten finger . 
The handkerchief was soaked with blood . 
Madame Hohlakov screamed and shut her eyes . 
`` Good heavens , what a wound , how awful ! 
But as soon as Lise saw Alyosha 's finger through the crack , she flung the door wide open . 
`` Come , come here , '' she cried , imperiously . 
`` No nonsense now ! 
Good heavens , why did you stand there saying nothing about it all this time ? 
He might have bled to death , mamma ! 
How did you do it ? 
Water , water ! 
You must wash it first of all , simply hold it in cold water to stop the pain , and keep it there , keep it there ... . 
Make haste , mamma , some water in a slop-basin . 
But do make haste , '' she finished nervously . 
She was quite frightened at the sight of Alyosha 's wound . 
`` Should n't we send for Herzenstube ? '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Mamma , you 'll be the death of me . 
Your Herzenstube will come and say that he can make nothing of it ! 
Water , water ! 
Mamma , for goodness ' sake go yourself and hurry Yulia , she is such a slowcoach and never can come quickly ! 
Make haste , mamma , or I shall die . '' 
`` Why , it 's nothing much , '' cried Alyosha , frightened at this alarm . 
Yulia ran in with water and Alyosha put his finger in it . 
`` Some lint , mamma , for mercy 's sake , bring some lint and that muddy caustic lotion for wounds , what 's it called ? 
We 've got some . 
You know where the bottle is , mamma ; it 's in your bedroom in the right-hand cupboard , there 's a big bottle of it there with the lint . '' 
`` I 'll bring everything in a minute , Lise , only do n't scream and do n't fuss . 
You see how bravely Alexey Fyodorovitch bears it . 
Where did you get such a dreadful wound , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
Madame Hohlakov hastened away . 
This was all Lise was waiting for . 
`` First of all , answer the question , where did you get hurt like this ? '' 
she asked Alyosha , quickly . 
`` And then I 'll talk to you about something quite different . 
Well ? '' 
Instinctively feeling that the time of her mother 's absence was precious for her , Alyosha hastened to tell her of his enigmatic meeting with the school boys in the fewest words possible . 
Lise clasped her hands at his story . 
`` How can you , and in that dress too , associate with schoolboys ? '' 
she cried angrily , as though she had a right to control him . 
`` You are nothing but a boy yourself if you can do that , a perfect boy ! 
But you must find out for me about that horrid boy and tell me all about it , for there 's some mystery in it . 
Now for the second thing , but first a question : does the pain prevent you talking about utterly unimportant things , but talking sensibly ? '' 
`` Of course not , and I do n't feel much pain now . '' 
`` That 's because your finger is in the water . 
It must be changed directly , for it will get warm in a minute . 
Yulia , bring some ice from the cellar and another basin of water . 
Now she is gone , I can speak ; will you give me the letter I sent you yesterday , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch - be quick , for mamma will be back in a minute and I do n't want - '' `` I have n't got the letter . '' 
`` That 's not true , you have . 
I knew you would say that . 
You 've got it in that pocket . 
I 've been regretting that joke all night . 
Give me back the letter at once , give it me . '' 
`` I 've left it at home . '' 
`` But you ca n't consider me as a child , a little girl , after that silly joke ! 
I beg your pardon for that silliness , but you must bring me the letter , if you really have n't got it - bring to-day , you must , you must . '' 
`` To-day I ca n't possibly , for I am going back to the monastery and I sha n't come and see you for the next two days - three or four perhaps - for Father Zossima - '' `` Four days , what nonsense ! 
Listen . 
Did you laugh at me very much ? '' 
`` I did n't laugh at all . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Because I believed all you said . '' 
`` You are insulting me ! '' 
`` Not at all . 
As soon as I read it , I thought that all that would come to pass , for as soon as Father Zossima dies , I am to leave the monastery . 
Then I shall go back and finish my studies , and when you reach the legal age we will be married . 
I shall love you . 
Though I have n't had time to think about it , I believe I could n't find a better wife than you , and Father Zossima tells me I must marry . '' 
`` But I am a cripple , wheeled about in a chair , '' laughed Lise , flushing crimson . 
`` I 'll wheel you about myself , but I 'm sure you 'll get well by then . '' 
`` But you are mad , '' said Lise , nervously , `` to make all this nonsense out of a joke ! 
Here 's mamma , very a propos , perhaps . 
Mamma , how slow you always are , how can you be so long ! 
And here 's Yulia with the ice ! 
`` Oh , Lise , do n't scream , above all things do n't scream . 
That scream drives me ... How can I help it when you put the lint in another place ? 
I 've been hunting and hunting - I do believe you did it on purpose . '' 
`` But I could n't tell that he would come with a bad finger , or else perhaps I might have done it on purpose . 
My darling mamma , you begin to say really witty things . '' 
`` Never mind my being witty , but I must say you show nice feeling for Alexey Fyodorovitch 's sufferings ! 
Oh , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , what 's killing me is no one thing in particular , not Herzenstube , but everything together , that 's what is too much for me . '' 
`` That 's enough , mamma , enough about Herzenstube , '' Lise laughed gaily . 
`` Make haste with the lint and the lotion , mamma . 
That 's simply Goulard 's water , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I remember the name now , but it 's a splendid lotion . 
Would you believe it , Mamma , on the way here he had a fight with the boys in the street , and it was a boy bit his finger , is n't he a child , a child himself ? 
Is he fit to be married after that ? 
For only fancy , he wants to be married , mamma . 
Just think of him married , would n't it be funny , would n't it be awful ? '' 
And Lise kept laughing her thin hysterical giggle , looking slyly at Alyosha . 
`` But why married , Lise ? 
What makes you talk of such a thing ? 
It 's quite out of place and perhaps the boy was rabid . '' 
`` Why , mamma ! 
As though there were rabid boys ! '' 
`` Why not , Lise , as though I had said something stupid ! 
Your boy might have been bitten by a mad dog and he would become mad and bite anyone near him . 
How well she has bandaged it , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
I could n't have done it . 
Do you still feel the pain ? '' 
`` It 's nothing much now . '' 
`` You do n't feel afraid of water ? '' 
asked Lise . 
`` Come , that 's enough , Lise , perhaps I really was rather too quick talking of the boy being rabid , and you pounced upon it at once . 
Katerina Ivanovna has only just heard that you are here , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she simply rushed at me , she 's dying to see you , dying ! '' 
`` Ach , mamma , go to them yourself . 
He ca n't go just now , he is in too much pain . '' 
`` Not at all , I can go quite well , '' said Alyosha . 
`` What ! 
You are going away ? 
Is that what you say ? '' 
`` Well , when I 've seen them , I 'll come back here and we can talk as much as you like . 
But I should like to see Katerina Ivanovna at once , for I am very anxious to be back at the monastery as soon as I can . '' 
`` Mamma , take him away quickly . 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , do n't trouble to come and see me afterwards , but go straight back to your monastery and a good riddance . 
I want to sleep , I did n't sleep all night . '' 
`` Ah , Lise , you are only making fun , but how I wish you would sleep ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` I do n't know what I 've done ... . 
I 'll stay another three minutes , five if you like , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Even five ! 
Do take him away quickly , mamma , he is a monster . '' 
`` Lise , you are crazy . 
Let us go , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she is too capricious to-day . 
I am afraid to cross her . 
Oh , the trouble one has with nervous girls ! 
Perhaps she really will be able to sleep after seeing you . 
How quickly you have made her sleepy , and how fortunate it is ! '' 
`` Ah , mamma , how sweetly you talk ! 
I must kiss you for it , mamma . '' 
`` And I kiss you too , Lise . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov began mysteriously and importantly , speaking in a rapid whisper . 
`` I do n't want to suggest anything , I do n't want to lift the veil , you will see for yourself what 's going on . 
It 's appalling . 
It 's the most fantastic farce . 
She loves your brother , Ivan , and she is doing her utmost to persuade herself she loves your brother , Dmitri . 
It 's appalling ! 
I 'll go in with you , and if they do n't turn me out , I 'll stay to the end . '' 
A Laceration in the Drawing-Room BUT in the drawing-room the conversation was already over . 
Katerina Ivanovna was greatly excited , though she looked resolute . 
At the moment Alyosha and Madame Hohlakov entered , Ivan Fyodorovitch stood up to take leave . 
His face was rather pale , and Alyosha looked at him anxiously . 
For this moment was to solve a doubt , a harassing enigma which had for some time haunted Alyosha . 
During the preceding month it had been several times suggested to him that his brother Ivan was in love with Katerina Ivanovna , and , what was more , that he meant `` to carry her off from Dmitri . 
Until quite lately the idea seemed to Alyosha monstrous , though it worried him extremely . 
He loved both his brothers , and dreaded such rivalry between them . 
Meantime , Dmitri had said outright on the previous day that he was glad that Ivan was his rival , and that it was a great assistance to him , Dmitri . 
In what way did it assist him ? 
To marry Grushenka ? 
But that Alyosha considered the worst thing possible . 
Besides all this , Alyosha had till the evening before implicitly believed that Katerina Ivanovna had a steadfast and passionate love for Dmitri ; but he had only believed it till the evening before . 
He had fancied , too , that she was incapable of loving a man like Ivan , and that she did love Dmitri , and loved him just as he was , in spite of all the strangeness of such a passion . 
But during yesterday 's scene with Grushenka another idea had struck him . 
The word `` lacerating , '' which Madame Hohlakov had just uttered , almost made him start , because half waking up towards daybreak that night he had cried out `` Laceration , laceration , '' probably applying it to his dream . 
He had been dreaming all night of the previous day 's scene at Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
Now Alyosha was impressed by Madame Hohlakov 's blunt and persistent assertion that Katerina Ivanovna was in love with Ivan , and only deceived herself through some sort of pose , from `` self-laceration , '' and tortured herself by her pretended love for Dmitri from some fancied duty of gratitude . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` perhaps the whole truth lies in those words . '' 
But in that case what was Ivan 's position ? 
Alyosha felt instinctively that a character like Katerina Ivanovna 's must dominate , and she could only dominate someone like Dmitri , and never a man like Ivan . 
For Dmitri might - at last submit to her domination `` to his own happiness '' -LRB- which was what Alyosha would have desired -RRB- , but Ivan - no , Ivan could not submit to her , and such submission would not give him happiness . 
Alyosha could not help believing that of Ivan . 
And now all these doubts and reflections flitted through his mind as he entered the drawing-room . 
Another idea , too , forced itself upon him : `` What if she loved neither of them - neither Ivan nor Dmitri ? '' 
It must be noted that Alyosha felt as it were ashamed of his own thoughts and blamed himself when they kept recurring to him during the last month . 
`` What do I know about love and women and how can I decide such questions ? '' 
he thought reproachfully , after such doubts and surmises . 
And yet it was impossible not to think about it . 
He felt instinctively that this rivalry was of immense importance in his brothers ' lives and that a great deal depended upon it . 
`` One reptile will devour the other , '' Ivan had pronounced the day before , speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri . 
So Ivan looked upon Dmitri as a reptile , and perhaps long done so . 
Was it perhaps since he had known Katerina Ivanovna ? 
That phrase had , of course , escaped Ivan unawares yesterday , but that only made it more important . 
If he felt like that , what chance was there of peace ? 
Were there not , on the contrary , new grounds for hatred and hostility in their family ? 
And with which of them was Alyosha to sympathise ? 
And what was he to wish for each of them ? 
He loved them both , but what could he desire for each in the midst of these conflicting interests ? 
He might go quite astray in this maze , and Alyosha 's heart could not endure uncertainty , because his love was always of an active character . 
He was incapable of passive love . 
If he loved anyone , he set to work at once to help him . 
And to do so he must know what he was aiming at ; he must know for certain what was best for each , and having ascertained this it was natural for him to help them both . 
But instead of a definite aim , he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on all sides . 
`` It was lacerating , '' as was said just now . 
But what could he understand even in this `` laceration '' ? 
He did not understand the first word in this perplexing maze . 
Seeing Alyosha , Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan , who had already got up to go , `` A minute ! 
Stay another minute ! 
I want to hear the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely . 
Do n't go away , '' she added , addressing Madame Hohlakov . 
She made Alyosha sit down beside her , and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite , by Ivan . 
`` You are all my friends here , all I have in the world , dear friends , '' she warmly , in a voice which quivered with genuine tears of suffering , and Alyosha 's heart warmed to her at once . 
`` You , Alexey Fyodorovitch , were witness yesterday of that abominable scene , and saw what I did . 
You did not see it , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he did . 
What he thought of me yesterday I do n't know . 
I only know one thing , that if it were repeated to-day , this minute , I should express the same feelings again as yesterday - the same feelings , the same words , the same actions . 
You remember my actions , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; you checked me in one of them '' ... -LRB- as she said that , she flushed and her eyes shone -RRB- . 
`` I must tell you that I ca n't get over it . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't even know whether I still love him . 
I feel pity for him , and that is a poor sign of love . 
If I loved him , if I still loved him , perhaps I should n't be sorry for him now , but should hate him '' . 
Her voice quivered and tears glittered on her eyelashes . 
Alyosha shuddered inwardly . 
`` That girl is truthful and sincere , '' he thought , `` and she does not love Dmitri any more . '' 
`` That 's true , that 's true , '' cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Wait , dear . 
I have n't told you the chief , the final decision I came to during the night . 
I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one - for me , but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it - nothing . 
It will be so all my life . 
My dear , kind , ever-faithful and generous adviser , the one friend I have in the world , Ivan Fyodorovitch , with his deep insight into the heart , approves and commends my decision . 
He knows it . '' 
`` Yes , I approve of it , '' Ivan assented , in a subdued but firm voice . 
`` But I should like Alyosha , too -LRB- Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , forgive my calling you simply Alyosha -RRB- , I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch , too , to tell me before my two friends whether I am right . 
I feel instinctively that you , Alyosha , my dear brother -LRB- for are a dear brother to me -RRB- , '' she said again ecstatically , taking his cold hand in her hot one , `` I foresee that your decision , your approval , will bring me peace , in spite of all my sufferings , for , after your words , I shall be calm and submit - I feel that . '' 
`` I do n't know what you are asking me , '' said Alyosha , flushing . 
`` I only know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more than my own ! 
... But I know nothing about such affairs , '' something impelled him to add hurriedly . 
`` In such affairs , Alexey Fyodorovitch , in such affairs , the chief thing is honour and duty and something higher - I do n't know what but higher perhaps even than duty . 
I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart , and it compels me irresistibly . 
But it may all be put in two words . 
I 've already decided , even if he marries that - creature , '' she began solemnly , `` whom I never , never can forgive , even then I will not abandon him . 
Henceforward I will never , never abandon him ! '' 
she cried , breaking into a sort of pale , hysterical ecstasy . 
`` Not that I would run after him continually , get in his way and worry him . 
Oh , no ! 
I will go away to another town - where you like - but I will watch over him all my life - I will watch over him all my life unceasingly . 
When he becomes unhappy with that woman , and that is bound to happen quite soon , let him come to me and he will find a friend , a sister ... Only a sister , of course , and so for ever ; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister , who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him . 
I will gain my point . 
I will insist on his knowing me confiding entirely in me , without reserve , '' she cried , in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I will be a god to whom he can pray - and that , at least , he owes me for his treachery and for what I suffered yesterday through him . 
And let him see that all my life I will be true to him and the promise I gave him , in spite of his being untrue and betraying me . 
I will - I will become nothing but a means for his happiness , or - how shall I say ? 
- an instrument , a machine for his happiness , and that for my whole life , my whole life , and that he may see that all his life ! 
That 's my decision . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me . '' 
She was breathless . 
She had perhaps intended to express her idea with more dignity , art and naturalness , but her speech was too hurried and crude . 
It was full of youthful impulsiveness , it betrayed that she was still smarting from yesterday 's insult , and that her pride craved satisfaction . 
She felt this herself . 
Her face suddenly darkened , an unpleasant look came into her eyes . 
Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy . 
His brother Ivan made it worse by adding : `` I 've only expressed my own view , '' he said . 
`` From anyone else , this would have been affected and over-strained , but from you - no . 
Any other woman would have been wrong , but you are right . 
I do n't know how to explain it , but I see that you are absolutely genuine and , therefore , you are right . '' 
`` But that 's only for the moment . 
And what does this moment stand for ? 
Nothing but yesterday 's insult . '' 
Madame Hohlakov obviously had not intended to interfere , but she could not refrain from this very just comment . 
`` Quite so , quite so , '' cried Ivan , with peculiar eagerness , obviously annoyed at being interrupted , `` in anyone else this moment would be only due to yesterday 's impression and would be only a moment . 
But with Katerina Ivanovna 's character , that moment will last all her life . 
What for anyone else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting burdensome , grim perhaps , but unflagging duty . 
And she will be sustained by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled . 
Your life , Katerina Ivanovna , will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings , your own heroism , and your own suffering ; but in the end that suffering will be softened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfilment of a bold and proud design . 
Yes , proud it certainly is , and desperate in any case , but a triumph for you . 
And the consciousness of it will at last be a source of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything else . '' 
This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention ; even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and with intention . 
`` Oh , dear , how mistaken it all is ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov cried again . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you speak . 
I want dreadfully to know what you will say ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and burst into tears . 
Alyosha got up from the sofa . 
`` It 's nothing , nothing ! '' 
she went on through her tears . 
`` I 'm upset , I did n't sleep last night . 
But by the side of two such friends as you and your brother I still feel strong - for I know you two will never desert me . '' 
`` Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow - perhaps to-morrow - and to leave you for a long time - and , unluckily , it 's unavoidable , '' Ivan said suddenly . 
`` To-morrow - to Moscow ! '' 
her face was suddenly contorted ; `` but - but , dear me , how fortunate ! '' 
she cried in a voice suddenly changed . 
In one instant there was no trace left of her tears . 
She underwent an instantaneous transformation , which amazed Alyosha . 
Instead of a poor , insulted girl , weeping in a sort of `` laceration , '' he saw a woman completely self-possessed and even exceedingly pleased , as though something agreeable had just happened . 
`` Oh , not fortunate that I am losing you , of course not , '' she collected herself suddenly , with a charming society smile . 
`` Such a friend as you are could not suppose that . 
I am only too unhappy at losing you . '' 
She rushed impulsively at Ivan , and seizing both his hands , pressed them warmly . 
`` But what is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to see auntie and Agafya and to tell them all the horror of my present position . 
You can speak with complete openness to Agafya , but spare dear auntie . 
You will know how to do that . 
You ca n't think how wretched I was yesterday and this morning , wondering how I could write them that dreadful letter - for one can never tell such things in a letter ... Now it will be easy for me to write , for you will see them and explain everything . 
Oh , how glad I am ! 
But I am only glad of that , believe me . 
Of course , no one can take your place ... . 
I will run at once to write the letter , '' she finished suddenly , and took a step as though to go out of the room . 
`` And what about Alyosha and his opinion , which you were so desperately anxious to hear ? '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
There was a sarcastic , angry note in her voice . 
`` I had not forgotten that , '' cried Katerina Ivanovna , coming to a sudden standstill , `` and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment ? '' 
she added , with warm and bitter reproachfulness . 
`` What I said , I repeat . 
I must have his opinion . 
More than that , I must have his decision ! 
As he says , so it shall be . 
You see how anxious I am for your words , Alexey Fyodorovitch ... But what 's the matter ? '' 
`` I could n't have believed it . 
I ca n't understand it ! '' 
Alyosha cried suddenly in distress . 
`` He is going to Moscow , and you cry out that you are glad . 
You said that on purpose ! 
And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that but sorry to be - losing a friend . 
But that was acting , too - you were playing a part as in a theatre ! '' 
`` In a theatre ? 
What ? 
What do you mean ? '' 
exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna , profoundly astonished , flushing crimson , and frowning . 
`` Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him , you persist in telling him to his face that it 's fortunate he is going , '' said Alyosha breathlessly . 
He was standing at the table and did not sit down . 
`` What are you talking about ? 
I do n't understand . '' 
`` I do n't understand myself ... . 
I seemed to see in a flash ... I know I am not saying it properly , but I 'll say it all the same , '' Alyosha went on in the same shaking and broken voice . 
`` What I see is that perhaps you do n't love Dmitri at all ... and never have , from the beginning ... . 
And Dmitri , too , has never loved you ... and only esteems you ... . 
I really do n't know how I dare to say all this , but somebody must tell the truth ... for nobody here will tell the truth . '' 
`` What truth ? '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and there was an hysterical ring in her voice . 
`` I 'll tell you , '' Alyosha went on with desperate haste , as though he were jumping from the top of a house . 
`` Call Dmitri ; I will fetch him and let him come here and take your hand and take Ivan 's and join your hands . 
For you 're torturing Ivan , simply because you love him - and torturing him , because you love Dmitri through ` self-laceration ' - with an unreal love - because you 've persuaded yourself . '' 
Alyosha broke off and was silent . 
`` You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot - that 's what you are ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna snapped . 
Her face was white and her lips were moving with anger . 
Ivan suddenly laughed and got up . 
His hat was in his hand . 
`` You are mistaken , my good Alyosha , '' he said , with an expression Alyosha had never seen in his face before - an expression of youthful sincerity and strong , irresistibly frank feeling . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has never cared for me ! 
She has known all the time that I cared for her - though I never said a word of my love to her - she knew , but she did n't care for me . 
I have never been her friend either , not for one moment ; she is too proud to need my friendship . 
She kept me at her side as a means of revenge . 
She revenged with me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receiving from Dmitri ever since their first meeting . 
For even that first meeting has rankled in her heart as an insult - that 's what her heart is like ! 
She has talked to me of nothing but her love for him . 
I am going now ; but , believe me , Katerina Ivanovna , you really love him . 
And the more he insults you , the more you love him - that 's your ` laceration . ' 
You love him just as he is ; you love him for insulting you . 
If he reformed , you 'd give him up at once and cease to love him . 
But you need him so as to contemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for infidelity . 
And it all comes from your pride . 
Oh , there 's a great deal of humiliation and self-abasement about it , but it all comes from pride ... . 
I am too young and I 've loved you too much . 
I know that I ought not to say this , that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you , and it would be less offensive for you . 
But I am going far away , and shall never come back ... . 
It is for ever . 
I do n't want to sit beside a ` laceration . ' 
... But I do n't know how to speak now . 
I 've said everything ... . 
Good-bye , Katerina Ivanovna ; you ca n't be angry with me , for I am a hundred times more severely punished than you , if only by the fact that I shall never see you again . 
Good-bye ! 
I do n't want your hand . 
You have tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at this moment . 
I shall forgive you later , but now I do n't want your hand . 
Den Dank , Dame , begehr ich nicht , '' * he added , with a forced smile , showing , however , that he could read Schiller , and read him till he knew him by heart - which Alyosha would never have believed . 
He went out of the room without saying good-bye even to his hostess , Madame Hohlakov . 
Alyosha clasped his hands . 
* Thank you , madam , I want nothing . 
`` Ivan ! '' 
he cried desperately after him . 
`` Come back , Ivan ! 
No , nothing will induce him to come back now ! '' 
he cried again , regretfully realising it ; `` but it 's my fault , my fault . 
I began it ! 
Ivan spoke angrily , wrongly . 
Unjustly and angrily . 
He must come back here , come back , '' Alyosha kept exclaiming frantically . 
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room . 
`` You have done no harm . 
You behaved beautifully , like an angel , '' Madame Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha . 
`` I will do my utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going . '' 
Her face beamed with delight , to the great distress of Alyosha , but Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned . 
She had two hundred-rouble notes in her hand . 
`` I have a great favour to ask of you , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she began , addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice , as though nothing had happened . 
`` A week - yes , I think it was a week ago - Dmitri Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action - a very ugly action . 
There is a low tavern here , and in it he met that discharged officer , that captain , whom your father used to employ in some business . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain , seized him by the beard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it , in that insulting fashion . 
And I am told that his son , a boy , quite a child , who is at the school here , saw it and ran beside them crying and begging for his father , appealing to everyone to defend him , while everyone laughed . 
You must forgive me , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can not think without indignation of that disgraceful action of his ... one of those actions of which only Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger ... and in his passions ! 
I ca n't describe it even ... . 
I ca n't find my words . 
I 've made inquiries about his victim , and find he is quite a poor man . 
His name is Snegiryov . 
He did something wrong in the army and was discharged . 
I ca n't tell you what . 
And now he has sunk into terrible destitution , with his family - an unhappy family of sick children , and , I believe , an insane wife . 
He has been living here a long time ; he used to work as a copying clerk , but now he is getting nothing . 
I thought if you ... that is I thought ... I do n't know . 
I am so confused . 
You see , I wanted to ask you , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , to go to him , to find some excuse to go to them - I mean to that captain - oh , goodness , how badly I explain it ! 
- and delicately , carefully , as only you know how to '' -LRB- Alyosha blushed -RRB- , `` manage to give him this assistance , these two hundred roubles . 
He will be sure to take it ... . 
I mean , persuade him to take it ... . 
Or , rather , what do I mean ? 
You see it 's not by way of compensation to prevent him from taking proceedings -LRB- for I believe he meant to -RRB- , but simply a token of sympathy , of a desire to assist him from me , Dmitri Fyodorovitch 's betrothed , not from himself ... . 
But you know ... . 
I would go myself , but you 'll know how to do it ever so much better . 
He lives in Lake Street in the house of a woman called Kalmikov ... . 
For God 's sake , Alexey Fyodorovitch , do it for me , and now ... now I am rather ... tired ... Good-bye ! '' 
She turned and disappeared behind the portiere so quickly that Alyosha had not time to utter a word , though he wanted to speak . 
He longed to beg her pardon , to blame himself , to say something , for his heart was full and he could not bear to go out of the room without it . 
But Madame Hohlakov took him by the hand and drew him along with her . 
In the hall she stopped him again as before . 
`` She is proud , she is struggling with herself ; but kind , charming , generous , `` she exclaimed , in a half-whisper . 
`` Oh , how I love her , especially sometimes , and how glad I am again of everything ! 
Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , you did n't know , but I must tell you , that we all , all - both her aunts , I and all of us , Lise , even - have been hoping and praying for nothing for the last month but that she may give up your favourite Dmitri , who takes no notice of her and does not care for her , and may marry Ivan Fyodorovitch - such an excellent and cultivated young man , who loves her more than anything in the world . 
We are in a regular plot to bring it about , and I am even staying on here perhaps on that account . '' 
`` But she has been crying - she has been wounded again , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Never trust a woman 's tears , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I am never for the women in such cases . 
I am always on the side of the men . '' 
`` Mamma , you are spoiling him , '' Lise 's little voice cried from behind the door . 
`` No , it was all my fault . 
I am horribly to blame , '' Alyosha repeated unconsoled , hiding his face in his hands in an agony of remorse for his indiscretion . 
`` Quite the contrary ; you behaved like an angel , like an angel . 
I am ready to say so a thousand times over . '' 
`` Mamma , how has he behaved like an angel ? '' 
Lise 's voice was heard again . 
`` I somehow fancied all at once , '' Alyosha went on as though he had not heard Lise , `` that she loved Ivan , and so I said that stupid thing ... . 
What will happen now ? '' 
`` To whom , to whom ? '' 
cried Lise . 
`` Mamma , you really want to be the death of me . 
I ask you and you do n't answer . '' 
At the moment the maid ran in . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna is ill ... . 
She is crying , struggling ... hysterics . '' 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
cried Lise , in a tone of real anxiety . 
`` Mamma , I shall be having hysterics , and not she ! '' 
`` Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream , do n't persecute me . 
At your age one ca n't know everything that grown-up people know . 
I 'll come and tell you everything you ought to know . 
Oh , mercy on us ! 
I am coming , I am coming ... . 
Hysterics is a good sign , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; it 's an excellent thing that she is hysterical . 
That 's just as it ought to be . 
In such cases I am always against the woman , against all these feminine tears and hysterics . 
Run and say , Yulia , that I 'll fly to her . 
As for Ivan Fyodorovitch 's going away like that , it 's her own fault . 
But he wo n't go away . 
Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream ! 
Oh , yes ; you are not screaming . 
It 's I am screaming . 
Forgive your mamma ; but I am delighted , delighted , delighted ! 
Did you notice , Alexey Fyodorovitch , how young , how young Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out , when he said all that and went out ? 
I thought he was so learned , such a savant , and all of a sudden he behaved so warmly , openly , and youthfully , with such youthful inexperience , and it was all so fine , like you ... . 
And the way he repeated that German verse , it was just like you ! 
But I must fly , I must fly ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , make haste to carry out her commission , and then make haste back . 
Lise , do you want anything now ? 
For mercy 's sake , do n't keep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute . 
He will come back to you at once . '' 
Madame Hohlakov at last ran off . 
Before leaving , Alyosha would have opened the door to see Lise . 
`` On no account , '' cried Lise . 
`` On no account now . 
Speak through the door . 
How have you come to be an angel ? 
That 's the only thing I want to know . '' 
`` For an awful piece of stupidity , Lise ! 
Goodbye ! '' 
`` Do n't dare to go away like that ! '' 
Lise was beginning . 
`` Lise , I have a real sorrow ! 
I 'll be back directly , but I have a great , great sorrow ! 
And he ran out of the room . 
A Laceration in the Cottage HE certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before . 
He had rushed in like a fool , and meddled in what ? 
In a love-affair . 
`` But what do I know about it ? 
What can I tell about such things ? '' 
he repeated to himself for the hundredth time , flushing crimson . 
`` Oh , being ashamed would be nothing ; shame is only the punishment I deserve . 
The trouble is I shall certainly have caused more unhappiness ... . 
And Father Zossima sent me to reconcile and bring them together . 
Is this the way to bring them together ? '' 
