And they will have no secrets from us . 
We shall allow or forbid them to live with their wives and mistresses , to have or not to have children according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient - and they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully . 
The most painful secrets of their conscience , all , all they will bring to us , and we shall have an answer for all . 
And they will be glad to believe our answer , for it will save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present in making a free decision for themselves . 
And all will be happy , all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them . 
For only we , we who guard the mystery , shall be unhappy . 
There will be thousands of millions of happy babes , and a hundred thousand sufferers who have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil . 
Peacefully they will die , peacefully they will expire in Thy name , and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death . 
But we shall keep the secret , and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity . 
Though if there were anything in the other world , it certainly would not be for such as they . 
It is prophesied that Thou wilt come again in victory , Thou wilt come with Thy chosen , the proud and strong , but we will say that they have only saved themselves , but we have saved all . 
We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast , and holds in her hands the mystery , shall be put to shame , that the weak will rise up again , and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her loathsome body . 
But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin . 
And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say : `` Judge us if Thou canst and darest . '' 
Know that I fear Thee not . 
Know that I too have been in the wilderness , I too have lived on roots and locusts , I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men , and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect , among the strong and powerful , thirsting `` to make up the number . '' 
But I awakened and would not serve madness . 
I turned back and joined the ranks of those who have corrected Thy work . 
I left the proud and went back to the humble , for the happiness of the humble . 
What I say to Thee will come to pass , and our dominion will be built up . 
I repeat , to-morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us . 
For if anyone has ever deserved our fires , it is Thou . 
To-morrow I shall burn Thee . 
Dixi . ' '' 
* * I have spoken . 
Ivan stopped . 
He was carried away as he talked , and spoke with excitement ; when he had finished , he suddenly smiled . 
Alyosha had listened in silence ; towards the end he was greatly moved and seemed several times on the point of interrupting , but restrained himself . 
Now his words came with a rush . 
`` But ... that 's absurd ! '' 
he cried , flushing . 
`` Your poem is in praise of Jesus , not in blame of Him - as you meant it to be . 
And who will believe you about freedom ? 
Is that the way to understand it ? 
That 's not the idea of it in the Orthodox Church ... . 
That 's Rome , and not even the whole of Rome , it 's false-those are the worst of the Catholics the Inquisitors , the Jesuits ! 
... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your Inquisitor . 
What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves ? 
Who are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves for the happiness of mankind ? 
When have they been seen ? 
We know the Jesuits , they are spoken ill of , but surely they are not what you describe ? 
They are not that at all , not at all ... . 
They are simply the Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future , with the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that 's their ideal , but there 's no sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it ... . 
It 's simple lust of power , of filthy earthly gain , of domination-something like a universal serfdom with them as masters-that 's all they stand for . 
They do n't even believe in God perhaps . 
Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy . '' 
`` Stay , stay , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` how hot you are ! 
A fantasy you say , let it be so ! 
Of course it 's a fantasy . 
But allow me to say : do you really think that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing but the lust of power , of filthy earthly gain ? 
Is that Father Paissy 's teaching ? '' 
`` No , no , on the contrary , Father Paissy did once say something rather the same as you ... but of course it 's not the same , not a bit the same , '' Alyosha hastily corrected himself . 
`` A precious admission , in spite of your ` not a bit the same . ' 
I ask you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material gain ? 
Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow and loving humanity ? 
You see , only suppose that there was one such man among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain-if there 's only one like my old Inquisitor , who had himself eaten roots in the desert and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and perfect . 
But yet all his life he loved humanity , and suddenly his eyes were opened , and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attain perfection and freedom , if at the same time one gains the conviction that millions of God 's creatures have been created as a mockery , that they will never be capable of using their freedom , that these poor rebels can never turn into giants to complete the tower , that it was not for such geese that the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony . 
Seeing all that he turned back and joined - the clever people . 
Surely that could have happened ? '' 
`` Joined whom , what clever people ? '' 
cried Alyosha , completely carried away . 
`` They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets ... . 
Perhaps nothing but Atheism , that 's all their secret . 
Your Inquisitor does not believe in God , that 's his secret ! '' 
`` What if it is so ! 
At last you have guessed it . 
It 's perfectly true , it 's true that that 's the whole secret , but is n't that suffering , at least for a man like that , who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could not shake off his incurable love of humanity ? 
In his old age he reached the clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spirit could build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble , unruly , ` incomplete , empirical creatures created in jest . ' 
And so , convinced of this , he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit , the dread spirit of death and destruction , and therefore accept lying and deception , and lead men consciously to death and destruction , and yet deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being led , that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think themselves happy . 
And note , the deception is in the name of Him in Whose ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long . 
Is not that tragic ? 
And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army ` filled with the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain ' - would not one such be enough to make a tragedy ? 
More than that , one such standing at the head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with all its armies and Jesuits , its highest idea . 
I tell you frankly that I firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood at the head of the movement . 
Who knows , there may have been some such even among the Roman Popes . 
Who knows , perhaps the spirit of that accursed old man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way , is to be found even now in a whole multitude of such old men , existing not by chance but by agreement , as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the mystery , to guard it from the weak and the unhappy , so as to make them happy . 
No doubt it is so , and so it must be indeed . 
I fancy that even among the Masons there 's something of the same mystery at the bottom , and that that 's why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals breaking up the unity of the idea , while it is so essential that there should be one flock and one shepherd ... . 
But from the way I defend my idea I might be an author impatient of your criticism . 
Enough of it . '' 
`` You are perhaps a Mason yourself ! '' 
broke suddenly from Alyosha . 
`` You do n't believe in God , '' he added , speaking this time very sorrowfully . 
He fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically . 
`` How does your poem end ? '' 
he asked , suddenly looking down . 
`` Or was it the end ? '' 
`` I meant to end it like this . 
When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him . 
His silence weighed down upon him . 
He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time , looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply . 
The old man longed for him to say something , however bitter and terrible . 
But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips . 
That was all his answer . 
The old man shuddered . 
His lips moved . 
He went to the door , opened it , and said to Him : ` Go , and come no more ... come not at all , never , never ! ' 
And he let Him out into the dark alleys of the town . 
The Prisoner went away . '' 
`` And the old man ? '' 
`` The kiss glows in his heart , but the old man adheres to his idea . '' 
`` And you with him , you too ? '' 
cried Alyosha , mournfully . 
Ivan laughed . 
`` Why , it 's all nonsense , Alyosha . 
It 's only a senseless poem of a senseless student , who could never write two lines of verse . 
Why do you take it so seriously ? 
Surely you do n't suppose I am going straight off to the Jesuits , to join the men who are correcting His work ? 
Good Lord , it 's no business of mine . 
I told you , all I want is to live on to thirty , and then ... dash the cup to the ground ! '' 
`` But the little sticky leaves , and the precious tombs , and the blue sky , and the woman you love ! 
How will you live , how will you love them ? '' 
Alyosha cried sorrowfully . 
`` With such a hell in your heart and your head , how can you ? 
No , that 's just what you are going away for , to join them ... if not , you will kill yourself , you ca n't endure it ! '' 
`` There is a strength to endure everything , '' Ivan said with a cold smile . 
`` The strength of the Karamazovs - the strength of the Karamazov baseness . '' 
`` To sink into debauchery , to stifle your soul with corruption , yes ? '' 
`` Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it , and then - '' `` How will you escape it ? 
By what will you escape it ? 
That 's impossible with your ideas . '' 
`` In the Karamazov way , again . '' '' 
` Everything is lawful , ' you mean ? 
Everything is lawful , is that it ? '' 
Ivan scowled , and all at once turned strangely pale . 
`` Ah , you 've caught up yesterday 's phrase , which so offended Muisov - and which Dmitri pounced upon so naively and paraphrased ! '' 
he smiled queerly . 
`` Yes , if you like , ` everything is lawful ' since the word has been said , I wo n't deny it . 
And Mitya 's version is n't bad . '' 
Alyosha looked at him in silence . 
`` I thought that going away from here I have you at least , '' Ivan said suddenly , with unexpected feeling ; `` but now I see that there is no place for me even in your heart , my dear hermit . 
The formula , ` all is lawful , ' I wo n't renounce - will you renounce me for that , yes ? '' 
Alyosha got up , went to him and softly kissed him on the lips . 
`` That 's plagiarism , '' cried Ivan , highly delighted . 
`` You stole that from my poem . 
Thank you though . 
Get up , Alyosha , it 's time we were going , both of us . '' 
They went out , but stopped when they reached the entrance of the restaurant . 
`` Listen , Alyosha , '' Ivan began in a resolute voice , `` if I am really able to care for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them , remembering you . 
It 's enough for me that you are somewhere here , and I sha n't lose my desire for life yet . 
Is that enough for you ? 
Take it as a declaration of love if you like . 
And now you go to the right and I to the left . 
And it 's enough , do you hear , enough . 
I mean even if I do n't go away to-morrow -LRB- I think I certainly shall go -RRB- and we meet again , do n't say a word more on these subjects . 
I beg that particularly . 
And about Dmitri too , I ask you specially , never speak to me again , '' he added , with sudden irritation ; `` it 's all exhausted , it has all been said over and over again , has n't it ? 
And I 'll make you one promise in return for it . 
When at thirty , I want to ` dash the cup to the ground , ' wherever I may be I 'll come to have one more talk with you , even though it were from America , you may be sure of that . 
I 'll come on purpose . 
It will be very interesting to have a look at you , to see what you 'll be by that time . 
It 's rather a solemn promise , you see . 
And we really may be parting for seven years or ten . 
Come , go now to your Pater Seraphicus , he is dying . 
If he dies without you , you will be angry with me for having kept you . 
Good-bye , kiss me once more ; that 's right , now go . '' 
Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back . 
It was just as Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before , though the parting had been very different . 
The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha 's mind in the distress and dejection of that moment . 
He waited a little , looking after his brother . 
He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left . 
He had never noticed it before . 
But all at once he turned too , and almost ran to the monastery . 
It was nearly dark , and he felt almost frightened ; something new was growing up in him for which he could not account . 
The wind had risen again as on the previous evening , and the ancient pines murmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse . 
He almost ran . 
`` Pater Seraphicus - he got that name from somewhere - where from ? '' 
Alyosha wondered . 
`` Ivan , poor Ivan , and when shall I see you again ? 
... Here is the hermitage . 
Yes , yes , that he is , Pater Seraphicus , he will save me - from him and for ever ! '' 
Several times afterwards he wondered how he could , on leaving Ivan , so completely forget his brother Dmitri , though he had that morning , only a few hours before , so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing so , even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night . 
For Awhile a Very Obscure One AND Ivan , on parting from Alyosha , went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house . 
But , strange to say , he was overcome by insufferable depression , which grew greater at every step he took towards the house . 
There was nothing strange in his being depressed ; what was strange was that Ivan could not have said what was the cause of it . 
He had often been depressed before , and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment , when he had broken off with everything had brought him here , and was preparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new , unknown future . 
He would again be as solitary as ever , and though he had great hopes , and great - too great - expectations from life , he could not have given any definite account of his hopes , his expectations , or even his desires . 
Yet at that moment , though the apprehension of the new and unknown certainly found place in his heart , what was worrying him was something quite different . 
`` Is it loathing for my father 's house ? '' 
he wondered . 
`` Quite likely ; I am so sick of it ; and though it 's the last time I shall cross its hateful threshold , still I loathe it ... . 
No , it 's not that either . 
Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had with him ? 
For so many years I 've been silent with the whole world and not deigned to speak , and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that . '' 
certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthful inexperience and vanity - vexation at having failed to express himself , especially with such a being as Alyosha , on whom his heart had certainly been reckoning . 
No doubt that came in , that vexation , it must have done indeed ; but yet that was not it , that was not it either . 
`` I feel sick with depression and yet I ca n't tell what I want . 
Better not think , perhaps . '' 
Ivan tried `` not to think , '' but that , too , was no use . 
What made his depression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual , external character - he felt that . 
Some person or thing seemed to be standing out somewhere , just as something will sometimes obtrude itself upon the eye , and though one may be so busy with work or conversation that for a long time one does not notice it , yet it irritates and almost torments one till at last one realises , and removes the offending object , often quite a trifling and ridiculous one - some article left about in the wrong place , a handkerchief on the floor , a book not replaced on the shelf , and so on . 
At last , feeling very cross and ill-humoured , Ivan arrived home , and suddenly , about fifteen paces from the garden gate , he guessed what was fretting and worrying him . 
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the coolness of the evening , and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that the valet Smerdyakov was on his mind , and that it was this man that his soul loathed . 
It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear . 
just before , when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov , he had felt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing , which had immediately stirred responsive anger in his heart . 
Afterwards , as he talked , Smerdyakov had been forgotten for the time ; but still he had been in his mind , and as soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home , the forgotten sensation began to obtrude itself again . 
`` Is it possible that a miserable , contemptible creature like that can worry me so much ? '' 
he wondered , with insufferable irritation . 
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the man , especially during the last few days . 
He had even begun to notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature . 
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came to the neighbourhood he had felt quite differently . 
Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov , and had even thought him very original . 
He had encouraged him to talk to him , although he had always wondered at a certain incoherence , or rather restlessness , in his mind , and could not understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon the brain of `` the contemplative . '' 
They discussed philosophical questions and even how there could have been light on the first day when the sun , moon , and stars were only created on the fourth day , and how that was to be understood . 
But Ivan soon saw that , though the sun , moon , and stars might be an interesting subject , yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov , and that he was looking for something altogether different . 
In one way and another , he began to betray a boundless vanity , and a wounded vanity , too , and that Ivan disliked . 
It had first given rise to his aversion . 
Later on , there had been trouble in the house . 
Grushenka had come on the scene , and there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri - they discussed that , too . 
But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement , it was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it . 
There was , in fact , something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of his desires , accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed . 
Smerdyakov was always inquiring , putting certain indirect but obviously premeditated questions , but what his object was he did not explain , and usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject . 
But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar , revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly . 
Not that he forgot himself and was rude ; on the contrary , he always spoke very respectfully , yet he had obviously begun to consider - goodness knows why ! 
- that there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact , some secret between them , that had at some time been expressed on both sides , only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around them . 
But for a long while Ivan did not recognise the real cause of his growing dislike and he had only lately realised what was at the root of it . 
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov . 
But Smerdyakov rose from the bench , and from that action alone , Ivan knew instantly that he wanted particularly to talk to him . 
Ivan looked at him and stopped , and the fact that he did stop , instead of passing by , as he meant to the minute before , drove him to fury . 
With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov 's emasculate , sickly face , with the little curls combed forward on his forehead . 
His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say , `` Where are you going ? 
You wo n't pass by ; you see that we two clever people have something to say to each other . '' 
Ivan shook . 
`` Get away , miserable idiot . 
What have I to do with you ? '' 
was on the tip of his tongue , but to his profound astonishment he heard himself say , `` Is my father still asleep , or has he waked ? '' 
He asked the question softly and meekly , to his own surprise , and at once , again to his own surprise , sat down on the bench . 
For an instant he felt almost frightened ; he remembered it afterwards . 
Smerdyakov stood facing him , his hands behind his back , looking at him with assurance and almost severity . 
`` His honour is still asleep , '' he articulated deliberately -LRB- `` You were the first to speak , not I , '' he seemed to say -RRB- . 
`` I am surprised at you , sir , '' he added , after a pause , dropping his eyes affectedly , setting his right foot forward , and playing with the tip of his polished boot . 
`` Why are you surprised at me ? '' 
Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly , doing his utmost to restrain himself , and suddenly realising , with disgust , that he was feeling intense curiosity and would not , on any account , have gone away without satisfying it . 
`` Why do n't you go to Tchermashnya , sir ? '' 
Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly . 
`` Why I smile you must understand of yourself , if you are a clever man , '' his screwed-up left eye seemed to say . 
`` Why should I go to Tchermashnya ? '' 
Ivan asked in surprise . 
Smerdyakov was silent again . 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to , '' he said at last , slowly and apparently attaching no significance to his answer . 
`` I put you off with a secondary reason , '' he seemed to suggest , `` simply to say something . '' 
`` Damn you ! 
Speak out what you want ! '' 
Ivan cried angrily at last , passing from meekness to violence . 
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left , pulled himself up , but still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile . 
`` Substantially nothing - but just by way of conversation . '' 
Another silence followed . 
They did not speak for nearly a minute . 
Ivan knew that he ought to get up and show anger , and Smerdyakov stood before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or not . 
So at least it seemed to Ivan . 
At last he moved to get up . 
Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment . 
`` I 'm in an awful position , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't know how to help myself , '' he said resolutely and distinctly , and at his last word he sighed . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again . 
`` They are both utterly crazy , they are no better than little children , '' Smerdyakov went on . 
`` I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin worrying me every minute , ` Has she come ? 
Why has n't she come ? ' 
and so on up till midnight and even after midnight . 
And if Agrafena Alexandrovna does n't come -LRB- for very likely she does not mean to come at all -RRB- then he will be at me again to-morrow morning , ` Why has n't she come ? 
When will she come ? ' 
- as though I were to blame for it . 
On the other side it 's no better . 
As soon as it gets dark , or even before , your brother will appear with his gun in his hands : ` Look out , you rogue , you soup-maker . 
If you miss her and do n't let me know she 's been - I 'll kill you before anyone . ' 
When the night 's over , in the morning , he , too , like Fyodor Pavlovitch , begins worrying me to death . 
` Why has n't she come ? 
Will she come soon ? ' 
And he , too , thinks me to blame because his lady has n't come . 
And every day and every hour they get angrier and angrier , so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a fright . 
I ca n't depend them , sir . '' 
`` And why have you meddled ? 
Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
said Ivan irritably . 
`` How could I help meddling ? 
Though , indeed , I have n't meddled at all , if you want to know the truth of the matter . 
I kept quiet from the very beginning , not daring to answer ; but he pitched on me to be his servant . 
He has had only one thing to say since : ` I 'll kill you , you scoundrel , if you miss her . ' 
I feel certain , sir , that I shall have a long fit to-morrow . '' 
`` What do you mean by ' a long fit ' ? '' 
`` A long fit , lasting a long time - several hours , or perhaps a day or two . 
Once it went on for three days . 
I fell from the garret that time . 
The struggling ceased and then began again , and for three days I could n't come back to my senses . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube , the doctor here , and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy , too ... . 
I might have died . '' 
`` But they say one ca n't tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming . 
What makes you say you will have one to-morrow ? '' 
Ivan inquired , with a peculiar , irritable curiosity . 
`` That 's just so . 
You ca n't tell beforehand . '' 
`` Besides , you fell from the garret then . '' 
`` I climb up to the garret every day . 
I might fall from the garret again to-morrow . 
And , if not , I might fall down the cellar steps . 
I have to go into the cellar every day , too . '' 
Ivan took a long look at him . 
`` You are talking nonsense , I see , and I do n't quite understand you , '' he said softly , but with a sort of menace . 
`` Do you mean to pretend to be ill to-morrow for three days , eh ? '' 
Smerdyakov , who was looking at the ground again , and playing with the toe of his right foot , set the foot down , moved the left one forward , and , grinning , articulated : `` If I were able to play such a trick , that is , pretend to have a fit - and it would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them - I should have a perfect right to use such a means to save myself from death . 
For even if Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill , his honour ca n't blame a sick man for not telling him . 
He 'd be ashamed to . '' 
`` Hang it all ! '' 
Ivan cried , his face working with anger , `` Why are you always in such a funk for your life ? 
All my brother Dmitri 's threats are only hasty words and mean nothing . 
He wo n't kill you ; it 's not you he 'll kill ! '' 
`` He 'd kill me first of all , like a fly . 
But even more than that , I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something crazy to his father . '' 
`` Why should you be taken for an accomplice ? '' 
`` They 'll think I am an accomplice , because I let him know the signals as a great secret . '' 
`` What signals ? 
Whom did you tell ? 
Confound you , speak more plainly . '' 
`` I 'm bound to admit the fact , '' Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure , `` that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business . 
As you know yourself -LRB- if only you do know it -RRB- he has for several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on . 
Of late you 've been going upstairs to your room early every evening , and yesterday you did not come down at all , and so perhaps you do n't know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night , and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he wo n't open to him till he hears his voice . 
But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come , because I wait upon him alone in his room now . 
That 's the arrangement he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began . 
But at night , by his orders , I go away to the lodge so that I do n't get to sleep till midnight , but am on the watch , getting up and walking about the yard , waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come . 
For the last few days he 's been perfectly frantic expecting her . 
What he argues is , she is afraid of him , Dmitri Fyodorovitch -LRB- Mitya , as he calls him -RRB- , ` and so , ' says he , ` she 'll come the back-way , late at night , to me . 
You look out for her , ' says he , 'till midnight and later ; and if she does come , you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden . 
Knock at first twice , rather gently , and then three times more quickly , then , ' says he , ' I shall understand at once that she has come , and will open the door to you quietly . ' 
Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens . 
At first , two knocks , and then , after an interval , another much louder . 
Then he will understand that something has happened suddenly and that I must see him , and he will open to me so that I can go and speak to him . 
That 's all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna ca n't come herself , but sends a message . 
Besides , Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come , too , so I must let him know he is near . 
His honour is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time , I should be bound to let him know at once , knocking three times . 
So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , while the second signal of three knocks means ` something important to tell you . ' 
His honour has shown me them several times and explained them . 
And as in the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his honour , so he 'd open the door without the slightest hesitation and without calling out -LRB- he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud -RRB- . 
Well , those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too , now . '' 
`` How are they known ? 
Did you tell him ? 
How dared you tell him ? '' 
`` It was through fright I did it . 
How could I dare to keep it back from him ? 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day , ` You are deceiving me , you are hiding something from me ! 
I 'll break both your legs for you . ' 
So I told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion , and might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him , but was telling him all I could . '' 
`` If you think that he 'll make use of those signals and try to get in , do n't let him in . '' 
`` But if I should be laid up with a fit , how can I prevent him coming in then , even if I dared prevent him , knowing how desperate he is ? '' 
`` Hang it ! 
How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit , confound you ? 
Are you laughing at me ? '' 
`` How could I dare laugh at you ? 
I am in no laughing humour with this fear on me . 
I feel I am going to have a fit . 
I have a presentiment . 
Fright alone will bring it on . '' 
`` Confound it ! 
If you are laid up , Grigory will be on the watch . 
Let Grigory know beforehand ; he will be sure not to let him in . '' 
`` I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals without orders from my master . 
And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him , he has been ill ever since yesterday , and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow . 
They 've just arranged it . 
It 's a very strange remedy of hers . 
Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a preparation and always keeps it . 
It 's a strong thing made from some herb . 
She has the secret of it , and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago 's so bad he is almost paralysed by it . 
Then she takes a towel , wets it with the stuff , and rubs his whole back for half an hour till it 's quite red and swollen , and what 's left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer ; but not quite all , for on such occasions she leaves some for herself , and drinks it herself . 
And as they never take strong drink , I assure you they both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long time . 
And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after it , but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it . 
So , if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow , they wo n't hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 'll be asleep . '' 
`` What a rigmarole ! 
And it all seems to happen at once , as though it were planned . 
You 'll have a fit and they 'll both be unconscious , '' cried Ivan . 
`` But are n't you trying to arrange it so ? '' 
broke from him suddenly , and he frowned threateningly . 
`` How could I ? 
... And why should I , when it all depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans ? 
... If he means to do anything , he 'll do it ; but if not , I sha n't be thrusting him upon his father . '' 
`` And why should he go to father , especially on the sly , if , as you say yourself , Agrafena Alexandrovna wo n't come at all ? '' 
Ivan went on , turning white with anger . 
`` You say that yourself , and all the while I 've been here , I 've felt sure it was all the old man 's fancy , and the creature wo n't come to him . 
Why should Dmitri break in on him if she does n't come ? 
Speak , I want to know what you are thinking ! '' 
`` You know yourself why he 'll come . 
What 's the use of what I think ? 
His honour will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps , and he 'll dash in , as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms , to see whether she has n't escaped him on the sly . 
He is perfectly well aware , too , that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it , tied up with ribbon and sealed with three seals . 
On it is written in his own hand ` To my angel Grushenka , if she will come , ' to which he added three days later , ` for my little chicken . ' 
There 's no knowing what that might do . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
cried Ivan , almost beside himself . 
`` Dmitri wo n't come to steal money and kill my father to do it . 
He might have killed him yesterday on account of Grushenka , like the frantic , savage fool he is , but he wo n't steal . '' 
`` He is in very great need of money now - the greatest need , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
You do n't know in what need he is , '' Smerdyakov explained , with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness . 
`` He looks on that three thousand as his own , too . 
He said so to me himself . 
` My father still owes me just three thousand , ' he said . 
And besides that , consider , Ivan Fyodorovitch , there is something else perfectly true . 
It 's as good as certain , so to say , that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him , if only she cares to , to marry her - the master himself , I mean , Fyodor Pavlovitch - if only she cares to , and of course she may care to . 
All I 've said is that she wo n't come , but maybe she 's looking for more than that - I mean to be mistress here . 
I know myself that Samsonov , her merchant , was laughing with her about it , telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do . 
And she 's got plenty of sense . 
She would n't marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
So , taking that into consideration , Ivan Fyodorovitch , reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch , would have anything after the master 's death , not a rouble , for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get hold of the whole , all the money there is . 
But if your father were to die now , there 'd be some forty thousand for sure , even for Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so , for he 's made no will ... . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knows all that very well . '' 
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan 's face . 
He suddenly flushed . 
`` Then why on earth , '' he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov , `` do you advise me to go to Tchermashnya ? 
What did you mean by that ? 
If I go away , you see what will happen here . '' 
Ivan drew his breath with difficulty . 
`` Precisely so , '' said Smerdyakov , softly and reasonably , watching Ivan intently , however . 
`` What do you mean by ` precisely so ' ? '' 
Ivan questioned him , with a menacing light in his eyes , restraining himself with difficulty . 
`` I spoke because I felt sorry for you . 
If I were in your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position , '' answered Smerdyakov , with the most candid air looking at Ivan 's flashing eyes . 
They were both silent . 
`` You seem to be a perfect idiot , and what 's more ... an awful scoundrel , too . '' 
Ivan rose suddenly from the bench . 
He was about to pass straight through the gate , but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov . 
Something strange followed . 
Ivan , in a sudden paroxysm , bit his lip , clenched his fists , and , in another minute , would have flung himself on Smerdyakov . 
The latter , anyway , noticed it at the same moment , started , and shrank back . 
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov , and Ivan turned in silence , as it seemed in perplexity , to the gate . 
`` I am going away to Moscow to-morrow , if you care to know - early to-morrow morning . 
That 's all ! '' 
he suddenly said aloud angrily , and wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov . 
`` That 's the best thing you can do , '' he responded , as though he had expected to hear it ; `` except that you can always be telegraphed for from Moscow , if anything should happen here . '' 
Ivan stopped again , and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov . 
But a change had passed over him , too . 
All his familiarity and carelessnes had completely disappeared . 
His face expressed attention and expectation , intent but timid and cringing . 
`` Have n't you something more to say - something to add ? '' 
could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan . 
`` And could n't I be sent for from Tchermashnya , too - in case anything happened ? '' 
Ivan shouted suddenly , for some unknown reason raising his voice . 
`` From Tchermashnya , too ... you could be sent for , '' Smerdyakov muttered , almost in a whisper , looking disconcerted , but gazing intently into Ivan 's eyes . 
`` Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer . 
Is it to save my spending money on the fare , or to save my going so far out of my way , that you insist on Tchermashnya ? '' 
`` Precisely so ... '' muttered Smerdyakov , with a breaking voice . 
He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile , and again made ready to draw back . 
But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh , and went through the gate still laughing . 
Anyone who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart , and he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that instant . 
He moved and walked as though in a nervous frenzy . 
`` It 's Always Worth While Speaking to a Clever Man '' AND in the same nervous frenzy , too , he spoke . 
Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in , he shouted to him , waving his hands , `` I am going upstairs to my room , not in to you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
and passed by , trying not even to look at his father . 
Very possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment ; but such an unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose . 
Receiving this amiable greeting , he stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going upstairs , till he passed out of sight . 
`` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
he promptly asked Smerdyakov , who had followed Ivan . 
`` Angry about something . 
Who can tell ? '' 
the valet muttered evasively . 
`` Confound him ! 
Let him be angry then . 
Bring in the samovar , and get along with you . 
Look sharp ! 
No news ? '' 
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained of to Ivan , all relating to his expected visitor , and these questions we will omit . 
Half an hour later the house was locked , and the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon . 
Now and then he peered out into the darkness , seeing nothing . 
It was very late , but Ivan was still awake and reflecting . 
He sat up late that night , till two o'clock . 
But we will not give an account of his thoughts , and this is not the place to look into that soul - its turn will come . 
And even if one tried , it would be very hard to give an account of them , for there were no thoughts in his brain , but something very vague , and , above all , intense excitement . 
He felt himself that he had lost his bearings . 
He was fretted , too , by all sorts of strange and almost surprising desires ; for instance , after midnight he suddenly had an intense irresistible inclination to go down , open the door , go to the lodge and beat Smerdyakov . 
But if he had been asked why , he could not have given any exact reason , except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than anyone in the world . 
On the other hand , he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror , which he felt positively paralysed his physical powers . 
His head ached and he was giddy . 
A feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart , as though he meant to avenge himself on someone . 
He even hated Alyosha , recalling the conversation he had just had with him . 
At moments he hated himself intensely . 
Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot to think , and wondered greatly at this afterwards , especially as he remembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina Ivanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow , something had whispered in his heart , `` That 's nonsense , you are not going , and it wo n't be so easy to tear yourself away as you are boasting now . '' 
Remembering that night long afterwards , Ivan recalled with peculiar repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily , as though he were afraid of being watched , opened the door , gone out on the staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below , had listened a long while - some five minutes - with a sort of strange curiosity , holding his breath while his heart throbbed . 
And why he had done all this , why he was listening , he could not have said . 
That `` action '' all his life afterwards he called `` infamous , '' and at the bottom of his heart , he thought of it as the basest action of his life . 
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment , but was simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now . 
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room , listening , listening - for someone to knock . 
Ivan went out on the stairs twice to listen like this . 
About two o'clock when everything was quiet , and even Fyodor Pavlovitch had gone to bed , Ivan had got into bed , firmly resolved to fall asleep at once , as he felt fearfully exhausted . 
And he did fall asleep at once , and slept soundly without dreams , but waked early , at seven o'clock , when it was broad daylight . 
Opening his eyes , he was surprised to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous . 
He jumped up at once and dressed quickly ; then dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately . 
His linen had come back from the laundress the previous morning . 
Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure . 
And his departure certainly was sudden . 
Though Ivan had said the day before -LRB- to Katerina Ivanovna , Alyosha , and Smerdyakov -RRB- that he was leaving next day , yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed , or , at least , had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk . 
At last his trunk and bag were ready . 
It was about nine o'clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry , `` Where will your honour take your tea , in your own room or downstairs ? '' 
He looked almost cheerful , but there was about him , about his words and gestures , something hurried and scattered . 
Greeting his father affably , and even inquiring specially after his health , though he did not wait to hear his answer to the end , he announced that he was starting off in an hour to return to Moscow for good , and begged him to send for the horses . 
His father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise , and forgot in an unmannerly way to show regret at losing him . 
Instead of doing so , he flew into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his own . 
`` What a fellow you are ! 
Not to tell me yesterday ! 
Never mind ; we 'll manage it all the same . 
Do me a great service , my dear boy . 
Go to Tchermashnya on the way . 
It 's only to turn to the left from the station at Volovya , only another twelve versts and you come to Tchermashnya . '' 
`` I 'm sorry , I ca n't . 
It 's eighty versts to the railway and the train starts for Moscow at seven o'clock to-night . 
I can only just catch it . '' 
`` You 'll catch it to-morrow or the day after , but to-day turn off to Tchermashnya . 
It wo n't put you out much to humour your father ! 
If I had n't had something to keep me here , I would have run over myself long ago , for I 've some business there in a hurry . 
But here I. . . 
it 's not the time for me to go now ... . 
You see , I 've two pieces of copse land there . 
The Maslovs , an old merchant and his son , will give eight thousand for the timber . 
But last year I just missed a purchaser who would have given twelve . 
There 's no getting anyone about here to buy it . 
The Maslovs have it all their own way . 
One has to take what they 'll give , for no one here dare bid against them . 
The priest at Ilyinskoe wrote to me last Thursday that a merchant called Gorstkin , a man I know , had turned up . 
What makes him valuable is that he is not from these parts , so he is not afraid of the Maslovs . 
He says he will give me eleven thousand for the copse . 
Do you hear ? 
But he 'll only be here , the priest writes , for a week altogether , so you must go at once and make a bargain with him . '' 
`` Well , you write to the priest ; he 'll make the bargain . '' 
`` He ca n't do it . 
He has no eye for business . 
He is a perfect treasure , I 'd give him twenty thousand to take care of for me without a receipt ; but he has no eye for business , he is a perfect child , a crow could deceive him . 
And yet he is a learned man , would you believe it ? 
This Gorstkin looks like a peasant , he wears a blue kaftan , but he is a regular rogue . 
That 's the common complaint . 
He is a liar . 
Sometimes he tells such lies that you wonder why he is doing it . 
He told me the year before last that his wife was dead and that he had married another , and would you believe it , there was not a word of truth in it ? 
His wife has never died at all , she is alive to this day and gives him a beating twice a week . 
So what you have to find out is whether he is lying or speaking the truth when he says he wants to buy it and would give eleven thousand . '' 
`` I shall be no use in such a business . 
I have no eye either . '' 
`` Stay , wait a bit ! 
You will be of use , for I will tell you the signs by which you can judge about Gorstkin . 
I 've done business with him a long time . 
You see , you must watch his beard ; he has a nasty , thin , red beard . 
If his beard shakes when he talks and he gets cross , it 's all right , he is saying what he means , he wants to do business . 
But if he strokes his beard with his left hand and grins - he is trying to cheat you . 
Do n't watch his eyes , you wo n't find out anything from his eyes , he is a deep one , a rogue but watch his beard ! 
I 'll give you a note and you show it to him . 
He 's called Gorstkin , though his real name is Lyagavy ; * but do n't call him so , he will be offended . 
If you come to an understanding with him , and see it 's all right , write here at once . 
You need only write : ` He 's not lying . ' 
Stand out for eleven thousand ; one thousand you can knock off , but not more . 
just think ! 
there 's a difference between eight thousand and eleven thousand . 
It 's as good as picking up three thousand ; it 's not so easy to find a purchaser , and I 'm in desperate need of money . 
Only let me know it 's serious , and I 'll run over and fix it up . 
I 'll snatch the time somehow . 
But what 's the good of my galloping over , if it 's all a notion of the priest 's ? 
Come , will you go ? '' 
* i.e. setter dog . 
`` Oh , I ca n't spare the time . 
You must excuse me . '' 
`` Come , you might oblige your father . 
I sha n't forget it . 
You 've no heart , any of you that 's what it is ! 
What 's a day or two to you ? 
Where are you going now - to Venice ? 
Your Venice will keep another two days . 
I would have sent Alyosha , but what use is Alyosha in a thing like that ? 
I send you just because you are a clever fellow . 
Do you suppose I do n't see that ? 
You know nothing about timber , but you 've got an eye . 
All that is wanted is to see whether the man is in earnest . 
I tell you , watch his beard - if his beard shakes you know he is in earnest . '' 
`` You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself , then ? '' 
cried Ivan , with a malignant smile . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch , or would not catch , the malignancy , but he caught the smile . 
`` Then you 'll go , you 'll go ? 
I 'll scribble the note for you at once . '' 
`` I do n't know whether I shall go . 
I do n't know . 
I 'll decide on the way . '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
Decide at once . 
My dear fellow , decide ! 
If you settle the matter , write me a line ; give it to the priest and he 'll send it on to me at once . 
And I wo n't delay you more than that . 
You can go to Venice . 
The priest will give you horses back to Volovya station . '' 
The old man was quite delighted . 
He wrote the note , and sent for the horses . 
A light lunch was brought in , with brandy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch was pleased , he usually became expansive , but to-day he seemed to restrain himself . 
Of Dmitri , for instance , he did not say a word . 
He was quite unmoved by the parting , and seemed , in fact , at a loss for something to say . 
Ivan noticed this particularly . 
`` He must be bored with me , '' he thought . 
Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps , the old man began to fuss about . 
He would have kissed him , but Ivan made haste to hold out his hand , obviously avoiding the kiss . 
His father saw it at once , and instantly pulled himself up . 
`` Well , good luck to you , good luck to you ! '' 
he repeated from the steps . 
`` You 'll come again some time or other ? 
Mind you do come . 
I shall always be glad to see you . 
Well , Christ be with you ! '' 
Ivan got into the carriage . 
`` Good-bye , Ivan ! 
Do n't be too hard on me ! '' 
the father called for the last time . 
The whole household came out to take leave - Smerdyakov , Marfa and Grigory . 
Ivan gave them ten roubles each . 
When he had seated himself in the carriage , Smerdyakov jumped up to arrange the rug . 
`` You see ... I am going to Tchermashnya , '' broke suddenly from Ivan . 
Again , as the day before , the words seemed to drop of themselves , and he laughed , too , a peculiar , nervous laugh . 
He remembered it long after . 
`` It 's a true saying then , that ` it 's always worth while speaking to a clever man , ' '' answered Smerdyakov firmly , looking significantly at Ivan . 
The carriage rolled away . 
Nothing was clear in Ivan 's soul , but he looked eagerly around him at the fields , at the hills , at the trees , at a flock of geese flying high overhead in the bright sky . 
And all of a sudden he felt very happy . 
He tried to talk to the driver , and he felt intensely interested in an answer the peasant made him ; but a minute later he realised that he was not catching anything , and that he had not really even taken in the peasant 's answer . 
He was silent , and it was pleasant even so . 
The air was pure and cool , sky bright . 
The images of Alyosha and Katerina Ivanovna floated into his mind . 
But he softly smiled , blew softly on the friendly phantoms , and they flew away . 
`` There 's plenty of time for them , '' he thought . 
They reached the station quickly , changed horses , and galloped to Volovya `` Why is it worth while speaking to a clever man ? 
What did he mean by that ? '' 
The thought seemed suddenly to clutch at his breathing . 
`` And why did I tell him I was going to Tchermashnya ? '' 
They reached Volovya station . 
Ivan got out of the carriage , and the drivers stood round him bargaining over the journey of twelve versts to Tchermashnya . 
He told them to harness the horses . 
He went into the station house , looked round , glanced at the overseer 's wife , and suddenly went back to the entrance . 
`` I wo n't go to Tchermashnya . 
Am I too late to reach the railway by seven , brothers ? '' 
`` We shall just do it . 
Shall we get the carriage out ? '' 
`` At once . 
Will any one of you be going to the town to-morrow ? '' 
`` To be sure . 
Mitri here will . '' 
`` Can you do me a service , Mitri ? 
Go to my father 's , to Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , and tell him I have n't gone to Tchermashnya . 
Can you ? '' 
`` Of course I can . 
I 've known Fyodor Pavlovitch a long time . '' 
`` And here 's something for you , for I dare say he wo n't give you anything , '' said Ivan , laughing gaily . 
`` You may depend on it he wo n't . '' 
Mitri laughed too . 
`` Thank you , sir . 
I 'll be sure to do it . '' 
At seven o'clock Ivan got into the train and set off to Moscow . 
`` Away with the past . 
I 've done with the old world for ever , and may I have no news , no echo , from it . 
To a new life , new places , and no looking back ! '' 
But instead of delight his soul was filled with such gloom , and his heart ached with such anguish , as he had never known in his life before . 
He was thinking all the night . 
The train flew on , and only at daybreak , when he was approaching Moscow , he suddenly roused himself from his meditation . 
`` I am a scoundrel , '' he whispered to himself . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off . 
For two hours afterwards he felt almost happy , and sat drinking brandy . 
But suddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant for everyone in the house , and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch 's equanimity at once . 
Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and fell down from the top of the steps . 
Fortunately , Marfa Ignatyevna was in the yard and heard him in time . 
She did not see the fall , but heard his scream - the strange , peculiar scream , long familiar to her - the scream of the epileptic falling in a fit . 
They could not tell whether the fit had come on him at the moment he was decending the steps , so that he must have fallen unconscious , or whether it was the fall and the shock that had caused the fit in Smerdyakov , who was known to be liable to them . 
They found him at the bottom of the cellar steps , writhing in convulsions and foaming at the mouth . 
It was thought at first that he must have broken something - an arm or a leg - and hurt himself , but `` God had preserved him , '' as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it - nothing of the kind had happened . 
But it was difficult to get him out of the cellar . 
They asked the neighbours to help and managed it somehow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at the whole ceremony . 
He helped , evidently alarmed and upset . 
The sick man did not regain consciousness ; the convulsions ceased for a time , but then began again , and everyone concluded that the same thing would happen , as had happened a year before , when he accidently fell from the garret . 
They remembered that ice been put on his head then . 
There was still ice in the cellar , and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up . 
In the evening , Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube , who arrived at once . 
He was a most estimable old man , and the most careful and conscientious doctor in the province . 
After careful examination , he concluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have serious consequences ; that meanwhile he , Herzenstube , did not fully understand it , but that by to-morrow morning , if the present remedies were unavailing , he would venture to try something else . 
The invalid was taken to the lodge , to a room next to Grigory 's and Marfa Ignatyevna 's . 
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with that day . 
Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner , and the soup , compared with Smerdyakov 's , was `` no better than dish-water , '' and the fowl was so dried up that it was impossible to masticate it . 
To her master 's bitter , though deserved , reproaches , Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a very old one to begin with , and that she had never been trained as a cook . 
In the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch ; he was informed that Grigory , who had not been well for the last three days , was completely laid up by his lumbago . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea as early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house . 
He was in terrible excitement and suspense . 
That evening he reckoned on Grushenka 's coming almost as a certainty . 
He had received from Smerdyakov that morning an assurance `` that she had promised to come without fail . '' 
The incorrigible old man 's heart throbbed with excitement ; he paced up and down his empty rooms listening . 
He had to be on the alert . 
Dmitri might be on the watch for her somewhere , and when she knocked on the window -LRB- Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her where and how to knock -RRB- the door must be opened at once . 
She must not be a second in the passage , for fear which God forbid ! 
- that she should be frightened and run away . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of , but never had his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes . 
This time he could say almost certainly that she would come ! 
The Russian Monk . 
Father Zossima and His Visitors WHEN with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder 's cell , he stood still almost astonished . 
Instead of a sick man at his last gasp , perhaps unconscious , as he had feared to find him , he saw him sitting up in his chair and , though weak and exhausted , his face was bright and cheerful , he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyful conversation . 
But he had only got up from his bed a quarter of an hour before Alyosha 's arrival ; his visitors had gathered together in his cell earlier , waiting for him to wake , having received a most confident assurance from Father Paissy that `` the teacher would get up , and as he had himself promised in the morning , converse once more with those dear to his heart . '' 
This promise and indeed every word of the dying elder Father Paissy put implicit trust in . 
If he had seen him unconscious , if he had seen him breathe his last , and yet had his promise that he would rise up and say good-bye to him , he would not have believed perhaps even in death , but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfil his promise . 
In the morning as he lay down to sleep , Father Zossima had told him positively : `` I shall not die without the delight of another conversation with you , beloved of my heart . 
I shall look once more on your dear face and pour out my heart to you once again . '' 
The monks , who had gathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima , had all been his devoted friends for many years . 
There were four of them : Father Iosif and Father Paissy , Father Mihail the warden of the hermitage , a man not very old and far from being learned . 
He was of humble origin , of strong will and steadfast faith , of austere appearance , but of deep tenderness , though he obviously concealed it as though he were almost ashamed of it . 
The fourth , Father Anfim , was a very old and humble little monk of the poorest peasant class . 
He was almost illiterate , and very quiet , scarcely speaking to anyone . 
He was the humblest of the humble , and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awful beyond the scope of his intelligence . 
Father Zossima had a great affection for this timorous man , and always treated him with marked respect , though perhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less , in spite of the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him . 
That was very long ago , forty years before , when Father Zossima first began his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma , and when , shortly after , he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage to collect alms for their poor monastery . 
The whole party were in the bedroom which , as we mentioned before , was very small , so that there was scarcely room for the four of them -LRB- in addition to Porfiry , the novice , who stood -RRB- to sit round Father Zossima on chairs brought from the sitting room . 
It was already beginning to get dark , the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before the ikons . 
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway , Father Zossima smiled at him joyfully and held out his hand . 
`` Welcome , my quiet one , welcome , my dear , here you are too . 
I knew you would come . '' 
Alyosha went up to him , bowed down before him to the ground and wept . 
Something surged up from his heart , his soul was quivering , he wanted to sob . 
`` Come , do n't weep over me yet , '' Father Zossima smiled , laying his right hand on his head . 
`` You see I am sitting up talking ; maybe I shall live another twenty years yet , as that dear good woman from Vishegorye , with her little Lizaveta in her arms , wished me yesterday . 
God bless the mother and the little girl Lizaveta , '' he crossed himself . 
`` Porfiry , did you take her offering where I told you ? '' 
He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good-humoured woman to be given `` to someone poorer than me . '' 
Such offerings , always of money gained by personal toil , are made by way of penance voluntarily undertaken . 
The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow , whose house had been burnt down lately , and who after the fire had gone with her children begging alms . 
Porfiry hastened to reply that he had given the money , as he had been instructed , `` from an unknown benefactress . '' 
`` Get up , my dear boy , '' the elder went on to Alyosha . 
`` Let me look at you . 
Have you been home and seen your brother ? '' 
It seemed strange to Alyosha that he asked so confidently and precisely , about one of his brothers only - but which one ? 
Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday and to-day for the sake of that brother . 
`` I have seen one of my brothers , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` I mean the elder one , to whom I bowed down . '' 
`` I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste to find him , go again to-morrow and make haste , leave everything and make haste . 
Perhaps you may still have time to prevent something terrible . 
I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in store for him . '' 
He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering . 
The words were strange . 
Father Iosif , who had witnessed the scene yesterday , exchanged glances with Father Paissy . 
Alyosha could not resist asking : `` Father and teacher , '' he began with extreme emotion , `` your words are too obscure ... . 
What is this suffering in store for him ? '' 
`` Do n't inquire . 
I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as though his whole future were expressed in his eyes . 
A look came into his eyes - so that I was instantly horror-stricken at what that man is preparing for himself . 
Once or twice in my life I 've seen such a look in a man 's face ... reflecting as it were his future fate , and that fate , alas , came to pass . 
I sent you to him , Alexey , for I thought your brotherly face would help him . 
But everything and all our fates are from the Lord . 
` Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone ; but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit . ' 
Remember that . 
You , Alexey , I 've many times silently blessed for your face , know that , '' added the elder with a gentle smile . 
`` This is what I think of you , you will go forth from these walls , but will live like a monk in the world . 
You will have many enemies , but even your foes will love you . 
Life will bring you many misfortunes , but you will find your happiness in them , and will bless life and will make others bless it - which is what matters most . 
Well , that is your character . 
Fathers and teachers , '' he addressed his friends with a tender smile , `` I have never till to-day told even him why the face of this youth is so dear to me . 
Now I will tell you . 
His face has been as it were a remembrance and a prophecy for me . 
At the dawn of my life when I was a child I had an elder brother who died before my eyes at seventeen . 
And later on in the course of my life I gradually became convinced that that brother had been for a guidance and a sign from on high for me . 
For had he not come into my life , I should never perhaps , so I fancy at least , have become a monk and entered on this precious path . 
He appeared first to me in my childhood , and here , at the end of my pilgrimage , he seems to have come to me over again . 
It is marvellous , fathers and teachers , that Alexey , who has some , though not a great , resemblance in face , seems to me so like him spiritually , that many times I have taken him for that young man , my brother , mysteriously come back to me at the end of my pilgrimage , as a reminder and an inspiration . 
So that I positively wondered at so strange a dream in myself . 
Do you hear this , Porfiry ? '' 
he turned to the novice who waited on him . 
`` Many times I 've seen in your face as it were a look of mortification that I love Alexey more than you . 
Now you know why that was so , but I love you too , know that , and many times I grieved at your mortification . 
I should like to tell you , dear friends , of that youth , my brother , for there has been no presence in my life more precious , more significant and touching . 
My heart is full of tenderness , and I look at my whole life at this moment as though living through it again . '' 
Here I must observe that this last conversation of Father Zossima with the friends who visited him on the last day of his life has been partly preserved in writing . 
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov wrote it down from memory , some time after his elder 's death . 
But whether this was only the conversation that took place then , or whether he added to it his notes of parts of former conversations with his teacher , I can not determine . 
In his account , Father Zossima 's talk goes on without interruption , as though he told his life to his friends in the form of a story , though there is no doubt , from other accounts of it , that the conversation that evening was general . 
Though the guests did not interrupt Father Zossima much , yet they too talked , perhaps even told something themselves . 
Besides , Father Zossima could not have carried on an uninterrupted narrative , for he was sometimes gasping for breath , his voice failed him , and he even lay down to rest on his bed , though he did not fall asleep and his visitors did not leave their seats . 
Once or twice the conversation was interrupted by Father Paissy 's reading the Gospel . 
It is worthy of note , too , that no one of them supposed that he would die that night , for on that evening of his life after his deep sleep in the day he seemed suddenly to have found new strength , which kept him up through this long conversation . 
It was like a last effort of love which gave him marvellous energy ; only for a little time , however , for his life was cut short immediately . . 
But of that later . 
I will only add now that I have preferred to confine myself to the account given by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
It will be shorter and not so fatiguing , though , of course , as I must repeat , Alyosha took a great deal from previous conversations and added them to it . 
Notes of the Life of the deceased Priest and Monk , the Elder Zossima , taken from his own words by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES -LRB- a -RRB- Father Zossima 's Brother . 
Beloved fathers and teachers , I was born in a distant province in the north , in the town of V. My father was a gentleman by birth , but of no great consequence or position . 
He died when I was only two years old , and I do n't remember him at all . 
He left my mother a small house built of wood , and a fortune , not large , but sufficient to keep her and her children in comfort . 
There were two of us , my elder brother Markel and I . 
He was eight years older than I was , of hasty , irritable temperament , but kind-hearted and never ironical . 
He was remarkably silent , especially at home with me , his mother , and the servants . 
He did well at school , but did not get on with his school-fellows , though he never quarrelled , at least so my mother has told me . 
Six months before his death , when he was seventeen , he made friends with a political exile who had been banished from Moscow to our town for freethinking , and led a solitary existence there . 
He was a good scholar who had gained distinction in philosophy in the university . 
Something made him take a fancy to Markel , and he used to ask him to see him . 
The young man would spend whole evenings with him during that winter , till the exile was summoned to Petersburg to take up his post again at his own request , as he had powerful friends . 
It was the beginning of Lent , and Markel would not fast , he was rude and laughed at it . 
`` That 's all silly twaddle , and there is no God , '' he said , horrifying my mother , the servants , and me too . 
For though I was only nine , I too was aghast at hearing such words . 
We had four servants , all serfs . 
I remember my mother selling one of the four , the cook Afimya , who was lame and elderly , for sixty paper roubles , and hiring a free servant to take her place . 
In the sixth week in Lent , my brother , who was never strong and had a tendency to consumption , was taken ill . 
He was tall but thin and delicate-looking , and of very pleasing countenance . 
I suppose he caught cold , anyway the doctor , who came , soon whispered to my mother that it was galloping consumption , that he would not live through the spring . 
My mother began weeping , and , careful not to alarm my brother , she entreated him to go to church , to confess and take the sacrament , as he was still able to move about . 
This made him angry , and he said something profane about the church . 
He grew thoughtful , however ; he guessed at once that he was seriously ill , and that that was why his mother was begging him to confess and take the sacrament . 
He had been aware , indeed , for a long time past , that he was far from well , and had a year before coolly observed at dinner to your mother and me , `` My life wo n't be long among you , I may not live another year , '' which seemed now like a prophecy . 
Three days passed and Holy Week had come . 
And on Tuesday morning my brother began going to church . 
`` I am doing this simply for your sake , mother , to please and comfort you , '' he said . 
My mother wept with joy and grief . 
`` His end must be near , '' she thought , `` if there 's such a change in him . '' 
But he was not able to go to church long , he took to his bed , so he had to confess and take the sacrament at home . 
It was a late Easter , and the days were bright , fine , and full of fragrance . 
I remember he used to cough all night and sleep badly , but in the morning he dressed and tried to sit up in an arm-chair . 
That 's how I remember him sitting , sweet and gentle , smiling , his face bright and joyous , in spite of his illness . 
A marvellous change passed over him , his spirit seemed transformed . 
The old nurse would come in and say , `` Let me light the lamp before the holy image , my dear . '' 
And once he would not have allowed it and would have blown it out . 
`` Light it , light it , dear , I was a wretch to have prevented you doing it . 
You are praying when you light the lamp , and I am praying when I rejoice seeing you . 
So we are praying to the same God . '' 
Those words seemed strange to us , and mother would go to her room and weep , but when she went in to him she wiped her eyes and looked cheerful . 
`` Mother , do n't weep , darling , '' he would say , `` I 've long to live yet , long to rejoice with you , and life is glad and joyful . '' 
`` Ah , dear boy , how can you talk of joy when you lie feverish at night , coughing as though you would tear yourself to pieces . '' 
`` Do n't cry , mother , '' he would answer , `` life is paradise , and we are all in paradise , but we wo n't see it ; if we would , we should have heaven on earth the next day . '' 
Everyone wondered at his words , he spoke so strangely and positively ; we were all touched and wept . 
Friends came to see us . 
`` Dear ones , '' he would say to them , `` what have I done that you should love me so , how can you love anyone like me , and how was it I did not know , I did not appreciate it before ? '' 
When the servants came in to him he would say continually , `` Dear , kind people , why are you doing so much for me , do I deserve to be waited on ? 
If it were God 's will for me to live , I would wait on you , for all men should wait on one another . '' 
Mother shook her head as she listened . 
`` My darling , it 's your illness makes you talk like that . '' 
`` Mother darling , '' he would say , `` there must be servants and masters , but if so I will be the servant of my servants , the same as they are to me . 
And another thing , mother , every one of us has sinned against all men , and I more than any . '' 
Mother positively smiled at that , smiled through her tears . 
`` Why , how could you have sinned against all men , more than all ? 
Robbers and murderers have done that , but what sin have you committed yet , that you hold yourself more guilty than all ? '' 
`` Mother , little heart of mine , '' he said -LRB- he had begun using such strange caressing words at that time -RRB- , `` little heart of mine , my joy , believe me , everyone is really responsible to all men for all men and for everything . 
I do n't know how to explain it to you , but I feel it is so , painfully even . 
And how is it we went on then living , getting angry and not knowing ? '' 
So he would get up every day , more and more sweet and joyous and full of love . 
When the doctor , an old German called Eisenschmidt , came : `` Well , doctor , have I another day in this world ? '' 
he would ask , joking . 
`` You 'll live many days yet , '' the doctor would answer , `` and months and years too . '' 
`` Months and years ! '' 
he would exclaim . 
`` Why reckon the days ? 
One day is enough for a man to know all happiness . 
My dear ones , why do we quarrel , try to outshine each other and keep grudges against each other ? 
Let 's go straight into the garden , walk and play there , love , appreciate , and kiss each other , and glorify life . '' 
`` Your son can not last long , '' the doctor told my mother , as she accompanied him the door . 
`` The disease is affecting his brain . '' 
The windows of his room looked out into the garden , and our garden was a shady one , with old trees in it which were coming into bud . 
The first birds of spring were flitting in the branches , chirruping and singing at the windows . 
And looking at them and admiring them , he began suddenly begging their forgiveness too : `` Birds of heaven , happy birds , forgive me , for I have sinned against you too . '' 
None of us could understand that at the time , but he shed tears of joy . 
`` Yes , '' he said , `` there was such a glory of God all about me : birds , trees , meadows , sky ; only I lived in shame and dishonoured it all and did not notice the beauty and glory . '' 
`` You take too many sins on yourself , '' mother used to say , weeping . 
`` Mother , darling , it 's for joy , not for grief I am crying . 
Though I ca n't explain it to you , I like to humble myself before them , for I do n't know how to love them enough . 
If I have sinned against everyone , yet all forgive me , too , and that 's heaven . 
Am I not in heaven now ? '' 
And there was a great deal more I do n't remember . 
I remember I went once into his room when there was no one else there . 
It was a bright evening , the sun was setting , and the whole room was lighted up . 
He beckoned me , and I went up to him . 
He put his hands on my shoulders and looked into my face tenderly , lovingly ; he said nothing for a minute , only looked at me like that . 
`` Well , '' he said , `` run and play now , enjoy life for me too . '' 
I went out then and ran to play . 
And many times in my life afterwards I remembered even with tears how he told me to enjoy life for him too . 
There were many other marvellous and beautiful sayings of his , though we did not understand them at the time . 
He died the third week after Easter . 
He was fully conscious though he could not talk ; up to his last hour he did not change . 
He looked happy , his eyes beamed and sought us , he smiled at us , beckoned us . 
There was a great deal of talk even in the town about his death . 
I was impressed by all this at the time , but not too much so , though I cried a good deal at his funeral . 
I was young then , a child , but a lasting impression , a hidden feeling of it all , remained in my heart , ready to rise up and respond when the time came . 
So indeed it happened . 
-LRB- b -RRB- Of the Holy Scriptures in the Life of Father Zossima . 
I was left alone with my mother . 
Her friends began advising her to send me to Petersburg as other parents did . 
`` You have only one son now , '' they said , `` and have a fair income , and you will be depriving him perhaps of a brilliant career if you keep him here . '' 
They suggested I should be sent to Petersburg to the Cadet Corps , that I might afterwards enter the Imperial Guard . 
My mother hesitated for a long time , it was awful to part with her only child , but she made up her mind to it at last , though not without many tears , believing she was acting for my happiness . 
She brought me to Petersburg and put me into the Cadet Corps , and I never saw her again . 
For she too died three years afterwards . 
She spent those three years mourning and grieving for both of us . 
From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but precious memories , for there are no memories more precious than those of early childhood in one 's first home . 
And that is almost always so if there is any love and harmony in the family at all . 
Indeed , precious memories may remain even of a bad home , if only the heart knows how to find what is precious . 
With my memories of home I count , too , my memories of the Bible , which , child as I was , I was very eager to read at home . 
I had a book of Scripture history then with excellent pictures , called A Hundred and Four Stories from the Old and New Testament , and I learned to read from it . 
I have it lying on my shelf now ; I keep it as a precious relic of the past . 
But even before I learned to read , I remember first being moved to devotional feeling at eight years old . 
My mother took me alone to mass -LRB- I do n't remember where my brother was at the time -RRB- on the Monday before Easter . 
It was a fine day , and I remember to-day , as though I saw it now , how the incense rose from the censer and softly floated upwards and , overhead in the cupola , mingled in rising waves with the sunlight that streamed in at the little window . 
I was stirred by the sight , and for the first time in my life I consciously received the seed of God 's word in my heart . 
A youth came out into the middle of the church carrying a big book , so large that at the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it . 
He laid it on the reading desk , opened it , and began reading , and suddenly for the first time I understood something read in the church of God . 
In the land of Uz , there lived a man , righteous and God-fearing , and he had great wealth , so many camels , so many sheep and asses , and his children feasted , and he loved them very much and prayed for them . 
`` It may be that my sons have sinned in their feasting . '' 
Now the devil came before the Lord together with the sons of God , and said to the Lord that he had gone up and down the earth and under the earth . 
`` And hast thou considered my servant Job ? '' 
God asked of him . 
And God boasted to the devil , pointing to His great and holy servant . 
And the devil laughed at God 's words . 
`` Give him over to me and Thou wilt see that Thy servant will murmur against Thee and curse Thy name . '' 
And God gave up the just man He loved so , to the devil . 
And the devil smote his children and his cattle and scattered his wealth , all of a sudden like a thunderbolt from heaven . 
And Job rent his mantle and fell down upon the ground and cried aloud , `` Naked came I out of my mother 's womb , and naked shall I return into the earth ; the Lord gave and the Lord has taken away . 
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever . '' 
Fathers and teachers , forgive my tears now , for all my childhood rises up again before me , and I breathe now as I breathed then , with the breast of a little child of eight , and I feel as I did then , awe and wonder and gladness . 
The camels at that time caught my imagination , and Satan , who talked like that with God , and God who gave His servant up to destruction , and His servant crying out : `` Blessed be Thy name although Thou dost punish me , '' and then the soft and sweet singing in the church : `` Let my prayer rise up before Thee , '' and again incense from the priest 's censer and the kneeling and the prayer . 
Ever since then - only yesterday I took it up - I 've never been able to read that sacred tale without tears . 
And how much that is great , mysterious and unfathomable there is in it ! 
Afterwards I heard the words of mockery and blame , proud words , `` How could God give up the most loved of His saints for the diversion of the devil , take from him his children , smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruption from his sores with a potsherd - and for no object except to boast to the devil ` See what My saint can suffer for My sake . ' 
`` But the greatness of it lies just in the fact that it is a mystery - that the passing earthly show and the eternal verity are brought together in it . 
In the face of the earthly truth , the eternal truth is accomplished . 
The Creator , just as on the first days of creation He ended each day with praise : `` That is good that I have created , '' looks upon Job and again praises His creation . 
And Job , praising the Lord , serves not only Him but all His creation for generations and generations , and for ever and ever , since for that he was ordained . 
Good heavens , what a book it is , and what lessons there are in it ! 
What a book the Bible is , what a miracle , what strength is given with it to man ! 
It is like a mould cast of the world and man and human nature , everything is there , and a law for everything for all the ages . 
And what mysteries are solved and revealed ! 
God raises Job again , gives him wealth again . 
Many years pass by , and he has other children and loves them . 
But how could he love those new ones when those first children are no more , when he has lost them ? 
Remembering them , how could he be fully happy with those new ones , however dear the new ones might be ? 
But he could , he could . 
It 's the great mystery of human life that old grief passes gradually into quiet , tender joy . 
The mild serenity of age takes the place of the riotous blood of youth . 
I bless the rising sun each day , and , as before , my heart sings to meet it , but now I love even more its setting , its long slanting rays and the soft , tender , gentle memories that come with them , the dear images from the whole of my long , happy life - and over all the Divine Truth , softening , reconciling , forgiving ! 
My life is ending , I know that well , but every day that is left me I feel how earthly life is in touch with a new infinite , unknown , but approaching life , the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture , my mind glowing and my heart weeping with joy . 
Friends and teachers , I have heard more than once , and of late one may hear it more often , that the priests , and above all the village priests , are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and their humiliating lot . 
They plainly state , even in print - I 've read it myself - that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people because of the smallness of their means , and if Lutherans and heretics come and lead the flock astray , they let them lead them astray because they have so little to live upon . 
May the Lord increase the sustenance that is so precious to them , for their complaint is just , too . 
But of a truth I say , if anyone is to blame in the matter , half the fault is ours . 
For he may be short of time , he may say truly that he is overwhelmed all the while with work and services , but still it 's not all the time , even he has an hour a week to remember God . 
And he does not work the whole year round . 
Let him gather round him once a week , some hour in the evening , if only the children at first - the fathers will hear of it and they too will begin to come . 
There 's no need to build halls for this , let him take them into his own cottage . 
They wo n't spoil his cottage , they would only be there one hour . 
Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand words or superciliousness , without condescension to them , but gently and kindly , being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with attention , loving the words himself , only stopping from time to time to explain words that are not understood by the peasants . 
Do n't be anxious , they will understand everything , the orthodox heart will understand all ! 
Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah , about Isaac and Rebecca , of how Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said , `` This place is holy '' - and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant . 
Let him read , especially to the children , how the brothers sold Joseph , the tender boy , the dreamer and prophet , into bondage , and told their father that a wild beast had devoured him , and showed him his blood-stained clothes . 
Let him read them how the brothers afterwards journeyed into Egypt for corn , and Joseph , already a great ruler , unrecognised by them , tormented them , accused them , kept his brother Benjamin , and all through love : `` I love you , and loving you I torment you . '' 
For he remembered all his life how they had sold him to the merchants in the burning desert by the well , and how , wringing his hands , he had wept and besought his brothers not to sell him as a slave in a strange land . 
And how , seeing them again after many years , he loved them beyond measure , but he harassed and tormented them in love . 
He left them at last not able to bear the suffering of his heart , flung himself on his bed and wept . 
Then , wiping his tears away , he went out to them joyful and told them , `` Brothers , I am your brother Joseph '' Let him read them further how happy old Jacob was on learning that his darling boy was still alive , and how he went to Egypt leaving his own country , and died in a foreign land , bequeathing his great prophecy that had lain mysteriously hidden in his meek and timid heart all his life , that from his offspring , from Judah , will come the great hope of the world , the Messiah and Saviour . 
Fathers and teachers , forgive me and do n't be angry , that like a little child I 've been babbling of what you know long ago , and can teach me a hundred times more skilfully . 
I only speak from rapture , and forgive my tears , for I love the Bible . 
Let him too weep , the priest of God , and be sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response . 
Only a little tiny seed is needed - drop it into the heart of the peasant and it wo n't die , it will live in his soul all his life , it will be hidden in the midst of his darkness and sin , like a bright spot , like a great reminder . 
And there 's no need of much teaching or explanation , he will understand it all simply . 
Do you suppose that the peasants do n't understand ? 
Try reading them the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti ; or the miraculous story of Jonah in the whale . 
Do n't forget either the parables of Our Lord , choose especially from the Gospel of St. Luke -LRB- that is what I did -RRB- , and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul -LRB- that you must n't leave out on any account -RRB- , and from the Lives of the Saints , for instance , the life of Alexey , the man of God and , greatest of all , the happy martyr and the seer of God , Mary of Egypt - and you will penetrate their hearts with these simple tales . 
Give one hour a week to it in spite of your poverty , only one little hour . 
And you will see for yourselves that our people is gracious and grateful , and will repay you a hundred foId . 
Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words they have heard from him , they will of their own accord help him in his fields and in his house and will treat him with more respect than before - so that it will even increase his worldly well-being too . 
The thing is so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words , for fear of being laughed at , and yet how true it is ! 
One who does not believe in God will not believe in God 's people . 
He who believes in God 's people will see His Holiness too , even though he had not believed in it till then . 
Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert our atheists , who have torn themselves away from their native soil . 
And what is the use of Christ 's words , unless we set an example ? 
The people is lost without the Word of God , for its soul is athirst for the Word and for all that is good . 
In my youth , long ago , nearly forty years ago , I travelled all over Russia with Father Anfim , collecting funds for our monastery , and we stayed one night on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen . 
A good looking peasant lad , about eighteen , joined us ; he had to hurry back next morning to pull a merchant 's barge along the bank . 
I noticed him looking straight before him with clear and tender eyes . 
It was a bright , warm , still , July night , a cool mist rose from the broad river , we could hear the plash of a fish , the birds were still , all was hushed and beautiful , everything praying to God . 
Only we two were not sleeping , the lad and I , and we talked of the beauty of this world of God 's and of the great mystery of it . 
Every blade of grass , every insect , ant , and golden bee , all so marvellously know their path , though they have not intelligence , they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish it themselves . 
I saw the dear lad 's heart was moved . 
He told me that he loved the forest and the forest birds . 
He was a bird-catcher , knew the note of each of them , could call each bird . 
`` I know nothing better than to be in the forest , '' said he , `` though all things are good . '' 
`` Truly , '' I answered him , `` all things are good and fair , because all is truth . 
Look , '' said I , `` at the horse , that great beast that is so near to man ; or the lowly , pensive ox , which feeds him and works for him ; look at their faces , what meekness , what devotion to man , who often beats them mercilessly . 
What gentleness , what confidence and what beauty ! 
It 's touching to know that there 's no sin in them , for all , all except man , is sinless , and Christ has been with them before us . '' 
`` Why , '' asked the boy , `` is Christ with them too ? '' 
`` It can not but be so , '' said I , `` since the Word is for all . 
All creation and all creatures , every leaf is striving to the Word , singing glory to God , weeping to Christ , unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery of their sinless life . 
Yonder , '' said I , `` in the forest wanders the dreadful bear , fierce and menacing , and yet innocent in it . '' 
And I told him how once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell in the wood . 
And the great saint pitied him , went up to him without fear and gave him a piece of bread . 
`` Go along , '' said he , `` Christ be with you , '' and the savage beast walked away meekly and obediently , doing no harm . 
And the lad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint , and that Christ was with him too . 
`` Ah , '' said he , `` how good that is , how good and beautiful is all God 's work ! '' 
He sat musing softly and sweetly . 
I saw he understood . 
And he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep . 
May God bless youth ! 
And I prayed for him as I went to sleep . 
Lord , send peace and light to Thy people ! 
-LRB- c -RRB- Recollections of Father Zossima 's Youth before he became a Monk . 
The Duel I SPENT a long time , almost eight years , in the military cadet school at Petersburg , and in the novelty of my surroundings there , many of my childish impressions grew dimmer , though I forgot nothing . 
I picked up so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel , absurd , almost savage creature . 
A surface polish of courtesy and society manners I did acquire together with the French language . 
But we all , myself included , looked upon the soldiers in our service as cattle . 
