Since he has openly abandoned his betrothed for her , he does n't despise her . 
There 's something here , my dear boy , that you do n't understand yet . 
A man will fall in love with some beauty , with a woman 's body , or even with a part of a woman 's body -LRB- a sensualist can understand that -RRB- , and he 'll abandon his own children for her , sell his father and mother , and his country , Russia , too . 
If he 's honest , he 'll steal ; if he 's humane , he 'll murder ; if he 's faithful , he 'll deceive . 
Pushkin , the poet of women 's feet , sung of their feet in his verse . 
Others do n't sing their praises , but they ca n't look at their feet without a thrill - and it 's not only their feet . 
Contempt 's no help here , brother , even if he did despise Grushenka . 
He does , but he ca n't tear himself away . '' 
`` I understand that , '' Alyosha jerked out suddenly . 
`` Really ? 
Well , I dare say you do understand , since you blurt it out at the first word , '' said Rakitin , malignantly . 
`` That escaped you unawares , and the confession 's the more precious . 
So it 's a familiar subject ; you 've thought about it already , about sensuality , I mean ! 
Oh , you virgin soul ! 
You 're a quiet one , Alyosha , you 're a saint , I know , but the devil only knows what you 've thought about , and what you know already ! 
You are pure , but you 've been down into the depths ... . 
I 've been watching you a long time . 
You 're a Karamazov yourself ; you 're a thorough Karamazov - no doubt birth and selection have something to answer for . 
You 're a sensualist from your father , a crazy saint from your mother . 
Why do you tremble ? 
Is it true , then ? 
Do you know , Grushenka has been begging me to bring you along . 
` I 'll pull off his cassock , ' she says . 
You ca n't think how she keeps begging me to bring you . 
I wondered why she took such an interest in you . 
Do you know , she 's an extraordinary woman , too ! '' 
`` Thank her and say I 'm not coming , '' said Alyosha , with a strained smile . 
`` Finish what you were saying , Misha . 
I 'll tell you . 
my idea after . '' 
`` There 's nothing to finish . 
It 's all clear . 
It 's the same old tune , brother . 
If even you are a sensualist at heart , what of your brother , Ivan ? 
He 's a Karamazov , too . 
What is at the root of all you Karamazovs is that you 're all sensual , grasping and crazy ! 
Your brother Ivan writes theological articles in joke , for some idiotic , unknown motive of his own , though he 's an atheist , and he admits it 's a fraud himself - that 's your brother Ivan . 
He 's trying to get Mitya 's betrothed for himself , and I fancy he 'll succeed , too . 
And what 's more , it 's with Mitya 's consent . 
For Mitya will surrender his betrothed to him to be rid of her , and escape to Grushenka . 
And he 's ready to do that in spite of all his nobility and disinterestedness . 
Observe that . 
Those are the most fatal people ! 
Who the devil can make you out ? 
He recognises his vileness and goes on with it ! 
Let me tell you , too , the old man , your father , is standing in Mitya 's way now . 
He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka . 
His mouth waters at the sight of her . 
It 's simply on her account he made that scene in the cell just now , simply because Miusov called her an ` abandoned creature . ' 
He 's worse than a tom-cat in love . 
At first she was only employed by him in connection with his taverns and in some other shady business , but now he has suddenly realised all she is and has gone wild about her . 
He keeps pestering her with his offers , not honourable ones , of course . 
And they 'll come into collision , the precious father and son , on that path ! 
But Grushenka favours neither of them , she 's still playing with them , and teasing them both , considering which she can get most out of . 
For though she could filch a lot of money from the papa he would n't marry her , and maybe he 'll turn stingy in the end , and keep his purse shut . 
That 's where Mitya 's value comes in ; he has no money , but he 's ready to marry her . 
Yes , ready to marry her ! 
to abandon his betrothed , a rare beauty , Katerina Ivanovna , who 's rich , and the daughter of a colonel , and to marry Grushenka , who has been the mistress of a dissolute old merchant , Samsonov , a coarse , uneducated , provincial mayor . 
Some murderous conflict may well come to pass from all this , and that 's what your brother Ivan is waiting for . 
It would suit him down to the ground . 
He 'll carry off Katerina Ivanovna , for whom he is languishing , and pocket her dowry of sixty thousand . 
That 's very alluring to start with , for a man of no consequence and a beggar . 
And , take note , he wo n't be wronging Mitya , but doing him the greatest service . 
For I know as a fact that Mitya only last week , when he was with some Gipsy girls drunk in a tavern , cried out aloud that he was unworthy of his betrothed , Katya , but that his brother Ivan , he was the man who deserved her . 
And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the end refuse such a fascinating man as Ivan . 
She 's hesitating between the two of them already . 
And how has that Ivan won you all , so that you all worship him ? 
He is laughing at you , and enjoying himself at your expense . '' 
`` How do you know ? 
How can you speak so confidently ? '' 
Alyosha asked sharply , frowning . 
`` Why do you ask , and are frightened at my answer ? 
It shows that you know I 'm speaking the truth . '' 
`` You do n't like Ivan . 
Ivan would n't be tempted by money . '' 
`` Really ? 
And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna ? 
It 's not only the money , though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction . '' 
`` Ivan is above that . 
He would n't make up to anyone for thousands . 
It is not money , it 's not comfort Ivan is seeking . 
Perhaps it 's suffering he is seeking . '' 
`` What wild dream now ? 
Oh , you - aristocrats ! '' 
`` Ah , Misha , he has a stormy spirit . 
His mind is in bondage . 
He is haunted by a great , unsolved doubt . 
He is one of those who do n't want millions , but an answer to their questions . '' 
`` That 's plagiarism , Alyosha . 
You 're quoting your elder 's phrases . 
Ah , Ivan has set you a problem ! '' 
cried Rakitin , with undisguised malice . 
His face changed , and his lips twitched . 
`` And the problem 's a stupid one . 
It is no good guessing it . 
Rack your brains - you 'll understand it . 
His article is absurd and ridiculous . 
And did you hear his stupid theory just now : if there 's no immortality of the soul , then there 's no virtue , and everything is lawful . 
-LRB- And by the way , do you remember how your brother Mitya cried out : ' I will remember ! ' -RRB- 
An attractive theory for scoundrels ! 
- -LRB- I 'm being abusive , that 's stupid . -RRB- 
Not for scoundrels , but for pedantic poseurs , ` haunted by profound , unsolved doubts . ' 
He 's showing off , and what it all comes to is , ` on the one hand we can not but admit ' and ` on the other it must be confessed ! ' 
His whole theory is a fraud ! 
Humanity will find in itself the power to live for virtue even without believing in immortality . 
It will find it in love for freedom , for equality , for fraternity . '' 
Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat , but , suddenly , as though remembering something , he stopped short . 
`` Well , that 's enough , '' he said , with a still more crooked smile . 
`` Why are you laughing ? 
Do you think I 'm a vulgar fool ? '' 
`` No , I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool . 
You are clever but ... never mind , I was silly to smile . 
I understand your getting hot about it , Misha . 
I guess from your warmth that you are not indifferent to Katerina Ivanovna yourself ; I 've suspected that for a long time , brother , that 's why you do n't like my brother Ivan . 
Are you jealous of him ? '' 
`` And jealous of her money , too ? 
Wo n't you add that ? '' 
`` I 'll say nothing about money . 
I am not going to insult you . '' 
`` I believe it , since you say so , but confound you , and your brother Ivan with you . 
Do n't you understand that one might very well dislike him , apart from Katerina Ivanovna . 
And why the devil should I like him ? 
He condescends to abuse me , you know . 
Why have n't I a right to abuse him ? '' 
`` I never heard of his saying anything about you , good or bad . 
He does n't speak of you at all . '' 
`` But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna 's he was abusing me for all he was worth - you see what an interest he takes in your humble servant . 
And which is the jealous one after that , brother , I ca n't say . 
He was so good as to express the opinion that , if I do n't go in for the career of an archimandrite in the immediate future and do n't become a monk , I shall be sure to go to Petersburg and get on to some solid magazine as a reviewer , that I shall write for the next ten years , and in the end become the owner of the magazine , and bring it out on the liberal and atheistic side , with a socialistic tinge , with a tiny gloss of socialism , but keeping a sharp lookout all the time , that is , keeping in with both sides and hoodwinking the fools . 
According to your brother 's account , the tinge of socialism wo n't hinder me from laying by the proceeds and investing them under the guidance of some Jew , till at the end of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move my publishing offices to it , and let out the upper stories to lodgers . 
He has even chosen the place for it , near the new stone bridge across the Neva , which they say is to be built in Petersburg . '' 
`` Ah , Misha , that 's just what will really happen , every word of it , '' cried Alyosha , unable to restrain a good-humoured smile . 
`` You are pleased to be sarcastic , too , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` No , no , I 'm joking , forgive me . 
I 've something quite different in my mind . 
But , excuse me , who can have told you all this ? 
You ca n't have been at Katerina Ivanovna 's yourself when he was talking about you ? '' 
`` I was n't there , but Dmitri Fyodorovitch was ; and I heard him tell it with my own ears ; if you want to know , he did n't tell me , but I overheard him , unintentionally , of course , for I was sitting in Grushenka 's bedroom and I could n't go away because Dmitri Fyodorovitch was in the next room . '' 
`` Oh yes , I 'd forgotten she was a relation of yours . '' 
`` A relation ! 
That Grushenka a relation of mine ! '' 
cried Rakitin , turning crimson . 
`` Are you mad ? 
You 're out of your mind ! '' 
`` Why , is n't she a relation of yours ? 
I heard so . '' 
`` Where can you have heard it ? 
You Karamazovs brag of being an ancient , noble family , though your father used to run about playing the buffoon at other men 's tables , and was only admitted to the kitchen as a favour . 
I may be only a priest 's son , and dirt in the eyes of noblemen like you , but do n't insult me so lightly and wantonly . 
I have a sense of honour , too , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I could n't be a relation of Grushenka , a common harlot . 
I beg you to understand that ! '' 
Rakitin was intensely irritated . 
`` Forgive me , for goodness ' sake , I had no idea ... besides ... how can you call her a harlot ? 
Is she ... that sort of woman ? '' 
Alyosha flushed suddenly . 
`` I tell you again , I heard that she was a relation of yours . 
You often go to see her , and you told me yourself you 're not her lover . 
I never dreamed that you of all people had such contempt for her ! 
Does she really deserve it ? '' 
`` I may have reasons of my own for visiting her . 
That 's not your business . 
But as for relationship , your brother , or even your father , is more likely to make her yours than mine . 
Well , here we are . 
You 'd better go to the kitchen . 
Hullo ! 
what 's wrong , what is it ? 
Are we late ? 
They ca n't have finished dinner so soon ! 
Have the Karamazovs been making trouble again ? 
No doubt they have . 
Here 's your father and your brother Ivan after him . 
They 've broken out from the Father Superior 's . 
And look , Father Isidor 's shouting out something after them from the steps . 
And your father 's shouting and waving his arms . 
I expect he 's swearing . 
Bah , and there goes Miusov driving away in his carriage . 
You see , he 's going . 
And there 's old Maximov running ! 
- there must have been a row . 
There ca n't have been any dinner . 
Surely they 've not been beating the Father Superior ! 
Or have they , perhaps , been beaten ? 
It would serve them right ! '' 
There was reason for Rakitin 's exclamations . 
There had been a scandalous , an unprecedented scene . 
It had all come from the impulse of a moment . 
The Scandalous Scene MIUSOV , as a man of breeding and delicacy , could not but feel some inward qualms , when he reached the Father Superior 's with Ivan : he felt ashamed of having lost his temper . 
He felt that he ought to have disdained that despicable wretch , Fyodor Pavlovitch , too much to have been upset by him in Father Zossima 's cell , and so to have forgotten himself . 
`` The monks were not to blame , in any case , '' he reflected , on the steps . 
`` And if they 're decent people here -LRB- and the Father Superior , I understand , is a nobleman -RRB- why not be friendly and courteous with them ? 
I wo n't argue , I 'll fall in with everything , I 'll win them by politeness , and ... and ... show them that I 've nothing to do with that Aesop , that buffoon , that Pierrot , and have merely been taken in over this affair , just as they have . '' 
He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery , and relinquish his claims to the wood-cutting and fishery rights at once . 
He was the more ready to do this because the rights had become much less valuable , and he had indeed the vaguest idea where the wood and river in question were . 
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the Father Superior 's dining-room , though , strictly speaking , it was not a dining-room , for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether ; they were , however , much larger and more comfortable than Father Zossima 's . 
But there was no great luxury about the furnishing of these rooms either . 
The furniture was of mahogany , covered with leather , in the old-fashioned style of 1820 the floor was not even stained , but everything was shining with cleanliness , and there were many choice flowers in the windows ; the most sumptuous thing in the room at the moment was , of course , the beautifully decorated table . 
The cloth was clean , the service shone ; there were three kinds of well-baked bread , two bottles of wine , two of excellent mead , and a large glass jug of kvas - both the latter made in the monastery , and famous in the neighbourhood . 
There was no vodka . 
Rakitin related afterwards that there were five dishes : fish-soup made of sterlets , served with little fish patties ; then boiled fish served in a special way ; then salmon cutlets , ice pudding and compote , and finally , blanc-mange . 
Rakitin found out about all these good things , for he could not resist peeping into the kitchen , where he already had a footing . 
He had a footing everywhere , and got information about everything . 
He was of an uneasy and envious temper . 
He was well aware of his own considerable abilities , and nervously exaggerated them in his self-conceit . 
He knew he would play a prominent part of some sort , but Alyosha , who was attached to him , was distressed to see that his friend Rakitin was dishonourable , and quite unconscious of being so himself , considering , on the contrary , that because he would not steal money left on the table he was a man of the highest integrity . 
Neither Alyosha nor anyone else could have influenced him in that . 
Rakitin , of course , was a person of too little consequence to be invited to the dinner , to which Father Iosif , Father Paissy , and one other monk were the only inmates of the monastery invited . 
They were already waiting when Miusov , Kalganov , and Ivan arrived . 
The other guest , Maximov , stood a little aside , waiting also . 
The Father Superior stepped into the middle of the room to receive his guests . 
He was a tall , thin , but still vigorous old man , with black hair streaked with grey , and a long , grave , ascetic face . 
He bowed to his guests in silence . 
But this time they approached to receive his blessing . 
Miusov even tried to kiss his hand , but the Father Superior drew it back in time to avoid the salute . 
But Ivan and Kalganov went through the ceremony in the most simple-hearted and complete manner , kissing his hand as peasants do . 
`` We must apologise most humbly , your reverence , '' began Miusov , simpering affably , and speaking in a dignified and respectful tone . 
`` Pardon us for having come alone without the gentleman you invited , Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He felt obliged to decline the honour of your hospitality , and not without reason . 
In the reverend Father Zossima 's cell he was carried away by the unhappy dissension with his son , and let fall words which were quite out of keeping ... in fact , quite unseemly ... as '' - he glanced at the monks - `` your reverence is , no doubt , already aware . 
And therefore , recognising that he had been to blame , he felt sincere regret and shame , and begged me , and his son Ivan Fyodorovitch , to convey to you his apologies and regrets . 
In brief , he hopes and desires to make amends later . 
He asks your blessing , and begs you to forget what has taken place . '' 
As he uttered the last word of his tirade , Miusov completely recovered his self-complacency , and all traces of his former irritation disappeared . 
He fully and sincerely loved humanity again . 
The Father Superior listened to him with dignity , and , with a slight bend of the head , replied : `` I sincerely deplore his absence . 
Perhaps at our table he might have learnt to like us , and we him . 
Pray be seated , gentlemen . '' 
He stood before the holy image , and began to say grace , aloud . 
All bent their heads reverently , and Maximov clasped his hands before him , with peculiar fervour . 
It was at this moment that Fyodor Pavlovitch played his last prank . 
It must be noted that he really had meant to go home , and really had felt the impossibility of going to dine with the Father Superior as though nothing had happened , after his disgraceful behaviour in the elder 's cell . 
Not that he was so very much ashamed of himself - quite the contrary perhaps . 
But still he felt it would be unseemly to go to dinner . 
Yet his creaking carriage had hardly been brought to the steps of the hotel , and he had hardly got into it , when he suddenly stopped short . 
He remembered his own words at the elder 's : `` I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than all , and that they all take me for a buffoon ; so I say let me play the buffoon , for you are , every one of you , stupider and lower than I. '' He longed to revenge himself on everyone for his own unseemliness . 
He suddenly recalled how he had once in the past been asked , `` Why do you hate so and so , so much ? '' 
And he had answered them , with his shameless impudence , `` I 'll tell you . 
He has done me no harm . 
But I played him a dirty trick , and ever since I have hated him . '' 
Remembering that now , he smiled quietly and malignantly , hesitating for a moment . 
His eyes gleamed , and his lips positively quivered . 
`` Well , since I have begun , I may as well go on , '' he decided . 
His predominant sensation at that moment might be expressed in the following words , `` Well , there is no rehabilitating myself now . 
So let me shame them for all I am worth . 
I will show them I do n't care what they think - that 's all ! '' 
He told the coachman to wait , while with rapid steps he returned to the monastery and straight to the Father Superior 's . 
He had no clear idea what he would do , but he knew that he could not control himself , and that a touch might drive him to the utmost limits of obscenity , but only to obscenity , to nothing criminal , nothing for which he could be legally punished . 
In the last resort , he could always restrain himself , and had marvelled indeed at himself , on that score , sometimes . 
He appeared in the Father Superior 's dining-room , at the moment when the prayer was over , and all were moving to the table . 
Standing in the doorway , he scanned the company , and laughing his prolonged , impudent , malicious chuckle , looked them all boldly in the face . 
`` They thought I had gone , and here I am again , '' he cried to the whole room . 
For one moment everyone stared at him without a word ; and at once everyone felt that something revolting , grotesque , positively scandalous , was about to happen . 
Miusov passed immediately from the most benevolent frame of mind to the most savage . 
All the feelings that had subsided and died down in his heart revived instantly . 
`` No ! 
this I can not endure ! '' 
he cried . 
`` I absolutely can not ! 
and ... I certainly can not ! '' 
The blood rushed to his head . 
He positively stammered ; but he was beyond thinking of style , and he seized his hat . 
`` What is it he can not ? '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` that he absolutely can not and certainly can not ? 
Your reverence , am I to come in or not ? 
Will you receive me as your guest ? '' 
`` You are welcome with all my heart , '' answered the Superior . 
`` Gentlemen ! '' 
he added , `` I venture to beg you most earnestly to lay aside your dissensions , and to be united in love and family harmony - with prayer to the Lord at our humble table . '' 
`` No , no , it is impossible ! '' 
cried Miusov , beside himself . 
`` Well , if it is impossible for Pyotr Alexandrovitch , it is impossible for me , and I wo n't stop . 
That is why I came . 
I will keep with Pyotr Alexandrovitch everywhere now . 
If you will go away , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , I will go away too , if you remain , I will remain . 
You stung him by what you said about family harmony , Father Superior , he does not admit he is my relation . 
That 's right , is n't it , von Sohn ? 
Here 's von Sohn . 
How are you , von Sohn ? '' 
`` Do you mean me ? '' 
muttered Maximov , puzzled . 
`` Of course I mean you , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` Who else ? 
The Father Superior could not be von Sohn . '' 
`` But I am not von Sohn either . 
I am Maximov . '' 
`` No , you are von Sohn . 
Your reverence , do you know who von Sohn was ? 
It was a famous murder case . 
He was killed in a house of harlotry - I believe that is what such places are called among you - he was killed and robbed , and in spite of his venerable age , he was nailed up in a box and sent from Petersburg to Moscow in the luggage van , and while they were nailing him up , the harlots sang songs and played the harp , that is to say , the piano . 
So this is that very von Solin . 
He has risen from the dead , has n't he , von Sohn ? '' 
`` What is happening ? 
What 's this ? '' 
voices were heard in the group of monks . 
`` Let us go , '' cried Miusov , addressing Kalganov . 
`` No , excuse me , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch broke in shrilly , taking another step into the room . 
`` Allow me to finish . 
There in the cell you blamed me for behaving disrespectfully just because I spoke of eating gudgeon , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
Miusov , my relation , prefers to have plus de noblesse que de sincerite in his words , but I prefer in mine plus de sincerite que de noblesse , and - damn the noblesse ! 
That 's right , is n't it , von Sohn ? 
Allow me , Father Superior , though I am a buffoon and play the buffoon , yet I am the soul of honour , and I want to speak my mind . 
Yes , I am the soul of honour , while in Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothing else . 
I came here perhaps to have a look and speak my mind . 
My son , Alexey , is here , being saved . 
I am his father ; I care for his welfare , and it is my duty to care . 
While I 've been playing the fool , I have been listening and having a look on the sly ; and now I want to give you the last act of the performance . 
You know how things are with us ? 
As a thing falls , so it lies . 
As a thing once has fallen , so it must lie for ever . 
Not a bit of it ! 
I want to get up again . 
Holy Father , I am indignant with you . 
Confession is a great sacrament , before which I am ready to bow down reverently ; but there in the cell , they all kneel down and confess aloud . 
Can it be right to confess aloud ? 
It was ordained by the holy Fathers to confess in secret : then only your confession will be a mystery , and so it was of old . 
But how can I explain to him before everyone that I did this and that ... well , you understand what - sometimes it would not be proper to talk about it - so it is really a scandal ! 
No , Fathers , one might be carried along with you to the Flagellants , I dare say ... . 
at the first opportunity I shall write to the Synod , and I shall take my son , Alexey , home . '' 
We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look for the weak spot . 
There had been at one time malicious rumours which had even reached the Archbishop -LRB- not only regarding our monastery , but in others where the institution of elders existed -RRB- that too much respect was paid to the elders , even to the detriment of the authority of the Superior , that the elders abused the sacrament of confession and so on and so on - absurd charges which had died away of themselves everywhere . 
But the spirit of folly , which had caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch and was bearing him on the current of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy , prompted him with this old slander . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not understand a word of it , and he could not even put it sensibly , for on this occasion no one had been kneeling and confessing aloud in the elder 's cell , so that he could not have seen anything of the kind . 
He was only speaking from confused memory of old slanders . 
But as soon as he had uttered his foolish tirade , he felt he had been talking absurd nonsense , and at once longed to prove to his audience , and above all to himself , that he had not been talking nonsense . 
And , though he knew perfectly well that with each word he would be adding more and more absurdity , he could not restrain himself , and plunged forward blindly . 
`` How disgraceful ! '' 
cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
`` Pardon me ! '' 
said the Father Superior . 
`` It was said of old , ` Many have begun to speak against me and have uttered evil sayings about me . 
And hearing it I have said to myself : it is the correction of the Lord and He has sent it to heal my vain soul . ' 
And so we humbly thank you , honoured guest ! '' 
and he made Fyodor Pavlovitch a low bow . 
`` Tut - tut - tut - sanctimoniousness and stock phrases ! 
Old phrases and old gestures . 
The old lies and formal prostrations . 
We know all about them . 
A kiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart , as in Schiller 's Robbers . 
I do n't like falsehood , Fathers , I want the truth . 
But the truth is not to be found in eating gudgeon and that I proclaim aloud ! 
Father monks , why do you fast ? 
Why do you expect reward in heaven for that ? 
Why , for reward like that I will come and fast too ! 
No , saintly monk , you try being virtuous in the world , do good to society , without shutting yourself up in a monastery at other people 's expense , and without expecting a reward up aloft for it - you 'll find that a bit harder . 
I can talk sense , too , Father Superior . 
What have they got here ? '' 
He went up to the table . 
`` Old port wine , mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers . 
Fie , fie , fathers ! 
That is something beyond gudgeon . 
Look at the bottles the fathers have brought out , he he he ! 
And who has provided it all ? 
The Russian peasant , the labourer , brings here the farthing earned by his horny hand , wringing it from his family and the tax-gatherer ! 
You bleed the people , you know , holy Fathers . '' 
`` This is too disgraceful ! '' 
said Father Iosif . 
Father Paissy kept obstinately silent . 
Miusov rushed from the room , and Kalgonov after him . 
`` Well , Father , I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch ! 
I am not coming to see you again . 
You may beg me on your knees , I sha n't come . 
I sent you a thousand roubles , so you have begun to keep your eye on me . 
He he he ! 
No , I 'll say no more . 
I am taking my revenge for my youth , for all the humiliation I endured . '' 
He thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysm of simulated feeling . 
`` This monastery has played a great part in my life ! 
It has cost me many bitter tears . 
You used to set my wife , the crazy one , against me . 
You cursed me with bell and book , you spread stories about me all over the place . 
Enough , fathers ! 
This is the age of Liberalism , the age of steamers and railways . 
Neither a thousand , nor a hundred roubles , no , nor a hundred farthings will you get out of me ! '' 
It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any great part in his life , and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it . 
But he was so carried away by his simulated emotion , that he was for one moment almost believing it himself . 
He was so touched he was almost weeping . 
But at that very instant , he felt that it was time to draw back . 
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie , and again spoke impressively : `` It is written again , ` Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonour that cometh upon thee by no act of thine own , be not confounded and hate not him who hath dishonoured thee . ' 
And so will we . '' 
`` Tut , tut , tut ! 
Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole . 
Bethink yourselves Fathers , I will go . 
But I will take my son , Alexey , away from here for ever , on my parental authority . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch , my most dutiful son , permit me to order you to follow me . 
Von Sohn , what have you to stay for ? 
Come and see me now in the town . 
It is fun there . 
It is only one short verst ; instead of lenten oil , I will give you sucking-pig and kasha . 
We will have dinner with some brandy and liqueur to it ... . 
I 've cloudberry wine . 
Hey , von Sohn , do n't lose your chance . '' 
He went out , shouting and gesticulating . 
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to Alyosha . 
`` Alexey ! '' 
his father shouted , from far off , catching sight of him . 
`` You come home to me to-day , for good , and bring your pillow and mattress , and leave no trace behind . '' 
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot , watching the scene in silence . 
Meanwhile , Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage , and Ivan was about to follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good-bye to Alyosha . 
But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesque buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode . 
Maximov suddenly appeared by the side of the carriage . 
He ran up , panting , afraid of being too late . 
Rakitin and Alyosha saw him running . 
He was in such a hurry that in his impatience he put his foot on the step on which Ivan 's left foot was still resting , and clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in . 
`` I am going with you ! '' 
he kept shouting , laughing a thin mirthful laugh with a look of reckless glee in his face . 
`` Take me , too . '' 
`` There ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , delighted . 
`` Did I not say he was von Sohn . 
It is von Sohn himself , risen from the dead . 
Why , how did you tear yourself away ? 
What did you von Sohn there ? 
And how could you get away from the dinner ? 
You must be a brazen-faced fellow ! 
I am that myself , but I am surprised at you , brother ! 
Jump in , jump in ! 
Let him pass , Ivan . 
It will be fun . 
He can lie somewhere at our feet . 
Will you lie at our feet , von Sohn ? 
Or perch on the box with the coachman . 
Skip on to the box , von Sohn ! '' 
But Ivan , who had by now taken his seat , without a word gave Maximov a violent punch in the breast and sent him flying . 
It was quite by chance he did not fall . 
`` Drive on ! '' 
Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman . 
`` Why , what are you doing , what are you about ? 
Why did you do that ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch protested . 
But the carriage had already driven away . 
Ivan made no reply . 
`` Well , you are a fellow , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said again . 
After a pause of two minutes , looking askance at his son , `` Why , it was you got up all this monastery business . 
You urged it , you approved of it . 
Why are you angry now ? '' 
`` You 've talked rot enough . 
You might rest a bit now , '' Ivan snapped sullenly . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes . 
`` A drop of brandy would be nice now , '' he observed sententiously , but Ivan made no response . 
`` You shall have some , too , when we get home . '' 
Ivan was still silent . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes . 
`` But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery , though you will dislike it so much , most honoured Karl von Moor . '' 
Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously , and turning away stared at the road . 
And they did not speak again all the way home . 
The Sensualists In the Servants ' Quarters THE Karamazovs ' house was far from being in the centre of the town , but it was not quite outside it . 
It was a pleasant-looking old house of two stories , painted grey , with a red iron roof . 
It was roomy and snug , and might still last many years . 
There were all sorts of unexpected little cupboards and closets and staircases . 
There were rats in it , but Fyodor Pavlovitch did not altogether dislike them . 
`` One does n't feel so solitary when one 's left alone in the evening , '' he used to say . 
It was his habit to send the servants away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself up alone . 
The lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to have the cooking done there , although there was a kitchen in the house ; he did not like the smell of cooking , and , winter and summer alike , the dishes were carried in across the courtyard . 
The house was built for a large family ; there was room for five times as many , with their servants . 
But at the time of our story there was no one living in the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son Ivan . 
And in the lodge there were only three servants : old Grigory , and his old wife Marfa , and a young man called Smerdyakov . 
Of these three we must say a few words . 
Of old Grigory we have said something already . 
He was firm and determined and went blindly and obstinately for his object , if once be had been brought by any reasons -LRB- and they were often very illogical ones -RRB- to believe that it was immutably right . 
He was honest and incorruptible . 
His wife , Marfa Ignatyevna , had obeyed her husband 's will implicitly all her life , yet she had pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the serfs . 
She was set on leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little shop in Moscow with their small savings . 
But Grigory decided then , once for all , that `` the woman 's talking nonsense , for every woman is dishonest , '' and that they ought not to leave their old master , whatever he might be , for `` that was now their duty . '' 
`` Do you understand what duty is ? '' 
he asked Marfa Ignatyevna . 
`` I understand what duty means , Grigory Vassilyevitch , but why it 's our duty to stay here I never shall understand , '' Marfa answered firmly . 
`` Well , do n't understand then . 
But so it shall be . 
And you hold your tongue . '' 
And so it was . 
They did not go away , and Fyodor Pavlovitch promised them a small sum for wages , and paid it regularly . 
Grigory knew , too , that he had an indisputable influence over his master . 
It was true , and he was aware of it . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was an obstinate and cunning buffoon , yet , though his will was strong enough `` in some of the affairs of life , '' as he expressed it , he found himself , to his surprise , extremely feeble in facing certain other emergencies . 
He knew his weaknesses and was afraid of them . 
There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp lookout . 
And that 's not easy without a trustworthy man , and Grigory was a most trustworthy man . 
Many times in the course of his life Fyodor Pavlovitch had only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory 's intervention , and on each occasion the old servant gave him a good lecture . 
But it was n't only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch was afraid of . 
There were graver occasions , and very subtle and complicated ones , when Fyodor Pavlovitch could not have explained the extraordinary craving for someone faithful and devoted , which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in a moment . 
It was almost a morbid condition . 
Corrupt and often cruel in his lust , like some noxious insect , Fyodor Pavlovitch was sometimes , in moments of drunkenness , overcome by superstitious terror and a moral convulsion which took an almost physical form . 
`` My soul 's simply quaking in my throat at those times , '' he used to say . 
At such moments he liked to feel that there was near at hand , in the lodge if not in the room , a strong , faithful man , virtuous and unlike himself , who had seen all his debauchery and knew all his secrets , but was ready in his devotion to overlook all that , not to oppose him , above all , not to reproach him or threaten him with anything , either in this world or in the next , and , in case of need , to defend him - from whom ? 
From somebody unknown , but terrible and dangerous . 
What he needed was to feel that there was another man , an old and tried friend , that he might call him in his sick moments merely to look at his face , or , perhaps , exchange some quite irrelevant words with him . 
And if the old servant were not angry , he felt comforted , and if he were angry , he was more dejected . 
It happened even -LRB- very rarely however -RRB- that Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory and fetch him for a moment . 
When the old man came , Fyodor Pavlovitch would begin talking about the most trivial matters , and would soon let him go again , sometimes even with a jest . 
And after he had gone , Fyodor Pavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and sleep the sleep of the just . 
Something of the same sort had happened to Fyodor Pavlovitch on Alyosha 's arrival . 
Alyosha `` pierced his heart '' by `` living with him , seeing everything and blaming nothing . '' 
Moreover , Alyosha brought with him something his father had never known before : a complete absence of contempt for him and an invariable kindness , a perfectly natural unaffected devotion to the old man who deserved it so little . 
All this was a complete surprise to the old profligate , who had dropped all family ties . 
It was a new and surprising experience for him , who had till then loved nothing but `` evil . '' 
When Alyosha had left him , he confessed to himself that he had learnt something he had not till then been willing to learn . 
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adelaida Ivanovna , the first wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of Dmitri , and that he had , on the contrary , protected Sofya Ivanovna , the poor `` crazy woman , '' against his master and anyone who chanced to speak ill or lightly of her . 
His sympathy for the unhappy wife had become something sacred to him , so that even now , twenty years after , he could not bear a slighting allusion to her from anyone , and would at once check the offender . 
Externally , Grigory was cold , dignified and taciturn , and spoke , weighing his words , without frivolity . 
It was impossible to tell at first sight whether he loved his meek , obedient wife ; but he really did love her , and she knew it . 
Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish ; she was probably , indeed , cleverer than her husband , or , at least , more prudent than he in worldly affairs , and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or complaint ever since her marriage , and respected him for his spiritual superiority . 
It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the course of their lives , and only of the most necessary daily affairs . 
The grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone , so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her advice . 
She felt that her husband respected her silence , and took it as a sign of her good sense . 
He had never beaten her but once , and then only slightly . 
Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch 's marriage with Adelaida Ivanovna , the village girls and women - at that time serfs - were called together before the house to sing and dance . 
They were beginning `` In the Green Meadows , '' when Marfa , at that time a young woman , skipped forward and danced `` the Russian Dance , '' not in the village fashion , but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich Miusov family , in their private theatre , where the actors were taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow . 
Grigory saw how his wife danced , and , an hour later , at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson , pulling her hair a little . 
But there it ended : the beating was never repeated , and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing . 
God had not blessed them with children . 
One child was born but it died . 
Grigory was fond of children , and was not ashamed of showing it . 
When Adelaida Ivanovna had run away , Grigory took Dmitri , then a child of three years old , combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands , and looked after him for almost a year . 
Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha , for which the general 's widow had rewarded him with a slap in the face ; but I have already related all that . 
The only happiness his own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth . 
When it was born , he was overwhelmed with grief and horror . 
The baby had six fingers . 
Grigory was so crushed by this , that he was not only silent till the day of the christening , but kept away in the garden . 
It was spring , and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden . 
The third day was fixed for christening the baby : meantime Grigory had reached a conclusion . 
Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived , including Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was to stand godfather , he suddenly announced that the baby `` ought not to be christened at all . '' 
He announced this quietly , briefly , forcing out his words , and gazing with dull intentness at the priest . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the priest with good-humoured surprise . 
`` Because it 's a dragon , '' muttered Grigory . 
`` A dragon ? 
What dragon ? '' 
Grigory did not speak for some time . 
`` It 's a confusion of nature , '' he muttered vaguely , but firmly , and obviously unwilling to say more . 
They laughed , and , of course , christened the poor baby . 
Grigory prayed earnestly at the font , but his opinion of the new-born child remained unchanged . 
Yet he did not interfere in any way . 
As long as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it , tried indeed not to notice it , and for the most part kept out of the cottage . 
But when , at the end of a fortnight , the baby died of thrush , he himself laid the child in its little coffin , looked at it in profound grief , and when they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the earth . 
He did not for years afterwards mention his child , nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him , and , even if Grigory were not present , she never spoke of it above a whisper . 
Marfa observed that , from the day of the burial , he devoted himself to `` religion , '' and took to reading the Lives of the Saints , for the most part sitting alone and in silence , and always putting on his big , round , silver-rimmed spectacles . 
He rarely read aloud , only perhaps in Lent . 
He was fond of the Book of Job , and had somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of `` the God fearing Father Isaac the Syrian , which he read persistently for years together , understanding very little of it , but perhaps prizing and loving it the more for that . 
Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighbourhood . 
He was evidently shaken by them , but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith . 
His habit of theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity . 
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism . 
And the birth of his deformed child , and its death , had , as though by special design , been accompanied by another strange and marvellous event , which , as he said later , had left a `` stamp '' upon his soul . 
It happened that , on the very night after the burial of his child , Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new-born baby . 
She was frightened and waked her husband . 
He listened and said he thought it was more like someone groaning , `` it might be a woman . '' 
He got up and dressed . 
It was a rather warm night in May . 
As he went down the steps , he distinctly heard groans coming from the garden . 
But the gate from the yard into the garden was locked at night , and there was no other way of entering it , for it was enclosed all round by a strong , high fence . 
Going back into the house , Grigory lighted a lantern , took the garden key , and taking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife , who was still persuaded that she heard a child crying , and that it was her own baby crying and calling for her , went into the garden in silence . 
There he heard at once that the groans came from the bath-house that stood near the garden gate , and that they were the groans of a woman . 
Opening the door of the bath-house , he saw a sight which petrified him . 
An idiot girl , who wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya -LRB- Stinking Lizaveta -RRB- , had got into the bath-house and had just given birth to a child . 
She lay dying with the baby beside her . 
She said nothing , for she had never been able to speak . 
But her story needs a chapter to itself . 
Lizaveta THERE was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly , and confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion . 
This Lizaveta was a dwarfish creature , `` not five foot within a wee bit , '' as many of the pious old women said pathetically about her , after her death . 
Her broad , healthy , red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in her eyes was unpleasant , in spite of their meek expression . 
She wandered about , summer and winter alike , barefooted , wearing nothing but a hempen smock . 
Her coarse , almost black hair curled like lamb 's wool , and formed a sort of huge cap on her head . 
It was always crusted with mud , and had leaves ; bits of stick , and shavings clinging to it , as she always slept on the ground and in the dirt . 
Her father , a homeless , sickly drunkard , called Ilya , had lost everything and lived many years as a workman with some well-to-do tradespeople . 
Her mother had long been dead . 
Spiteful and diseased , Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned to him . 
But she rarely did so , for everyone in the town was ready to look after her as being an idiot , and so specially dear to God . 
Ilya 's employers , and many others in the town , especially of the tradespeople , tried to clothe her better , and always rigged her out with high boots and sheepskin coat for the winter . 
But , although she allowed them to dress her up without resisting , she usually went away , preferably to the cathedral porch , and taking off all that had been given her - kerchief , sheepskin , skirt or boots - she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smock as before . 
It happened on one occasion that a new governor of the province , making a tour of inspection in our town , saw Lizaveta , and was wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities . 
And though he was told she was an idiot , he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander about in nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties , and must not occur again . 
But the governor went his way , and Lizaveta was left as she was . 
At last her father died , which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of the religious persons of the town , as an orphan . 
In fact , everyone seemed to like her ; even the boys did not tease her , and the boys of our town , especially the schoolboys , are a mischievous set . 
She would walk into strange houses , and no one drove her away . 
Everyone was kind to her and gave her something . 
If she were given a copper , she would take it , and at once drop it in the alms-jug of the church or prison . 
If she were given a roll or bun in the market , she would hand it to the first child she met . 
Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it to her , and the lady would be pleased to take it . 
She herself never tasted anything but black bread and water . 
If she went into an expensive shop , where there were costly goods or money lying about , no one kept watch on her , for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked by them , she would not have touched a farthing . 
She scarcely ever went to church . 
She slept either in the church porch or climbed over a hurdle -LRB- there are many hurdles instead of fences to this day in our town -RRB- into a kitchen garden . 
She used at least once a week to turn up `` at home , '' that is at the house of her father 's former employers , and in the winter went there every night , and slept either in the passage or the cow-house . 
People were amazed that she could stand such a life , but she was accustomed to it , and , although she was so tiny , she was of a robust constitution . 
Some of the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride , but that is hardly credible . 
She could hardly speak , and only from time to time uttered an inarticulate grunt . 
How could she have been proud ? 
It happened one clear , warm , moonlight night in September -LRB- many years ago -RRB- five or six drunken revellers were returning from the club at a very late hour , according to our provincial notions . 
They passed through the `` backway , '' which led between the back gardens of the houses , with hurdles on either side . 
This way leads out on to the bridge over the long , stinking pool which we were accustomed to call a river . 
Among the nettles and burdocks under the hurdle our revellers saw Lizaveta asleep . 
They stopped to look at her , laughing , and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness . 
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whether anyone could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman , and so forth ... . 
They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it was impossible . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was among them , sprang forward and declared that it was by no means impossible , and that , indeed , there was a certain piquancy about it , and so on ... . 
It is true that at that time he was overdoing his part as a buffoon . 
He liked to put himself forward and entertain the company , ostensibly on equal terms , of course , though in reality he was on a servile footing with them . 
It was just at the time when he had received the news of his first wife 's death in Petersburg , and , with crape upon his hat , was drinking and behaving so shamelessly that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him . 
The revellers , of course , laughed at this unexpected opinion ; and one of them even began challenging him to act upon it . 
The others repelled the idea even more emphatically , although still with the utmost hilarity , and at last they went on their way . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had gone with them , and perhaps it was so , no one knows for certain , and no one ever knew . 
But five or six months later , all the town was talking , with intense and sincere indignation , of Lizaveta 's condition , and trying to find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her . 
Then suddenly a terrible rumour was all over the town that this miscreant was no other than Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Who set the rumour going ? 
Of that drunken band five had left the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and much respected civil councillor , the father of grown-up daughters , who could hardly have spread the tale , even if there had been any foundation for it . 
But rumour pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch , and persisted in pointing at him . 
Of course this was no great grievance to him : he would not have troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople . 
In those days he was proud , and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officials and nobles , whom he entertained so well . 
At the time , Grigory stood up for his master vigorously . 
He provoked quarrels and altercations in defence of him and succeeded in bringing some people round to his side . 
`` It 's the wench 's own fault , '' he asserted , and the culprit was Karp , a dangerous convict , who had escaped from prison and whose name was well known to us , as he had hidden in our town . 
This conjecture sounded plausible , for it was remembered that Karp had been in the neighbourhood just at that time in the autumn , and had robbed three people . 
But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular sympathy from the poor idiot . 
She was better looked after than ever . 
A well-to-do merchants 's widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into her house at the end of April , meaning not to let her go out until after the confinement . 
They kept a constant watch over her , but in spite of their vigilance she escaped on the very last day , and made her way into Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
How , in her condition , she managed to climb over the high , strong fence remained a mystery . 
Some maintained that she must have been lifted over by somebody ; others hinted at something more uncanny . 
The most likely explanation is that it happened naturally - that Lizaveta , accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens , had somehow managed to climb this fence , in spite of her condition , and had leapt down , injuring herself . 
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta , while he ran to fetch an old midwife who lived close by . 
They saved the baby , but Lizaveta died at dawn . 
Grigory took the baby , brought it home , and making his wife sit down , put it on her lap . 
`` A child of God - an orphan is akin to all , '' he said , `` and to us above others . 
Our little lost one has sent us this , who has come from the devil 's son and a holy innocent . 
Nurse him and weep no more . '' 
So Marfa brought up the child . 
He was christened Pavel , to which people were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch -LRB- son of Fyodor -RRB- . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not object to any of this , and thought it amusing , though he persisted vigorously in denying his responsibility . 
The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the foundling . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child , calling him Smerdyakov , after his mother 's nickname . 
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch 's second servant , and was living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins . 
He was employed as cook . 
I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov , but I am ashamed of keeping my readers ' attention so long occupied with these common menials , and I will go back to my story , hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in the course of it . 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - in Verse ALYOSHA remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command his father shouted to him from the carriage . 
But in spite of his uneasiness he did not stand still . 
That was not his way . 
He went at once to the kitchen to find out what his father had been doing above . 
Then he set off , trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting him . 
I hasten to add that his father 's shouts , commanding him to return home `` with his mattress and pillow '' did not frighten him in the least . 
He understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely `` a flourish '' to produce an effect . 
In the same way a tradesman in our town who was celebrating his name-day with a party of friends , getting angry at being refused more vodka , smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore his own and his wife 's clothes , and finally broke his windows , all for the sake of effect . 
Next day , of course , when he was sober , he regretted the broken cups and saucers . 
Alyosha knew that his father would let him go back to the monastery next day , possibly even that evening . 
Moreover , he was fully persuaded that his father might hurt anyone else , but would not hurt him . 
Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever would want to hurt him , and , what is more , he knew that no one could hurt him . 
This was for him an axiom , assumed once for all without question , and he went his way without hesitation , relying on it . 
But at that moment an anxiety of sort disturbed him , and worried him the more because he could not formulate it . 
It was the fear of a woman , of Katerina Ivanovna , who had so urgently entreated him in the note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something . 
This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasy feeling in his heart , and this feeling had grown more and more painful all the morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the Father Superior 's . 
He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speak of and what he must answer . 
And he was not afraid of her simply as a woman . 
Though he knew little of women , he spent his life , from early childhood till he entered the monastery , entirely with women . 
He was afraid of that woman , Katerina Ivanovna . 
He had been afraid of her from the first time he saw her . 
He had only seen her two or three times , and had only chanced to say a few words to her . 
He thought of her as a beautiful , proud , imperious girl . 
It was not her beauty which troubled him , but something else . 
And the vagueness of his apprehension increased the apprehension itself . 
The girl 's aims were of the noblest , he knew that . 
She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity , though he had already behaved badly to her . 
Yet , although Alyosha recognised and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments , a shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house . 
He reflected that he would not find Ivan , who was so intimate a friend , with her , for Ivan was certainly now with his father . 
Dmitri he was even more certain not to find there , and he had a foreboding of the reason . 
And so his conversation would be with her alone . 
He had a great longing to run and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview . 
Without showing him the letter , he could talk to him about it . 
But Dmitri lived a long way off , and he was sure to be away from home too . 
Standing still for a minute , he reached a final decision . 
Crossing himself with a rapid and accustomed gesture , and at once smiling , he turned resolutely in the direction of his terrible lady . 
He knew her house . 
If he went by the High Street and then across the market-place , it was a long way round . 
Though our town is small , it is scattered , and the houses are far apart . 
And meanwhile his father was expecting him , and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command . 
He might be unreasonable , and so he had to make haste to get there and back . 
So he decided to take a short cut by the backway , for he knew every inch of the ground . 
This meant skirting fences , climbing over hurdles , and crossing other people 's back-yards , where everyone he met knew him and greeted him . 
In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time . 
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father 's , and belonging to a little tumbledown house with four windows . 
The owner of this house , as Alyosha knew , was a bedridden old woman , living with her daughter , who had been a genteel maid-servant in generals ' families in Petersburg . 
Now she had been at home a year , looking after her sick mother . 
She always dressed up in fine clothes , though her old mother and she had sunk into such poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and bread , which Marfa gave readily . 
Yet , though the young woman came up for soup , she had never sold any of her dresses , and one of these even had a long train - a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin , who always knew everything that was going on in the town . 
He had forgotten it as soon as he heard it , but now , on reaching the garden , he remembered the dress with the train , raised his head , which had been bowed in thought , and came upon something quite unexpected . 
Over the hurdle in the garden , Dmitri , mounted on something , was leaning forward , gesticulating violently , beckoning to him , obviously afraid to utter a word for fear of being overheard . 
Alyosha ran up to the hurdle . 
`` It 's a good thing you looked up . 
I was nearly shouting to you , '' Mitya said in a joyful , hurried whisper . 
`` Climb in here quickly ! 
How splendid that you 've come ! 
I was just thinking of you '' Alyosha was delighted too , but he did not know how to get over the hurdle . 
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump . 
Tucking up his cassock , Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare-legged street urchin . 
`` Well done ! 
Now come along , '' said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper . 
`` Where ? '' 
whispered Alyosha , looking about him and finding himself in a deserted garden with no one near but themselves . 
The garden was small , but the house was at least fifty paces away . 
`` There 's no one here . 
Why do you whisper ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Why do I whisper ? 
Deuce take it '' cried Dmitri at the top of his voice . 
`` You see what silly tricks nature plays one . 
I am here in secret , and on the watch . 
I 'll explain later on , but , knowing it 's a secret , I began whispering like a fool , when there 's no need . 
Let us go . 
Over there . 
Till then be quiet . 
I want to kiss you . 
Glory to God in the world , Glory to God in me ... I was just repeating that , sitting here , before you came . '' 
The garden was about three acres in extent , and planted with trees only along the fence at the four sides . 
There were apple-trees , maples , limes and birch-trees . 
The middle of the garden was an empty grass space , from which several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer . 
The garden was let out for a few roubles for the summer . 
There were also plantations of raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides ; a kitchen garden had been planted lately near the house . 
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden . 
There , in a thicket of lime-trees and old bushes of black currant , elder , snowball-tree , and lilac , there stood a tumbledown green summer-house ; blackened with age . 
Its walls were of lattice-work , but there was still a roof which could give shelter . 
God knows when this summer-house was built . 
There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by a retired colonel called von Schmidt , who owned the house at that time . 
It was all in decay , the floor was rotting , the planks were loose , the woodwork smelled musty . 
In the summer-house there was a green wooden table fixed in the ground , and round it were some green benches upon which it was still possible to sit . 
Alyosha had at once observed his brother 's exhilarated condition , and on entering the arbour he saw half a bottle of brandy and a wineglass on the table . 
`` That 's brandy , '' Mitya laughed . 
`` I see your look : ` He 's drinking again '' Distrust the apparition . 
Distrust the worthless , lying crowd , And lay aside thy doubts . 
I 'm not drinking , I 'm only ` indulging , ' as that pig , your Rakitin , says . 
He 'll be a civil councillor one day , but he 'll always talk about ` indulging . ' 
Sit down . 
I could take you in my arms , Alyosha , and press you to my bosom till I crush you , for in the whole world - in reality - in real-i-ty - -LRB- can you take it in ? -RRB- 
I love no one but you ! 
He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation . 
`` No one but you and one ` jade ' I have fallen in love with , to my ruin . 
But being in love does n't mean loving . 
You may be in love with a woman and yet hate her . 
Remember that ! 
I can talk about it gaily still . 
Sit down here by the table and I 'll sit beside you and look at you , and go on talking . 
You shall keep quiet and I 'll go on talking , for the time has come . 
But on reflection , you know , I 'd better speak quietly , for here - here - you can never tell what ears are listening . 
I will explain everything ; as they say , ` the story will be continued . ' 
Why have I been longing for you ? 
Why have I been thirsting for you all these days , and just now ? 
-LRB- It 's five days since I 've cast anchor here . -RRB- 
Because it 's only to you I can tell everything ; because I must , because I need you , because to-morrow I shall fly from the clouds , because to-morrow life is ending and beginning . 
Have you ever felt , have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into a pit ? 
That 's just how I 'm falling , but not in a dream . 
And I 'm not afraid , and do n't you be afraid . 
At least , I am afraid , but I enjoy it . 
It 's not enjoyment though , but ecstasy . 
Damn it all , whatever it is ! 
A strong spirit , a weak spirit , a womanish spirit - what , ever it is ! 
Let us praise nature : you see what sunshine , how clear the sky is , the leaves are all green , it 's still summer ; four o'clock in the afternoon and the stillness ! 
Where were you going ? '' 
`` I was going to father 's , but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna 's first . '' 
`` To her , and to father ! 
Oo ! 
what a coincidence ! 
Why was I waiting for you ? 
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my ribs ? 
Why , to send you to father and to her , Katerina Ivanovna , so as to have done with her and with father . 
To send an angel . 
I might have sent anyone , but I wanted to send an angel . 
And here you are on your way to see father and her . '' 
`` Did you really mean to send me ? '' 
cried Alyosha with a distressed expression . 
`` Stay ! 
You knew it And I see you understand it all at once . 
But be quiet , be quiet for a time . 
Do n't be sorry , and do n't cry . '' 
Dmitri stood up , thought a moment , and put his finger to his forehead . 
`` She 's asked you , written to you a letter or something , that 's why you 're going to her ? 
You would n't be going except for that ? '' 
`` Here is her note . '' 
Alyosha took it out of his pocket . 
Mitya looked through it quickly . 
`` And you were going the backway ! 
Oh , gods , I thank you for sending him by the backway , and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old fishermen in the fable ! 
Listen , Alyosha , listen , brother ! 
Now I mean to tell you everything , for I must tell someone . 
An angel in heaven I 've told already ; but I want to tell an angel on earth . 
You are an angel on earth . 
You will hear and judge and forgive . 
And that 's what I need , that someone above me should forgive . 
Listen ! 
If two people break away from everything on earth and fly off into the unknown , or at least one of them , and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to someone else and says , ` Do this for me ' - some favour never asked before that could only be asked on one 's deathbed - would that other refuse , if he were a friend or a brother ? '' 
`` I will do it , but tell me what it is , and make haste , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste ! 
H 'm ! 
... Do n't be in a hurry , Alyosha , you hurry and worry yourself . 
There 's no need to hurry now . 
Now the world has taken a new turning . 
Ah , Alyosha , what a pity you ca n't understand ecstasy . 
But what am I saying to him ? 
As though you did n't understand it . 
What an ass I am ! 
What am I saying ? 
` Be noble , O man ! ' 
- who says that ? '' 
Alyosha made up his mind to wait . 
He felt that , perhaps , indeed , his work lay here . 
Mitya sank into thought for a moment , with his elbow on the table and his head in his hand . 
Both were silent . 
`` Alyosha , '' said Mitya , `` you 're the only one who wo n't laugh . 
I should like to begin - my confession - with Schiller 's Hymn to Joy , An die Freude ! 
I do n't know German , I only know it 's called that . 
Do n't think I 'm talking nonsense because I 'm drunk . 
I 'm not a bit drunk . 
Brandy 's all very well , but I need two bottles to make me drunk : Silenus with his rosy phiz Upon his stumbling ass . 
But I 've not drunk a quarter of a bottle , and I 'm not Silenus . 
I 'm not Silenus , though I am strong , * for I 've made a decision once for all . 
Forgive me the pun ; you 'll have to forgive me a lot more than puns to-day . 
Do n't be uneasy . 
I 'm not spinning it out . 
I 'm talking sense , and I 'll come to the point in a minute . 
I wo n't keep you in suspense . 
Stay , how does it go ? '' 
* In Russian , silen . 
He raised his head , thought a minute , and began with enthusiasm : Wild and fearful in his cavern Hid the naked troglodyte , And the homeless nomad wandered Laying waste the fertile plain . 
Menacing with spear and arrow In the woods the hunter strayed ... . 
Woe to all poor wretches stranded On those cruel and hostile shores ! 
From the peak of high Olympus Came the mother Ceres down , Seeking in those savage regions Her lost daughter Proserpine . 
But the Goddess found no refuge , Found no kindly welcome there , And no temple bearing witness To the worship of the gods . 
From the fields and from the vineyards Came no fruits to deck the feasts , Only flesh of bloodstained victims Smouldered on the altar-fires , And where'er the grieving goddess Turns her melancholy gaze , Sunk in vilest degradation Man his loathsomeness displays Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha 's hand . 
`` My dear , my dear , in degradation , in degradation now , too . 
There 's a terrible amount of suffering for man on earth , a terrible lot of trouble . 
Do n't think I 'm only a brute in an officer 's uniform , wallowing in dirt and drink . 
I hardly think of anything but of that degraded man - if only I 'm not lying . 
I pray God I 'm not lying and showing off . 
I think about that man because I am that man myself . 
Would he purge his soul from vileness And attain to light and worth , He must turn and cling for ever To his ancient Mother Earth . 
But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth . 
I do n't kiss her . 
I do n't cleave to her bosom . 
Am I to become a peasant or a shepherd ? 
I go on and I do n't know whether I 'm going to shame or to light and joy . 
That 's the trouble , for everything in the world is a riddle ! 
And whenever I 've happened to sink into the vilest degradation -LRB- and it 's always been happening -RRB- I always read that poem about Ceres and man . 
Has it reformed me ? 
Never ! 
For I 'm a Karamazov . 
For when I do leap into the pit , I go headlong with my heels up , and am pleased to be falling in that degrading attitude , and pride myself upon it . 
And in the very depths of that degradation I begin a hymn of praise . 
Let me be accursed . 
Let me be vile and base , only let me kiss the hem of the veil in which my God is shrouded . 
Though I may be following the devil , I am Thy son , O Lord , and I love Thee , and I feel the joy without which the world can not stand . 
Joy everlasting fostereth The soul of all creation , It is her secret ferment fires The cup of life with flame . 
'T is at her beck the grass hath turned Each blade towards the light And solar systems have evolved From chaos and dark night , Filling the realms of boundless space Beyond the sage 's sight . 
At bounteous Nature 's kindly breast , All things that breathe drink Joy , And birds and beasts and creeping things All follow where She leads . 
Her gifts to man are friends in need , The wreath , the foaming must , To angels - vision of God 's throne , To insects - sensual lust . 
But enough poetry ! 
I am in tears ; let me cry . 
It may be foolishness that everyone would laugh at . 
But you wo n't laugh . 
Your eyes are shining , too . 
Enough poetry . 
I want to tell you now about the insects to whom God gave ` sensual lust . ' 
To insects - sensual lust . 
I am that insect , brother , and it is said of me specially . 
All we Karamazovs are such insects , and , angel as you are , that insect lives in you , too , and will stir up a tempest in your blood . 
Tempests , because sensual lust is a tempest worse than a tempest ! 
Beauty is a terrible and awful thing ! 
It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never can be fathomed , for God sets us nothing but riddles . 
Here the boundaries meet and all contradictions exist side by side . 
I am a cultivated man , brother , but I 've thought a lot about this . 
It 's terrible what mysteries there are ! 
Too many riddles weigh men down on earth . 
We must solve them as we can , and try to keep a dry skin in the water . 
Beauty ! 
I ca n't endure the thought that a man of lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal of the Madonna and ends with the ideal of Sodom . 
What 's still more awful is that a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal of the Madonna , and his heart may be on fire with that ideal , genuinely on fire , just as in his days of youth and innocence . 
Yes , man is broad , too broad , indeed . 
I 'd have him narrower . 
The devil only knows what to make of it ! 
What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart . 
Is there beauty in Sodom ? 
Believe me , that for the immense mass of mankind beauty is found in Sodom . 
Did you know that secret ? 
The awful thing is that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible . 
God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man . 
But a man always talks of his own ache . 
Listen , now to come to facts . '' 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - In Anecdote `` I was leading a wild life then . 
Father said just now that I spent several thousand roubles in seducing young girls . 
That 's a swinish invention , and there was nothing of the sort . 
And if there was , I did n't need money simply for that . 
With me money is an accessory , the overflow of my heart , the framework . 
To-day she would be my lady , to-morrow a wench out of the streets in her place . 
I entertained them both . 
I threw away money by the handful on music , rioting , and Gypsies . 
Sometimes I gave it to the ladies , too , for they 'll take it greedily , that must be admitted , and be pleased and thankful for it . 
Ladies used to be fond of me : not all of them , but it happened , it happened . 
But I always liked side-paths , little dark back-alleys behind the main road - there one finds adventures and surprises , and precious metal in the dirt . 
I am speaking figuratively , brother . 
In the town I was in , there were no such back-alleys in the literal sense , but morally there were . 
If you were like me , you 'd know what that means . 
I loved vice , I loved the ignominy of vice . 
I loved cruelty ; am I not a bug , am I not a noxious insect ? 
In fact a Karamazov ! 
Once we went , a whole lot of us , for a picnic , in seven sledges . 
It was dark , it was winter , and I began squeezing a girl 's hand , and forced her to kiss me . 
She was the daughter of an official , a sweet , gentle , submissive creature . 
She allowed me , she allowed me much in the dark . 
She thought , poor thing , that I should come next day to make her an offer -LRB- I was looked upon as a good match , too -RRB- . 
But I did n't say a word to her for five months . 
I used to see her in a corner at dances -LRB- we were always having dances -RRB- , her eyes watching me . 
I saw how they glowed with fire - a fire of gentle indignation . 
This game only tickled that insect lust I cherished in my soul . 
Five months later she married an official and left the town , still angry , and still , perhaps , in love with me . 
Now they live happily . 
Observe that I told no one . 
I did n't boast of it . 
Though I 'm full of low desires , and love what 's low , I 'm not dishonourable . 
You 're blushing ; your eyes flashed . 
Enough of this filth with you . 
And all this was nothing much - wayside blossoms a la Paul de Kock - though the cruel insect had already grown strong in my soul . 
I 've a perfect album of reminiscences , brother . 
God bless them , the darlings . 
I tried to break it off without quarrelling . 
And I never gave them away , I never bragged of one of them . 
But that 's enough . 
You ca n't suppose I brought you here simply to talk of such nonsense . 
No , I 'm going to tell you something more curious ; and do n't be surprised that I 'm glad to tell you , instead of being ashamed . '' 
`` You say that because I blushed , '' Alyosha said suddenly . 
`` I was n't blushing at what you were saying or at what you 've done . 
I blushed because I am the same as you are . '' 
`` You ? 
Come , that 's going a little too far ! '' 
`` No , it 's not too far , '' said Alyosha warmly -LRB- obviously the idea was not a new one -RRB- . 
`` The ladder 's the same . 
I 'm at the bottom step , and you 're above , somewhere about the thirteenth . 
That 's how I see it . 
But it 's all the same . 
Absolutely the same in kind . 
Anyone on the bottom step is bound to go up to the top one . '' 
`` Then one ought not to step on at all . '' 
`` Anyone who can help it had better not . '' 
`` But can you ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` Hush , Alyosha , hush , darling ! 
I could kiss your hand , you touch me so . 
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men . 
She told me once that she 'd devour you one day . 
There , there , I wo n't ! 
From this field of corruption fouled by flies , let 's pass to my tragedy , also befouled by flies , that is , by every sort of vileness . 
Although the old man told lies about my seducing innocence , there really was something of the sort in my tragedy , though it was only once , and then it did not come off . 
The old man who has reproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact ; I never told anyone about it . 
You 're the first , except Ivan , of course - Ivan knows everything . 
He knew about it long before you . 
But Ivan 's a tomb . '' 
`` Ivan 's a tomb ? '' 
Alyosha listened with great attention . 
`` I was lieutenant in a line regiment , but still I was under supervision , like a kind of convict . 
Yet I was awfully well received in the little town . 
I spent money right and left . 
I was thought to be rich ; I thought so myself . 
But I must have pleased them in other ways as well . 
Although they shook their heads over me , they liked me . 
My colonel , who was an old man , took a sudden dislike to me . 
He was always down upon me , but I had powerful friends , and , moreover , all the town was on my side , so he could n't do me much harm . 
I was in fault myself for refusing to treat him with proper respect . 
I was proud . 
This obstinate old fellow , who was really a very good sort , kind-hearted and hospitable , had had two wives , both dead . 
His first wife , who was of a humble family , left a daughter as unpretentious as herself . 
She was a young woman of four and twenty when I was there , and was living with her father and an aunt , her mother 's sister . 
The aunt was simple and illiterate ; the niece was simple but lively . 
I like to say nice things about people . 
I never knew a woman of more charming character than Agafya - fancy , her name was Agafya Ivanovna ! 
And she was n't bad-looking either , in the Russian style : tall , stout , with a full figure , and beautiful eyes , though a rather coarse face . 
She had not married , although she had had two suitors . 
She refused them , but was as cheerful as ever . 
I was intimate with her , not in ` that ' way , it was pure friendship . 
I have often been friendly with women quite innocently . 
I used to talk to her with shocking frankness , and she only laughed . 
Many woman like such freedom , and she was a girl too , which made it very amusing . 
Another thing , one could never think of her as a young lady . 
She and her aunt lived in her father 's house with a sort of voluntary humility , not putting themselves on an equality with other people . 
She was a general favourite , and of use of everyone , for she was a clever dressmaker . 
She had a talent for it . 
She gave her services freely without asking for payment , but if anyone offered her payment , she did n't refuse . 
The colonel , of course , was a very different matter . 
He was one of the chief personages in the district . 
He kept open house , entertained the whole town , gave suppers and dances . 
At the time I arrived and joined the battalion , all the town was talking of the expected return of the colonel 's second daughter , a great beauty , who had just left a fashionable school in the capital . 
This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna , and she was the child of the second wife , who belonged to a distinguished general 's family ; although , as I learnt on good authority , she too brought the colonel no money . 
She had connections , and that was all . 
There may have been expectations , but they had come to nothing . 
`` Yet , when the young lady came from boarding-school on a visit , the whole town revived . 
Our most distinguished ladies - two ` Excellencies ' and a colonel 's wife - and all the rest following their lead , at once took her up and gave entertainments in her honour . 
She was the belle of the balls and picnics , and they got up tableaux vivants in aid of distressed governesses . 
I took no notice , I went on as wildly as before , and one of my exploits at the time set all the town talking . 
I saw her eyes taking my measure one evening at the battery commander 's , but I did n't go up to her , as though I disdained her acquaintance . 
I did go up and speak to her at an evening party not long after . 
She scarcely looked at me , and compressed her lips scornfully . 
` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have my revenge , ' thought I. I behaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time , and I was conscious of it myself . 
What made it worse was that I felt that ` Katenka ' was not an innocent boarding-school miss , but a person of character , proud and really high-principled ; above all , she had education and intellect , and I had neither . 
You think I meant to make her an offer ? 
No , I simply wanted to revenge myself , because I was such a hero and she did n't seem to feel it . 
