Where can one sit down ? '' 
He went to the other end of the table , moved up a chair and sat down on it . 
`` Why do you look at me without speaking ? 
We only come with one question , and I swear I wo n't go without an answer . 
Has the young lady , Katerina Ivanovna , been with you ? '' 
Smerdyakov still remained silent , looking quietly at Ivan as before . 
Suddenly , with a motion of his hand , he turned his face away . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Nothing . '' 
`` What do you mean by ` nothing ' ? '' 
`` Yes , she has . 
It 's no matter to you . 
Let me alone . '' 
`` No , I wo n't let you alone . 
Tell me , when was she here ? '' 
`` Why , I 'd quite forgotten about her , '' said Smerdyakov , with a scornful smile , and turning his face to Ivan again , he stared at him with a look of frenzied hatred , the same look that he had fixed on him at their last interview , a month before . 
`` You seem very ill yourself , your face is sunken ; you do n't look like yourself , '' he said to Ivan . 
`` Never mind my health , tell me what I ask you. , `` But why are your eyes so yellow ? 
The whites are quite yellow . 
Are you so worried ? '' 
He smiled contemptuously and suddenly laughed outright . 
`` Listen ; I 've told you I wo n't go away without an answer ! '' 
Ivan cried , intensely irritated . 
`` Why do you keep pestering me ? 
Why do you torment me ? '' 
said Smerdyakov , with a look of suffering . 
`` Damn it ! 
I 've nothing to do with you . 
Just answer my question and I 'll go away . '' 
`` I 've no answer to give you , '' said Smerdyakov , looking down again . 
`` You may be sure I 'll make you answer ! '' 
`` Why are you so uneasy ? '' 
Smerdyakov stared at him , not simply with contempt , but almost with repulsion . 
`` Is this because the trial begins to-morrow ? 
Nothing will happen to you ; ca n't you believe that at last ? 
Go home , go to bed and sleep in peace , do n't be afraid of anything . '' 
`` I do n't understand you ... . 
What have I to be afraid of to-morrow ? '' 
Ivan articulated in astonishment , and suddenly a chill breath of fear did in fact pass over his soul . 
Smerdyakov measured him with his eyes . 
`` You do n't understand ? '' 
he drawled reproachfully . 
`` It 's a strange thing a sensible man should care to play such a farce ! '' 
Ivan looked at him speechless . 
The startling , incredibly supercilious tone of this man who had once been his valet , was extraordinary in itself . 
He had not taken such a tone even at their last interview . 
`` I tell you , you 've nothing to be afraid of . 
I wo n't say anything about you ; there 's no proof against you . 
I say , how your hands are trembling ! 
Why are your fingers moving like that ? 
Go home , you did not murder him . '' 
Ivan started . 
He remembered Alyosha . 
`` I know it was not I , '' he faltered . 
`` Do you ? '' 
Smerdyakov caught him up again . 
Ivan jumped up and seized him by the shoulder . 
`` Tell me everything , you viper ! 
Tell me everything ! '' 
Smerdyakov was not in the least scared . 
He only riveted his eyes on Ivan with insane hatred . 
`` Well , it was you who murdered him , if that 's it , '' he whispered furiously . 
Ivan sank back on his chair , as though pondering something . 
He laughed malignantly . 
`` You mean my going away . 
What you talked about last time ? '' 
`` You stood before me last time and understood it all , and you understand it now . '' 
`` All I understand is that you are mad . '' 
`` Are n't you tired of it ? 
Here we are face to face ; what 's the use of going on keeping up a farce to each other ? 
Are you still trying to throw it all on me , to my face ? 
You murdered him ; you are the real murderer , I was only your instrument , your faithful servant , and it was following your words I did it . '' 
`` Did it ? 
Why , did you murder him ? '' 
Ivan turned cold . 
Something seemed to give way in his brain , and he shuddered all over with a cold shiver . 
Then Smerdyakov himself looked at him wonderingly ; probably the genuineness of Ivan 's horror struck him . 
`` You do n't mean to say you really did not know ? '' 
he faltered mistrustfully , looking with a forced smile into his eyes . 
Ivan still gazed at him , and seemed unable to speak . 
Ach , Vanka 's gone to Petersburg ; I wo n't wait till he comes back , suddenly echoed in his head . 
`` Do you know , I am afraid that you are a dream , a phantom sitting before me , '' he muttered . 
`` There 's no phantom here , but only us two and one other . 
No doubt he is here , that third , between us . '' 
`` Who is he ? 
Who is here ? 
What third person ? '' 
Ivan cried in alarm , looking about him , his eyes hastily searching in every corner . 
`` That third is God Himself - Providence . 
He is the third beside us now . 
Only do n't look for Him , you wo n't find him . '' 
`` It 's a lie that you killed him ! '' 
Ivan cried madly . 
`` You are mad , or teasing me again ! '' 
Smerdyakov , as before , watched him curiously , with no sign of fear . 
He could still scarcely get over his incredulity ; he still fancied that Ivan knew everything and was trying to `` throw it all on him to his face . '' 
`` Wait a minute , '' he said at last in a weak voice , and suddenly bringing up his left leg from under the table , he began turning up his trouser leg . 
He was wearing long white stockings and slippers . 
Slowly he took off his garter and fumbled to the bottom of his stocking . 
Ivan gazed at him , and suddenly shuddered in a paroxysm of terror . 
`` He 's mad ! '' 
he cried , and rapidly jumping up , he drew back , so that he knocked his back against the wall and stood up against it , stiff and straight . 
He looked with insane terror at Smerdyakov , who , entirely unaffected by his terror , continued fumbling in his stocking , as though he were making an effort to get hold of something with his fingers and pull it out . 
At last he got hold of it and began pulling it out . 
Ivan saw that it was a piece of paper , or perhaps a roll of papers . 
Smerdyakov pulled it out and laid it on the table . 
`` Here , '' he said quietly . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Ivan , trembling . 
`` Kindly look at it , '' Smerdyakov answered , still in the same low tone . 
Ivan stepped up to the table , took up the roll of paper and began unfolding it , but suddenly drew back his fingers , as though from contact with a loathsome reptile . 
`` Your hands keep twitching , '' observed Smerdyakov , and he deliberately unfolded the bundle himself . 
Under the wrapper were three packets of hundred-rouble notes . 
`` They are all here , all the three thousand roubles ; you need not count them . 
Take them , '' Smerdyakov suggested to Ivan , nodding at the notes . 
Ivan sank back in his chair . 
He was as white as a handkerchief . 
`` You frightened me ... with your stocking , '' he said , with a strange grin . 
`` Can you really not have known till now ? '' 
Smerdyakov asked once more . 
`` No , I did not know . 
I kept thinking of Dmitri . 
Brother , brother ! 
Ach ! '' 
He suddenly clutched his head in both hands . 
`` Listen . 
Did you kill him alone ? 
With my brother 's help or without ? '' 
`` It was only with you , with your help , I killed him , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch is quite innocent . '' 
`` All right , all right . 
Talk about me later . 
Why do I keep on trembling ? 
I ca n't speak properly . '' 
`` You were bold enough then . 
You said ` everything was lawful , ' and how frightened you are now , '' Smerdyakov muttered in surprise . 
`` Wo n't you have some lemonade ? 
I 'll ask for some at once . 
It 's very refreshing . 
Only I must hide this first . '' 
And again he motioned at the notes . 
He was just going to get up and call at the door to Marya Kondratyevna to make some lemonade and bring it them , but , looking for something to cover up the notes that she might not see them , he first took out his handkerchief , and as it turned out to be very dirty , took up the big yellow book that Ivan had noticed at first lying on the table , and put it over the notes . 
The book was The Sayings of the Holy Father Isaac the Syrian . 
Ivan read it mechanically . 
`` I wo n't have any lemonade , '' he said . 
`` Talk of me later . 
Sit down and tell me how you did it . 
Tell me all about it . '' 
`` You 'd better take off your greatcoat , or you 'll be too hot . '' 
Ivan , as though he 'd only just thought of it , took off his coat , and , without getting up from his chair , threw it on the bench . 
`` Speak , please , speak . '' 
He seemed calmer . 
He waited , feeling sure that Smerdyakov would tell him all about it . 
`` How it was done ? '' 
sighed Smerdyakov . 
`` It was done in a most natural way , following your very words . '' 
`` Of my words later , '' Ivan broke in again , apparently with complete self-possession , firmly uttering his words , and not shouting as before . 
`` Only tell me in detail how you did it . 
Everything , as it happened . 
Do n't forget anything . 
The details , above everything , the details , I beg you . '' 
`` You 'd gone away , then I fell into the cellar . '' 
`` In a fit or in a sham one ? '' 
`` A sham one , naturally . 
I shammed it all . 
I went quietly down the steps to the very bottom and lay down quietly , and as I lay down I gave a scream , and struggled , till they carried me out . '' 
`` Stay ! 
And were you shamming all along , afterwards , and in the hospital ? '' 
`` No , not at all . 
Next day , in the morning , before they took me to the hospital , I had a real attack and a more violent one than I 've had for years . 
For two days I was quite unconscious . '' 
`` All right , all right . 
Go on . '' 
`` They laid me on the bed . 
I knew I 'd be the other side of the partition , for whenever I was ill , Marfa Ignatyevna used to put me there , near them . 
She 's always been very kind to me , from my birth up . 
At night I moaned , but quietly . 
I kept expecting Dmitri Fyodorovitch to come . '' 
`` Expecting him ? 
To come to you ? '' 
`` Not to me . 
I expected him to come into the house , for I 'd no doubt that he 'd come that night , for being without me and getting no news , he 'd be sure to come and climb over the fence , as he used to , and do something . '' 
`` And if he had n't come ? '' 
`` Then nothing would have happened . 
I should never have brought myself to it without him . '' 
`` All right , all right . 
speak more intelligibly , do n't hurry ; above all , do n't leave anything out ! '' 
`` I expected him to kill Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I thought that was certain , for I had prepared him for it ... during the last few days ... . 
He knew about the knocks , that was the chief thing . 
With his suspiciousness and the fury which had been growing in him all those days , he was bound to get into the house by means of those taps . 
That was inevitable , so I was expecting him . '' 
`` Stay , '' Ivan interrupted ; `` if he had killed him , he would have taken the money and carried it away ; you must have considered that . 
What would you have got by it afterwards ? 
I do n't see . '' 
0 `` But he would never have found the money . 
That was only what I told him , that the money was under the mattress . 
But that was n't true . 
It had been lying in a box . 
And afterwards I suggested to Fyodor Pavlovitch , as I was the only person he trusted , to hide the envelope with the notes in the corner behind the ikons , for no one would have guessed that place , especially if they came in a hurry . 
So that 's where the envelope lay , in the corner behind the ikons . 
It would have been absurd to keep it under the mattress ; the box , anyway , could be locked . 
But all believe it was under the mattress . 
A stupid thing to believe . 
So if Dmitri Fyodorovitch had committed the murder , finding nothing , he would either have run away in a hurry , afraid of every sound , as always happens with murderers , or he would have been arrested . 
So I could always have clambered up to the ikons and have taken away the money next moming or even that night , and it would have all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I could reckon upon that . '' 
`` But what if he did not kill him , but only knocked him down ? '' 
`` If he did not kill him , of course , I would not have ventured to take the money , and nothing would have happened . 
But I calculated that he would beat him senseless , and I should have time to take it then , and then I 'd make out to Fyodor Pavlovitch that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitch who had taken the money after beating him . '' 
`` Stop ... I am getting mixed . 
Then it was Dmitri after all who killed him ; you only took the money ? '' 
`` No , he did n't kill him . 
Well , I might as well have told you now that he was the murderer ... . 
But I do n't want to lie to you now because ... because if you really have n't understood till now , as I see for myself , and are not pretending , so as to throw your guilt on me to my very face , you are still responsible for it all , since you knew of the murder and charged me to do it , and went away knowing all about it . 
And so I want to prove to your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in the whole affair , and I am not the real murderer , though I did kill him . 
You are the rightful murderer . '' 
`` Why , why , am I a murderer ? 
Oh , God ! '' 
Ivan cried , unable to restrain himself at last , and forgetting that he had put off discussing himself till the end of the conversation . 
`` You still mean that Tchermashnya ? 
Stay , tell me , why did you want my consent , if you really took Tchermashnya for consent ? 
How will you explain that now ? '' 
`` Assured of your consent , I should have known that you would n't have made an outcry over those three thousand being lost , even if I 'd been suspected , instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , or as his accomplice ; on the contrary , you would have protected me from others ... . 
And when you got your inheritance you would have rewarded me when you were able , all the rest of your life . 
For you 'd have received your inheritance through me , seeing that if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna , you would n't have had a farthing . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Then you intended to worry me all my life afterwards , '' snarled Ivan . 
`` And what if I had n't gone away then , but had informed against you ? '' 
`` What could you have informed ? 
That I persuaded you to go to Tcherinashnya ? 
That 's all nonsense . 
Besides , after our conversation you would either have gone away or have stayed . 
If you had stayed , nothing would have happened . 
I should have known that you did n't want it done , and should have attempted nothing . 
As you went away , it meant you assured me that you would n't dare to inform against me at the trial , and that you 'd overlook my having the three thousand . 
And , indeed , you could n't have prosecuted me afterwards , because then I should have told it all in the court ; that is , not that I had stolen the money or killed him - I should n't have said that - but that you 'd put me up to the theft and the murder , though I did n't consent to it . 
That 's why I needed your consent , so that you could n't have cornered me afterwards , for what proof could you have had ? 
I could always have cornered you , revealing your eagerness for your father 's death , and I tell you the public would have believed it all , and you would have been ashamed for the rest of your life . '' 
`` Was I then so eager , was I ? '' 
Ivan snarled again . 
`` To be sure you were , and by your consent you silently sanctioned my doing it . '' 
Smerdyakov looked resolutely at Ivan . 
He was very weak and spoke slowly and wearily , but some hidden inner force urged him on . 
He evidently had some design . 
Ivan felt that . 
`` Go on , '' he said . 
`` Tell me what happened that night . '' 
`` What more is there to tell ! 
I lay there and I thought I heard the master shout . 
And before that Grigory Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and came out , and he suddenly gave a scream , and then all was silence and darkness . 
I lay there waiting , my heart beating ; I could n't bear it . 
I got up at last , went out . 
I saw the window open on the left into the garden , and I stepped to the left to listen whether he was sitting there alive , and I heard the master moving about , sighing , so I knew he was alive . 
` Ech ! ' 
I thought . 
I went to the window and shouted to the master , ` It 's I. ' And he shouted to me , ` He 's been , he 's been ; he 's run away . ' 
He meant Dmitri Fyodorovitch had been . 
` He 's killed Grigory ! 
`` Where ? ' 
I whispered . 
` There , in the corner , ' he pointed . 
He was whispering , too . 
` Wait a bit , '' I said . 
I went to the corner of the garden to look , and there I came upon Grigory Vassilyevitch lying by the wall , covered with blood , senseless . 
So it 's true that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here , was the thought that came into my head , and I determined on the spot to make an end of it , as Grigory Vassilyevitch , even if he were alive , would see nothing of it , as he lay there senseless . 
The only risk was that Marfa Ignatyevna might wake up . 
I felt that at the moment , but the longing to get it done came over me , till I could scarcely breathe . 
I went back to the window to the master and said , ` She 's here , she 's come ; Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , wants to be let in . ' 
And he started like a baby . 
` Where is she ? ' 
he fairly gasped , but could n't believe it . 
` She 's standing there , ' said I. ` Open . ' 
He looked out of the window at me , half believing and half distrustful , but afraid to open . 
` Why , he is afraid of me now , ' I thought . 
And it was funny . 
I bethought me to knock on the window-frame those taps we 'd agreed upon as a signal that Grushenka had come , in his presence , before his eyes . 
He did n't seem to believe my word , but as soon as he heard the taps , he ran at once to open the door . 
He opened it . 
I would have gone in , but he stood in the way to prevent me passing . 
` Where is she ? 
Where is she ? ' 
He looked at me , all of a tremble . 
` Well , ' thought I , ` if he 's so frightened of me as all that , it 's a bad lookout ! ' 
And my legs went weak with fright that he would n't let me in or would call out , or Marfa Ignatyevna would run up , or something else might happen . 
I do n't remember now , but I must have stood pale , facing him . 
I whispered to him , ` Why , she 's there , there , under the window ; how is it you do n't see her ? ' 
I said . 
` Bring her then , bring her . ' 
` She 's afraid , ' said I ; ` she was frightened at the noise , she 's hidden in the bushes ; go and call to her yourself from the study . ' 
He ran to the window , put the candle in the window . 
` Grushenka , ' he cried , ` Grushenka , are you here ? ' 
Though he cried that , he did n't want to lean out of the window , he did n't want to move away from me , for he was panic-stricken ; he was so frightened he did n't dare to turn his back on me . 
` Why , here she is , ' said I. I went up to the window and leaned right out of it . 
` Here she is ; she 's in the bush , laughing at you , do n't you see her ? ' 
He suddenly believed it ; he was all of a shake - he was awfully crazy about her - and he leaned right out of the window . 
I snatched up that iron paper-weight from his table ; do you remember , weighing about three pounds ? 
I swung it and hit him on the top of the skull with the corner of it . 
He did n't even cry out . 
He only sank down suddenly , and I hit him again and a third time . 
And the third time I knew I 'd broken his skull . 
He suddenly rolled on his back , face upwards , covered with blood . 
I looked round . 
There was no blood on me , not a spot . 
I wiped the paper-weight , put it back , went up to the ikons , took the money out of the envelope , and flung the envelope on the floor and the pink ribbon beside it . 
I went out into the garden all of a tremble , straight to the apple-tree with a hollow in it - you know that hollow . 
I 'd marked it long before and put a rag and a piece of paper ready in it . 
I wrapped all the notes in the rag and stuffed it deep down in the hole . 
And there it stayed for over a fortnight . 
I took it out later , when I came out of the hospital . 
I went back to my bed , lay down and thought , ` If Grigory Vassilyevitch has been killed outright it may be a bad job for me , but if he is not killed and recovers , it will be first-rate , for then he 'll bear witness that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here , and so he must have killed him and taken the money . ' 
Then I began groaning with suspense and impatience , so as to wake Marfa Ignatyevna as soon as possible . 
At last she got up and she rushed to me , but when she saw Grigory Vassilyevitch was not there , she ran out , and I heard her scream in the garden . 
And that set it all going and set my mind at rest . '' 
He stopped . 
Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence without stirring or taking his eyes off him . 
As he told his story Smerdyakov glanced at him from time to time , but for the most part kept his eyes averted . 
When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathing hard . 
The perspiration stood out on his face . 
But it was impossible to tell whether it was remorse he was feeling , or what . 
`` Stay , '' cried Ivan pondering . 
`` What about the door ? 
If he only opened the door to you , how could Grigory have seen it open before ? 
For Grigory saw it before you went . '' 
It was remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably , in a different tone , not angry as before , so if anyone had opened the door at that moment and peeped in at them , he would certainly have concluded that they were talking peaceably about some ordinary , though interesting , subject . 
`` As for that door and having seen it open , that 's only his fancy , '' said Smerdyakov , with a wry smile . 
`` He is not a man , I assure you , but an obstinate mule . 
He did n't see it , but fancied he had seen it , and there 's no shaking him . 
It 's just our luck he took that notion into his head , for they ca n't fail to convict Dmitri Fyodorovitch after that . '' 
`` Listen ... '' said Ivan , beginning to seem bewildered again and making an effort to grasp something . 
`` Listen . 
There are a lot of questions I want to ask you , but I forget them ... I keep forgetting and getting mixed up . 
Yes . 
Tell me this at least , why did you open the envelope and leave it there on the floor ? 
Why did n't you simply carry off the envelope ? 
... When you were telling me , I thought you spoke about it as though it were the right thing to do ... but why , I ca n't understand ... '' `` I did that for a good reason . 
For if a man had known all about it , as I did for instance , if he 'd seen those notes before , and perhaps had put them in that envelope himself , and had seen the envelope sealed up and addressed , with his own eyes , if such a man had done the murder , what should have made him tear open the envelope afterwards , especially in such desperate haste , since he 'd know for certain the notes must be in the envelope ? 
No , if the robber had been someone like me , he 'd simply have put the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast as he could . 
But it 'd be quite different with Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
He only knew about the envelope by hearsay ; he had never seen it , and if he 'd found it , for instance , under the mattress , he 'd have torn it open as quickly as possible to make sure the notes were in it . 
And he 'd have thrown the envelope down , without having time to think that it would be evidence against him . 
Because he was not an habitual thief and had never directly stolen anything before , for he is a gentleman born , and if he did bring himself to steal , it would not be regular stealing , but simply taking what was his own , for he 'd told the whole town he meant to before , and had even bragged aloud before everyone that he 'd go and take his property from Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I did n't say that openly to the prosecutor when I was being examined , but quite the contrary , I brought him to it by a hint , as though I did n't see it myself , and as though he 'd thought of it himself and I had n't prompted him ; so that Mr. Prosecutor 's mouth positively watered at my suggestion . '' 
`` But can you possibly have thought of all that on the spot ? '' 
cried Ivan , overcome with astonishment . 
He looked at Smerdyakov again with alarm . 
`` Mercy on us ! 
Could anyone think of it all in such a desperate hurry ? 
It was all thought out beforehand . '' 
`` Well ... well , it was the devil helped you ! '' 
Ivan cried again . 
`` No , you are not a fool , you are far cleverer than I thought ... '' He got up , obviously intending to walk across the room . 
He was in terrible distress . 
But as the table blocked his way , and there was hardly room to pass between the table and the wall , he only turned round where he stood and sat down again . 
Perhaps the impossibility of moving irritated him , as he suddenly cried out almost as furiously as before . 
`` Listen , you miserable , contemptible creature ! 
Do n't you understand that if I have n't killed you , it 's simply because I am keeping you to answer to-morrow at the trial . 
God sees , '' Ivan raised his hand , `` perhaps I , too , was guilty ; perhaps I really had a secret desire for my father 's ... death , but I swear I was not as guilty as you think , and perhaps I did n't urge you on at all . 
No , no , I did n't urge you on ! 
But no matter , I will give evidence against myself to-morrow at the trial . 
I 'm determined to ! 
I shall tell everything , everything . 
But we 'll make our appearance together . 
And whatever you may say against me at the trial , whatever evidence you give , I 'll face it ; I am not afraid of you . 
I 'll confirm it all myself ! 
But you must confess , too ! 
You must , you must ; we 'll go together . 
That 's how it shall be ! '' 
Ivan said this solemnly and resolutely and from his flashing eyes alone it could be seen that it would be so . 
`` You are ill , I see ; you are quite ill . 
Your eyes are yellow , '' Smerdyakov commented , without the least irony , with apparent sympathy in fact . 
`` We 'll go together , '' Ivan repeated . 
`` And if you wo n't go , no matter , I 'll go alone . '' 
Smerdyakov paused as though pondering . 
`` There 'll be nothing of the sort , and you wo n't go , '' he concluded at last positively . 
`` You do n't understand me , '' Ivan exclaimed reproachfully . 
`` You 'll be too much ashamed , if you confess it all . 
And , what 's more , it will be no use at all , for I shall say straight out that I never said anything of the sort to you , and that you are either ill -LRB- and it looks like it , too -RRB- , or that you 're so sorry for your brother that you are sacrificing yourself to save him and have invented it all against me , for you 've always thought no more of me than if I 'd been a fly . 
And who will believe you , and what single proof have you got ? '' 
`` Listen , you showed me those notes just now to convince me . '' 
Smerdyakov lifted the book off the notes and laid it on one side . 
`` Take that money away with you , '' Smerdyakov sighed . 
`` Of course , I shall take it . 
But why do you give it to me , if you committed the murder for the sake of it ? '' 
Ivan looked at him with great surprise . 
`` I do n't want it , '' Smerdyakov articulated in a shaking voice , with a gesture of refusal . 
`` I did have an idea of beginning a new life with that money in Moscow or , better still , abroad . 
I did dream of it , chiefly because ` all things are lawful . ' 
That was quite right what you taught me , for you talked a lot to me about that . 
For if there 's no everlasting God , there 's no such thing as virtue , and there 's no need of it . 
You were right there . 
So that 's how I looked at it . '' 
`` Did you come to that of yourself ? '' 
asked Ivan , with a wry smile . 
`` With your guidance . '' 
`` And now , I suppose , you believe in God , since you are giving back the money ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe , '' whispered Smerdyakov . 
`` Then why are you giving it back ? '' 
`` Leave off ... that 's enough ! '' 
Smerdyakov waved his hand again . 
`` You used to say yourself that everything was lawful , so now why are you so upset , too ? 
You even want to go and give evidence against yourself ... . 
Only there 'll be nothing of the sort ! 
You wo n't go to give evidence , '' Smerdyakov decided with conviction . 
`` You 'll see , '' said Ivan . 
`` It is n't possible . 
You are very clever . 
You are fond of money , I know that . 
You like to be respected , too , for you 're very proud ; you are far too fond of female charms , too , and you mind most of all about living in undisturbed comfort , without having to depend on anyone - that 's what you care most about . 
You wo n't want to spoil your life for ever by taking such a disgrace on yourself . 
You are like Fyodor Pavlovitch , you are more like him than any of his children ; you 've the same soul as he had . '' 
`` You are not a fool , '' said Ivan , seeming struck . 
The blood rushed to his face . 
`` You are serious now ! '' 
he observed , looking suddenly at Smerdyakov with a different expression . 
`` It was your pride made you think I was a fool . 
Take the money . '' 
Ivan took the three rolls of notes and put them in his pocket without wrapping them in anything . 
`` I shall show them at the court to-morrow , '' he said . 
`` Nobody will believe you , as you 've plenty of money of your own ; you may simply have taken it out of your cash-box and brought it to the court . '' 
Ivan rose from his seat . 
`` I repeat , '' he said , `` the only reason I have n't killed you is that I need you for to-morrow , remember that , do n't forget it ! '' 
`` Well , kill me . 
Kill me now , '' Smerdyakov said , all at once looking strangely at Ivan . 
`` You wo n't dare do that even ! '' 
he added , with a bitter smile . 
`` You wo n't dare to do anything , you , who used to be so bold ! '' 
`` Till to-morrow , '' cried Ivan , and moved to go out . 
`` Stay a moment ... . 
Show me those notes again . '' 
Ivan took out the notes and showed them to him . 
Smerdyakov looked at them for ten seconds . 
`` Well , you can go , '' he said , with a wave of his hand . 
`` Ivan Fyodorovitch ! '' 
he called after him again . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
Ivan turned without stopping . 
`` Good-bye ! '' 
`` Till to-morrow ! '' 
Ivan cried again , and he walked out of the cottage . 
The snowstorm was still raging . 
He walked the first few steps boldly , but suddenly began staggering . 
`` It 's something physical , '' he thought with a grin . 
Something like joy was springing up in his heart . 
He was conscious of unbounded resolution ; he would make an end of the wavering that had so tortured him of late . 
His determination was taken , `` and now it will not be changed , '' he thought with relief . 
At that moment he stumbled against something and almost fell down . 
Stopping short , he made out at his feet the peasant he had knocked down , still lying senseless and motionless . 
The snow had almost covered his face . 
Ivan seized him and lifted him in his arms . 
Seeing a light in the little house to the right he went up , knocked at the shutters , and asked the man to whom the house belonged to help him carry the peasant to the police station , promising him three roubles . 
The man got ready and came out . 
I wo n't describe in detail how Ivan succeeded in his object , bringing the peasant to the police-station and arranging for a doctor to see him at once , providing with a liberal hand for the expenses . 
I will only say that this business took a whole hour , but Ivan was well content with it . 
His mind wandered and worked incessantly . 
`` If I had not taken my decision so firmly for to-morrow , '' he reflected with satisfaction , `` I should not have stayed a whole hour to look after the peasant , but should have passed by , without caring about his being frozen . 
I am quite capable of watching myself , by the way , '' he thought at the same instant , with still greater satisfaction , `` although they have decided that I am going out of my mind ! '' 
Just as he reached his own house he stopped short , asking himself suddenly had n't he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell him everything . 
He decided the question by turning back to the house . 
`` Everything together to-morrow ! '' 
he whispered to himself , and , strange to say , almost all his gladness and selfsatisfaction passed in one instant . 
As he entered his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on his heart , like a recollection or , more exactly , a reminder , of something agonising and revolting that was in that room now , at that moment , and had been there before . 
He sank wearily on his sofa . 
The old woman brought him a samovar ; he made tea , but did not touch it . 
He sat on the sofa and felt giddy . 
He felt that he was ill and helpless . 
He was beginning to drop asleep , but got up uneasily and walked across the room to shake off his drowsiness . 
At moments he fancied he was delirious , but it was not illness that he thought of most . 
Sitting down again , he began looking round , as though searching for something . 
This happened several times . 
At last his eyes were fastened intently on one point . 
Ivan smiled , but an angry flush suffused his face . 
He sat a long time in his place , his head propped on both arms , though he looked sideways at the same point , at the sofa that stood against the opposite wall . 
There was evidently something , some object , that irritated him there , worried him and tormented him . 
The Devil . 
Ivan 's Nightmare I AM NOT a doctor , but yet I feel that the moment has come when I must inevitably give the reader some account of the nature of Ivan 's illness . 
Anticipating events I can say at least one thing : he was at that moment on the very eve of an attack of brain fever . 
Though his health had long been affected , it had offered a stubborn resistance to the fever which in the end gained complete mastery over it . 
Though I know nothing of medicine , I venture to hazard the suggestion that he really had perhaps , by a terrible effort of will , succeeded in delaying the attack for a time , hoping , of course , to check it completely . 
He knew that he was unwell , but he loathed the thought of being ill at that fatal time , at the approaching crisis in his life , when he needed to have all his wits about him , to say what he had to say boldly and resolutely and `` to justify himself to himself . '' 
He had , however , consulted the new doctor , who had been brought from Moscow by a fantastic notion of Katerina Ivanovna 's to which I have referred already . 
After listening to him and examining him the doctor came to the conclusion that he was actually suffering from some disorder of the brain , and was not at all surprised by an admission which Ivan had reluctantly made him . 
`` Hallucinations are quite likely in your condition , '' the doctor opined , ` though it would be better to verify them ... you must take steps at once , without a moment 's delay , or things will go badly with you . '' 
But Ivan did not follow this judicious advice and did not take to his bed to be nursed . 
`` I am walking about , so I am strong enough , if I drop , it 'll be different then , anyone may nurse me who likes , '' he decided , dismissing the subject . 
And so he was sitting almost conscious himself of his delirium and , as I have said already , looking persistently at some object on the sofa against the opposite wall . 
Someone appeared to be sitting there , though goodness knows how he had come in , for he had not been in the room when Ivan came into it , on his return from Smerdyakov . 
This was a person or , more accurately speaking , a Russian gentleman of a particular kind , no longer young , qui faisait la cinquantaine , * as the French say , with rather long , still thick , dark hair , slightly streaked with grey and a small pointed beard . 
He was wearing a brownish reefer jacket , rather shabby , evidently made by a good tailor though , and of a fashion at least three years old , that had been discarded by smart and well-to-do people for the last two years . 
His linen and his long scarf-like neck-tie were all such as are worn by people who aim at being stylish , but on closer inspection his linen was not overclean and his wide scarf was very threadbare . 
The visitor 's check trousers were of excellent cut , but were too light in colour and too tight for the present fashion . 
His soft fluffy white hat was out of keeping with the season . 
* Fiftyish . 
In brief there was every appearance of gentility on straitened means . 
It looked as though the gentleman belonged to that class of idle landowners who used to flourish in the times of serfdom . 
He had unmistakably been , at some time , in good and fashionable society , had once had good connections , had possibly preserved them indeed , but , after a gay youth , becoming gradually impoverished on the abolition of serfdom , he had sunk into the position of a poor relation of the best class , wandering from one good old friend to another and received by them for his companionable and accommodating disposition and as being , after all , a gentleman who could be asked to sit down with anyone , though , of course , not in a place of honour . 
Such gentlemen of accommodating temper and dependent position , who can tell a story , take a hand at cards , and who have a distinct aversion for any duties that may be forced upon them , are usually solitary creatures , either bachelors or widowers . 
Sometimes they have children , but if so , the children are always being brought up at a distance , at some aunt 's , to whom these gentlemen never allude in good society , seeming ashamed of the relationship . 
They gradually lose sight of their children altogether , though at intervals they receive a birthday or Christmas letter from them and sometimes even answer it . 
The countenance of the unexpected visitor was not so much good-natured , as accommodating and ready to assume any amiable expression as occasion might arise . 
He had no watch , but he had a tortoise-shell lorgnette on a black ribbon . 
On the middle finger of his right hand was a massive gold ring with a cheap opal stone in it . 
Ivan was angrily silent and would not begin the conversation . 
The visitor waited and sat exactly like a poor relation who had come down from his room to keep his host company at tea , and was discreetly silent , seeing that his host was frowning and preoccupied . 
But he was ready for any affable conversation as soon as his host should begin it . 
All at once his face expressed a sudden solicitude . 
`` I say , '' he began to Ivan , `` excuse me , I only mention it to remind you . 
You went to Smerdyakov 's to find out about Katerina Ivanovna , but you came away without finding out anything about her , you probably forgot - '' `` Ah , yes . '' 
broke from Ivan and his face grew gloomy with uneasiness . 
`` Yes , I 'd forgotten ... but it does n't matter now , never mind , till to-morrow , '' he muttered to himself , `` and you , '' he added , addressing his visitor , `` I should have remembered that myself in a minute , for that was just what was tormenting me ! 
Why do you interfere , as if I should believe that you prompted me , and that I did n't remember it of myself ? '' 
`` Do n't believe it then , '' said the gentleman , smiling amicably , `` what 's the good of believing against your will ? 
Besides , proofs are no help to believing , especially material proofs . 
Thomas believed , not because he saw Christ risen , but because he wanted to believe , before he saw . 
Look at the spiritualists , for instance ... . 
I am very fond of them ... only fancy , they imagine that they are serving the cause of religion , because the devils show them their horns from the other world . 
That , they say , is a material proof , so to speak , of the existence of another world . 
The other world and material proofs , what next ! 
And if you come to that , does proving there 's a devil prove that there 's a God ? 
I want to join an idealist society , I 'll lead the opposition in it , I 'll say I am a realist , but not a materialist , he he ! '' 
`` Listen , '' Ivan suddenly got up from the table . 
`` I seem to be delirious ... I am delirious , in fact , talk any nonsense you like , I do n't care ! 
You wo n't drive me to fury , as you did last time . 
But I feel somehow ashamed ... I want to walk about the room ... . 
I sometimes do n't see you and do n't even hear your voice as I did last time , but I always guess what you are prating , for it 's I , I myself speaking , not you . 
Only I do n't know whether I was dreaming last time or whether I really saw you . 
I 'll wet a towel and put it on my head and perhaps you 'll vanish into air . '' 
Ivan went into the corner , took a towel , and did as he said , and with a wet towel on his head began walking up and down the room . 
`` I am so glad you treat me so familiarly , '' the visitor began . 
`` Fool , '' laughed Ivan , `` do you suppose I should stand on ceremony with you ? 
I am in good spirits now , though I 've a pain in my forehead ... and in the top of my head ... only please do n't talk philosophy , as you did last time . 
If you ca n't take yourself off , talk of something amusing . 
Talk gossip , you are a poor relation , you ought to talk gossip . 
What a nightmare to have ! 
But I am not afraid of you . 
I 'll get the better of you . 
I wo n't be taken to a mad-house ! '' 
`` C'est charmant , poor relation . 
Yes , I am in my natural shape . 
For what am I on earth but a poor relation ? 
By the way , I am listening to you and am rather surprised to find you are actually beginning to take me for something real , not simply your fancy , as you persisted in declaring last time - '' `` Never for one minute have I taken you for reality , '' Ivan cried with a sort of fury . 
`` You are a lie , you are my illness , you are a phantom . 
It 's only that I do n't know how to destroy you and I see I must suffer for a time . 
You are my hallucination . 
You are the incarnation of myself , but only of one side of me ... of my thoughts and feelings , but only the nastiest and stupidest of them . 
From that point of view you might be of interest to me , if only I had time to waste on you - '' `` Excuse me , excuse me , I 'll catch you . 
When you flew out at Alyosha under the lamp-post this evening and shouted to him , ` You learnt it from him ! 
How do you know that he visits me ? ' 
You were thinking of me then . 
So for one brief moment you did believe that I really exist , '' the gentleman laughed blandly . 
`` Yes , that was a moment of weakness ... but I could n't believe in you . 
I do n't know whether I was asleep or awake last time . 
Perhaps I was only dreaming then and did n't see you really at all - '' `` And why were you so surly with Alyosha just now ? 
He is a dear ; I 've treated him badly over Father Zossima . '' 
`` Do n't talk of Alyosha ! 
How dare you , you flunkey ! '' 
Ivan laughed again . 
`` You scold me , but you laugh - that 's a good sign . 
But you are ever so much more polite than you were last time and I know why : that great resolution of yours - '' `` Do n't speak of my resolution , '' cried Ivan , savagely . 
`` I understand , I understand , c'est noble , c'est charmant , you are going to defend your brother and to sacrifice yourself ... C'est chevaleresque . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , I 'll kick you ! '' 
`` I sha n't be altogether sorry , for then my object will be attained . 
If you kick me , you must believe in my reality , for people do n't kick ghosts . 
Joking apart , it does n't matter to me , scold if you like , though it 's better to be a trifle more polite even to me . 
` Fool , flunkey ! ' 
what words ! '' 
`` Scolding you , I scold myself , '' Ivan laughed again , `` you are myself , myself , only with a different face . 
You just say what I am thinking ... and are incapable of saying anything new ! '' 
`` If I am like you in my way of thinking , it 's all to my credit , '' the gentleman declared , with delicacy and dignity . 
`` You choose out only my worst thoughts , and what 's more , the stupid ones . 
You are stupid and vulgar . 
You are awfully stupid . 
No , I ca n't put up with you ! 
What am I to do , what am I to do ? '' 
Ivan said through his clenched teeth . 
`` My dear friend , above all things I want to behave like a gentleman and to be recognised as such , '' the visitor began in an access of deprecating and simple-hearted pride , typical of a poor relation . 
`` I am poor , but ... I wo n't say very honest , but ... it 's an axiom generally accepted in society that I am a fallen angel . 
I certainly ca n't conceive how I can ever have been an angel . 
If I ever was , it must have been so long ago that there 's no harm in forgetting it . 
Now I only prize the reputation of being a gentlemanly person and live as I can , trying to make myself agreeable . 
I love men genuinely , I 've been greatly calumniated ! 
Here when I stay with you from time to time , my life gains a kind of reality and that 's what I like most of all . 
You see , like you , I suffer from the fantastic and so I love the realism of earth . 
Here , with you , everything is circumscribed , here all is formulated and geometrical , while we have nothing but indeterminate equations ! 
I wander about here dreaming . 
I like dreaming . 
Besides , on earth I become superstitious . 
Please do n't laugh , that 's just what I like , to become superstitious . 
I adopt all your habits here : I 've grown fond of going to the public baths , would you believe it ? 
and I go and steam myself with merchants and priests . 
What I dream of is becoming incarnate once for all and irrevocably in the form of some merchant 's wife weighing eighteen stone , and of believing all she believes . 
My ideal is to go to church and offer a candle in simple-hearted faith , upon my word it is . 
Then there would be an end to my sufferings . 
I like being doctored too ; in the spring there was an outbreak of smallpox and I went and was vaccinated in a foundling hospital - if only you knew how I enjoyed myself that day . 
I subscribed ten roubles in the cause of the Slavs ! 
... But you are not listening . 
Do you know , you are not at all well this evening ? 
I know you went yesterday to that doctor ... well , what about your health ? 
What did the doctor say ? '' 
`` Fool ! '' 
Ivan snapped out . 
`` But you are clever , anyway . 
You are scolding again ? 
I did n't ask out of sympathy . 
You need n't answer . 
Now rheumatism has come in again - '' `` Fool ! '' 
repeated Ivan . 
`` You keep saying the same thing ; but I had such an attack of rheumatism last year that I remember it to this day . '' 
`` The devil have rheumatism ! '' 
`` Why not , if I sometimes put on fleshly form ? 
I put on fleshly form and I take the consequences . 
Satan sum et nihil humanum a me alienum puto . '' 
* * I am Satan , and deem nothing human alien to me . 
`` What , what , Satan sum et nihil humanum ... that 's not bad for the devil ! '' 
`` I am glad I 've pleased you at last . '' 
`` But you did n't get that from me . '' 
Ivan stopped suddenly , seeming struck . 
`` That never entered my head , that 's strange . '' 
`` C'est du nouveau , n'est - ce pas ? '' 
* This time I 'll act honestly and explain to you . 
Listen , in dreams and especially in nightmares , from indigestion or anything , a man sees sometimes such artistic visions , such complex and real actuality , such events , even a whole world of events , woven into such a plot , with such unexpected details from the most exalted matters to the last button on a cuff , as I swear Leo Tolstoy has never invented . 
Yet such dreams are sometimes seen not by writers , but by the most ordinary people , officials , journalists , priests ... . 
The subject is a complete enigma . 
A statesman confessed to me , indeed , that all his best ideas came to him when he was asleep . 
Well , that 's how it is now , though I am your hallucination , yet just as in a nightmare , I say original things which had not entered your head before . 
So I do n't repeat your ideas , yet I am only your nightmare , nothing more . '' 
* It 's new , is n't it ? 
`` You are lying , your aim is to convince me you exist apart and are not my nightmare , and now you are asserting you are a dream . '' 
`` My dear fellow , I 've adopted a special method to-day , I 'll explain it to you afterwards . 
Stay , where did I break off ? 
Oh , yes ! 
I caught cold then , only not here but yonder . '' 
`` Where is yonder ? 
Tell me , will you be here long . 
Ca n't you go away ? '' 
Ivan exclaimed almost in despair . 
He ceased walking to and fro , sat down on the sofa , leaned his elbows on the table again and held his head tight in both hands . 
He pulled the wet towel off and flung it away in vexation . 
It was evidently of no use . 
`` Your nerves are out of order , '' observed the gentleman , with a carelessly easy , though perfectly polite , air . 
`` You are angry with me even for being able to catch cold , though it happened in a most natural way . 
I was hurrying then to a diplomatic soiree at the house of a lady of high rank in Petersburg , who was aiming at influence in the Ministry . 
Well , an evening suit , white tie , gloves , though I was God knows where and had to fly through space to reach your earth ... . 
Of course , it took only an instant , but you know a ray of light from the sun takes full eight minutes , and fancy in an evening suit and open waistcoat . 
Spirits do n't freeze , but when one 's in fleshly form , well ... in brief , I did n't think , and set off , and you know in those ethereal spaces , in the water that is above the firmament , there 's such a frost ... at least one ca n't call it frost , you fancy , 150 degrees below zero ! 
You know the game the village girls play - they invite the unwary to lick an axe in thirty degrees of frost , the tongue instantly freezes to it and the dupe tears the skin off , so it bleeds . 
But that 's only in 30 degrees , in 150 degrees I imagine it would be enough to put your finger on the axe and it would be the end of it ... if only there could be an axe there . '' 
`` And can there be an axe there ? '' 
Ivan interrupted , carelessly and disdainfully . 
He was exerting himself to the utmost not to believe in the delusion and not to sink into complete insanity `` An axe ? '' 
the guest interrupted in surprise . 
`` Yes , what would become of an axe there ? '' 
Ivan cried suddenly , with a sort of savage and insistent obstinacy . 
`` What would become of an axe in space ? 
Quelle idee ! 
If it were to fall to any distance , it would begin , I think , flying round the earth without knowing why , like a satellite . 
The astronomers would calculate the rising and the setting of the axe ; Gatzuk would put it in his calendar , that 's all . '' 
`` You are stupid , awfully stupid , '' said Ivan peevishly . 
`` Fib more cleverly or I wo n't listen . 
You want to get the better of me by realism , to convince me that you exist , but I do n't want to believe you exist ! 
I wo n't believe it ! '' 
`` But I am not fibbing , it 's all the truth ; the truth is unhappily hardly ever amusing . 
I see you persist in expecting something big of me , and perhaps something fine . 
That 's a great pity , for I only give what I can - '' `` Do n't talk philosophy , you ass ! '' 
`` Philosophy , indeed , when all my right side is numb and I am moaning and groaning . 
I 've tried all the medical faculty : they can diagnose beautifully , they have the whole of your disease at their finger-tips , but they 've no idea how to cure you . 
There was an enthusiastic little student here , ` You may die , ' said he , ` but you 'll know perfectly what disease you are dying of ! ' 
And then what a way they have of sending people to specialists ! 
` We only diagnose , ' they say , ` but go to such-and-such a specialist , he 'll cure you . ' 
The old doctor who used to cure all sorts of disease has completely disappeared , I assure you , now there are only specialists and they all advertise in the newspapers . 
If anything is wrong with your nose , they send you to Paris : there , they say , is a European specialist who cures noses . 
If you go to Paris , he 'll look at your nose ; I can only cure your right nostril , he 'll tell you , for I do n't cure the left nostril , that 's not my speciality , but go to Vienna , there there 's a specialist who will cure your left nostril . 
What are you to do ? 
I fell back on popular remedies , a German doctor advised me to rub myself with honey and salt in the bath-house . 
Solely to get an extra bath I went , smeared myself all over and it did me no good at all . 
In despair I wrote to Count Mattei in Milan . 
He sent me a book and some drops , bless him , and , only fancy , Hoff 's malt extract cured me ! 
I bought it by accident , drank a bottle and a half of it , and I was ready to dance , it took it away completely . 
I made up my mind to write to the papers to thank him , I was prompted by a feeling of gratitude , and only fancy , it led to no end of a bother : not a single paper would take my letter . 
` It would be very reactionary , ' they said , ` none will believe it . 
Le diable n'existe point . 
* You 'd better remain anonymous , ' they advised me . 
What use is a letter of thanks if it 's anonymous ? 
I laughed with the men at the newspaper office ; ` It 's reactionary to believe in God in our days , ' I said , ` but I am the devil , so I may be believed in . ' 
` We quite understand that , ' they said . 
` Who does n't believe in the devil ? 
Yet it wo n't do , it might injure our reputation . 
As a joke , if you like . ' 
But I thought as a joke it would n't be very witty . 
So it was n't printed . 
And do you know , I have felt sore about it to this day . 
My best feelings , gratitude , for instance , are literally denied me simply from my social position . '' 
* The devil does not exist . 
`` Philosophical reflections again ? '' 
Ivan snarled malignantly . 
`` God preserve me from it , but one ca n't help complaining sometimes . 
I am a slandered man . 
You upbraid me every moment with being stupid . 
One can see you are young . 
My dear fellow , intelligence is n't the only thing ! 
I have naturally a kind and merry heart . ' 
I also write vaudevilles of all sorts . ' 
You seem to take me for Hlestakov grown old , but my fate is a far more serious one . 
Before time was , by some decree which I could never make out , I was predestined ` to deny ' and yet I am genuinely good-hearted and not at all inclined to negation . 
` No , you must go and deny , without denial there 's no criticism and what would a journal be without a column of criticism ? ' 
Without criticism it would be nothing but one ` hosannah . ' 
But nothing but hosannah is not enough for life , the hosannah must be tried in the crucible of doubt and so on , in the same style . 
But I do n't meddle in that , I did n't create it , I am not answerable for it . 
Well , they 've chosen their scapegoat , they 've made me write the column of criticism and so life was made possible . 
We understand that comedy ; I , for instance , simply ask for annihilation . 
No , live , I am told , for there 'd be nothing without you . 
If everything in the universe were sensible , nothing would happen . 
There would be no events without you , and there must be events . 
So against the grain I serve to produce events and do what 's irrational because I am commanded to . 
For all their indisputable intelligence , men take this farce as something serious , and that is their tragedy . 
They suffer , of course ... but then they live , they live a real life , not a fantastic one , for suffering is life . 
Without suffering what would be the pleasure of it ? 
It would be transformed into an endless church service ; it would be holy , but tedious . 
But what about me ? 
I suffer , but still , I do n't live . 
I am x in an indeterminate equation . 
I am a sort of phantom in life who has lost all beginning and end , and who has even forgotten his own name . 
You are laughing - no , you are not laughing , you are angry again . 
You are for ever angry , all you care about is intelligence , but I repeat again that I would give away all this superstellar life , all the ranks and honours , simply to be transformed into the soul of a merchant 's wife weighing eighteen stone and set candles at God 's shrine . '' 
`` Then even you do n't believe in God ? '' 
said Ivan , with a smile of hatred . 
`` What can I say ? 
- that is , if you are in earnest - '' `` Is there a God or not ? '' 
Ivan cried with the same savage intensity . 
`` Ah , then you are in earnest ! 
My dear fellow , upon my word I do n't know . 
There ! 
I 've said it now ! '' 
`` You do n't know , but you see God ? 
No , you are not someone apart , you are myself , you are I and nothing more ! 
You are rubbish , you are my fancy ! '' 
`` Well , if you like , I have the same philosophy as you , that would be true . 
Je pense , donc je suis , * I know that for a fact ; all the rest , all these worlds , God and even Satan - all that is not proved , to my mind . 
Does all that exist of itself , or is it only an emanation of myself , a logical development of my ego which alone has existed for ever : but I make haste to stop , for I believe you will be jumping up to beat me directly . '' 
* I think , therefore I am . 
`` You 'd better tell me some anecdote ! '' 
said Ivan miserably . 
`` There is an anecdote precisely on our subject , or rather a legend , not an anecdote . 
You reproach me with unbelief ; you see , you say , yet you do n't believe . 
But , my dear fellow , I am not the only one like that . 
We are all in a muddle over there now and all through your science . 
Once there used to be atoms , five senses , four elements , and then everything hung together somehow . 
There were atoms in the ancient world even , but since we 've learned that you 've discovered the chemical molecule and protoplasm and the devil knows what , we had to lower our crest . 
There 's a regular muddle , and , above all , superstition , scandal ; there 's as much scandal among us as among you , you know ; a little more in fact , and spying , indeed , for we have our secret police department where private information is received . 
Well , this wild legend belongs to our middle ages - not yours , but ours - and no one believes it even among us , except the old ladies of eighteen stone , not your old ladies I mean , but ours . 
We 've everything you have , I am revealing one of our secrets out of friendship for you ; though it 's forbidden . 
This legend is about Paradise . 
There was , they say , here on earth a thinker and philosopher . 
He rejected everything , ` laws , conscience , faith , ' and , above all , the future life . 
He died ; he expected to go straight to darkness and death and he found a future life before him . 
He was astounded and indignant . 
` This is against my principles ! ' 
he said . 
And he was punished for that ... that is , you must excuse me , I am just repeating what I heard myself , it 's only a legend ... he was sentenced to walk a quadrillion kilometres in the dark -LRB- we 've adopted the metric system , you know -RRB- : and when he has finished that quadrillion , the gates of heaven would be opened to him and he 'll be forgiven - '' `` And what tortures have you in the other world besides the quadrillion kilometres ? '' 
asked Ivan , with a strange eagerness . 
`` What tortures ? 
Ah , do n't ask . 
In old days we had all sorts , but now they have taken chiefly to moral punishments - ` the stings of conscience ' and all that nonsense . 
We got that , too , from you , from the softening of your manners . 
And who 's the better for it ? 
Only those who have got no conscience , for how can they be tortured by conscience when they have none ? 
But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honour suffer for it . 
Reforms , when the ground has not been prepared for them , especially if they are institutions copied from abroad , do nothing but mischief ! 
The ancient fire was better . 
Well , this man , who was condemned to the quadrillion kilometres , stood still , looked round and lay down across the road . ' 
I wo n't go , I refuse on principle ! ' 
Take the soul of an enlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the prophet Jonah , who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the whale , and you get the character of that thinker who lay across the road . '' 
`` What did he lie on there ? '' 
`` Well , I suppose there was something to lie on . 
You are not laughing ? '' 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan , still with the same strange eagerness . 
Now he was listening with an unexpected curiosity . 
`` Well , is he lying there now ? '' 
`` That 's the point , that he is n't . 
He lay there almost a thousand years and then he got up and went on . '' 
`` What an ass ! '' 
cried Ivan , laughing nervously and still seeming to be pondering something intently . 
`` Does it make any difference whether he lies there for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometres ? 
It would take a billion years to walk it ? '' 
`` Much more than that . 
I have n't got a pencil and paper or I could work it out . 
But he got there long ago , and that 's where the story begins . '' 
`` What , he got there ? 
But how did he get the billion years to do it ? '' 
`` Why , you keep thinking of our present earth ! 
But our present earth may have been repeated a billion times . 
Why , it 's become extinct , been frozen ; cracked , broken to bits , disintegrated into its elements , again ` the water above the firmament , ' then again a comet , again a sun , again from the sun it becomes earth - and the same sequence may have been repeated endlessly and exactly the same to every detail , most unseemly and insufferably tedious - '' `` Well , well , what happened when he arrived ? '' 
`` Why , the moment the gates of Paradise were open and he walked in ; before he had been there two seconds , by his watch -LRB- though to my thinking his watch must have long dissolved into its elements on the way -RRB- , he cried out that those two seconds were worth walking not a quadrillion kilometres but a quadrillion of quadrillions , raised to the quadrillionth power ! 
In fact , he sang ` hosannah ' and overdid it so , that some persons there of lofty ideas would n't shake hands with him at first - he 'd become too rapidly reactionary , they said . 
The Russian temperament . 
I repeat , it 's a legend . 
I give it for what it 's worth , so that 's the sort of ideas we have on such subjects even now . '' 
`` I 've caught you ! '' 
Ivan cried , with an almost childish delight , as though he had succeeded in remembering something at last . 
`` That anecdote about the quadrillion years , I made up myself ! 
I was seventeen then , I was at the high school . 
I made up that anecdote and told it to a schoolfellow called Korovkin , it was at Moscow ... . 
The anecdote is so characteristic that I could n't have taken it from anywhere . 
I thought I 'd forgotten it ... but I 've unconsciously recalled it - I recalled it myself - it was not you telling it ! 
Thousands of things are unconsciously remembered like that even when people are being taken to execution ... it 's come back to me in a dream . 
You are that dream ! 
You are a dream , not a living creature ! '' 
`` From the vehemence with which you deny my existence , '' laughed the gentleman , `` I am convinced that you believe in me . '' 
`` Not in the slightest ! 
I have n't a hundredth part of a grain of faith in you ! '' 
`` But you have the thousandth of a grain . 
Homeopathic doses perhaps are the strongest . 
Confess that you have faith even to the ten-thousandth of a grain . '' 
`` Not for one minute , '' cried Ivan furiously . 
`` But I should like to believe in you , '' he added strangely . 
`` Aha ! 
There 's an admission ! 
But I am good-natured . 
I 'll come to your assistance again . 
Listen , it was I caught you , not you me . 
I told you your anecdote you 'd forgotten , on purpose , so as to destroy your faith in me completely . '' 
`` You are lying . 
The object of your visit is to convince me of your existence ! '' 
`` Just so . 
But hesitation , suspense , conflict between belief and disbelief - is sometimes such torture to a conscientious man , such as you are , that it 's better to hang oneself at once . 
Knowing that you are inclined to believe in me , I administered some disbelief by telling you that anecdote . 
I lead you to belief and disbelief by turns , and I have my motive in it . 
It 's the new method . 
As soon as you disbelieve in me completely , you 'll begin assuring me to my face that I am not a dream but a reality . 
I know you . 
Then I shall have attained my object , which is an honourable one . 
I shall sow in you only a tiny grain of faith and it will grow into an oak-tree - and such an oak-tree that , sitting on it , you will long to enter the ranks of ` the hermits in the wilderness and the saintly women , ' for that is what you are secretly longing for . 
You 'll dine on locusts , you 'll wander into the wilderness to save your soul ! '' 
`` Then it 's for the salvation of my soul you are working , is it , you scoundrel ? '' 
`` One must do a good work sometimes . 
How ill-humoured you are ! '' 
`` Fool ! 
did you ever tempt those holy men who ate locusts and prayed seventeen years in the wilderness till they were overgrown with moss ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , I 've done nothing else . 
One forgets the whole world and all the worlds , and sticks to one such saint , because he is a very precious diamond . 
One such soul , you know , is sometimes worth a whole constellation . 
We have our system of reckoning , you know . 
The conquest is priceless ! 
And some of them , on my word , are not inferior to you in culture , though you wo n't believe it . 
They can contemplate such depths of belief and disbelief at the same moment that sometimes it really seems that they are within a hair 's - breadth of being ` turned upside down , ' as the actor Gorbunov says . '' 
`` Well , did you get your nose pulled ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , '' observed the visitor sententiously , `` it 's better to get off with your nose pulled than without a nose at all . 
As an afflicted marquis observed not long ago -LRB- he must have been treated by a specialist -RRB- in confession to his spiritual father - a Jesuit . 
I was present , it was simply charming . 
` Give me back my nose ! ' 
he said , and he beat his breast . 
` My son , ' said the priest evasively , ` all things are accomplished in accordance with the inscrutable decrees of Providence , and what seems a misfortune sometimes leads to extraordinary , though unapparent , benefits . 
If stern destiny has deprived you of your nose , it 's to your advantage that no one can ever pull you by your nose . ' 
` Holy father , that 's no comfort , ' cried the despairing marquis . 
` I 'd be delighted to have my nose pulled every day of my life , if it were only in its proper place . ' 
` My son , ' sighs the priest , ` you ca n't expect every blessing at once . 
This is murmuring against Providence , who even in this has not forgotten you , for if you repine as you repined just now , declaring you 'd be glad to have your nose pulled for the rest of your life , your desire has already been fulfilled indirectly , for when you lost your nose , you were led by the nose . ' 
`` Fool , how stupid ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` My dear friend , I only wanted to amuse you . 
But I swear that 's the genuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word as I 've told you . 
It happened lately and gave me a great deal of trouble . 
The unhappy young man shot himself that very night when he got home . 
I was by his side till the very last moment . 
Those Jesuit confessionals are really my most delightful diversion at melancholy moments . 
Here 's another incident that happened only the other day . 
A little blonde Norman girl of twenty - a buxom , unsophisticated beauty that would make your mouth water - comes to an old priest . 
She bends down and whispers her sin into the grating . 
` Why , my daughter , have you fallen again already ? ' 
cries the priest : ' O Sancta Maria , what do I hear ! 
Not the same man this time , how long is this going on ? 
Are n't you ashamed ! ' 
` Ah , mon pere , ' answers the sinner with tears of penitence , ` Ca lui fait tant de plaisir , et a moi si peu de peine ! ' 
* Fancy , such an answer ! 
I drew back . 
It was the cry of nature , better than innocence itself , if you like . 
I absolved her sin on the spot and was turning to go , but I was forced to turn back . 
I heard the priest at the grating making an appointment with her for the evening - though he was an old man hard as flint , he fell in an instant ! 
It was nature , the truth of nature asserted its rights ! 
What , you are turning up your nose again ? 
Angry again ? 
I do n't know how to please you - '' * Ah , my father , this gives him so much pleasure , and me so little pain ! 
`` Leave me alone , you are beating on my brain like a haunting nightmare , '' Ivan moaned miserably , helpless before his apparition . 
`` I am bored with you , agonisingly and insufferably . 
I would give anything to be able to shake you off ! '' 
`` I repeat , moderate your expectations , do n't demand of me ` everything great and noble , ' and you 'll see how well we shall get on , '' said the gentleman impressively . 
`` You are really angry with me for not having appeared to you in a red glow , with thunder and lightning , with scorched wings , but have shown myself in such a modest form . 
You are wounded , in the first place , in your asthetic feelings , and , secondly , in your pride . 
How could such a vulgar devil visit such a great man as you ! 
Yes , there is that romantic strain in you , that was so derided by Byelinsky . 
I ca n't help it , young man , as I got ready to come to you I did think as a joke of appearing in the figure of a retired general who had served in the Caucasus , with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my coat . 
But I was positively afraid of doing it , for you 'd have thrashed me for daring to pin the Lion and the Sun on my coat , instead of , at least , the Polar Star or the Sirius . 
And you keep on saying I am stupid , but , mercy on us ! 
I make no claim to be equal to you in intelligence . 
Mephistopheles declared to Faust that he desired evil , but did only good . 
Well , he can say what he likes , it 's quite the opposite with me . 
I am perhaps the one man in all creation who loves the truth and genuinely desires good . 
I was there when the Word , Who died on the Cross , rose up into heaven bearing on His bosom the soul of the penitent thief . 
I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubim singing and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphim which shook heaven and all creation , and I swear to you by all that 's sacred , I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all . 
The word had almost escaped me , had almost broken from my lips ... you know how susceptible and aesthetically impressionable I am . 
But common sense - oh , a most unhappy trait in my character - kept me in due bounds and I let the moment pass ! 
For what would have happened , I reflected , what would have happened after my hosannah ? 
Everything on earth would have been extinguished at once and no events could have occurred . 
And so , solely from a sense of duty and my social position , was forced to suppress the good moment and to stick to my nasty task . 
Somebody takes all the credit of what 's good for Himself , and nothing but nastiness is left for me . 
But I do n't envy the honour of a life of idle imposture , I am not ambitious . 
Why am I , of all creatures in the world , doomed to be cursed by all decent people and even to be kicked , for if I put on mortal form I am bound to take such consequences sometimes ? 
I know , of course , there 's a secret in it , but they wo n't tell me the secret for anything , for then perhaps , seeing the meaning of it , I might bawl hosannah , and the indispensable minus would disappear at once , and good sense would reign supreme throughout the whole world . 
And that , of course , would mean the end of everything , even of magazines and newspapers , for who would take them in ? 
I know that at the end of all things I shall be reconciled . 
I , too , shall walk my quadrillion and learn the secret . 
But till that happens I am sulking and fulfil my destiny though it 's against the grain - that is , to ruin thousands for the sake of saving one . 
How many souls have had to be ruined and how many honourable reputations destroyed for the sake of that one righteous man , Job , over whom they made such a fool of me in old days ! 
Yes , till the secret is revealed , there are two sorts of truths for me - one , their truth , yonder , which I know nothing about so far , and the other my own . 
And there 's no knowing which will turn out the better ... . 
Are you asleep ? '' 
`` I might well be , '' Ivan groaned angrily . 
`` All my stupid ideas - outgrown , thrashed out long ago , and flung aside like a dead carcass you present to me as something new ! '' 
`` There 's no pleasing you ! 
And I thought I should fascinate you by my literary style . 
That hosannah in the skies really was n't bad , was it ? 
And then that ironical tone a la Heine , eh ? '' 
`` No , I was never such a flunkey ! 
How then could my soul beget a flunkey like you ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , I know a most charming and attractive young Russian gentleman , a young thinker and a great lover of literature and art , the author of a promising poem entitled The Grand Inquisitor . 
I was only thinking of him ! '' 
`` I forbid you to speak of The Grand Inquisitor , '' cried Ivan , crimson with shame . 
`` And the Geological Cataclysm . 
Do you remember ? 
That was a poem , now ! '' 
`` Hold your tongue , or I 'll kill you ! '' 
`` You 'll kill me ? 
No , excuse me , I will speak . 
I came to treat myself to that pleasure . 
Oh , I love the dreams of my ardent young friends , quivering with eagerness for life ! 
` There are new men , ' you decided last spring , when you were meaning to come here , ` they propose to destroy everything and begin with cannibalism . 
Stupid fellows ! 
they did n't ask my advice ! 
I maintain that nothing need be destroyed , that we only need to destroy the idea of God in man , that 's how we have to set to work . 
It 's that , that we must begin with . 
Oh , blind race of men who have no understanding ! 
As soon as men have all of them denied God - and I believe that period , analogous with geological periods , will come to pass - the old conception of the universe will fall of itself without cannibalism , and , what 's more , the old morality , and everything will begin anew . 
Men will unite to take from life all it can give , but only for joy and happiness in the present world . 
Man will be lifted up with a spirit of divine Titanic pride and the man-god will appear . 
From hour to hour extending his conquest of nature infinitely by his will and his science , man will feel such lofty joy from hour to hour in doing it that it will make up for all his old dreams of the joys of heaven . 
Everyone will know that he is mortal and will accept death proudly and serenely like a god . 
His pride will teach him that it 's useless for him to repine at life 's being a moment , and he will love his brother without need of reward . 
Love will be sufficient only for a moment of life , but the very consciousness of its momentariness will intensify its fire , which now is dissipated in dreams of eternal love beyond the grave ' ... and so on and so on in the same style . 
Charming ! '' 
Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor , and his hands pressed to his ears , but he began trembling all over . 
The voice continued . 
`` The question now is , my young thinker reflected , is it possible that such a period will ever come ? 
If it does , everything is determined and humanity is settled for ever . 
But as , owing to man 's inveterate stupidity , this can not come about for at least a thousand years , everyone who recognises the truth even now may legitimately order his life as he pleases , on the new principles . 
In that sense , ` all things are lawful ' for him . 
What 's more , even if this period never comes to pass , since there is anyway no God and no immortality , the new man may well become the man-god , even if he is the only one in the whole world , and promoted to his new position , he may lightheartedly overstep all the barriers of the old morality of the old slaveman , if necessary . 
There is no law for God . 
Where God stands , the place is holy . 
Where I stand will be at once the foremost place ... ` all things are lawful ' and that 's the end of it ! 
That 's all very charming ; but if you want to swindle why do you want a moral sanction for doing it ? 
But that 's our modern Russian all over . 
He ca n't bring himself to swindle without a moral sanction . 
He is so in love with truth - '' The visitor talked , obviously carried away by his own eloquence , speaking louder and louder and looking ironically at his host . 
But he did not succeed in finishing ; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the table and flung it at the orator . 
`` Ah , mais c'est bete enfin , '' * cried the latter , jumping up from the sofa and shaking the drops of tea off himself . 
`` He remembers Luther 's inkstand ! 
He takes me for a dream and throws glasses at a dream ! 
It 's like a woman ! 
I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your ears . '' 
* But after all , that 's stupid . 
A loud , persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window . 
Ivan jumped up from the sofa . 
`` Do you hear ? 
You 'd better open , '' cried the visitor ; `` it 's your brother Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising news , I 'll be bound ! '' 
`` Be silent , deceiver , I knew it was Alyosha , I felt he was coming , and of course he has not come for nothing ; of course he brings ` news , ' '' Ivan exclaimed frantically . 
`` Open , open to him . 
There 's a snowstorm and he is your brother . 
Monsieur sait-il le temps qu'il fait ? 
C'est a ne pas mettre un chien dehors . '' 
* * Does the gentleman know the weather he 's making ? 
It 's not weather for a dog . 
The knocking continued . 
Ivan wanted to rush to the window , but something seemed to fetter his arms and legs . 
He strained every effort to break his chains , but in vain . 
The knocking at the window grew louder and louder . 
At last the chains were broken and Ivan leapt up from the sofa . 
He looked round him wildly . 
Both candles had almost burnt out , the glass he had just thrown at his visitor stood before him on the table , and there was no one on the sofa opposite . 
The knocking on the window frame went on persistently , but it was by no means so loud as it had seemed in his dream ; on the contrary , it was quite subdued . 
`` It was not a dream ! 
No , I swear it was not a dream , it all happened just now ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
He rushed to the window and opened the movable pane . 
`` Alyosha , I told you not to come , '' he cried fiercely to his brother . 
`` In two words , what do you want ? 
In two words , do you hear ? '' 
`` An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself , '' Alyosha answered from the yard . 
`` Come round to the steps , I 'll open at once , '' said Ivan , going to open the door to Alyosha . 
`` It Was He Who Said That '' ALYOSHA coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken his own life . 
