`` Once in olden times a holy saint saw in the Temple a mother like you weeping for her little one , her only one , whom God had taken . 
` Knowest thou not , ' said the saint to her , ` how bold these little ones are before the throne of God ? 
Verily there are none bolder than they in the Kingdom of Heaven . 
`` Thou didst give us life , O Lord , '' they say , `` and scarcely had we looked upon it when Thou didst take it back again . '' 
And so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives them at once the rank of angels . 
Therefore , ' said the saint , ` thou , too , O Mother , rejoice and weep not , for thy little son is with the Lord in the fellowship of the angels . ' 
That 's what the saint said to the weeping mother of old . 
He was a great saint and he could not have spoken falsely . 
Therefore you too , mother , know that your little one is surely before the throne of God , is rejoicing and happy , and praying to God for you , and therefore weep , but rejoice . '' 
The woman listened to him , looking down with her cheek in her hand . 
She sighed deeply . 
`` My Nikita tried to comfort me with the same words as you . 
` Foolish one , ' he said , ` why weep ? 
Our son is no doubt singing with the angels before God . ' 
He says that to me , but he weeps himself . 
I see that he cries like me . ' 
I know , Nikita , ' said I. ` Where could he be if not with the Lord God ? 
Only , here with us now he is not as he used to sit beside us before . ' 
And if only I could look upon him one little time , if only I could peep at him one little time , without going up to him , without speaking , if I could be hidden in a corner and only see him for one little minute , hear him playing in the yard , calling in his little voice , ` Mammy , where are you ? ' 
If only I could hear him pattering with his little feet about the room just once , only once ; for so often , so often I remember how he used to run to me and shout and laugh , if only I could hear his little feet I should know him ! 
But he 's gone , Father , he 's gone , and I shall never hear him again . 
Here 's his little sash , but him I shall never see or hear now . '' 
She drew out of her bosom her boy 's little embroidered sash , and as soon as she looked at it she began shaking with sobs , hiding her eyes with her fingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden stream . 
`` It is Rachel of old , '' said the elder , `` weeping for her children , and will not be comforted because they are not . 
Such is the lot set on earth for you mothers . 
Be not comforted . 
Consolation is not what you need . 
Weep and be not consoled , but weep . 
Only every time that you weep be sure to remember that your little son is one of the angels of God , that he looks down from there at you and sees you , and rejoices at your tears , and points at them to the Lord God ; and a long while yet will you keep that great mother 's grief . 
But it will turn in the end into quiet joy , and your bitter tears will be only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heart and delivers it from sin . 
And I shall pray for the peace of your child 's soul . 
What was his name ? '' 
`` Alexey , Father . '' 
`` A sweet name . 
After Alexey , the man of God ? '' 
`` Yes , Father . '' 
`` What a saint he was ! 
I will remember him , mother , and your grief in my prayers , and I will pray for your husband 's health . 
It is a sin for you to leave him . 
Your little one will see from heaven that you have forsaken his father , and will weep over you . 
Why do you trouble his happiness ? 
He is living , for the soul lives for ever , and though he is not in the house he is near you , unseen . 
How can he go into the house when you say that the house is hateful to you ? 
To whom is he to go if he find you not together , his father and mother ? 
He comes to you in dreams now , and you grieve . 
But then he will send you gentle dreams . 
Go to your husband , mother ; go this very day . '' 
`` I will go , Father , at your word . 
I will go . 
You 've gone straight to my heart . 
My Nikita , my Nikita , you are waiting for me , '' the woman began in a sing-song voice ; but the elder had already turned away to a very old woman , dressed like a dweller in the town , not like a pilgrim . 
Her eyes showed that she had come with an object , and in order to say something . 
She said she was the widow of a non-commissioned officer , and lived close by in the town . 
Her son Vasenka was in the commissariat service , and had gone to Irkutsk in Siberia . 
He had written twice from there , but now a year had passed since he had written . 
She did inquire about him , but she did not know the proper place to inquire . 
`` Only the other day Stepanida Ilyinishna - she 's a rich merchant 's wife - said to me , ` You go , Prohorovna , and put your son 's name down for prayer in the church , and pray for the peace of his soul as though he were dead . 
His soul will be troubled , ' she said , ` and he will write you a letter . ' 
And Stepanida Ilyinishna told me it was a certain thing which had been many times tried . 
Only I am in doubt ... . 
Oh , you light of ours ! 
is it true or false , and would it be right ? '' 
`` Do n't think of it . 
It 's shameful to ask the question . 
How is it possible to pray for the peace of a living soul ? 
And his own mother too ! 
It 's a great sin , akin to sorcery . 
Only for your ignorance it is forgiven you . 
Better pray to the Queen of Heaven , our swift defence and help , for his good health , and that she may forgive you for your error . 
And another thing I will tell you , Prohorovna . 
Either he will soon come back to you , your son , or he will be sure to send a letter . 
Go , and henceforward be in peace . 
Your son is alive , I tell you . '' 
`` Dear Father , God reward you , our benefactor , who prays for all of us and for our sins ! '' 
But the elder had already noticed in the crowd two glowing eyes fixed upon him . 
An exhausted , consumptive-looking , though young peasant woman was gazing at him in silence . 
Her eyes besought him , but she seemed afraid to approach . 
`` What is it , my child ? '' 
`` Absolve my soul , Father , '' she articulated softly , and slowly sank on her knees and bowed down at his feet . 
`` I have sinned , Father . 
I am afraid of my sin . '' 
The elder sat down on the lower step . 
The woman crept closer to him , still on her knees . 
`` I am a widow these three years , '' she began in a half-whisper , with a sort of shudder . 
`` I had a hard life with my husband . 
He was an old man . 
He used to beat me cruelly . 
He lay ill ; I thought looking at him , if he were to get well , if he were to get up again , what then ? 
And then the thought came to me - '' `` Stay ! '' 
said the elder , and he put his ear close to her lips . 
The woman went on in a low whisper , so that it was almost impossible to catch anything . 
She had soon done . 
`` Three years ago ? '' 
asked the elder . 
`` Three years . 
At first I did n't think about it , but now I 've begun to be ill , and the thought never leaves me . '' 
`` Have you come from far ? '' 
`` Over three hundred miles away . '' 
`` Have you told it in confession ? '' 
`` I have confessed it . 
Twice I have confessed it . '' 
`` Have you been admitted to Communion ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I am afraid . 
I am afraid to die . '' 
`` Fear nothing and never be afraid ; and do n't fret . 
If only your penitence fail not , God will forgive all . 
There is no sin , and there can be no sin on all the earth , which the Lord will not forgive to the truly repentant ! 
Man can not commit a sin so great as to exhaust the infinite love of God . 
Can there be a sin which could exceed the love of God ? 
Think only of repentance , continual repentance , but dismiss fear altogether . 
Believe that God loves you as you can not conceive ; that He loves you with your sin , in your sin . 
It has been said of old that over one repentant sinner there is more joy in heaven than over ten righteous men . 
Go , and fear not . 
Be not bitter against men . 
Be not angry if you are wronged . 
Forgive the dead man in your heart what wrong he did you . 
Be reconciled with him in truth . 
If you are penitent , you love . 
And if you love you are of God . 
All things are atoned for , all things are saved by love . 
If I , a sinner , even as you are , am tender with you and have pity on you , how much more will God . 
Love is such a priceless treasure that you can redeem the whole world by it , and expiate not only your own sins but the sins of others . '' 
He signed her three times with the cross , took from his own neck a little ikon and put it upon her . 
She bowed down to the earth without speaking . 
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tiny baby in her arms . 
`` From Vyshegorye , dear Father . '' 
`` Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby . 
What do you want ? '' 
`` I 've come to look at you . 
I have been to you before - or have you forgotten ? 
You 've no great memory if you 've forgotten me . 
They told us you were ill . 
Thinks I , I 'll go and see him for myself . 
Now I see you , and you 're not ill ! 
You 'll live another twenty years . 
God bless you ! 
There are plenty to pray for you ; how should you be ill ? '' 
`` I thank you for all , daughter . '' 
`` By the way , I have a thing to ask , not a great one . 
Here are sixty copecks . 
Give them , dear Father , to someone poorer than me . 
I thought as I came along , better give through him . 
He 'll know whom to give to . '' 
`` Thanks , my dear , thanks ! 
You are a good woman . 
I love you . 
I will do so certainly . 
Is that your little girl ? '' 
`` My little girl , Father , Lizaveta . '' 
`` May the Lord bless you both , you and your babe Lizaveta ! 
You have gladdened my heart , mother . 
Farewell , dear children , farewell , dear ones . '' 
He blessed them all and bowed low to them . 
A Lady of Little Faith A visitor looking on the scene of his conversation with the peasants and his blessing them shed silent tears and wiped them away with her handkerchief . 
She was a sentimental society lady of genuinely good disposition in many respects . 
When the elder went up to her at last she met him enthusiastically . 
`` Ah , what I have been feeling , looking on at this touching scene ! 
... `` She could not go on for emotion . 
`` Oh , I understand the people 's love for you . 
I love the people myself . 
I want to love them . 
And who could help loving them , our splendid Russian people , so simple in their greatness ! '' 
`` How is your daughter 's health ? 
You wanted to talk to me again ? '' 
`` Oh , I have been urgently begging for it , I have prayed for it ! 
I was ready to fall on my knees and kneel for three days at your windows until you let me in . 
We have come , great healer , to express our ardent gratitude . 
You have healed my Lise , healed her completely , merely by praying over her last Thursday and laying your hands upon her . 
We have hastened here to kiss those hands , to pour out our feelings and our homage . '' 
`` What do you mean by healed ? 
But she is still lying down in her chair . '' 
`` But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since Thursday , '' said the lady with nervous haste . 
`` And that 's not all . 
Her legs are stronger . 
This mourning she got up well ; she had slept all night . 
Look at her rosy cheeks , her bright eyes ! 
She used to be always crying , but now she laughs and is gay and happy . 
This morning she insisted on my letting her stand up , and she stood up for a whole minute without any support . 
She wagers that in a fortnight she 'll be dancing a quadrille . 
I 've called in Doctor Herzenstube . 
He shrugged his shoulders and said , ' I am amazed ; I can make nothing of it . ' 
And would you have us not come here to disturb you , not fly here to thank you ? 
Lise , thank him - thank him ! '' 
Lise 's pretty little laughing face became suddenly serious . 
She rose in her chair as far as she could and , looking at the elder , clasped her hands before him , but could not restrain herself and broke into laughter . 
`` It 's at him , '' she said , pointing to Alyosha , with childish vexation at herself for not being able to repress her mirth . 
If anyone had looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the elder , he would have caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in an instant . 
His eyes shone and he looked down . 
`` She has a message for you , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
How are you ? '' 
the mother went on , holding out her exquisitely gloved hand to Alyosha . 
The elder turned round and all at once looked attentively at Alyosha . 
The latter went nearer to Lise and , smiling in a strangely awkward way , held out his hand to her too . 
Lise assumed an important air . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through me . '' 
She handed him a little note . 
`` She particularly begs you to go and see her as soon as possible ; that you will not fail her , but will be sure to come . '' 
`` She asks me to go and see her ? 
Me ? 
What for ? '' 
Alyosha muttered in great astonishment . 
His face at once looked anxious . 
`` Oh , it 's all to do with Dmitri Fyodorovitch and - what has happened lately , '' the mother explained hurriedly . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has made up her mind , but she must see you about it ... . 
Why , of course , I ca n't say . 
But she wants to see you at once . 
And you will go to her , of course . 
It is a Christian duty . '' 
`` I have only seen her once , '' Alyosha protested with the same perplexity . 
`` Oh , she is such a lofty , incomparable creature If only for her suffering ... . 
Think what she has gone through , what she is enduring now Think what awaits her ! 
It 's all terrible , terrible ! 
`` Very well , I will come , '' Alyosha decided , after rapidly scanning the brief , enigmatic note , which consisted of an urgent entreaty that he would come , without any sort of explanation . 
`` Oh , how sweet and generous that would be of you '' cried Lise with sudden animation . 
`` I told mamma you 'd be sure not to go . 
I said you were saving your soul . 
How splendid you are I 've always thought you were splendid . 
How glad I am to tell you so ! '' 
`` Lise ! '' 
said her mother impressively , though she smiled after she had said it . 
`` You have quite forgotten us , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she said ; `` you never come to see us . 
Yet Lise has told me twice that she is never happy except with you . '' 
Alyosha raised his downcast eyes and again flushed , and again smiled without knowing why . 
But the elder was no longer watching him . 
He had begun talking to a monk who , as mentioned before , had been awaiting his entrance by Lise 's chair . 
He was evidently a monk of the humblest , that is of the peasant , class , of a narrow outlook , but a true believer , and , in his own way , a stubborn one . 
He announced that he had come from the far north , from Obdorsk , from Saint Sylvester , and was a member of a poor monastery , consisting of only ten monks . 
The elder gave him his blessing and invited him to come to his cell whenever he liked . 
`` How can you presume to do such deeds ? '' 
the monk asked suddenly , pointing solemnly and significantly at Lise . 
He was referring to her `` healing . '' 
`` It 's too early , of course , to speak of that . 
Relief is not complete cure , and may proceed from different causes . 
But if there has been any healing , it is by no power but God 's will . 
It 's all from God . 
Visit me , Father , '' he added to the monk . 
`` It 's not often I can see visitors . 
I am ill , and I know that my days are numbered . '' 
`` Oh , no , no ! 
God will not take you from us . 
You will live a long , long time yet , '' cried the lady . 
`` And in what way are you ill ? 
You look so well , so gay and happy . '' 
`` I am extraordinarily better to-day . 
But I know that it 's only for a moment . 
I understand my disease now thoroughly . 
If I seem so happy to you , you could never say anything that would please me so much . 
For men are made for happiness , and anyone who is completely happy has a right to say to himself , ' I am doing God 's will on earth . ' 
All the righteous , all the saints , all the holy martyrs were happy . '' 
`` Oh , how you speak ! 
What bold and lofty words '' cried the lady . 
`` You seem to pierce with your words . 
And yet - happiness , happiness - where is it ? 
Who can say of himself that he is happy ? 
Oh , since you have been so good as to let us see you once more to-day , let me tell you what I could not utter last time , what I dared not say , all I am suffering and have been for so long ! 
I am suffering ! 
Forgive me ! 
I am suffering ! '' 
And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him . 
`` From what specially ? '' 
`` I suffer ... from lack of faith . '' 
`` Lack of faith in God ? '' 
`` Oh , no , no ! 
I dare not even think of that . 
But the future life - it is such an enigma And no one , no one can solve it . 
Listen ! 
You are a healer , you are deeply versed in the human soul , and of course I dare not expect you to believe me entirely , but I assure you on my word of honour that I am not speaking lightly now . 
The thought of the life beyond the grave distracts me to anguish , to terror . 
And I do n't know to whom to appeal , and have not dared to all my life . 
And now I am so bold as to ask you . 
Oh , God ! 
What will you think of me now ? '' 
She clasped her hands . 
`` Do n't distress yourself about my opinion of you , '' said the elder . 
`` I quite believe in the sincerity of your suffering . '' 
`` Oh , how thankful I am to you ! 
You see , I shut my eyes and ask myself if everyone has faith , where did it come from ? 
And then they do say that it all comes from terror at the menacing phenomena of nature , and that none of it 's real . 
And I say to myself , ` What if I 've been believing all my life , and when I come to die there 's nothing but the burdocks growing on my grave ? ' 
as I read in some author . 
It 's awful ! 
How - how can I get back my faith ? 
But I only believed when I was a little child , mechanically , without thinking of anything . 
How , how is one to prove it ? 
have come now to lay my soul before you and to ask you about it . 
If I let this chance slip , no one all my life will answer me . 
How can I prove it ? 
How can I convince myself ? 
Oh , how unhappy I am ! 
I stand and look about me and see that scarcely anyone else cares ; no one troubles his head about it , and I 'm the only one who ca n't stand it . 
It 's deadly - deadly ! '' 
`` No doubt . 
But there 's no proving it , though you can be convinced of it . '' 
`` By the experience of active love . 
Strive to love your neighbour actively and indefatigably . 
In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer of the reality of God and of the immortality of your soul . 
If you attain to perfect self-forgetfulness in the love of your neighbour , then you will believe without doubt , and no doubt can possibly enter your soul . 
This has been tried . 
This is certain . '' 
`` In active love ? 
There 's another question and such a question ! 
You see , I so love humanity that - would you believe it ? 
- I often dream of forsaking all that I have , leaving Lise , and becoming a sister of mercy . 
I close my eyes and think and dream , and at that moment I feel full of strength to overcome all obstacles . 
No wounds , no festering sores could at that moment frighten me . 
I would bind them up and wash them with my own hands . 
I would nurse the afflicted . 
I would be ready to kiss such wounds . '' 
`` It is much , and well that your mind is full of such dreams and not others . 
Some time , unawares , you may do a good deed in reality . '' 
`` Yes . 
But could I endure such a life for long ? '' 
the lady went on fervently , almost frantically . 
`` That 's the chief question - that 's my most agonising question . 
I shut my eyes and ask myself , ` Would you persevere long on that path ? 
And if the patient whose wounds you are washing did not meet you with gratitude , but worried you with his whims , without valuing or remarking your charitable services , began abusing you and rudely commanding you , and complaining to the superior authorities of you -LRB- which often happens when people are in great suffering -RRB- - what then ? 
Would you persevere in your love , or not ? ' 
And do you know , I came with horror to the conclusion that , if anything could dissipate my love to humanity , it would be ingratitude . 
In short , I am a hired servant , I expect my payment at once - that is , praise , and the repayment of love with love . 
Otherwise I am incapable of loving anyone . ' '' 
She was in a very paroxysm of self-castigation , and , concluding , she looked with defiant resolution at the elder . 
`` It 's just the same story as a doctor once told me , '' observed the elder . 
`` He was a man getting on in years , and undoubtedly clever . 
He spoke as frankly as you , though in jest , in bitter jest . ' 
I love humanity , ' he said , ` but I wonder at myself . 
The more I love humanity in general , the less I love man in particular . 
In my dreams , ' he said , ' I have often come to making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity , and perhaps I might actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary ; and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with anyone for two days together , as I know by experience . 
As soon as anyone is near me , his personality disturbs my self-complacency and restricts my freedom . 
In twenty-four hours I begin to hate the best of men : one because he 's too long over his dinner ; another because he has a cold and keeps on blowing his nose . 
I become hostile to people the moment they come close to me . 
But it has always happened that the more I detest men individually the more ardent becomes my love for humanity . ' 
`` But what 's to be done ? 
What can one do in such a case ? 
Must one despair ? '' 
`` No . 
It is enough that you are distressed at it . 
Do what you can , and it will be reckoned unto you . 
Much is done already in you since you can so deeply and sincerely know yourself . 
If you have been talking to me so sincerely , simply to gain approbation for your frankness , as you did from me just now , then , of course , you will not attain to anything in the achievement of real love ; it will all get no further than dreams , and your whole life will slip away like a phantom . 
In that case you will naturally cease to think of the future life too , and will of yourself grow calmer after a fashion in the end . '' 
`` You have crushed me ! 
Only now , as you speak , I understand that I was really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you I could not endure ingratitude . 
You have revealed me to myself . 
You have seen through me and explained me to myself `` Are you speaking the truth ? 
Well , now , after such a confession , I believe that you are sincere and good at heart . 
If you do not attain happiness , always remember that you are on the right road , and try not to leave it . 
Above all , avoid falsehood , every kind of falsehood , especially falseness to yourself . 
Watch over your own deceitfulness and look into it every hour , every minute . 
Avoid being scornful , both to others and to yourself . 
What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your observing it in yourself . 
Avoid fear , too , though fear is only the consequence of every sort of falsehood . 
Never be frightened at your own faint-heartedness in attaining love . 
Do n't be frightened overmuch even at your evil actions . 
I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you , for love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams . 
Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action , rapidly performed and in the sight of all . 
Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon over , with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage . 
But active love is labour and fortitude , and for some people too , perhaps , a complete science . 
But I predict that just when you see with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther from your goal instead of nearer to it - at that very moment I predict that you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you . 
Forgive me for not being able to stay longer with you . 
They are waiting for me . 
Good-bye . '' 
The lady was weeping . 
`` Lise , Lise ! 
Bless her - bless her ! '' 
she cried , starting up suddenly . 
`` She does not deserve to be loved . 
I have seen her naughtiness all along , '' the elder said jestingly . 
`` Why have you been laughing at Alexey ? '' 
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time . 
She had noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her , and she found this extremely amusing . 
She waited intently to catch his eye . 
Alyosha , unable to endure her persistent stare , was irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her , and at once she smiled triumphantly in his face . 
Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed . 
At last he turned away from her altogether and hid behind the elder 's back . 
After a few minutes , drawn by the same irresistible force , he turned again to see whether he was being looked at or not , and found Lise almost hanging out of her chair to peep sideways at him , eagerly waiting for him to look . 
Catching his eye , she laughed so that the elder could not help saying , `` Why do you make fun of him like that , naughty girl ? '' 
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed . 
Her eyes flashed and her face became quite serious . 
She began speaking quickly and nervously in a warm and resentful voice : `` Why has he forgotten everything , then ? 
He used to carry me about when I was little . 
We used to play together . 
He used to come to teach me to read , do you know . 
Two years ago , when he went away , he said that he would never forget me , that we were friends for ever , for ever , for ever ! 
And now he 's afraid of me all at once . 
Am I going to eat him ? 
Why does n't he want to come near me ? 
Why does n't he talk ? 
Why wo n't he come and see us ? 
It 's not that you wo n't let him . 
We know that he goes everywhere . 
It 's not good manners for me to invite him . 
He ought to have thought of it first , if he has n't forgotten me . 
No , now he 's saving his soul ! 
Why have you put that long gown on him ? 
If he runs he 'll fall . '' 
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible , prolonged , nervous , inaudible laughter . 
The elder listened to her with a smile , and blessed her tenderly . 
As she kissed his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying . 
`` Do n't be angry with me . 
I 'm silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps Alyosha 's right , quite right , in not wanting to come and see such a ridiculous girl . '' 
`` I will certainly send him , '' said the elder . 
So Be It ! 
So Be It ! 
THE elder 's absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty-five minutes . 
It was more than half-past twelve , but Dmitri , on whose account they had all met there , had still not appeared . 
But he seemed almost to be forgotten , and when the elder entered the cell again , he found his guests engaged in eager conversation . 
Ivan and the two monks took the leading share in it . 
Miusov , too , was trying to take a part , and apparently very eagerly , in the conversation . 
But he was unsuccessful in this also . 
He was evidently in the background , and his remarks were treated with neglect , which increased his irritability . 
He had had intellectual encounters with Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed him . 
`` Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is progressive in Europe , and here the new generation positively ignores us , '' he thought . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had given his word to sit still and be quiet , had actually been quiet for some time , but he watched his neighbour Miusov with an ironical little smile , obviously enjoying his discomfiture . 
He had been waiting for some time to pay off old scores , and now he could not let the opportunity slip . 
Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper . 
`` Why did n't you go away just now , after the ` courteously kissing ' ? 
Why did you consent to remain in such unseemly company ? 
It was because you felt insulted and aggrieved , and you remained to vindicate yourself by showing off your intelligence . 
Now you wo n't go till you 've displayed your intellect to them . '' 
`` You again ? 
... On the contrary , I 'm just going . '' 
`` You 'll be the last , the last of all to go ! '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered him another thrust , almost at the moment of Father Zossima 's return . 
The discussion died down for a moment , but the elder , seating himself in his former place , looked at them all as though cordially inviting them to go on . 
Alyosha , who knew every expression of his face , saw that he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort . 
Of late he had been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion . 
His face had the pallor that was common before such attacks , and his lips were white . 
But he evidently did not want to break up the party . 
He seemed to have some special object of his own in keeping them . 
What object ? 
Alyosha watched him intently . 
`` We are discussing this gentleman 's most interesting article , '' said Father Iosif , the librarian , addressing the elder , and indicating Ivan . 
`` He brings forward much that is new , but I think the argument cuts both ways . 
It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court , and the scope of its jurisdiction . '' 
`` I 'm sorry I have not read your article , but I 've heard of it , '' said the elder , looking keenly and intently at Ivan . 
`` He takes up a most interesting position , '' continued the Father Librarian . 
`` As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposed to the separation of Church from State . '' 
`` That 's interesting . 
But in what sense ? '' 
Father Zossima asked Ivan . 
The latter , at last , answered him , not condescendingly , as Alyosha had feared , but with modesty and reserve , with evident goodwill and apparently without the slightest arrierepensee `` I start from the position that this confusion of elements , that is , of the essential principles of Church and State , will , of course , go on for ever , in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle , and that the confusion of these elements can not lead to any consistent or even normal results , for there is falsity at the very foundation of it . 
Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as , for instance , jurisdiction , is , to my thinking , impossible in any real sense . 
My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and defined position in the State . 
I maintain , on the contrary , that the Church ought to include the whole State , and not simply to occupy a corner in it , and , if this is , for some reason , impossible at present , then it ought , in reality , to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the future development of Christian society ! '' 
`` Perfectly true , '' Father Paissy , the silent and learned monk , assented with fervour and decision . 
`` The purest Ultramontanism ! '' 
cried Miusov impatiently , crossing and recrossing his legs . 
`` Oh , well , we have no mountains , '' cried Father Iosif , and turning to the elder he continued : `` Observe the answer he makes to the following ` fundamental and essential ' propositions of his opponent , who is , you must note , an ecclesiastic . 
First , that ` no social organisation can or ought to arrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political rights of its members . ' 
Secondly , that ` criminal and civil jurisdiction ought not to belong to the Church , and is inconsistent with its nature , both as a divine institution and as an organisation of men for religious objects , ' and , finally , in the third place , ` the Church is a kingdom not of this world . ' 
`` A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic ! '' 
Father Paissy could not refrain from breaking in again . 
`` I have read the book which you have answered , '' he added , addressing Ivan , `` and was astounded at the words ` The Church is a kingdom not of this world . 
` If it is not of this world , then it can not exist on earth at all . 
In the Gospel , the words ` not of this world ' are not used in that sense . 
To play with such words is indefensible . 
Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church upon earth . 
The Kingdom of Heaven , of course , is not of this world , but in Heaven ; but it is only entered through the Church which has been founded and established upon earth . 
And so a frivolous play upon words in such a connection is unpardonable and improper . 
The Church is , in truth , a kingdom and ordained to rule , and in the end must undoubtedly become the kingdom ruling over all the earth . 
For that we have the divine promise . '' 
He ceased speaking suddenly , as though checking himself . 
After listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on , addressing the elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality : `` The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was nothing but the Church . 
When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become Christian , it inevitably happened that , by becoming Christian , it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments . 
In reality this was bound to happen . 
But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan civilisation and culture , as , for example , in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State . 
The Christian Church entering into the State could , of course , surrender no part of its fundamental principles - the rock on which it stands - and could pursue no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself , and among them that of drawing the whole world , and therefore the ancient pagan State itself , into the Church . 
In that way -LRB- that is , with a view to the future -RRB- it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State , like ` every social organisation , ' or as ` an organisation of men for religious purposes ' -LRB- as my opponent calls the Church -RRB- , but , on the contrary , every earthly State should be , in the end , completely transformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church , rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church . 
All this will not degrade it in any way or take from its honour and glory as a great State , nor from the glory of its rulers , but only turns it from a false , still pagan , and mistaken path to the true and rightful path , which alone leads to the eternal goal . 
This is why the author of the book On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction would have judged correctly if , in seeking and laying down those foundations , he bad looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days . 
But as soon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which he predicates now , part of which Father Iosif just enumerated , are the permanent , essential , and eternal foundations , he is going directly against the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation . 
That is the gist of my article . '' 
`` That is , in brief , '' Father Paissy began again , laying stress on each word , `` according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in the nineteenth century , the Church ought to be transformed into the State , as though this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form , so as to disappear into it , making way for science , for the spirit of the age , and civilisation . 
And if the Church resists and is unwilling , some corner will be set apart for her in the State , and even that under control and this will be so everywhere in all modern European countries . 
But Russian hopes and conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower into a higher type into the State , but , on the contrary , that the State should end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else . 
So be it ! 
So be it ! '' 
`` Well , I confess you 've reassured me somewhat , '' Miusov said smiling , again crossing his legs . 
`` So far as I understand , then , the realisation of such an ideal is infinitely remote , at the second coming of Christ . 
That 's as you please . 
It 's a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war , diplomacy , banks , and so on - something after the fashion of socialism , indeed . 
But I imagined that it was all meant seriously , and that the Church might be now going to try criminals , and sentence them to beating , prison , and even death . '' 
`` But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court , the Church would not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death . 
Crime and the way of regarding it would inevitably change , not all at once of course , but fairly soon , '' Ivan replied calmly , without flinching . 
`` Are you serious ? '' 
Miusov glanced keenly at him . 
`` If everything became the Church , the Church would exclude all the criminal and disobedient , and would not cut off their heads , '' Ivan went on . 
`` I ask you , what would become of the excluded ? 
He would be cut off then not only from men , as now , but from Christ . 
By his crime he would have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ . 
This is so even now , of course , strictly speaking , but it is not clearly enunciated , and very , very often the criminal of to-day compromises with his conscience : ' I steal , ' he says , ` but I do n't go against the Church . 
I 'm not an enemy of Christ . ' 
That 's what the criminal of to-day is continually saying to himself , but when the Church takes the place of the State it will be difficult for him , in opposition to the Church all over the world , to say : ` All men are mistaken , all in error , all mankind are the false Church . 
I , a thief and murderer , am the only true Christian Church . ' 
It will be very difficult to say this to himself ; it requires a rare combination of unusual circumstances . 
Now , on the other side , take the Church 's own view of crime : is it not bound to renounce the present almost pagan attitude , and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its tainted member for the preservation of society , as at present , into completely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man , of his reformation and salvation ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
I fail to understand again , '' Miusov interrupted . 
`` Some sort of dream again . 
Something shapeless and even incomprehensible . 
What is excommunication ? 
What sort of exclusion ? 
I suspect you are simply amusing yourself , Ivan Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Yes , but you know , in reality it is so now , '' said the elder suddenly , and all turned to him at once . 
`` If it were not for the Church of Christ there would be nothing to restrain the criminal from evil-doing , no real chastisement for it afterwards ; none , that is , but the mechanical punishment spoken of just now , which in the majority of cases only embitters the heart ; and not the real punishment , the only effectual one , the only deterrent and softening one , which lies in the recognition of sin by conscience . '' 
`` How is that , may one inquire ? '' 
asked Miusov , with lively curiosity . 
`` Why , '' began the elder , `` all these sentences to exile with hard labour , and formerly with flogging also , reform no one , and what 's more , deter hardly a single criminal , and the number of crimes does not diminish but is continually on the increase . 
You must admit that . 
Consequently the security of society is not preserved , for , although the obnoxious member is mechanically cut off and sent far away out of sight , another criminal always comes to take his place at once , and often two of them . 
If anything does preserve society , even in our time , and does regenerate and transform the criminal , it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience . 
It is only by recognising his wrongdoing as a son of a Christian society - that is , of the Church - that he recognises his sin against society - that is , against the Church . 
So that it is only against the Church , and not against the State , that the criminal of to-day can recognise that he has sinned . 
If society , as a Church , had jurisdiction , then it would know when to bring back from exclusion and to reunite to itself . 
Now the Church having no real jurisdiction , but only the power of moral condemnation , withdraws of her own accord from punishing the criminal actively . 
She does not excommunicate him but simply persists in motherly exhortation of him . 
What is more , the Church even tries to preserve all Christian communion with the criminal . 
She admits him to church services , to the holy sacrament , gives him alms , and treats him more a captive than as a convict . 
And what would become of the criminal , O Lord , if even the Christian society - that is , the Church - were to reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off ? 
What would become of him if the Church punished him with her excommunication as the direct consequence of the secular law ? 
There could be no more terrible despair , at least for a Russian criminal , for Russian criminals still have faith . 
Though , who knows , perhaps then a fearful thing would happen , perhaps the despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and then what would become of him ? 
But the Church , like a tender , loving mother , holds aloof from active punishment herself , as the sinner is too severely punished already by the civil law , and there must be at least someone to have pity on him . 
The Church holds aloof , above all , because its judgment is the only one that contains the truth , and therefore can not practically and morally be united to any other judgment even as a temporary compromise . 
She can enter into no compact about that . 
The foreign criminal , they say , rarely repents , for the very doctrines of to-day confirm him in the idea that his crime is not a crime , but only a reaction against an unjustly oppressive force . 
Society cuts him off completely by a force that triumphs over him mechanically and -LRB- so at least they say of themselves in Europe -RRB- accompanies this exclusion with hatred , forgetfulness , and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fate of the erring brother . 
In this way , it all takes place without the compassionate intervention of the Church , for in many cases there are no churches there at all , for though ecclesiastics and splendid church buildings remain , the churches themselves have long ago striven to pass from Church into State and to disappear in it completely . 
So it seems at least in Lutheran countries . 
As for Rome , it was proclaimed a State instead of a Church a thousand years ago . 
And so the criminal is no longer conscious of being a member of the Church and sinks into despair . 
If he returns to society , often it is with such hatred that society itself instinctively cuts him off . 
You can judge for yourself how it must end . 
In many cases it would seem to be the same with us , but the difference is that besides the established law courts we have the Church too , which always keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still precious son . 
And besides that , there is still preserved , though only in thought , the judgment of the Church , which though no longer existing in practice is still living as a dream for the future , and is , no doubt , instinctively recognised by the criminal in his soul . 
What was said here just now is true too , that is , that if the jurisdiction of the Church were introduced in practice in its full force , that is , if the whole of the society were changed into the Church , not only the judgment of the Church would have influence on the reformation of the criminal such as it never has now , but possibly also the crimes themselves would be incredibly diminished . 
And there can be no doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and the crime of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed in restoring the excluded , in restraining those who plan evil , and in regenerating the fallen . 
It is true , '' said Father Zossima , with a smile , `` the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting on some seven righteous men , but as they are never lacking , it will continue still unshaken in expectation of its complete transformation from a society almost heathen in character into a single universal and all-powerful Church . 
So be it , so be it ! 
Even though at the end of the ages , for it is ordained to come to pass ! 
And there is no need to be troubled about times and seasons , for the secret of the times and seasons is in the wisdom of God , in His foresight , and His love . 
And what in human reckoning seems still afar off , may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand , on the eve of its appearance . 
And so be it , so be it ! 
`` So be it , so be it ! '' 
Father Paissy repeated austerely and reverently . 
`` Strange , extremely strange '' Miusov pronounced , not so much with heat as with latent indignation . 
`` What strikes you as so strange ? '' 
Father Iosif inquired cautiously . 
`` Why , it 's beyond anything ! '' 
cried Miusov , suddenly breaking out ; `` the State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State . 
It 's not simply Ultramontanism , it 's arch-Ultramontanism ! 
It 's beyond the dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh ! '' 
`` You are completely misunderstanding it , '' said Father Paissy sternly . 
`` Understand , the Church is not to be transformed into the State . 
That is Rome and its dream . 
That is the third temptation of the devil . 
On the contrary , the State is transformed into the Church , will ascend and become a Church over the whole world - which is the complete opposite of Ultramontanism and Rome , and your interpretation , and is only the glorious destiny ordained for the Orthodox Church . 
This star will arise in the east ! '' 
Miusov was significantly silent . 
His whole figure expressed extraordinary personal dignity . 
A supercilious and condescending smile played on his lips . 
Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart . 
The whole conversation stirred him profoundly . 
He glanced casually at Rakitin , who was standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watching intently though with downcast eyes . 
But from the colour in his cheeks Alyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited , and he knew what caused his excitement . 
`` Allow me to tell you one little anecdote , gentlemen , '' Miusov said impressively , with a peculiarly majestic air . 
`` Some years ago , soon after the coup d'etat of December , I happened to be calling in Paris on an extremely influential personage in the Government , and I met a very interesting man in his house . 
This individual was not precisely a detective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment of political detectives - a rather powerful position in its own way . 
I was prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him . 
And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringing a special report , and as he saw the reception given me by his chief , he deigned to speak with some openness , to a certain extent only , of course . 
He was rather courteous than open , as Frenchmen know how to be courteous , especially to a foreigner . 
But I thoroughly understood him . 
The subject was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted . 
I will quote only one most curious remark dropped by this person . 
` We are not particularly afraid , ' said he , ` of all these socialists , anarchists , infidels , and revolutionists ; we keep watch on them and know all their goings on . 
But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in God and are Christians , but at the same time are socialists . 
These are the people we are most afraid of . 
They are dreadful people The socialist who is a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist . ' 
The words struck me at the time , and now they have suddenly come back to me here , gentlemen . '' 
`` You apply them to us , and look upon us as socialists ? '' 
Father Paissy asked directly , without beating about the bush . 
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer , the door opened , and the guest so long expected , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , came in . 
They had , in fact , given up expecting him , and his sudden appearance caused some surprise for a moment . 
Why Is Such a Man Alive ? 
DMITRI FYODOROVITCH , a young man of eight and twenty , of medium height and agreeable countenance , looked older than his years . 
He was muscular , and showed signs of considerable physical strength . 
Yet there was something not healthy in his face . 
It was rather thin , his cheeks were hollow , and there was an unhealthy sallowness in their colour . 
His rather large , prominent , dark eyes had an expression of firm determination , and yet there was a vague look in them , too . 
Even when he was excited and talking irritably , his eyes somehow did not follow his mood , but betrayed something else , sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing . 
`` It 's hard to tell what he 's thinking , '' those who talked to him sometimes declared . 
People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes were startled by his sudden laugh , which bore witness to mirthful and light-hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy . 
A certain strained look in his face was easy to understand at this moment . 
Everyone knew , or had heard of , the extremely restless and dissipated life which he had been leading of late , as well as of the violent anger to which he had been roused in his quarrels with his father . 
There were several stories current in the town about it . 
It is true that he was irascible by nature , `` of an unstable and unbalanced mind , '' as our justice of the peace , Katchalnikov , happily described him . 
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned frock-coat . 
He wore black gloves and carried a top hat . 
Having only lately left the army , he still had moustaches and no beard . 
His dark brown hair was cropped short , and combed forward on his temples . 
He had the long , determined stride of a military man . 
He stood still for a moment on the threshold , and glancing at the whole party went straight up to the elder , guessing him to be their host . 
He made him a low bow , and asked his blessing . 
Father Zossima , rising in his chair , blessed him . 
Dmitri kissed his hand respectfully , and with intense feeling , almost anger , he said : `` Be so generous as to forgive me for having kept you waiting so long , but Smerdyakov , the valet sent me by my father , in reply to my inquiries , told me twice over that the appointment was for one . 
Now I suddenly learn - '' `` Do n't disturb yourself , '' interposed the elder . 
`` No matter . 
You are a little late . 
It 's of no consequence ... '' `` I 'm extremely obliged to you , and expected no less from your goodness . '' 
Saying this , Dmitri bowed once more . 
Then , turning suddenly towards his father , made him , too , a similarly low and respectful bow . 
He had evidently considered it beforehand , and made this bow in all seriousness , thinking it his duty to show his respect and good intentions . 
Although Fyodor Pavlovitch was taken unawares , he was equal to the occasion . 
In response to Dmitri 's bow he jumped up from his chair and made his son a bow as low in return . 
His face was suddenly solemn and impressive , which gave him a positively malignant look . 
Dmitri bowed generally to all present , and without a word walked to the window with his long , resolute stride , sat down on the only empty chair , near Father Paissy , and , bending forward , prepared to listen to the conversation he had interrupted . 
Dmitri 's entrance had taken no more than two minutes , and the conversation was resumed . 
But this time Miusov thought it unnecessary to reply to Father Paissy 's persistent and almost irritable question . 
`` Allow me to withdraw from this discussion , '' he observed with a certain well-bred nonchalance . 
`` It 's a subtle question , too . 
Here Ivan Fyodorovitch is smiling at us . 
He must have something interesting to say about that also . 
Ask him . '' 
`` Nothing special , except one little remark , '' Ivan replied at once . 
`` European Liberals in general , and even our liberal dilettanti , often mix up the final results of socialism with those of Christianity . 
This wild notion is , of course , a characteristic feature . 
But it 's not only Liberals and dilettanti who mix up socialism and Christianity , but , in many cases , it appears , the police - the foreign police , of course - do the same . 
Your Paris anecdote is rather to the point , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . '' 
`` I ask your permission to drop this subject altogether , '' Miusov repeated . 
`` I will tell you instead , gentlemen , another interesting and rather characteristic anecdote of Ivan Fyodorovitch himself . 
Only five days ago , in a gathering here , principally of ladies , he solemnly declared in argument that there was nothing in the whole world to make men love their neighbours . 
That there was no law of nature that man should love mankind , and that , if there had been any love on earth hitherto , it was not owing to a natural law , but simply because men have believed in immortality . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies in that faith , and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief in immortality , not only love but every living force maintaining the life of the world would at once be dried up . 
Moreover , nothing then would be immoral , everything would be lawful , even cannibalism . 
That 's not all . 
He ended by asserting that for every individual , like ourselves , who does not believe in God or immortality , the moral law of nature must immediately be changed into the exact contrary of the former religious law , and that egoism , even to crime , must become not only lawful but even recognised as the inevitable , the most rational , even honourable outcome of his position . 
From this paradox , gentlemen , you can judge of the rest of our eccentric and paradoxical friend Ivan Fyodorovitch 's theories . '' 
`` Excuse me , '' Dmitri cried suddenly ; `` if I 've heard aright , crime must not only be permitted but even recognised as the inevitable and the most rational outcome of his position for every infidel ! 
Is that so or not ? '' 
`` Quite so , '' said Father Paissy . 
`` I 'll remember it . '' 
Having uttered these words Dmitri ceased speaking as suddenly as he had begun . 
Everyone looked at him with curiosity . 
`` Is that really your conviction as to the consequences of the disappearance of the faith in immortality ? '' 
the elder asked Ivan suddenly . 
`` Yes . 
That was my contention . 
There is no virtue if there is no immortality . '' 
`` You are blessed in believing that , or else most unhappy . '' 
`` Why unhappy ? '' 
Ivan asked smiling . 
`` Because , in all probability you do n't believe yourself in the immortality of your soul , nor in what you have written yourself in your article on Church Jurisdiction . '' 
`` Perhaps you are right ! 
... But I was n't altogether joking , '' Ivan suddenly and strangely confessed , flushing quickly . 
`` You were not altogether joking . 
That 's true . 
The question is still fretting your heart , and not answered . 
But the martyr likes sometimes to divert himself with his despair , as it were driven to it by despair itself . 
Meanwhile , in your despair , you , too , divert yourself with magazine articles , and discussions in society , though you do n't believe your own arguments , and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly ... . 
That question you have not answered , and it is your great grief , for it clamours for an answer . '' 
`` But can it be answered by me ? 
Answered in the affirmative ? '' 
Ivan went on asking strangely , still looking at the elder with the same inexplicable smile . 
`` If it ca n't be decided in the affirmative , it will never be decided in the negative . 
You know that that is the peculiarity of your heart , and all its suffering is due to it . 
But thank the Creator who has given you a lofty heart capable of such suffering ; of thinking and seeking higher things , for our dwelling is in the heavens . 
God grant that your heart will attain the answer on earth , and may God bless your path . '' 
The elder raised his hand and would have made the sign of the cross over Ivan from where he stood . 
But the latter rose from his seat , went up to him , received his blessing , and kissing his hand went back to his place in silence . 
His face looked firm and earnest . 
This action and all the preceding conversation , which was so surprising from Ivan , impressed everyone by its strangeness and a certain solemnity , so that all were silent for a moment , and there was a look almost of apprehension in Alyosha 's face . 
But Miusov suddenly shrugged his shoulders . 
And at the same moment Fyodor Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat . 
`` Most pious and holy elder , '' he cried pointing to Ivan , `` that is my son , flesh of my flesh , the dearest of my flesh ! 
He is my most dutiful Karl Moor , so to speak , while this son who has just come in , Dmitri , against whom I am seeking justice from you , is the undutiful Franz Moor - they are both out of Schiller 's Robbers , and so I am the reigning Count von Moor ! 
Judge and save us ! 
We need not only your prayers but your prophecies ! '' 
`` Speak without buffoonery , and do n't begin by insulting the members of your family , '' answered the elder , in a faint , exhausted voice . 
He was obviously getting more and more fatigued , and his strength was failing . 
`` An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here ! '' 
cried Dmitri indignantly . 
He too leapt up . 
`` Forgive it , reverend Father , '' he added , addressing the elder . 
`` I am not a cultivated man , and I do n't even know how to address you properly , but you have been deceived and you have been too good-natured in letting us meet here . 
All my father wants is a scandal . 
Why he wants it only he can tell . 
He always has some motive . 
But I believe I know why - '' `` They all blame me , all of them ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn . 
`` Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too . 
You have been blaming me , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , you have ! '' 
he turned suddenly to Miusov , although the latter was not dreaming of interrupting him . 
`` They all accuse me of having hidden the children 's money in my boots , and cheated them , but is n't there a court of law ? 
There they will reckon out for you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , from your notes , your letters , and your agreements , how much money you had , how much you have spent , and how much you have left . 
Why does Pyotr Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment ? 
Dmitri is not a stranger to him . 
Because they are all against me , while Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt to me , and not a little , but some thousands of which I have documentary proof . 
The whole town is echoing with his debaucheries . 
And where he was stationed before , he several times spent a thousand or two for the seduction of some respectable girl ; we know all about that , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , in its most secret details . 
I 'll prove it ... . 
Would you believe it , holy Father , he has captivated the heart of the most honourable of young ladies of good family and fortune , daughter of a gallant colonel , formerly his superior officer , who had received many honours and had the Anna Order on his breast . 
He compromised the girl by his promise of marriage , now she is an orphan and here ; she is betrothed to him , yet before her very eyes he is dancing attendance on a certain enchantress . 
And although this enchantress has lived in , so to speak , civil marriage with a respectable man , yet she is of an independent character , an unapproachable fortress for everybody , just like a legal wife - for she is virtuous , yes , holy Fathers , she is virtuous . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch wants to open this fortress with a golden key , and that 's why he is insolent to me now , trying to get money from me , though he has wasted thousands on this enchantress already . 
He 's continually borrowing money for the purpose . 
From whom do you think ? 
Shall I say , Mitya ? '' 
`` Be silent ! '' 
cried Dmitri , `` wait till I 'm gone . 
Do n't dare in my presence to asperse the good name of an honourable girl ! 
That you should utter a word about her is an outrage , and I wo n't permit it ! '' 
He was breathless . 
He was breathless . 
`` Mitya ! 
Mitya ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically , squeezing out a tear . 
`` And is your father 's blessing nothing to you ? 
If I curse you , what then ? '' 
`` Shameless hypocrite ! 
`` exclaimed Dmitri furiously . 
`` He says that to his father ! 
his father What would he be with others ? 
Gentlemen , only fancy ; there 's a poor but honourable man living here , burdened with a numerous family , a captain who got into trouble and was discharged from the army , but not publicly , not by court-martial , with no slur on his honour . 
And three weeks ago , Dmitri seized him by the beard in a tavern , dragged him out into the street and beat him publicly , and all because he is an agent in a little business of mine . '' 
`` It 's all a lie ! 
Outwardly it 's the truth , but inwardly a lie ! '' 
Dmitri was trembling with rage . 
`` Father , I do n't justify my action . 
Yes , I confess it publicly , I behaved like a brute to that captain , and I regret it now , and I 'm disgusted with myself for my brutal rage . 
But this captain , this agent of yours , went to that lady whom you call an enchantress , and suggested to her from you , that she should take I.O.U.s of mine which were in your possession , and should sue me for the money so as to get me into prison by means of them , if I persisted in claiming an account from you of my property . 
Now you reproach me for having a weakness for that lady when you yourself incited her to captivate me ! 
She told me so to my face ... . 
She told me the story and laughed at you ... . 
You wanted to put me in prison because you are jealous of me with her , because you 'd begun to force your attentions upon her ; and I know all about that , too ; she laughed at you for that as well - you hear - she laughed at you as she described it . 
So here you have this man , this father who reproaches his profligate son ! 
Gentlemen , forgive my anger , but I foresaw that this crafty old man would only bring you together to create a scandal . 
I had come to forgive him if he held out his hand ; to forgive him , and ask forgiveness ! 
But as he has just this minute insulted not only me , but an honourable young lady , for whom I feel such reverence that I dare not take her name in vain , I have made up my mind to show up his game , though he is my father ... '' He could not go on . 
His eyes were glittering and he breathed with difficulty . 
But everyone in the cell was stirred . 
All except Father Zossima got up from their seats uneasily . 
The monks looked austere but waited for guidance from the elder . 
He sat still , pale , not from excitement but from the weakness of disease . 
An imploring smile lighted up his face ; from time to time he raised his hand , as though to check the storm , and , of course , a gesture from him would have been enough to end the scene ; but he seemed to be waiting for something and watched them intently as though trying to make out something which was not perfectly clear to him . 
At last Miusov felt completely humiliated and disgraced . 
`` We are all to blame for this scandalous scene , '' he said hotly . 
`` But I did not foresee it when I came , though I knew with whom I had to deal . 
This must be stopped at once ! 
Believe me , your reverence , I had no precise knowledge of the details that have just come to light , I was unwilling to believe them , and I learn for the first time ... . 
A father is jealous of his son 's relation with a woman of loose behaviour and intrigues with the creature to get his son into prison ! 
This is the company in which I have been forced to be present ! 
I was deceived . 
I declare to you all that I was as much deceived as anyone . '' 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly , in an unnatural voice , `` if you were not my son I would challenge you this instant to a duel ... with pistols , at three paces ... across a handkerchief , '' he ended , stamping with both feet . 
With old liars who have been acting all their lives there are moments when they enter so completely into their part that they tremble or shed tears of emotion in earnest , although at that very moment , or a second later , they are able to whisper to themselves , `` You know you are lying , you shameless old sinner ! 
You 're acting now , in spite of your ` holy ' wrath . '' 
Dmitri frowned painfully , and looked with unutterable contempt at his father . 
`` I thought ... I thought , '' he said . 
in a soft and , as it were , controlled voice , `` that I was coming to my native place with the angel of my heart , my betrothed , to cherish his old age , and I find nothing but a depraved profligate , a despicable clown ! '' 
`` A duel ! '' 
yelled the old wretch again , breathless and spluttering at each syllable . 
`` And you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov , let me tell you that there has never been in all your family a loftier , and more honest - you hear - more honest woman than this ` creature , ' as you have dared to call her ! 
And you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , have abandoned your betrothed for that ` creature , ' so you must yourself have thought that your betrothed could n't hold a candle to her . 
That 's the woman called a `` creature '' `` Shameful ! '' 
broke from Father Iosif . 
`` Shameful and disgraceful ! '' 
Kalganov , flushing crimson cried in a boyish voice , trembling with emotion . 
He had been silent till that moment . 
`` Why is such a man alive ? '' 
Dmitri , beside himself with rage , growled in a hollow voice , hunching up his shoulders till he looked almost deformed . 
`` Tell me , can he be allowed to go on defiling the earth ? '' 
He looked round at everyone and pointed at the old man . 
He spoke evenly and deliberately . 
`` Listen , listen , monks , to the parricide ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , rushing up to Father Iosif . 
`` That 's the answer to your ` shameful ! ' 
What is shameful ? 
That ` creature , ' that ` woman of loose behaviour ' is perhaps holier than you are yourselves , you monks who are seeking salvation ! 
She fell perhaps in her youth , ruined by her environment . 
But she loved much , and Christ himself forgave the woman ` who loved much . ' '' 
`` It was not for such love Christ forgave her , '' broke impatiently from the gentle Father Iosif . 
`` Yes , it was for such , monks , it was ! 
You save your souls here , eating cabbage , and think you are the righteous . 
You eat a gudgeon a day , and you think you bribe God with gudgeon . '' 
`` This is unendurable ! '' 
was heard on all sides in the cell . 
But this unseemly scene was cut short in a most unexpected way . 
Father Zossima Father Zossima rose suddenly from his seat . 
Almost distracted with anxiety for the elder and everyone else , Alyosha succeeded , however , in supporting him by the arm . 
Father Zossima moved towards Dmitri and reaching him sank on his knees before him . 
Alyosha thought that he had fallen from weakness , but this was not so . 
The elder distinctly and deliberately bowed down at Dmitri 's feet till his forehead touched the floor . 
Alyosha was so astounded that he failed to assist him when he got up again . 
There was a faint smile on his lips . 
`` Good-bye ! 
Forgive me , all of you '' he said , bowing on all sides to his guests . 
Dmitri stood for a few moments in amazement . 
Bowing down to him - what did it mean ? 
Suddenly he cried aloud , `` Oh God ! '' 
hid his face in his hands , and rushed out of the room . 
All the guests flocked out after him , in their confusion not saying good-bye , or bowing to their host . 
Only the monks went up to him again for a blessing . 
`` What did it mean , falling at his feet like that ? 
Was it symbolic or what ? '' 
said Fyodor Pavlovitch , suddenly quieted and trying to reopen conversation without venturing to address anybody in particular . 
They were all passing out of the precincts of the hermitage at the moment . 
`` I ca n't answer for a madhouse and for madmen , '' Miusov answered at once ill-humouredly , `` but I will spare myself your company , Fyodor Pavlovitch , and , trust me , for ever . 
Where 's that monk ? '' 
`` That monk , '' that is , the monk who had invited them to dine with the Superior , did not keep them waiting . 
He met them as soon as they came down the steps from the elder 's cell , as though he had been waiting for them all the time . 
`` Reverend Father , kindly do me a favour . 
Convey my deepest respect to the Father Superior , apologise for me , personally , Miusov , to his reverence , telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen circumstances I am unable to have the honour of being present at his table , greatly I should desire to do so , '' Miusov said irritably to the monk . 
`` And that unforeseen circumstance , of course , is myself , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cut in immediately . 
`` Do you hear , Father ; this gentleman does n't want to remain in my company or else he 'd come at once . 
And you shall go , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , pray go to the Father Superior and good appetite to you . 
I will decline , and not you . 
Home , home , I 'll eat at home , I do n't feel equal to it here , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , my amiable relative . '' 
`` I am not your relative and never have been , you contemptible man ! '' 
`` I said it on purpose to madden you , because you always disclaim the relationship , though you really are a relation in spite of your shuffling . 
I 'll prove it by the church calendar . 
As for you , Ivan , stay if you like . 
I 'll send the horses for you later . 
Propriety requires you to go to the Father Superior , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , to apologise for the disturbance we 've been making ... '' `` Is it true that you are going home ? 
Are n't you lying ? '' 
`` Pyotr Alexandrovitch ! 
How could I dare after what 's happened ! 
Forgive me , gentlemen , I was carried away ! 
And upset besides ! 
And , indeed , I am ashamed . 
Gentlemen , one man has the heart of Alexander of Macedon and another the heart of the little dog Fido . 
Mine is that of the little dog Fido . 
I am ashamed ! 
After such an escapade how can I go to dinner , to gobble up the monastery 's sauces ? 
I am ashamed , I ca n't . 
You must excuse me ! '' 
`` The devil only knows , what if he deceives us ? '' 
thought Miusov , still hesitating , and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful eyes . 
The latter turned round , and noticing that Miusov was watching him , waved him a kiss . 
`` Well , are you coming to the Superior ? '' 
Miusov asked Ivan abruptly . 
`` Why not ? 
I was especially invited yesterday . '' 
`` Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded dinner , '' said Miusov with the same irritability , regardless of the fact that the monk was listening . 
`` We ought , at least , to apologise for the disturbance , and explain that it was not our doing . 
What do you think ? '' 
`` Yes , we must explain that it was n't our doing . 
Besides , father wo n't be there , '' observed Ivan . 
`` Well , I should hope not ! 
Confound this dinner ! '' 
They all walked on , however . 
The monk listened in silence . 
On the road through the copse he made one observation however - that the Father Superior had been waiting a long time , and that they were more than half an hour late . 
He received no answer . 
Miusov looked with hatred at Ivan . 
`` Here he is , going to the dinner as though nothing had happened , '' he thought . 
`` A brazen face , and the conscience of a Karamazov ! '' 
A Young Man Bent on a Career ALYOSHA helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated him on his bed . 
It was a little room furnished with the bare necessities . 
There was a narrow iron bedstead , with a strip of felt for a mattress . 
In the corner , under the ikons , was a reading-desk with a cross and the Gospel lying on it . 
The elder sank exhausted on the bed . 
His eyes glittered and he breathed hard . 
He looked intently at Alyosha , as though considering something . 
`` Go , my dear boy , go . 
Porfiry is enough for me . 
Make haste , you are needed there , go and wait at the Father Superior 's table . '' 
`` Let me stay here , '' Alyosha entreated . 
`` You are more needed there . 
There is no peace there . 
You will wait , and be of service . 
If evil spirits rise up , repeat a prayer . 
And remember , my son '' - the elder liked to call him that - `` this is not the place for you in the future . 
When it is God 's will to call me , leave the monastery . 
Go away for good . '' 
Alyosha started . 
`` What is it ? 
This is not your place for the time . 
I bless you for great service in the world . 
Yours will be a long pilgrimage . 
And you will have to take a wife , too . 
You will have to bear all before you come back . 
There will be much to do . 
But I do n't doubt of you , and so I send you forth . 
Christ is with you . 
Do not abandon Him and He will not abandon you . 
You will see great sorrow , and in that sorrow you will be happy . 
This is my last message to you : in sorrow seek happiness . 
Work , work unceasingly . 
Remember my words , for although I shall talk with you again , not only my days but my hours are numbered . '' 
Alyosha 's face again betrayed strong emotion . 
The corners of his mouth quivered . 
`` What is it again ? '' 
Father Zossima asked , smiling gently . 
`` The worldly may follow the dead with tears , but here we rejoice over the father who is departing . 
We rejoice and pray for him . 
Leave me , I must pray . 
Go , and make haste . 
Be near your brothers . 
And not near one only , but near both . '' 
Father Zossima raised his hand to bless him . 
Alyosha could make no protest , though he had a great longing to remain . 
He longed , moreover , to ask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri , the question was on the tip of his tongue , but he dared not ask it . 
He knew that the elder would have explained it unasked if he had thought fit . 
But evidently it was not his will . 
That action had made a terrible impression on Alyosha ; he believed blindly in its mysterious significance . 
Mysterious , and perhaps awful . 
As he hastened out of the hermatage precincts to reach the monastery in time to serve at the Father Superior 's dinner , he felt a sudden pang at his heart , and stopped short . 
He seemed to hear again Father Zossima 's words , foretelling his approaching end . 
What he had foretold so exactly must infallibly come to pass . 
Alyosha believed that implicitly . 
But how could he go ? 
He had told him not to weep , and to leave the monastery . 
Good God ! 
It was long since Alyosha had known such anguish . 
He hurried through the copse that divided the monastery from the hermitage , and unable to bear the burden of his thoughts , he gazed at the ancient pines beside the path . 
He had not far to go - about five hundred paces . 
He expected to meet no one at that hour , but at the first turn of the path he noticed Rakitin . 
He was waiting for someone . 
`` Are you waiting for me ? '' 
asked Alyosha , overtaking him . 
`` Yes , '' grinned Rakitin . 
`` You are hurrying to the Father Superior , I know ; he has a banquet . 
There 's not been such a banquet since the Superior entertained the Bishop and General Pahatov , do you remember ? 
I sha n't be there , but you go and hand the sauces . 
Tell me one thing , Alexey , what does that vision mean ? 
That 's what I want to ask you . '' 
`` What vision ? '' 
`` That bowing to your brother , Dmitri . 
And did n't he tap the ground with his forehead , too ! '' 
`` You speak of Father Zossima ? '' 
`` Yes , of Father Zossima , '' `` Tapped the ground ? '' 
`` Ah , an irreverent expression ! 
Well , what of it ? 
Anyway , what does that vision mean ? '' 
`` I do n't know what it means , Misha . '' 
`` I knew he would n't explain it to you There 's nothing wonderful about it , of course , only the usual holy mummery . 
But there was an object in the performance . 
All the pious people in the town will talk about it and spread the story through the province , wondering what it meant . 
To my thinking the old man really has a keen nose ; he sniffed a crime . 
Your house stinks of it . '' 
Rakitin evidently had something he was eager to speak of . 
`` It 'll be in your family , this crime . 
Between your brothers and your rich old father . 
So Father Zossima flopped down to be ready for what may turn up . 
If something happens later on , it 'll be : ` Ah , the holy man foresaw it , prophesied it ! ' 
though it 's a poor sort of prophecy , flopping like that . 
` Ah , but it was symbolic , ' they 'll say , ` an allegory , ' and the devil knows what all ! 
It 'll be remembered to his glory : ` He predicted the crime and marked the criminal ! ' 
That 's always the way with these crazy fanatics ; they cross themselves at the tavern and throw stones at the temple . 
Like your elder , he takes a stick to a just man and falls at the feet of a murderer . '' 
`` What crime ? 
What do you mean ? '' 
Alyosha stopped dead . 
Rakitin stopped , too . 
`` What murderer ? 
As though you did n't know ! 
I 'll bet you 've thought of it before . 
That 's interesting , too , by the way . 
Listen , Alyosha , you always speak the truth , though you 're always between two stools . 
Have you thought of it or not ? 
Answer . '' 
`` I have , '' answered Alyosha in a low voice . 
Even Rakitin was taken aback . 
`` What ? 
Have you really ? '' 
he cried . 
`` I. . . 
I 've not exactly thought it , '' muttered Alyosha , `` but directly you began speaking so strangely , I fancied I had thought of it myself . '' 
`` You see ? 
-LRB- And how well you expressed it ! -RRB- 
Looking at your father and your brother Mitya to-day you thought of a crime . 
Then I 'm not mistaken ? '' 
`` But wait , wait a minute , '' Alyosha broke in uneasily , `` What has led you to see all this ? 
Why does it interest you ? 
That 's the first question . '' 
`` Two questions , disconnected , but natural . 
I 'll deal with them separately . 
What led me to see it ? 
I should n't have seen it , if I had n't suddenly understood your brother Dmitri , seen right into the very heart of him all at once . 
I caught the whole man from one trait . 
These very honest but passionate people have a line which must n't be crossed . 
If it were , he 'd run at your father with a knife . 
But your father 's a drunken and abandoned old sinner , who can never draw the line - if they both themselves go , they 'll both come to grief . '' 
`` No , Misha , no . 
If that 's all , you 've reassured me . 
It wo n't come to that . '' 
`` But why are you trembling ? 
Let me tell you ; he may be honest , our Mitya -LRB- he is stupid , but honest -RRB- , but he 's - a sensualist . 
That 's the very definition and inner essence of him . 
It 's your father has handed him on his low sensuality . 
Do you know , I simply wonder at you , Alyosha , how you can have kept your purity . 
You 're a Karamazov too , you know ! 
In your family sensuality is carried to a disease . 
But now , these three sensualists are watching one another , with their knives in their belts . 
The three of them are knocking their heads together , and you may be the fourth . '' 
`` You are mistaken about that woman . 
Dmitri despises her , '' said Alyosha , with a sort of shudder . 
`` Grushenka ? 
No , brother , he does n't despise her . 
