I 'm not ` old fellow ' to you , and you can keep your advice for another time ! '' 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely , as though glad to vent his wrath . 
Mitya was reduced to silence . 
He flushed all over . 
A moment later he felt suddenly very cold . 
The rain had ceased , but the dull sky was still overcast with clouds , and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face . 
`` I 've taken a chill , '' thought Mitya , twitching his shoulders . 
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , too , got into the cart , sat down heavily , and , as though without noticing it , squeezed Mitya into the corner . 
It is true that he was out of humour and greatly disliked the task that had been laid upon him . 
`` Good-bye , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
Mitya shouted again , and felt himself , that he had not called out this time from good-nature , but involuntarily , from resentment . 
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly , with both hands behind his back , and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face , he made no reply . 
`` Good-bye , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , good-bye ! '' 
he heard all at once the voice of Kalganov , who had suddenly darted out . 
Running up to the cart he held out his hand to Mitya . 
He had no cap on . 
Mitya had time to seize and press his hand . 
`` Good-bye , dear fellow ! 
I sha n't forget your generosity , '' he cried warmly . 
But the cart moved and their hands parted . 
The bell began ringing and Mitya was driven off . 
Kalganov ran back , sat down in a corner , bent his head , hid his face in his hands , and burst out crying . 
For a long while he sat like that , crying as though he were a little boy instead of a young man of twenty . 
Oh , he believed almost without doubt in Mitya 's guilt . 
`` What are these people ? 
What can men be after this ? '' 
he exclaimed incoherently , in bitter despondency , almost despair . 
At that moment he had no desire to live . 
`` Is it worth it ? 
Is it worth it ? '' 
exclaimed the boy in his grief . 
Kolya Krassotkin IT was the beginning of November . 
There had been a hard frost , eleven degrees Reaumur , without snow , but a little dry snow had fallen on the frozen ground during the night , and a keen dry wind was lifting and blowing it along the dreary streets of our town , especially about the market-place . 
It was a dull morning , but the snow had ceased . 
Not far from the market-place , close to Plotnikov 's shop , there stood a small house , very clean both without and within . 
It belonged to Madame Krassotkin , the widow of a former provincial secretary , who had been dead for fourteen years . 
His widow , still a nice-looking woman of thirty-two , was living in her neat little house on her private means . 
She lived in respectable seclusion ; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition . 
She was about eighteen at the time of her husband 's death ; she had been married only a year and had just borne him a son . 
From the day of his death she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her precious treasure , her boy Kolya . 
Though she had loved him passionately those fourteen years , he had caused her far more suffering than happiness . 
She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day , afraid he would fall ill , would catch cold , do something naughty , climb on a chair and fall off it , and so on and so on . 
When Kolya began going to school , the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with him so as to help him , and go through his lessons with him . 
She hastened to make the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives , even made up to Kolya 's schoolfellows , and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving Kolya from being teased , laughed at , or beaten by them . 
She went so far that the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him with being a `` mother 's darling . '' 
But the boy could take his own part . 
He was a resolute boy , `` tremendously strong , '' as was rumoured in his class , and soon proved to be the fact ; he was agile , strong-willed , and of an audacious and enterprising temper . 
He was good at lessons , and there was a rumour in the school that he could beat the teacher , Dardanelov , at arithmetic and universal history . 
Though he looked down upon everyone , he was a good comrade and not supercilious . 
He accepted his schoolfellows ' respect as his due , but was friendly with them . 
Above all , he knew where to draw the line . 
He could restrain himself on occasion , and in his relations with the teachers he never overstepped that last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes an unpardonable breach of discipline . 
But he was as fond of mischief on every possible occasion as the smallest boy in the school , and not so much for the sake of mischief as for creating a sensation , inventing something , something effective and conspicuous . 
He was extremely vain . 
He knew how to make even his mother give way to him ; he was almost despotic in his control of her . 
She gave way to him , oh , she had given way to him for years . 
The one thought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great love for her . 
She was always fancying that Kolya was `` unfeeling '' to her , and at times , dissolving into hysterical tears , she used to reproach him with his coldness . 
The boy disliked this , and the more demonstrations of feeling were demanded of him , the more he seemed intentionally to avoid them . 
Yet it was not intentional on his part but instinctive - it was his character . 
His mother was mistaken ; he was very fond of her . 
He only disliked `` sheepish sentimentality , '' as he expressed it in his schoolboy language . 
There was a bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been his father 's . 
Kolya was fond of reading , and had read several of them by himself . 
His mother did not mind that and only wondered sometimes at seeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase poring over a book instead of going to play . 
And in that way Kolya read some things unsuitable for his age . 
Though the boy , as a rule , knew where to draw the line in his mischief , he had of late begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm . 
It is true there was nothing vicious in what he did , but a wild mad recklessness . 
It happened that July , during the summer holidays , that the mother and son went to another district , forty-five miles away , to spend a week with a distant relation , whose husband was an official at the railway station -LRB- the very station , the nearest one to our town , from which a month later Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for Moscow -RRB- . 
There Kolya began by carefully investigating every detail connected with the railways , knowing that he could impress his schoolfellows when he got home with his newly acquired knowledge . 
But there happened to be some other boys in the place with whom he soon made friends . 
Some of them were living at the station , others in the neighbourhood ; there were six or seven of them , all between twelve and fifteen , and two of them came from our town . 
The boys played together , and on the fourth or fifth day of Kolya 's stay at the station , a mad bet was made by the foolish boys . 
Kolya , who was almost the youngest of the party and rather looked down upon by the others in consequence , was moved by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that he would lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o'clock train was due , and would lie there without moving while the train rolled over him at full speed . 
It is true they made a preliminary investigation , from which it appeared that it was possible to lie so flat between the rails that the train could pass over without touching , but to lie there was no joke ! 
Kolya maintained stoutly that he would . 
At first they laughed at him , called him a little liar , a braggart , but that only egged him on . 
What piqued him most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their noses at him too superciliously , and were at first disposed to treat him as `` a small boy , '' not fit to associate with them , and that was an unendurable insult . 
And so it was resolved to go in the evening , half a mile from the station , so that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving the station The boys assembled . 
It was a pitch-dark night without a moon . 
At the time fixed , Kolya lay down between the rails . 
The five others who had taken the bet waited among the bushes below the embankment , their hearts beating with suspense , which was followed by alarm and remorse . 
At last they heard in the distance the rumble of the train leaving the station . 
Two red lights gleamed out of the darkness ; the monster roared as it approached . 
`` Run , run away from the rails , '' the boys cried to Kolya from the bushes , breathless with terror . 
But it was too late : the train darted up and flew past . 
The boys rushed to Kolya . 
He lay without moving . 
They began pulling at him , lifting him up . 
He suddenly got up and walked away without a word . 
Then he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible to frighten them , but the fact was that he really had lost consciousness , as he confessed long after to his mother . 
In this way his reputation as `` a desperate character , '' was established for ever . 
He returned home to the station as white as a sheet . 
Next day he had a slight attack of nervous fever , but he was in high spirits and well pleased with himself . 
The incident did not become known at once , but when they came back to the town it penetrated to the school and even reached the ears of the masters . 
But then Kolya 's mother hastened to entreat the masters on her boy 's behalf , and in the end Dardanelov , a respected and influential teacher , exerted himself in his favour , and the affair was ignored . 
Dardanelov was a middle-aged bachelor , who had been passionately in love with Madame Krassotkin for many years past , and had once already , about a year previously , ventured , trembling with fear and the delicacy of his sentiments , to offer her most respectfully his hand in marriage . 
But she refused him resolutely , feeling that to accept him would be an act of treachery to her son , though Dardanelov had , to judge from certain mysterious symptoms , reason for believing that he was not an object of aversion to the charming but too chaste and tender-hearted widow . 
Kolya 's mad prank seemed to have broken the ice , and Dardanelov was rewarded for his intercession by a suggestion of hope . 
The suggestion , it is true , was a faint one , but then Dardanelov was such a paragon of purity and delicacy that it was enough for the time being to make him perfectly happy . 
He was fond of the boy , though he would have felt it beneath him to try and win him over , and was severe and strict with him in class . 
Kolya , too , kept him at a respectful distance . 
He learned his lessons perfectly ; he was second in his class , was reserved with Dardanelov , and the whole class firmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could `` beat '' even Dardanelov . 
Kolya did indeed ask him the question , `` Who founded Troy ? '' 
to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply , referring to the movements and migrations of races , to the remoteness of the period , to the mythical legends . 
But the question , `` Who had founded Troy ? '' 
that is , what individuals , he could not answer , and even for some reason regarded the question as idle and frivolous . 
But the boys remained convinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy . 
Kolya had read of the founders of Troy in Smaragdov , whose history was among the After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya 's attitude to his mother . 
When Anna Fyodorovna -LRB- Madame Krassotkin -RRB- heard of her son 's exploit , she almost went out of her mind with horror . 
She had such terrible attacks of hysterics , lasting with intervals for several days , that Kolya , seriously alarmed at last , promised on his honour that such pranks should never be repeated . 
He swore on his knees before the holy image , and swore by the memory of his father , at Madame Krassotkin 's instance , and the `` manly '' Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six . 
And all that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other 's arms sobbing . 
Next day Kolya woke up as `` unfeeling '' as before , but he had become more silent , more modest , sterner , and more thoughtful . 
Six weeks later , it is true , he got into another scrape , which even brought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace , but it was a scrape of quite another kind , amusing , foolish , and he did not , as it turned out , take the leading part in it , but was only implicated in it . 
But of this later . 
His mother still fretted and trembled , but the more uneasy she became , the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov . 
It must be noted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov 's heart and , of course , despised him profoundly for his `` feelings '' ; he had in the past been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother , hinting vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after . 
But from the time of the railway incident his behaviour in this respect also was changed ; he did not allow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more respectfully of Dardanelov before his mother , which the sensitive woman at once appreciated with boundless gratitude . 
But at the slightest mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya 's presence , she would flush as pink as a rose . 
At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling , or would investigate the state of his boots , or would shout angrily for `` Perezvon , '' the big , shaggy , mangy dog , which he had picked up a month before , brought home , and kept for some reason secretly indoors , not showing him to any of his schoolfellows . 
He bullied him frightfully , teaching him all sorts of tricks , so that the poor dog howled for him whenever he was absent at school , and when he came in , whined with delight , rushed about as if he were crazy , begged , lay down on the ground pretending to be dead , and so on ; in fact , showed all the tricks he had taught him , not at the word of command , but simply from the zeal of his excited and grateful heart . 
I have forgotten , by the way , to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son of Captain Snegiryov . 
Ilusha had been defending his father when the schoolboys jeered at him , shouting the nickname `` wisp of tow . '' 
Children AND so on that frosty , snowy , and windy day in November , Kolya Krassotkin was sitting at home . 
It was Sunday and there was no school . 
It had just struck eleven , and he particularly wanted to go out `` on very urgent business , '' but he was left alone in charge of the house , for it so happened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden and singular event . 
Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms , separated from the rest of the house by a passage , to a doctor 's wife with her two small children . 
This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna , and a great friend of hers . 
Her husband , the doctor , had taken his departure twelve months before , going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend , and for the last six months she had not heard a word from him . 
Had it not been for her friendship with Madame Krassotkin , which was some consolation to the forsaken lady , she would certainly have completely dissolved away in tears . 
And now , to add to her misfortunes , Katerina , her only servant , was suddenly moved the evening before to announce , to her mistress 's amazement , that she proposed to bring a child into the world before morning . 
It seemed almost miraculous to everyone that no one had noticed the probability of it before . 
The astounded doctor 's wife decided to move Katerina while there was still time to an establishment in the town kept by a midwife for such emergencies . 
As she set great store by her servant , she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her . 
By the morning all Madame Krassotkin 's friendly sympathy and energy were called upon to render assistance and appeal to someone for help in the case . 
So both the ladies were absent from home , the Krassotkins ' servant , Agafya , had gone out to the market , and Kolya was thus left for a time to protect and look after `` the kids , '' that is , the son and daughter of the doctor 's wife , who were left alone . 
Kolya was not afraid of taking care of the house , besides he had Perezvon , who had been told to lie flat , without moving , under the bench in the hall . 
Every time Kolya , walking to and fro through the rooms , came into the hall , the dog shook his head and gave two loud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail , but alas ! 
the whistle did not sound to release him . 
Kolya looked sternly at the luckless dog , who relapsed again into obedient rigidity . 
The one thing that troubled Kolya was `` the kids . '' 
He looked , of course , with the utmost scorn on Katerina 's unexpected adventure , but he was very fond of the bereaved `` kiddies , '' and had already taken them a picture-book . 
Nastya , the elder , a girl of eight , could read , and Kostya , the boy , aged seven , was very fond of being read to by her . 
Krassotkin could , of course , have provided more diverting entertainment for them . 
He could have made them stand side by side and played soldiers with them , or sent them hiding all over the house . 
He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it , so much so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horses with the little lodgers at home , prancing with his head on one side like a trace-horse . 
But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust , pointing out that to play horses with boys of one 's own age , boys of thirteen , would certainly be disgraceful `` at this date , '' but that he did it for the sake of `` the kids '' because he liked them , and no one had a right to call him to account for his feelings . 
The two `` kids '' adored him . 
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games . 
He had very important business of his own before him , something almost mysterious . 
Meanwhile time was passing and Agafya , with whom he could have left the children , would not come back from market . 
He had several times already crossed the passage , opened the door of the lodgers ' room and looked anxiously at `` the kids '' who were sitting over the book , as he had bidden them . 
Every time he opened the door they grinned at him , hoping he would come in and would do something delightful and amusing . 
But Kolya was bothered and did not go in . 
At last it struck eleven and he made up his mind , once for all , that if that `` damned '' Agafya did not come back within ten minutes he should go out without waiting for her , making `` the kids '' promise , of course , to be brave when he was away , not to be naughty , not to cry from fright . 
With this idea he put on his wadded winter overcoat with its catskin fur collar , slung his satchel round his shoulder , and , regardless of his mother 's constantly reiterated entreaties that he would always put on goloshes in such cold weather , he looked at them contemptuously as he crossed the hall and went out with only his boots on . 
Perezvon , seeing him in his outdoor clothes , began tapping nervously , yet vigorously , on the floor with his tail . 
Twitching all over , he even uttered a plaintive whine . 
But Kolya , seeing his dog 's passionate excitement , decided that it was a breach of discipline , kept him for another minute under the bench , and only when he had opened the door into the passage , whistled for him . 
The dog leapt up like a mad creature and rushed bounding before him rapturously . 
Kolya opened the door to peep at `` the kids . '' 
They were both sitting as before at the table , not reading but warmly disputing about something . 
The children often argued together about various exciting problems of life , and Nastya , being the elder , always got the best of it . 
If Kostya did not agree with her , he almost always appealed to Kolya Krassotkin , and his verdict was regarded as infallible by both of them . 
This time the `` kids '' ' discussion rather interested Krassotkin , and he stood still in the passage to listen . 
The children saw he was listening and that made them dispute with even greater energy . 
`` I shall never , never believe , '' Nastya prattled , `` that the old women find babies among the cabbages in the kitchen garden . 
It 's winter now and there are no cabbages , and so the old woman could n't have taken Katerina a daughter . '' 
Kolya whistled to himself . 
`` Or perhaps they do bring babies from somewhere , but only to those who are married . '' 
Kostya stared at Nastya and listened , pondering profoundly . 
`` Nastya , how silly you are ! '' 
he said at last , firmly and calmly . 
`` How can Katerina have a baby when she is n't married ? '' 
Nastya was exasperated . 
`` You know nothing about it , '' she snapped irritably . 
`` Perhaps she has a husband , only he is in prison , so now she 's got a baby . '' 
`` But is her husband in prison ? '' 
the matter-of-fact Kostya inquired gravely . 
`` Or , I tell you what , '' Nastya interrupted impulsively , completely rejecting and forgetting her first hypothesis . 
`` She has n't a husband , you are right there , but she wants to be married , and so she 's been thinking of getting married , and thinking and thinking of it till now she 's got it , that is , not a husband but a baby . '' 
`` Well , perhaps so , '' Kostya agreed , entirely vanquished . 
`` But you did n't say so before . 
So how could I tell ? '' 
`` Come , kiddies , '' said Kolya , stepping into the room . 
`` You 're terrible people , I see . '' 
`` And Perezvon with you ! '' 
grinned Kostya , and began snapping his fingers and calling Perezvon . 
`` I am in a difficulty , kids , '' Krassotkin began solemnly , `` and you must help me . 
Agafya must have broken her leg , since she has not turned up till now , that 's certain . 
I must go out . 
Will you let me go ? '' 
The children looked anxiously at one another . 
Their smiling faces showed signs of uneasiness , but they did not yet fully grasp what was expected of them . 
`` You wo n't be naughty while I am gone ? 
You wo n't climb on the cupboard and break your legs ? 
You wo n't be frightened alone and cry ? '' 
A look of profound despondency came into the children 's faces . 
`` And I could show you something as a reward , a little copper cannon which can be fired with real gunpowder . '' 
The children 's faces instantly brightened . 
`` Show us the cannon , '' said Kostya , beaming all over . 
Krassotkin put his hand in his satchel , and pulling out a little bronze cannon stood it on the table . 
`` Ah , you are bound to ask that ! 
Look , it 's on wheels . '' 
He rolled the toy on along the table . 
`` And it can be fired off , too . 
It can be loaded with shot and fired off . '' 
`` And it could kill anyone ? '' 
`` It can kill anyone ; you 've only got to aim at anybody , '' and Krassotkin explained where the powder had to be put , where the shot should be rolled in , showing a tiny hole like a touch-hole , and told them that it kicked when it was fired . 
The children listened with intense interest . 
What particularly struck their imagination was that the cannon kicked . 
`` And have you got any powder ? '' 
Nastya inquired . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Show us the powder , too , '' she drawled with a smile of entreaty . 
Krassotkin dived again into his satchel and pulled out a small flask containing a little real gunpowder . 
He had some shot , too , in a screw of paper . 
He even uncorked the flask and shook a little powder into the palm of his hand . 
`` One has to be careful there 's no fire about , or it would blow up and kill us all , '' Krassotkin warned them sensationally . 
The children gazed at the powder with an awe-stricken alarm that only intensified their enjoyment . 
But Kostya liked the shot better . 
`` And does the shot burn ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` No , it does n't . '' 
`` Give me a little shot , '' he asked in an imploring voice . 
`` I 'll give you a little shot ; here , take it , but do n't show it to your mother till I come back , or she 'll be sure to think it 's gunpowder , and will die of fright and give you a thrashing . '' 
`` Mother never does whip us , '' Nastya observed at once . 
`` I know , I only said it to finish the sentence . 
And do n't you ever deceive your mother except just this once , until I come back . 
And so , kiddies , can I go out ? 
You wo n't be frightened and cry when I 'm gone ? '' 
`` We sha-all cry , '' drawled Kostya , on the verge of tears already . 
`` We shall cry , we shall be sure to cry , '' Nastya chimed in with timid haste . 
`` Oh , children , children , how fraught with peril are your years ! 
There 's no help for it , chickens ; I shall have to stay with you I do n't know how long . 
And time is passing , time is passing , oogh ! '' 
`` Tell Perezvon to pretend to be dead ! '' 
Kostya begged . 
`` There 's no help for it , we must have recourse to Perezvon . 
Ici , Perezvon . '' 
And Kolya began giving orders to the dog , who performed all his tricks . 
He was a rough-haired dog , of medium size , with a coat of a sort of lilac-grey colour . 
He was blind in his right eye , and his left ear was torn . 
He whined and jumped , stood and walked on his hind legs , lay on his back with his paws in the air , rigid as though he were dead . 
While this last performance was going on , the door opened and Agafya , Madame Krassotkin 's servant , a stout woman of forty , marked with small-pox , appeared in the doorway . 
She had come back from market and had a bag full of provisions in her hand . 
Holding up the bag of provisions in her left hand she stood still to watch the dog . 
Though Kolya had been so anxious for her return , he did not cut short the performance , and after keeping Perezvon dead for the usual time , at last he whistled to him . 
The dog jumped up and began bounding about in his joy at having done his duty . 
`` Only think , a dog ! '' 
Agafya observed sententiously . 
`` Why are you late , female ? '' 
asked Krassotkin sternly . 
`` Female , indeed ! 
Go on with you , you brat . '' 
`` Brat ? '' 
`` Yes , a brat . 
What is it to you if I 'm late ; if I 'm late , you may be sure I have good reason , '' muttered Agafya , busying herself about the stove , without a trace of anger or displeasure in her voice . 
She seemed quite pleased , in fact , to enjoy a skirmish with her merry young master . 
`` Listen , you frivolous young woman , '' Krassotkin began , getting up from the sofa , `` can you swear by all you hold sacred in the world and something else besides , that you will watch vigilantly over the kids in my absence ? 
I am going out . '' 
`` And what am I going to swear for ? '' 
laughed Agafya . 
`` I shall look after them without that . '' 
`` No , you must swear on your eternal salvation . 
Else I sha n't go . '' 
`` Well , do n't then . 
What does it matter to me ? 
It 's cold out ; stay at home . '' 
`` Kids , '' Kolya turned to the children , `` this woman will stay with you till I come back or till your mother comes , for she ought to have been back long ago . 
She will give you some lunch , too . 
You 'll give them something , Agafya , wo n't you ? '' 
`` That I can do . '' 
`` Good-bye , chickens , I go with my heart at rest . 
And you , granny , '' he added gravely , in an undertone , as he passed Agafya , `` I hope you 'll spare their tender years and not tell them any of your old woman 's nonsense about Katerina . 
Ici , Perezvon ! '' 
`` Get along with you ! '' 
retorted Agafya , really angry this time . 
`` Ridiculous boy ! 
You want a whipping for saying such things , that 's what you want ! '' 
The Schoolboy BUT Kolya did not hear her . 
At last he could go out . 
As he went out at the gate he looked round him , shrugged up his shoulders , and saying `` It is freezing , '' went straight along the street and turned off to the right towards the market-place . 
When he reached the last house but one before the market-place he stopped at the gate , pulled a whistle out of his pocket , and whistled with all his might as though giving a signal . 
He had not to wait more than a minute before a rosy-cheeked boy of about eleven , wearing a warm , neat and even stylish coat , darted out to meet him . 
This was Smurov , a boy in the preparatory class -LRB- two classes below Kolya Krassotkin -RRB- , son of a well-to-do official . 
Apparently he was forbidden by his parents to associate with Krassotkin , who was well known to be a desperately naughty boy , so Smurov was obviously slipping out on the sly . 
He was - if the reader has not forgotten one of the group of boys who two months before had thrown stones at Ilusha . 
He was the one who told Alyosha about Ilusha . 
`` I 've been waiting for you for the last hour , Krassotkin , '' said Smurov stolidly , and the boys strode towards the market-place . 
`` I am late , '' answered Krassotkin . 
`` I was detained by circumstances . 
You wo n't be thrashed for coming with me ? '' 
`` Come , I say , I 'm never thrashed ! 
And you 've got Perezvon with you ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You 're taking him , too ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Ah ! 
if it were only Zhutchka ! '' 
`` That 's impossible . 
Zhutchka 's non-existent . 
Zhutchka is lost in the mists of obscurity . '' 
`` Ah ! 
could n't we do this ? '' 
Smurov suddenly stood still . 
`` You see Ilusha says that Zhutchka was a shaggy , greyish , smoky-looking dog like Perezvon . 
Could n't you tell him this is Zhutchka , and he might believe you ? '' 
`` Boy , shun a lie , that 's one thing ; even with a good object - that 's another . 
Above all , I hope you 've not told them anything about my coming . '' 
`` Heaven forbid ! 
I know what I am about . 
But you wo n't comfort him with Perezvon , '' said Smurov , with a sigh . 
`` You know his father , the captain , ` the wisp of tow , ' told us that he was going to bring him a real mastiff pup , with a black nose , to-day . 
He thinks that would comfort Ilusha ; but I doubt it . '' 
`` And how is Ilusha ? '' 
`` Ah , he is bad , very bad ! 
I believe he 's in consumption : he is quite conscious , but his breathing ! 
His breathing 's gone wrong . 
The other day he asked to have his boots on to be led round the room . 
He tried to walk , but he could n't stand . 
` Ah , I told you before , father , ' he said , ` that those boots were no good . 
I could never walk properly in them . ' 
He fancied it was his boots that made him stagger , but it was simply weakness , really . 
He wo n't live another week . 
Herzenstube is looking after him . 
Now they are rich again - they 've got heaps of money . 
`` They are rogues . '' 
`` Who are rogues ? '' 
`` Doctors and the whole crew of quacks collectively , and also , of course , individually . 
I do n't believe in medicine . 
It 's a useless institution . 
I mean to go into all that . 
But what 's that sentimentality you 've got up there ? 
The whole class seems to be there every day . '' 
`` Not the whole class : it 's only ten of our fellows who go to see him every day . 
There 's nothing in that . '' 
`` What I do n't understand in all this is the part that Alexey Karamazov is taking in it . 
His brother 's going to be tried to-morrow or next day for such a crime , and yet he has so much time to spend on sentimentality with boys . '' 
`` There 's no sentimentality about it . 
You are going yourself now to make it up with Ilusha . '' 
`` Make it up with him ? 
What an absurd expression ! 
But I allow no one to analyse my actions . '' 
`` And how pleased Ilusha will be to see you ! 
He has no idea that you are coming . 
Why was it , why was it you would n't come all this time ? '' 
Smurov cried with sudden warmth . 
`` My dear boy , that 's my business , not yours . 
I am going of myself because I choose to , but you 've all been hauled there by Alexey Karamazov - there 's a difference , you know . 
And how do you know ? 
I may not be going to make it up at all . 
It 's a stupid expression . '' 
`` It 's not Karamazov at all ; it 's not his doing . 
Our fellows began going there of themselves . 
Of course , they went with Karamazov at first . 
And there 's been nothing of that sort of silliness . 
First one went , and then another . 
His father was awfully pleased to see us . 
You know he will simply go out of his mind if Ilusha dies . 
He sees that Ilusha 's dying . 
And he seems so glad we 've made it up with Ilusha . 
Ilusha asked after you , that was all . 
He just asks and says no more . 
His father will go out of his mind or hang himself . 
He behaved like a madman before . 
You know he is a very decent man . 
We made a mistake then . 
It 's all the fault of that murderer who beat him then . '' 
`` Karamazov 's a riddle to me all the same . 
I might have made his acquaintance long ago , but I like to have a proper pride in some cases . 
Besides , I have a theory about him which I must work out and verify . '' 
Kolya subsided into dignified silence . 
Smurov , too , was silent . 
Smurov , of course , worshipped Krassotkin and never dreamed of putting himself on a level with him . 
Now he was tremendously interested at Kolya 's saying that he was `` going of himself '' to see Ilusha . 
He felt that there must be some mystery in Kolya 's suddenly taking it into his head to go to him that day . 
They crossed the market-place , in which at that hour were many loaded wagons from the country and a great number of live fowls . 
The market women were selling rolls , cottons and threads , etc. , in their booths . 
These Sunday markets were naively called `` fairs '' in the town , and there were many such fairs in the year . 
Perezvon ran about in the wildest spirits , sniffing about first one side , then the other . 
When he met other dogs they zealously smelt each other over according to the rules of canine etiquette . 
`` I like to watch such realistic scenes , Smurov , '' said Kolya suddenly . 
`` Have you noticed how dogs sniff at one another when they meet ? 
It seems to be a law of their nature . '' 
`` Yes ; it 's a funny habit . '' 
`` No , it 's not funny ; you are wrong there . 
There 's nothing funny in nature , however funny it may seem to man with his prejudices . 
If dogs could reason and criticise us they 'd be sure to find just as much that would be funny to them , if not far more , in the social relations of men , their masters - far more , indeed . 
I repeat that , because I am convinced that there is far more foolishness among us . 
That 's Rakitin 's idea - a remarkable idea . 
I am a Socialist , Smurov . '' 
`` And what is a Socialist ? '' 
asked Smurov . 
`` That 's when all are equal and all have property in common , there are no marriages , and everyone has any religion and laws he likes best , and all the rest of it . 
You are not old enough to understand that yet . 
It 's cold , though . '' 
`` Yes , twelve degrees of frost . 
Father looked at the thermometer just now . '' 
`` Have you noticed , Smurov , that in the middle of winter we do n't feel so cold even when there are fifteen or eighteen degrees of frost as we do now , in the beginning of winter , when there is a sudden frost of twelve degrees , especially when there is not much snow . 
It 's because people are not used to it . 
Everything is habit with men , everything even in their social and political relations . 
Habit is the great motive-power . 
What a funny-looking peasant ! '' 
Kolya pointed to a tall peasant , with a good-natured countenance in a long sheepskin coat , who was standing by his wagon , clapping together his hands , in their shapeless leather gloves , to warm them . 
His long fair beard was all white with frost . 
`` That peasant 's beard 's frozen , '' Kolya cried in a loud provocative voice as he passed him . 
`` Lots of people 's beards are frozen , '' the peasant replied , calmly and sententiously . 
`` Do n't provoke him , '' observed Smurov . 
`` It 's all right ; he wo n't be cross ; he 's a nice fellow . 
Good-bye , Matvey . '' 
`` Good-bye . '' 
`` Is your name Matvey ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Did n't you know ? '' 
`` No , I did n't . 
It was a guess . '' 
`` You do n't say so ! 
You are a schoolboy , I suppose ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You get whipped , I expect ? '' 
`` Nothing to speak of - sometimes . '' 
`` Does it hurt ? '' 
`` Well , yes , it does . '' 
`` Ech , what a life ! '' 
The peasant heaved a sigh from the bottom of his heart . 
`` Good-bye , Matvey . '' 
`` Good-bye . 
You are a nice chap , that you are . '' 
The boys went on . 
`` That was a nice peasant , '' Kolya observed to Smurov . 
`` I like talking to the peasants , and am always glad to do them justice . '' 
`` Why did you tell a lie , pretending we are thrashed ? '' 
asked Smurov . 
`` I had to say that to please him . '' 
`` How do you mean ? '' 
`` You know , Smurov , I do n't like being asked the same thing twice . 
I like people to understand at the first word . 
Some things ca n't be explained . 
According to a peasant 's notions , schoolboys are whipped , and must be whipped . 
What would a schoolboy be if he were not whipped ? 
And if I were to tell him we are not , he 'd be disappointed . 
But you do n't understand that . 
One has to know how to talk to the peasants . '' 
`` Only do n't tease them , please , or you 'll get into another scrape as you did about that goose . '' 
`` So you 're afraid ? '' 
`` Do n't laugh , Kolya . 
Of course I 'm afraid . 
My father would be awfully cross . 
I am strictly forbidden to go out with you . '' 
`` Do n't be uneasy , nothing will happen this time . 
Hallo , Natasha ! '' 
he shouted to a market woman in one of the booths . 
`` Call me Natasha ! 
What next ! 
My name is Marya , '' the middle-aged marketwoman shouted at him . 
`` I am so glad it 's Marya . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Ah , you young rascal ! 
A brat like you to carry on so ! '' 
`` I 'm in a hurry . 
I ca n't stay now . 
You shall tell me next Sunday . '' 
Kolya waved his hand at her , as though she had attacked him and not he her . 
`` I 've nothing to tell you next Sunday . 
You set upon me , you impudent young monkey . 
I did n't say anything , '' bawled Marya . 
`` You want a whipping , that 's what you want , you saucy jackanapes ! '' 
There was a roar of laughter among the other market women round her . 
Suddenly a man in a violent rage darted out from the arcade of shops close by . 
He was a young man , not a native of the town , with dark , curly hair and a long , pale face , marked with smallpox . 
He wore a long blue coat and a peaked cap , and looked like a merchant 's clerk . 
He was in a state of stupid excitement and brandished his fist at Kolya . 
`` I know you ! '' 
he cried angrily , `` I know you ! '' 
Kolya stared at him . 
He could not recall when he could have had a row with the man . 
But he had been in so many rows in the street that he could hardly remember them all . 
`` Do you ? '' 
he asked sarcastically . 
`` I know you ! 
I know you ! '' 
the man repeated idiotically . 
So much the better for you . 
Well , it 's time I was going . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` You are at your saucy pranks again ? '' 
cried the man . 
`` You are at your saucy pranks again ? 
I know , you are at it again ! '' 
`` It 's not your business , brother , if I am at my saucy pranks again , '' said Kolya , standing still and scanning him . 
`` Not my business ? '' 
`` No ; it 's not your business . '' 
`` Whose then ? 
Whose then ? 
Whose then ? '' 
`` It 's Trifon Nikititch 's business , not yours . '' 
`` What Trifon Nikititch ? '' 
asked the youth , staring with loutish amazement at Kolya , but still as angry as ever . 
Kolya scanned him gravely . 
`` Have you been to the Church of the Ascension ? '' 
he suddenly asked him , with stern emphasis . 
`` What Church of Ascension ? 
What for ? 
No , I have n't , '' said the young man , somewhat taken aback . 
`` Do you know Sabaneyev ? '' 
Kolya went on even more emphatically and even more severely . 
`` What Sabaneyev ? 
No , I do n't know him . '' 
`` Well then you can go to the devil , '' said Kolya , cutting short the conversation ; and turning sharply to the right he strode quickly on his way as though he disdained further conversation with a dolt who did not even know Sabaneyev . 
`` Stop , heigh ! 
What Sabaneyev ? '' 
the young man recovered from his momentary stupefaction and was as excited as before . 
`` What did he say ? '' 
He turned to the market women with a silly stare . 
The women laughed . 
`` You can never tell what he 's after , '' said one of them . 
`` What Sabaneyev is it he 's talking about ? '' 
the young man repeated , still furious and brandishing his right arm . 
`` It must be a Sabaneyev who worked for the Kuzmitchovs , that 's who it must be , '' one of the women suggested . 
The young man stared at her wildly . 
`` For the Kuzmitchovs ? '' 
repeated another woman . 
`` But his name was n't Trifon . 
His name 's Kuzma , not Trifon ; but the boy said Trifon Nikititch , so it ca n't be the same . '' 
`` His name is not Trifon and not Sabaneyev , it 's Tchizhov , '' put in suddenly a third woman , who had hitherto been silent , listening gravely . 
`` Alexey Ivanitch is his name . 
Tchizhov , Alexey Ivanitch . '' 
`` Not a doubt about it , it 's Tchizhov , '' a fourth woman emphatically confirmed the statement . 
The bewildered youth gazed from one to another . 
`` But what did he ask for , what did he ask for , good people ? '' 
he cried almost in desperation . '' 
` Do you know Sabaneyev ? ' 
says he . 
And who the devil 's to know who is Sabaneyev ? '' 
`` You 're a senseless fellow . 
I tell you it 's not Sabaneyev , but Tchizhov , Alexey Ivanitch Tchizhov , that 's who it is ! '' 
one of the women shouted at him impressively . 
`` What Tchizhov ? 
Who is he ? 
Tell me , if you know . '' 
`` That tall , snivelling fellow who used to sit in the market in the summer . '' 
`` And what 's your Tchizhov to do with me , good people , eh ? '' 
`` How can I tell what he 's to do with you ? '' 
put in another . 
`` You ought to know yourself what you want with him , if you make such a clamour about him . 
He spoke to you , he did not speak to us , you stupid . 
Do n't you really know him ? '' 
`` Know whom ? '' 
`` Tchizhov . '' 
`` The devil take Tchizhov and you with him . 
I 'll give him a hiding , that I will . 
He was laughing at me ! '' 
`` Will give Tchizhov a hiding ! 
More likely he will give you one . 
You are a fool , that 's what you are ! '' 
`` Not Tchizhov , not Tchizhov , you spiteful , mischievous woman . 
I 'll give the boy a hiding . 
Catch him , catch him , he was laughing at me The woman guffawed . 
But Kolya was by now a long way off , marching along with a triumphant air . 
Smurov walked beside him , looking round at the shouting group far behind . 
He too was in high spirits , though he was still afraid of getting into some scrape in Kolya 's company . 
`` What Sabaneyev did you mean ? '' 
he asked Kolya , foreseeing what his answer would be . 
`` How do I know ? 
Now there 'll be a hubbub among them all day . 
I like to stir up fools in every class of society . 
There 's another blockhead , that peasant there . 
You know , they say ` there 's no one stupider than a stupid Frenchman , ' but a stupid Russian shows it in his face just as much . 
Ca n't you see it all over his face that he is a fool , that peasant , eh ? '' 
`` Let him alone , Kolya . 
Let 's go on . '' 
`` Nothing could stop me , now I am once off . 
Hey , good morning , peasant ! '' 
A sturdy-looking peasant , with a round , simple face and grizzled beard , who was walking by , raised his head and looked at the boy . 
He seemed not quite sober . 
`` Good morning , if you are not laughing at me , '' he said deliberately in reply . 
`` And if I am ? '' 
laughed Kolya . 
`` Well , a joke 's a joke . 
Laugh away . 
I do n't mind . 
There 's no harm in a joke . '' 
`` I beg your pardon , brother , it was a joke . '' 
`` Well , God forgive you ! '' 
`` Do you forgive me , too ? '' 
`` I quite forgive you . 
Go along . '' 
`` I say , you seem a clever peasant . '' 
`` Cleverer than you , '' the peasant answered unexpectedly , with the same gravity . 
`` I doubt it , '' said Kolya , somewhat taken aback . 
`` It 's true , though . '' 
`` Perhaps it is . '' 
`` It is , brother . '' 
`` Good-bye , peasant ! '' 
`` Good-bye ! '' 
`` There are all sorts of peasants , '' Kolya observed to Smurov after a brief silence . 
`` How could I tell I had hit on a clever one ? 
I am always ready to recognise intelligence in the peasantry . '' 
In the distance the cathedral clock struck half-past eleven . 
The boys made haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov 's lodging , a considerable distance , quickly and almost in silence . 
Twenty paces from the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov to come out to him . 
`` One must sniff round a bit first , '' he observed to Smurov . 
`` Why ask him to come out ? '' 
Smurov protested . 
`` You go in ; they will be awfully glad to see you . 
What 's the sense of making friends in the frost out here ? '' 
`` I know why I want to see him out here in the frost , '' Kolya cut him short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with `` small boys , '' and Smurov ran to do his bidding . 
The Lost Dog KOLYA leaned against the fence with an air of dignity , waiting for Alyosha to appear . 
Yes , he had long wanted to meet him . 
He had heard a great deal about him from the boys , but hitherto he had always maintained an appearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned , and he had even `` criticised '' what he heard about Alyosha . 
But secretely he had a great longing to make his acquaintance ; there was something sympathetic and attractive in all he was told about Alyosha . 
So the present moment was important : to begin with , he had to show himself at his best , to show his independence . 
`` Or he 'll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy , like the rest of them . 
And what are these boys to him ? 
I shall ask him when I get to know him . 
It 's a pity I am so short , though . 
Tuzikov is younger than I am , yet he is half a head taller . 
But I have a clever face . 
I am not good-looking . 
I know I 'm hideous , but I 've a clever face . 
I must n't talk too freely ; if I fall into his arms all at once , he may think - Tfoo ! 
how horrible if he should think - ! '' 
Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost to assume the most independent air . 
What distressed him most was his being so short ; he did not mind so much his `` hideous '' face , as being so short . 
On the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil-mark to show his height , and every two months since he anxiously measured himself against it to see how much he had gained . 
But alas ! 
he grew very slowly , and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair . 
His face was in reality by no means `` hideous '' ; on the contrary , it was rather attractive , with a fair , pale skin , freckled . 
His small , lively grey eyes had a fearless look , and often glowed with feeling . 
He had rather high cheekbones ; small , very red , but not very thick , lips ; his nose was small and unmistakably turned up . 
`` I 've a regular pug nose , a regular pug nose , '' Kolya used to mutter to himself when he looked in the looking-glass , and he always left it with indignation . 
`` But perhaps I have n't got a clever face ? '' 
he sometimes thought , doubtful even of that . 
But it must not be supposed that his mind was preoccupied with his face and his height . 
On the contrary , however bitter the moments before the looking-glass were to him , he quickly forgot them , and forgot them for a long time , `` abandoning himself entirely to ideas and to real life , '' as he formulated it to himself . 
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya . 
Before he reached him , Kolya could see that he looked delighted . 
`` Can he be so glad to see me ? '' 
Kolya wondered , feeling pleased . 
We may note here , in passing , that Alyosha 's appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw him last . 
He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a wellcut coat , a soft , round hat , and his hair had been cropped short . 
All this was very becoming to him , and he looked quite handsome . 
His charming face always had a good-humoured expression ; but there was a gentleness and serenity in his good-humour . 
To Kolya 's surprise , Alyosha came out to him just as he was , without an overcoat . 
He had evidently come in haste . 
He held out his hand to Kolya at once . 
`` Here you are at last ! 
How anxious we 've been to see you ! '' 
`` There were reasons which you shall know directly . 
Anyway , I am glad to make your acquaintance . 
I 've long been hoping for an opportunity , and have heard a great deal about you , '' Kolya muttered , a little breathless . 
`` We should have met anyway . 
I 've heard a great deal about you , too ; but you 've been a long time coming here . '' 
`` Tell me , how are things going ? '' 
`` Ilusha is very ill . 
He is certainly dying . '' 
`` How awful ! 
You must admit that medicine is a fraud , Karamazov , '' cried Kolya warmly . 
`` Ilusha has mentioned you often , very often , even in his sleep , in delirium , you know . 
One can see that you used to be very , very dear to him ... before the incident ... with the knife ... . 
Then there 's another reason ... . 
Tell me , is that your dog ? '' 
`` Yes Perezvon . '' 
`` Not Zhutchka ? '' 
Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity . 
`` Is she lost for ever ? '' 
`` I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka . 
I 've heard all about it . '' 
Kolya smiled mysteriously . 
`` Listen , Karamazov , I 'll tell you all about it . 
That 's what I came for ; that 's what I asked you to come out here for , to explain the whole episode to you before we go in , '' he began with animation . 
`` You see , Karamazov , Ilusha came into the preparatory class last spring . 
Well , you know what our preparatory class is - a lot of small boys . 
They began teasing Ilusha at once . 
I am two classes higher up , and , of course , I only look on at them from a distance . 
I saw the boy was weak and small , but he would n't give in to them ; he fought with them . 
I saw he was proud , and his eyes were full of fire . 
I like children like that . 
And they teased him all the more . 
The worst of it was he was horribly dressed at the time , his breeches were too small for him , and there were holes in his boots . 
They worried him about it ; they jeered at him . 
That I ca n't stand . 
I stood up for him at once , and gave it to them hot . 
I beat them , but they adore me , do you know , Karamazov ? '' 
Kolya boasted impulsively ; `` but I am always fond of children . 
I 've two chickens in my hands at home now - that 's what detained me to-day . 
So they left off beating Ilusha and I took him under my protection . 
I saw the boy was proud . 
I tell you that , the boy was proud ; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me : he did my slightest bidding , obeyed me as though I were God , tried to copy me . 
In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once ' and I 'd go about with him . 
On Sundays , too . 
They always laugh when an older boy makes friends with a younger one like that ; but that 's a prejudice . 
If it 's my fancy , that 's enough . 
I am teaching him , developing him . 
Why should n't I develop him if I like him ? 
Here you , Karamazov , have taken up with all these nestlings . 
I see you want to influence the younger generation - to develop them , to be of use to them , and I assure you this trait in your character , which I knew by hearsay , attracted me more than anything . 
Let us get to the point , though . 
I noticed that there was a sort of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy , and you know I have a positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality , and I have had it from a baby . 
There were contradictions in him , too : he was proud , but he was slavishly devoted to me , and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he 'd refuse to agree with me ; he 'd argue , fly into a rage . 
I used sometimes to propound certain ideas ; I could see that it was not so much that he disagreed with the ideas , but that he was simply rebelling against me , because I was cool in responding to his endearments . 
And so , in order to train him properly , the tenderer he was , the colder I became . 
I did it on purpose : that was my idea . 
My object was to form his character , to lick him into shape , to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt , you understand me at a word . 
Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession he was downcast and dejected , not because of my coldness , but for something else , something more important . 
I wondered what the tragedy was . 
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know Smerdyakov , who was footman to your late father - it was before his death , of course - and he taught the little fool a silly trick - that is , a brutal , nasty trick . 
He told him to take a piece of bread , to stick a pin in it , and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without biting it , and then to watch and see what would happen . 
So they prepared a piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka , that shaggy dog there 's been such a fuss about . 
The people of the house it belonged to never fed it at all , though it barked all day . 
-LRB- Do you like that stupid barking , Karamazov ? 
I ca n't stand it . -RRB- 
So it rushed at the bread , swallowed it , and began to squeal ; it turned round and round and ran away , squealing as it ran out of sight . 
That was Ilusha 's own account of it . 
He confessed it to me , and cried bitterly . 
He hugged me , shaking all over . 
He kept on repeating ` He ran away squealing ' : the sight of that haunted him . 
He was tormented by remorse , I could see that . 
I took it seriously . 
I determined to give him a lesson for other things as well . 
So I must confess I was n't quite straightforward , and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I was . 
` You 've done a nasty thing , ' I said , ` you are a scoundrel . 
I wo n't tell of it , of course , but I shall have nothing more to do with you for a time . 
I 'll think it over and let you know through Smurov ' - that 's the boy who 's just come with me ; he 's always ready to do anything for me - ` whether I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up for good as a scoundrel . ' 
He was tremendously upset . 
I must own I felt I 'd gone too far as I spoke , but there was no help for it . 
I did what I thought best at the time . 
A day or two after , I sent Smurov to tell him that I would not speak to him again . 
That 's what we call it when two schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another . 
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then , if I saw signs of repentance , to hold out my hand to him again . 
That was my intention . 
But what do you think happened ? 
He heard Smurov 's message , his eyes flashed . 
` Tell Krassotkin for me , ' he cried , ` that I will throw bread with pins to all the dogs - all - all of them ! ' 
` So he 's going in for a little temper . 
We must smoke it out of him . ' 
And I began to treat him with contempt ; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically . 
And just then that affair with his father happened . 
You remember ? 
You must realise that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already . 
The boys , seeing I 'd given him up , set on him and taunted him , shouting , ` Wisp of tow , wisp of tow ! ' 
And he had soon regular skirmishes with them , which I am very sorry for . 
They seem to have given him one very bad beating . 
One day he flew at them all as they were coming out of school . 
I stood a few yards off , looking on . 
And , I swear , I do n't remember that I laughed ; it was quite the other way , I felt awfully sorry for him ; in another minute I would have run up to take his part . 
But he suddenly met my eyes . 
I do n't know what he fancied ; but he pulled out a penknife , rushed at me , and struck at my thigh , here in my right leg . 
I did n't move . 
I do n't mind owning I am plucky sometimes , Karamazov . 
I simply looked at him contemptuously , as though to say , ` This is how you repay all my kindness ! 
Do it again if you like , I 'm at your service . ' 
But he did n't stab me again ; he broke down ; he was frightened at what he had done ; he threw away the knife , burst out crying , and ran away . 
I did not sneak on him , of course , and I made them all keep quiet , so it should n't come to the ears of the masters . 
I did n't even tell my mother till it had healed up . 
And the wound was a mere scratch . 
And then I heard that the same day he 'd been throwing stones and had bitten your finger - but you understand now what a state he was in ! 
Well , it ca n't be helped : it was stupid of me not to come and forgive him - that is , to make it up with him - when he was taken ill . 
I am sorry for it now . 
But I had a special reason . 
So now I 've told you all about it ... but I 'm afraid it was stupid of me . '' 
`` Oh , what a pity , '' exclaimed Alyosha , with feeling , `` that I did n't know before what terms you were on with him , or I 'd have come to you long ago to beg you to go to him with me . 
Would you believe it , when he was feverish he talked about you in delirium . 
I did n't know how much you were to him ! 
And you 've really not succeeded in finding that dog ? 
His father and the boys have been hunting all over the town for it . 
Would you believe it , since he 's been ill , I 've three times heard him repeat with tears , ` It 's because I killed Zhutchka , father , that I am ill now . 
God is punishing me for it . ' 
He ca n't get that idea out of his head . 
And if the dog were found and proved to be alive , one might almost fancy the joy would cure him . 
We have all rested our hopes on you . '' 
`` Tell me , what made you hope that I should be the one to find him ? '' 
Kolya asked , with great curiosity . 
`` Why did you reckon on me rather than anyone else ? '' 
`` There was a report that you were looking for the dog , and that you would bring it when you 'd found it . 
Smurov said something of the sort . 
We 've all been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive , that it 's been seen . 
The boys brought him a live hare : he just looked at it , with a faint smile , and asked them to set it free in the fields . 
And so we did . 
His father has just this moment come back , bringing him a mastiff pup , hoping to comfort him with that ; but I think it only makes it worse . '' 
`` Tell me , Karamazov , what sort of man is the father ? 
I know him , but what do you make of him - a mountebank , a buffoon ? '' 
`` Oh no ; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed . 
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they dare n't speak the truth , from having been for years humiliated and intimidated by them . 
Believe me , Krassotkin , that sort of buffoonery is sometimes tragic in the extreme . 
His whole life now is centred in Ilusha , and if Ilusha dies , he will either go mad with grief or kill himself . 
I feel almost certain of that when I look at him now . '' 
`` I understand you , Karamazov . 
I see you understand human nature , '' Kolya added , with feeling . 
`` And as soon as I saw you with a dog , I thought it was Zhutchka you were bringing . '' 
`` Wait a bit , Karamazov , perhaps we shall find it yet ; but this is Perezvon . 
I 'll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha more than the mastiff pup . 
Wait a bit , Karamazov , you will know something in a minute . 
But , I say , I am keeping you here ! '' 
Kolya cried suddenly . 
`` You 've no overcoat on in this bitter cold . 
You see what an egoist I am . 
Oh , we are all egoists , Karamazov ! '' 
`` Do n't trouble ; it is cold , but I do n't often catch cold . 
Let us go in , though , and , by the way , what is your name ? 
I know you are called Kolya , but what else ? '' 
`` Nikolay - Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin , or , as they say in official documents , ` Krassotkin son . ' '' 
Kolya laughed for some reason , but added suddenly , `` Of course I hate my name Nikolay . '' 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` It 's so trivial , so ordinary . '' 
`` You are thirteen ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` No , fourteen - that is , I shall be fourteen very soon , in a fortnight . 
I 'll confess one weakness of mine , Karamazov , just to you , since it 's our first meeting , so that you may understand my character at once . 
I hate being asked my age , more than that ... and in fact ... there 's a libellous story going about me , that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys . 
It 's a fact that I did play with them , but it 's a perfect libel to say I did it for my own amusement . 
I have reasons for believing that you 've heard the story ; but I was n't playing for my own amusement , it was for the sake of the children , because they could n't think of anything to do by themselves . 
But they 've always got some silly tale . 
This is an awful town for gossip , I can tell you . '' 
`` But what if you had been playing for your own amusement , what 's the harm ? '' 
`` Come , I say , for my own amusement ! 
You do n't play horses , do you ? '' 
`` But you must look at it like this , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Grown-up people go to the theatre and there the adventures of all sorts of heroes are represented - sometimes there are robbers and battles , too - and is n't that just the same thing , in a different form , of course ? 
And young people 's games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art in its first stage . 
You know , they spring from the growing artistic instincts of the young . 
And sometimes these games are much better than performances in the theatre ; the only difference is that people go there to look at the actors , while in these games the young people are the actors themselves . 
But that 's only natural . '' 
`` You think so ? 
Is that your idea ? '' 
Kolya looked at him intently . 
`` Oh , you know , that 's rather an interesting view . 
When I go home , I 'll think it over . 
I 'll admit I thought I might learn something from you . 
I 've come to learn of you , Karamazov , '' Kolya concluded , in a voice full of spontaneous feeling . 
`` And I of you , '' said Alyosha , smiling and pressing his hand . 
Kolya was much pleased with Alyosha . 
What struck him most was that he treated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if he were `` quite grown up . '' 
`` I 'll show you something directly , Karamazov ; it 's a theatrical performance , too , '' he said , laughing nervously . 
`` That 's why I 've come . '' 
`` Let us go first to the people of the house , on the left . 
All the boys leave their coats in there , because the room is small and hot . '' 
`` Oh , I 'm only coming in for a minute . 
I 'll keep on my overcoat . 
Perezvon will stay here in the passage and be dead . 
Ici , Perezvon , lie down and be dead ! 
You see how he 's dead . 
I 'll go in first and explore , then I 'll whistle to him when I think fit , and you 'll see , he 'll dash in like mad . 
Only Smurov must not forget to open the door at the moment . 
I 'll arrange it all and you 'll see something . '' 
By Ilusha 's Bedside THE room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov is already familiar to the reader . 
It was close and crowded at that moment with a number of visitors . 
Several boys were sitting with Ilusha , and though all of them , like Smurov , were prepared to deny that it was Alyosha who had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha , it was really the fact . 
All the art he had used had been to take them , one by one , to Ilusha , without `` sheepish sentimentality , '' appearing to do so casually and without design . 
It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering . 
He was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy shown him by these boys , who had been his enemies . 
Krassotkin was the only one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha 's heart . 
Perhaps the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin , who had been his one friend and protector . 
Clever little Smurov , who was the first to make it up with Ilusha , thought it was so . 
But when Smurov hinted to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something , the latter cut him short , bidding Smurov tell `` Karamazov '' at once that he knew best what to do , that he wanted no one 's advice , and that , if he went to see Ilusha , he would choose his own time for he had `` his own reasons . '' 
That was a fortnight before this Sunday . 
That was why Alyosha had not been to see him , as he had meant to . 
But though he waited he sent Smurov to him twice again . 
Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt , impatient refusal , sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more , that if he came himself , he , Krassotkin , would not go to Ilusha at all . 
Up to the very last day , Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that morning , and only the evening before , as he parted from Smurov , Kolya abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning , for he would go with him to the Snegiryovs , but warned him on no account to say he was coming , as he wanted to drop in casually . 
Smurov obeyed . 
Smurov 's fancy that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had dropped that `` they must be asses not to find the dog , if it was alive . '' 
When Smurov , waiting for an opportunity , timidly hinted at his guess about the dog , Krassotkin flew into a violent rage . 
`` I 'm not such an ass as to go hunting about the town for other people 's dogs when I 've got a dog of my own ! 
And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a pin ? 
Sheepish sentimentality , thats what it is ! 
For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons in the corner . 
He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha and bit his finger . 
He was taken ill the same day , though for a month afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and passage . 
But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without help from his father . 
His father was terribly concerned about him . 
He even gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die . 
And often , especially after leading him round the room on his arm and putting him back to bed , he would run to a dark corner in the passage and , leaning his head against the wall , he would break into paroxysms of violent weeping , stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha . 
Returning to the room , he would usually begin doing something to amuse and comfort his precious boy : he would tell him stories , funny anecdotes , or would mimic comic people he had happened to meet , even imitate the howls and cries of animals . 
But Ilusha could not bear to see his father fooling and playing the buffoon . 
Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked it , he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt , and he was continually haunted by the memory of the `` wisp of tow '' and that `` terrible day . '' 
Nina , Ilusha 's gentle , crippled sister , did not like her father 's buffoonery either -LRB- Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg to study at the university -RRB- . 
But the half-imbecile mother was greatly diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or performing something . 
It was the only way she could be amused ; all the rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now everyone had forgotten her , that no one treated her with respect , that she was slighted , and so on . 
But during the last few days she had completely changed . 
She began looking constantly at Ilusha 's bed in the corner and seemed lost in thought . 
She was more silent , quieter , and , if she cried , she cried quietly so as not to be heard . 
The captain noticed the change in her with mournful perplexity . 
The boys ' visits at first only angered her , but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her , and at last she liked them so much that , if the boys had given up coming , she would have felt dreary without them . 
When the children told some story or played a game , she laughed and clapped her hands . 
She called some of them to her and kissed them . 
She was particularly fond of Smurov . 
As for the captain , the presence in his room of the children , who came to cheer up Ilusha , filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy . 
He even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression and that that would hasten his recovery . 
In spite of his alarm about Ilusha , he had not , till lately , felt one minute 's doubt of his boy 's ultimate recovery . 
He met his little visitors with homage , waited upon them hand and foot ; he was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back , but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up . 
He began buying little things for them , gingerbread and nuts , gave them tea and cut them sandwiches . 
It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money . 
He had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha had predicted he would . 
And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna , learning more about their circumstances and Ilusha 's illness , visited them herself , made the acquaintance of the family , and succeeded in fascinating the half-imbecile mother . 
Since then she had been lavish in helping them , and the captain , terror-stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying , forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance . 
All this time Doctor Herzenstube , who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna , came punctually every other day , but little was gained by his visits and he dosed the invalid mercilessly . 
But on that Sunday morning a new doctor was expected , who had come from Moscow , where he had a great reputation . 
Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense , not expressly for Ilusha , but for another object of which more will be said in its place hereafter . 
But , as he had come , she had asked him to see Ilusha as well , and the captain had been told to expect him . 
He had n't the slightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming , though he had long wished for a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting . 
At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room , the captain and all the boys were round Ilusha 's bed , looking at a tiny mastiff pup , which had only been born the day before , though the captain had bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha , who was still fretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka . 
Ilusha , who had heard three days before that he was to be presented with a puppy , not an ordinary puppy , but a pedigree mastiff -LRB- a very important point , of course -RRB- , tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased . 
But his father and the boys could not help seeing that the puppy only served to recall to his little heart the thought of the unhappy dog he had killed . 
The puppy lay beside him feebly moving and he , smiling sadly , stroked it with his thin , pale , wasted hand . 
Clearly he liked the puppy , but ... it was n't Zhutchka ; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy , too , then he would have been completely happy . 
`` Krassotkin ! '' 
cried one of the boys suddenly . 
He was the first to see him come in . 
Krassotkin 's entrance made a general sensation ; the boys moved away and stood on each side of the bed , so that he could get a full view of Ilusha . 
The captain ran eagerly to meet Kolya . 
`` Please come in ... you are welcome ! '' 
he said hurriedly . 
`` Ilusha , Mr. Krassotkin has come to see you ! 
But Krassotkin , shaking hands with him hurriedly , instantly showed his complete knowledge of the manners of good society . 
He turned first to the captain 's wife sitting in her armchair , who was very ill-humoured at the moment , and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha 's bed and did not let her see the new puppy . 
With the greatest courtesy he made her a bow , scraping his foot , and turning to Nina , he made her , as the only other lady present , a similar bow . 
This polite behaviour made an extremely favourable impression on the deranged lady . 
`` There , . 
you can see at once he is a young man that has been well brought up , '' she commented aloud , throwing up her hands ; `` But as for our other visitors they come in one on the top of another . '' 
`` How do you mean , mamma , one on the top of another , how is that ? '' 
muttered the captain affectionately , though a little anxious on her account . 
`` That 's how they ride in . 
They get on each other 's shoulders in the passage and prance in like that on a respectable family . 
Strange sort of visitors ! '' 
`` But who 's come in like that , mamma ? '' 
`` Why , that boy came in riding on that one 's back and this one on that one 's . '' 
Kolya was already by Ilusha 's bedside . 
The sick boy turned visibly paler . 
He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya . 
Kolya had not seen his little friend for two months , and he was overwhelmed at the sight of him . 
He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted , yellow face , such enormous , feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands . 
He saw , with grieved surprise , Ilusha 's rapid , hard breathing and dry lips . 
He stepped close to him , held out his hand , and almost overwhelmed , he said : `` Well , old man ... how are you ? '' 
But his voice failed him , he could n't achieve an appearance of ease ; his face suddenly twitched and the corners of his mouth quivered . 
Ilusha smiled a pitiful little smile , still unable to utter a word . 
Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it over Ilusha 's hair . 
`` Never mind ! '' 
he murmured softly to him to cheer him up , or perhaps not knowing why he said it . 
For a minute they were silent again . 
`` Hallo , so you 've got a new puppy ? '' 
Kolya said suddenly , in a most callous voice . 
`` Ye-es , '' answered Ilusha in a long whisper , gasping for breath . 
`` A black nose , that means he 'll be fierce , a good house-dog , '' Kolya observed gravely and stolidly , as if the only thing he cared about was the puppy and its black nose . 
But in reality he still had to do his utmost to control his feelings not to burst out crying like a child , and do what he would he could not control it . 
`` When it grows up , you 'll have to keep it on the chain , I 'm sure . '' 
`` He 'll be a huge dog ! '' 
cried one of the boys . 
`` Of course he will , '' `` a mastiff , '' `` large , '' `` like this , '' `` as big as a calf , '' shouted several voices . 
`` As big as a calf , as a real calf , '' chimed in the captain . 
`` I got one like that on purpose , one of the fiercest breed , and his parents are huge and very fierce , they stand as high as this from the floor ... . 
Sit down here , on Ilusha 's bed , or here on the bench . 
You are welcome , we 've been hoping to see you a long time ... . 
You were so kind as to come with Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
Krassotkin sat on the edge of the bed , at Ilusha 's feet . 
Though he had perhaps prepared a free-and-easy opening for the conversation on his way , now he completely lost the thread of it . 
`` No ... I came with Perezvon . 
I 've got a dog now , called Perezvon . 
A Slavonic name . 
He 's out there ... if I whistle , he 'll run in . 
I 've brought a dog , too , '' he said , addressing Ilusha all at once . 
`` Do you remember Zhutchka , old man ? '' 
he suddenly fired the question at him . 
Ilusha 's little face quivered . 
He looked with an agonised expression at Kolya . 
Alyosha , standing at the door , frowned and signed to Kolya not to speak of Zhutchka , but he did not or would not notice . 
`` Where ... is Zhutchka ? '' 
Ilusha asked in a broken voice . 
`` Oh well , my boy , your Zhutchka 's lost and done for ! '' 
Ilusha did not speak , but he fixed an intent gaze once more on Kolya . 
Alyosha , catching Kolya 's eye , signed to him vigourously again , but he turned away his eyes pretending not to have noticed . 
`` It must have run away and died somewhere . 
It must have died after a meal like that , '' Kolya pronounced pitilessly , though he seemed a little breathless . 
`` But I 've got a dog , Perezvon ... A Slavonic name ... I 've brought him to show you . '' 
`` I do n't want him ! '' 
said Ilusha suddenly . 
`` No , no , you really must see him ... it will amuse you . 
I brought him on purpose ... . 
He 's the same sort of shaggy dog ... . 
You allow me to call in my dog , madam ? '' 
He suddenly addressed Madame Snegiryov , with inexplicable excitement in his manner . 
`` I do n't want him , I do n't want him ! '' 
cried Ilusha , with a mournful break in his voice . 
There was a reproachful light in his eyes . 
`` You 'd better , '' the captain started up from the chest by the wall on which he had just sat down , `` you 'd better ... another time , '' he muttered , but Kolya could not be restrained . 
He hurriedly shouted to Smurov , `` Open the door , '' and as soon as it was open , he blew his whistle . 
Perezvon dashed headlong into the room . 
`` Jump , Perezvon , beg ! 
Beg ! '' 
shouted Kolya , jumping up , and the dog stood erect on its hind-legs by Ilusha 's bedside . 
What followed was a surprise to everyone : Ilusha started , lurched violently forward , bent over Perezvon and gazed at him , faint with suspense . 
`` It 's ... Zhutchka ! '' 
he cried suddenly , in a voice breaking with joy and suffering . 
`` And who did you think it was ? '' 
Krassotkin shouted with all his might , in a ringing , happy voice , and bending down he seized the dog and lifted him up to Ilusha . 
`` Look , old man , you see , blind of one eye and the left ear is torn , just the marks you described to me . 
It was by that I found him . 
I found him directly . 
