The soldiers of Dessaix 's division advancing against the fleches could only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and the fleches . 
As soon as they had descended into that hollow , the smoke of the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it covered the whole approach on that side of it . 
Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of something black -- probably men -- and at times the glint of bayonets . 
But whether they were moving or stationary , whether they were French or Russian , could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt . 
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into Napoleon 's face as , shading his eyes with his hand , he looked at the fleches . 
The smoke spread out before them , and at times it looked as if the smoke were moving , at times as if the troops moved . 
Sometimes shouts were heard through the firing , but it was impossible to tell what was being done there . 
Napoleon , standing on the knoll , looked through a field glass , and in its small circlet saw smoke and men , sometimes his own and sometimes Russians , but when he looked again with the naked eye , he could not tell where what he had seen was . 
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it . 
Occasionally he stopped , listened to the firing , and gazed intently at the battlefield . 
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where he was standing down below , or from the knoll above on which some of his generals had taken their stand , but even from the fleches themselves -- in which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers , alternately or together , dead , wounded , alive , frightened , or maddened -- even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what was taking place . 
There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketry fire , now Russians were seen alone , now Frenchmen alone , now infantry , and now cavalry : they appeared , fired , fell , collided , not knowing what to do with one another , screamed , and ran back again . 
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out , and orderlies from his marshals , kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress of the action , but all these reports were false , both because it was impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place of conflict but reported what they had heard from others ; and also because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming false . 
Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the hands of the French . 
The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the troops to cross it ? 
Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up on the farther side and wait . 
But before that order was given - almost as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino -- the bridge had been retaken by the Russians and burned , in the very skirmish at which Pierre had been present at the beginning of the battle . 
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed , Campan wounded , and Davout killed ; yet at the very time the adjutant had been told that the French had been repulsed , the fleches had in fact been recaptured by other French troops , and Davout was alive and only slightly bruised . 
On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders , which had either been executed before he gave them or could not be and were not executed . 
The marshals and generals , who were nearer to the field of battle but , like Napoleon , did not take part in the actual fighting and only occasionally went within musket range , made their own arrangements without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run . 
But even their orders , like Napoleon 's , were seldom carried out , and then but partially . 
For the most part things happened contrary to their orders . 
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot ; soldiers ordered to remain where they were , suddenly , seeing Russians unexpectedly before them , sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward , and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians . 
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and galloped full speed back again . 
The infantry moved in the same way , sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to go to . 
All orders as to where and when to move the guns , when to send infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry -- all such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the units concerned , without asking either Ney , Davout , or Murat , much less Napoleon . 
They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling orders or for acting on their own initiative , for in battle what is at stake is what is dearest to man -- his own life -- and it sometimes seems that safety lies in running back , sometimes in running forward ; and these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to the mood of the moment . 
In reality , however , all these movements forward and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops . 
All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm , the harm of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over the fields on which these men were floundering about . 
As soon as they left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about , their superiors , located in the background , re-formed them and brought them under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them back to the zone of fire , where under the influence of fear of death they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance promptings of the throng . 
Napoleon 's generals -- Davout , Ney , and Murat , who were near that region of fire and sometimes even entered it -- repeatedly led into it huge masses of well-ordered troops . 
But contrary to what had always happened in their former battles , instead of the news they expected of the enemy 's flight , these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized and terrified mobs . 
The generals re-formed them , but their numbers constantly decreased . 
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements . 
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll , drinking punch , when Murat 's adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed if His Majesty would let him have another division . 
`` Reinforcements ? '' 
said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise , looking at the adjutant -- a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat 's own -- as though he did not understand his words . 
`` Reinforcements ! '' 
thought Napoleon to himself . 
`` How can they need reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a weak , unentrenched Russian wing ? '' 
`` Tell the King of Naples , '' said he sternly , `` that it is not noon yet , and I do n't yet see my chessboard clearly . 
Go ! 
... '' The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being slaughtered . 
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle . 
In the midst of this conversation , which was beginning to interest Napoleon , Berthier 's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite , who was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse . 
It was Belliard . 
Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending reinforcements . 
He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the Emperor would give another division . 
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down without replying . 
Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the generals of the suite around him . 
`` You are very fiery , Belliard , '' said Napoleon , when he again came up to the general . 
`` In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake . 
Go and have another look and then come back to me . '' 
Before Belliard was out of sight , a messenger from another part of the battlefield galloped up . 
`` Now then , what do you want ? '' 
asked Napoleon in the tone of a man irritated at being continually disturbed . 
`` Sire , the prince ... '' began the adjutant . 
`` Asks for reinforcements ? '' 
said Napoleon with an angry gesture . 
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report , but the Emperor turned from him , took a couple of steps , stopped , came back , and called Berthier . 
`` We must give reserves , '' he said , moving his arms slightly apart . 
`` Who do you think should be sent there ? '' 
he asked of Berthier -LRB- whom he subsequently termed `` that gosling I have made an eagle '' -RRB- . 
`` Send Claparede 's division , sire , '' replied Berthier , who knew all the divisions regiments , and battalions by heart . 
Napoleon nodded assent . 
The adjutant galloped to Claparede 's division and a few minutes later the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward . 
Napoleon gazed silently in that direction . 
`` No ! '' 
he suddenly said to Berthier . 
`` I ca n't send Claparede . 
Send Friant 's division . '' 
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant 's division instead of Claparede 's , and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping Claparede and sending Friant now , the order was carried out exactly . 
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines -- a role he so justly understood and condemned . 
Friant 's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke of the battlefield . 
From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing . 
They all asked for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was melting away . 
Napoleon sat on a campstool , wrapped in thought . 
M. de Beausset , the man so fond of travel , having fasted since morning , came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His Majesty . 
`` I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory ? '' 
said he . 
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation . 
Assuming the negation to refer only to the victory and not to the lunch , M. de Beausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not having lunch when one can get it . 
`` Go away ... '' exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely , and turned aside . 
A beatific smile of regret , repentance , and ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset 's face and he glided away to the other generals . 
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an ever-lucky gambler who , after recklessly flinging money about and always winning , suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the game , finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he loses . 
His troops were the same , his generals the same , the same preparations had been made , the same dispositions , and the same proclamation courte et energique , he himself was still the same : he knew that and knew that he was now even more experienced and skillful than before . 
Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland -- yet the terrible stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent . 
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success : the concentration of batteries on one point , an attack by reserves to break the enemy 's line , and a cavalry attack by `` the men of iron , '' all these methods had already been employed , yet not only was there no victory , but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded , of reinforcements needed , of the impossibility of driving back the Russians , and of disorganization among his own troops . 
Formerly , after he had given two or three orders and uttered a few phrases , marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with congratulations and happy faces , announcing the trophies taken , the corps of prisoners , bundles of enemy eagles and standards , cannon and stores , and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gather in the baggage wagons . 
So it had been at Lodi , Marengo , Arcola , Jena , Austerlitz , Wagram , and so on . 
But now something strange was happening to his troops . 
Despite news of the capture of the fleches , Napoleon saw that this was not the same , not at all the same , as what had happened in his former battles . 
He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about him experienced in the art of war . 
All their faces looked dejected , and they all shunned one another 's eyes -- only a de Beausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was happening . 
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours , after all efforts had been expended . 
He knew that it was a lost battle and that the least accident might now -- with the fight balanced on such a strained center -- destroy him and his army . 
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign in which not one battle had been won , and in which not a flag , or cannon , or army corps had been captured in two months , when he looked at the concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the Russians still holding their ground -- a terrible feeling like a nightmare took possession of him , and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy him occurred to his mind . 
The Russians might fall on his left wing , might break through his center , he himself might be killed by a stray cannon ball . 
All this was possible . 
In former battles he had only considered the possibilities of success , but now innumerable unlucky chances presented themselves , and he expected them all . 
Yes , it was like a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him , and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows should annihilate him , but then feels that his arm drops powerless and limp like a rag , and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in his helplessness . 
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French army aroused that horror in Napoleon . 
He sat silently on a campstool below the knoll , with head bowed and elbows on his knees . 
Berthier approached and suggested that they should ride along the line to ascertain the position of affairs . 
`` What ? 
What do you say ? '' 
asked Napoleon . 
`` Yes , tell them to bring me my horse . '' 
He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk . 
Amid the powder smoke , slowly dispersing over the whole space through which Napoleon rode , horses and men were lying in pools of blood , singly or in heaps . 
Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area . 
The roar of guns , that had not ceased for ten hours , wearied the ear and gave a peculiar significance to the spectacle , as music does to tableaux vivants . 
Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk , and through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him . 
They were Russians . 
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its knoll , and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent forth clouds of smoke . 
It was no longer a battle : it was a continuous slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the Russians . 
Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie from which Berthier had aroused him . 
He could not stop what was going on before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to depend on him , and from its lack of success this affair , for the first time , seemed to him unnecessary and horrible . 
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead the Old Guard into action . 
Ney and Berthier , standing near Napoleon , exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general 's senseless offer . 
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time . 
`` At eight hundred leagues from France , I will not have my Guard destroyed ! '' 
he said , and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino . 
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat Kutuzov , his gray head hanging , his heavy body relaxed . 
He gave no orders , but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested . 
`` Yes , yes , do that , '' he replied to various proposals . 
`` Yes , yes : go , dear boy , and have a look , '' he would say to one or another of those about him ; or , `` No , do n't , we 'd better wait ! '' 
He listened to the reports that were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded that of him ; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he were not interested in the import of the words spoken , but rather in something else -- in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who were reporting . 
By long years of military experience he knew , and with the wisdom of age understood , that it is impossible for one man to direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death , and he knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of a commander in chief , nor the place where the troops are stationed , nor by the number of cannon or of slaughtered men , but by that intangible force called the spirit of the army , and he watched this force and guided it in as far as that was in his power . 
Kutuzov 's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention , and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master the fatigue of his old and feeble body . 
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by the French had been retaken , but that Prince Bagration was wounded . 
Kutuzov groaned and swayed his head . 
`` Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly , '' he said to one of his adjutants , and then turned to the Duke of Wurttemberg who was standing behind him . 
`` Will Your Highness please take command of the first army ? '' 
Soon after the duke 's departure -- before he could possibly have reached Semenovsk -- his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the duke asked for more troops . 
Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the command of the first army , and a request to the duke -- whom he said he could not spare at such an important moment -- to return to him . 
When they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner , and the staff officers congratulated him , Kutuzov smiled . 
`` Wait a little , gentlemen , '' said he . 
`` The battle is won , and there is nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat . 
Still , it is better to wait before we rejoice . '' 
But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army . 
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that the French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk , Kutuzov , guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin 's looks that the news was bad , rose as if to stretch his legs and , taking Scherbinin 's arm , led him aside . 
`` Go , my dear fellow , '' he said to Ermolov , `` and see whether something ca n't be done . '' 
Kutuzov was in Gorki , near the center of the Russian position . 
The attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several times repulsed . 
In the center the French had not got beyond Borodino , and on their left flank Uvarov 's cavalry had put the French to flight . 
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased . 
On the faces of all who came from the field of battle , and of those who stood around him , Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension . 
He was satisfied with the day 's success -- a success exceeding his expectations , but the old man 's strength was failing him . 
Several times his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off . 
Dinner was brought him . 
Adjutant General Wolzogen , the man who when riding past Prince Andrew had said , `` the war should be extended widely , '' and whom Bagration so detested , rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner . 
Wolzogen had come from Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank . 
The sagacious Barclay de Tolly , seeing crowds of wounded men running back and the disordered rear of the army , weighed all the circumstances , concluded that the battle was lost , and sent his favorite officer to the commander in chief with that news . 
Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids . 
Wolzogen , nonchalantly stretching his legs , approached Kutuzov with a half-contemptuous smile on his lips , scarcely touching the peak of his cap . 
He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalance intended to show that , as a highly trained military man , he left it to Russians to make an idol of this useless old man , but that he knew whom he was dealing with . 
`` Der alte Herr '' -LRB- as in their own set the Germans called Kutuzov -RRB- `` is making himself very comfortable , '' thought Wolzogen , and looking severely at the dishes in front of Kutuzov he began to report to `` the old gentleman '' the position of affairs on the left flank as Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understood it . 
`` All the points of our position are in the enemy 's hands and we can not dislodge them for lack of troops , the men are running away and it is impossible to stop them , '' he reported . 
Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen , as if not understand what was said to him . 
Wolzogen , noticing `` the old gentleman 's '' agitation , said with a smile : `` I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness what I have seen . 
The troops are in complete disorder ... '' `` You have seen ? 
You have seen ? 
... '' Kutuzov shouted frowning , and rising quickly he went up to Wolzogen . 
`` How ... how dare you ! 
... '' he shouted , choking and making a threatening gesture with his trembling arms : `` How dare you , sir , say that to me ? 
You know nothing about it . 
Tell General Barclay from me that his information is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to me , the commander in chief , than to him . '' 
Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder , but Kutuzov interrupted him . 
`` The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right flank . 
If you have seen amiss , sir , do not allow yourself to say what you do n't know ! 
Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow , '' said Kutuzov sternly . 
All were silent , and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of the panting old general . 
`` They are repulsed everywhere , for which I thank God and our brave army ! 
The enemy is beaten , and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred soil of Russia , '' said Kutuzov crossing himself , and he suddenly sobbed as his eyes filled with tears . 
Wolzogen , shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips , stepped silently aside , marveling at `` the old gentleman 's '' conceited stupidity . 
`` Ah , here he is , my hero ! '' 
said Kutuzov to a portly , handsome , dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll . 
This was Raevski , who had spent the whole day at the most important part of the field of Borodino . 
Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and that the French no longer ventured to attack . 
After hearing him , Kutuzov said in French : `` Then you do not think , like some others , that we must retreat ? '' 
`` On the contrary , your Highness , in indecisive actions it is always the most stubborn who remain victors , '' replied Raevski , `` and in my opinion ... '' `` Kaysarov ! '' 
Kutuzov called to his adjutant . 
`` Sit down and write out the order of the day for tomorrow . 
And you , '' he continued , addressing another , `` ride along the line and that tomorrow we attack . '' 
While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day , Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given . 
Kutuzov , without looking at Wolzogen , gave directions for the order to be written out which the former commander in chief , to avoid personal responsibility , very judiciously wished to receive . 
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains throughout an army one and the same temper , known as `` the spirit of the army , '' and which constitutes the sinew of war , Kutuzov 's words , his order for a battle next day , immediately became known from one end of the army to the other . 
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the farthest links of that chain . 
The tales passing from mouth to mouth at different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said , but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was not the outcome of cunning calculations , but of a feeling that lay in the commander in chief 's soul as in that of every Russian . 
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy , and hearing from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe , the exhausted , wavering men felt comforted and inspirited . 
Prince Andrew 's regiment was among the reserves which till after one o'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk , under heavy artillery fire . 
Toward two o'clock the regiment , having already lost more than two hundred men , was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery , where thousands of men perished that day and on which an intense , concentrated fire from several hundred enemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock . 
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here lost another third of its men . 
From in front and especially from the right , in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed , and out of the mysterious domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front , quick hissing cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly . 
At times , as if to allow them a respite , a quarter of an hour passed during which the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead , but sometimes several men were torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continually being dragged away and the wounded carried off . 
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not yet killed . 
The regiment stood in columns of battalion , three hundred paces apart , but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same mood . 
All alike were taciturn and morose . 
Talk was rarely heard in the ranks , and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful shot and the cry of `` stretchers ! '' 
was heard . 
Most of the time , by their officers ' order , the men sat on the ground . 
One , having taken off his shako , carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight again ; another , rubbing some dry clay between his palms , polished his bayonet ; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his bandolier , while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put his boots on again . 
Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed ground , or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield . 
All seemed fully absorbed in these pursuits . 
When men were killed or wounded , when rows of stretchers went past , when some troops retreated , and when great masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke , no one paid any attention to these things . 
But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or some of our infantry were seen to move forward , words of approval were heard on all sides . 
But the liveliest attention was attracted by occurrences quite apart from , and unconnected with , the battle . 
It was as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday , commonplace occurrences . 
A battery of artillery was passing in front of the regiment . 
The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace . 
`` Hey , look at the trace horse ! 
... Get her leg out ! 
She 'll fall ... . 
Ah , they do n't see it ! '' 
came identical shouts from the ranks all along the regiment . 
Another time , general attention was attracted by a small brown dog , coming heaven knows whence , which trotted in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell close by , when it yelped , tucked its tail between its legs , and darted aside . 
Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment . 
But such distractions lasted only a moment , and for eight hours the men had been inactive , without food , in constant fear of death , and their pale and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier . 
Prince Andrew , pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment , paced up and down from the border of one patch to another , at the edge of the meadow beside an oatfield , with head bowed and arms behind his back . 
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given . 
Everything went on of itself . 
The killed were dragged from the front , the wounded carried away , and the ranks closed up . 
If any soldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and hastily . 
At first Prince Andrew , considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them an example , walked about among the ranks , but he soon became convinced that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teach them . 
All the powers of his soul , as of every soldier there , were unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their situation . 
He walked along the meadow , dragging his feet , rustling the grass , and gazing at the dust that covered his boots ; now he took big strides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the mowers , then he counted his steps , calculating how often he must walk from one strip to another to walk a mile , then he stripped the flowers from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut , rubbed them in his palms , and smelled their pungent , sweetly bitter scent . 
Nothing remained of the previous day 's thoughts . 
He thought of nothing . 
He listened with weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds , distinguishing the whistle of flying projectiles from the booming of the reports , glanced at the tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion , and waited . 
`` Here it comes ... this one is coming our way again ! '' 
he thought , listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke . 
`` One , another ! 
Again ! 
It has hit ... '' He stopped and looked at the ranks . 
`` No , it has gone over . 
But this one has hit ! '' 
And again he started trying to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces . 
A whizz and a thud ! 
Five paces from him , a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared . 
A chill ran down his back . 
Again he glanced at the ranks . 
Probably many had been hit -- a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion . 
`` Adjutant ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Order them not to crowd together . '' 
The adjutant , having obeyed this instruction , approached Prince Andrew . 
From the other side a battalion commander rode up . 
`` Look out ! '' 
came a frightened cry from a soldier and , like a bird whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground , a shell dropped with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the battalion commander 's horse . 
The horse first , regardless of whether it was right or wrong to show fear , snorted , reared almost throwing the major , and galloped aside . 
The horse 's terror infected the men . 
`` Lie down ! '' 
cried the adjutant , throwing himself flat on the ground . 
Prince Andrew hesitated . 
The smoking shell spun like a top between him and the prostrate adjutant , near a wormwood plant between the field and the meadow . 
`` Can this be death ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew , looking with a quite new , envious glance at the grass , the wormwood , and the streamlet of smoke that curled up from the rotating black ball . 
`` I can not , I do not wish to die . 
I love life -- I love this grass , this earth , this air ... '' He thought this , and at the same time remembered that people were looking at him . 
`` It 's shameful , sir ! '' 
he said to the adjutant . 
`` What ... '' He did not finish speaking . 
At one and the same moment came the sound of an explosion , a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame , a suffocating smell of powder , and Prince Andrew started to one side , raising his arm , and fell on his chest . 
Several officers ran up to him . 
From the right side of his abdomen , blood was welling out making a large stain on the grass . 
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the officers . 
Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass , breathing heavily and noisily . 
`` What are you waiting for ? 
Come along ! '' 
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs , but he moaned piteously and , exchanging looks , they set him down again . 
`` Pick him up , lift him , it 's all the same ! '' 
cried someone . 
They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher . 
`` Ah , God ! 
My God ! 
What is it ? 
The stomach ? 
That means death ! 
My God ! '' 
-- voices among the officers were heard saying . 
`` It flew a hair 's breadth past my ear , '' said the adjutant . 
The peasants , adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders , started hurriedly along the path they had trodden down , to the dressing station . 
`` Keep in step ! 
Ah ... those peasants ! '' 
shouted an officer , seizing by their shoulders and checking the peasants , who were walking unevenly and jolting the stretcher . 
`` Get into step , Fedor ... I say , Fedor ! '' 
said the foremost peasant . 
`` Now that 's right ! '' 
said the one behind joyfully , when he had got into step . 
`` Your excellency ! 
Eh , Prince ! '' 
said the trembling voice of Timokhin , who had run up and was looking down on the stretcher . 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids drooped . 
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to dressing station by the wood , where wagons were stationed . 
The dressing station consisted of three tents with flaps turned back , pitched at the edge of a birch wood . 
In the wood , wagons and horses were standing . 
The horses were eating oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the grains that fell . 
Some crows , scenting blood , flew among the birch trees cawing impatiently . 
Around the tents , over more than five acres , bloodstained men in various garbs stood , sat , or lay . 
Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive faces , whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the spot . 
Disregarding the officers ' orders , the soldiers stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently , as if trying to comprehend the difficult problem of what was taking place before them . 
From the tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans . 
Occasionally dressers ran out to fetch water , or to point out those who were to be brought in next . 
The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned , sighed , wept , screamed , swore , or asked for vodka . 
Some were delirious . 
Prince Andrew 's bearers , stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged , took him , as a regimental commander , close up to one of the tents and there stopped , awaiting instructions . 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going on around him . 
He remembered the meadow , the wormwood , the field , the whirling black ball , and his sudden rush of passionate love of life . 
Two steps from him , leaning against a branch and talking loudly and attracting general attention , stood a tall , handsome , black-haired noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head . 
He had been wounded in the head and leg by bullets . 
Around him , eagerly listening to his talk , a crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered . 
`` We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything , we grabbed the King himself ! '' 
cried he , looking around him with eyes that glittered with fever . 
`` If only reserves had come up just then , lads , there would n't have been nothing left of him ! 
I tell you surely ... '' Like all the others near the speaker , Prince Andrew looked at him with shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort . 
`` But is n't it all the same now ? '' 
thought he . 
`` And what will be there , and what has there been here ? 
Why was I so reluctant to part with life ? 
There was something in this life I did not and do not understand . '' 
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron , holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small bloodstained hands , so as not to smear it . 
He raised his head and looked about him , but above the level of the wounded men . 
He evidently wanted a little respite . 
After turning his head from right to left for some time , he sighed and looked down . 
`` All right , immediately , '' he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince Andrew out to him , and he told them to carry him into the tent . 
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting . 
`` It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a chance ! '' 
remarked one . 
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been cleared and which a dresser was washing down . 
Prince Andrew could not make out distinctly what was in that tent . 
The pitiful groans from all sides and the torturing pain in his thigh , stomach , and back distracted him . 
All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked , bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent , as a few weeks previously , on that hot August day , such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road . 
Yes , it was the same flesh , the same chair a canon , the sight of which had even then filled him with horror , as by a presentiment . 
There were three operating tables in the tent . 
Two were occupied , and on the third they placed Prince Andrew . 
For a little while he was left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two tables . 
On the nearest one sat a Tartar , probably a Cossack , judging by the uniform thrown down beside him . 
Four soldiers were holding him , and a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back . 
`` Ooh , ooh , ooh ! '' 
grunted the Tartar , and suddenly lifting up his swarthy snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones , and baring his white teeth , he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing , ringing , and prolonged yells . 
On the other table , round which many people were crowding , a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back . 
His curly hair , its color , and the shape of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew . 
Several dressers were pressing on his chest to hold him down . 
One large , white , plump leg twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor . 
The man was sobbing and choking convulsively . 
Two doctors -- one of whom was pale and trembling -- were silently doing something to this man 's other , gory leg . 
When he had finished with the Tartar , whom they covered with an overcoat , the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew , wiping his hands . 
He glanced at Prince Andrew 's face and quickly turned away . 
`` Undress him ! 
What are you waiting for ? '' 
he cried angrily to the dressers . 
His very first , remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince Andrew 's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him . 
The doctor bent down over the wound , felt it , and sighed deeply . 
Then he made a sign to someone , and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to lose consciousness . 
When he came to himself the splintered portions of his thighbone had been extracted , the torn flesh cut away , and the wound bandaged . 
Water was being sprinkled on his face . 
As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes , the doctor bent over , kissed him silently on the lips , and hurried away . 
After the sufferings he had been enduring , Prince Andrew enjoyed a blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time . 
All the best and happiest moments of his life -- especially his earliest childhood , when he used to be undressed and put to bed , and when leaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he , burying his head in the pillow , felt happy in the mere consciousness of life - returned to his memory , not merely as something past but as something present . 
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew : they were lifting him up and trying to quiet him . 
`` Show it to me ... . 
Oh , ooh ... Oh ! 
Oh , ooh ! '' 
his frightened moans could be heard , subdued by suffering and broken by sobs . 
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep . 
Whether because he was dying without glory , or because he was sorry to part with life , or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return , or because he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near him was groaning so piteously -- he felt like weeping childlike , kindly , and almost happy tears . 
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood and with the boot still on . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh , ooh ! '' 
he sobbed , like a woman . 
The doctor who had been standing beside him , preventing Prince Andrew from seeing his face , moved away . 
`` My God ! 
What is this ? 
Why is he here ? '' 
said Prince Andrew to himself . 
In the miserable , sobbing , enfeebled man whose leg had just been amputated , he recognized Anatole Kuragin . 
Men were supporting him in their arms and offering him a glass of water , but his trembling , swollen lips could not grasp its rim . 
Anatole was sobbing painfully . 
`` Yes , it is he ! 
Yes , that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me , '' thought Prince Andrew , not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him . 
`` What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life ? '' 
he asked himself without finding an answer . 
And suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to him . 
He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the ball in 1810 , with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture , and love and tenderness for her , stronger and more vivid than ever , awoke in his soul . 
He now remembered the connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes . 
He remembered everything , and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart . 
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving tears for his fellow men , for himself , and for his own and their errors . 
`` Compassion , love of our brothers , for those who love us and for those who hate us , love of our enemies ; yes , that love which God preached on earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand -- that is what made me sorry to part with life , that is what remained for me had I lived . 
But now it is too late . 
I know it ! '' 
The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded , together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded , and the consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm , produced an unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the killed and wounded , thereby , he considered , testing his strength of mind . 
This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his greatness . 
He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the Shevardino knoll , where he sat on his campstool , his sallow face swollen and heavy , his eyes dim , his nose red , and his voice hoarse , involuntarily listening , with downcast eyes , to the sounds of firing . 
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action , in which he regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest . 
A personal , human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the artificial phantasm of life he had served so long . 
He felt in his own person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield . 
The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death for himself . 
At that moment he did not desire Moscow , or victory , or glory -LRB- what need had he for any more glory ? -RRB- . 
The one thing he wished for was rest , tranquillity , and freedom . 
But when he had been on the Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo . 
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought to him of the effect those batteries produced . 
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns had been concentrated on the Russians , as he had ordered , but that they still held their ground . 
`` Our fire is mowing them down by rows , but still they hold on , '' said the adjutant . 
`` They want more ! 
... '' said Napoleon in a hoarse voice . 
`` Sire ? '' 
asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark . 
`` They want more ! '' 
croaked Napoleon frowning . 
`` Let them have it ! '' 
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire , and for which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him , was being done . 
And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary greatness , and again -- as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing something for itself -- he submissively fulfilled the cruel , sad , gloomy , and inhuman role predestined for him . 
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening lay more than on all the others who took part in it . 
Never to the end of his life could he understand goodness , beauty , or truth , or the significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and truth , too remote from everything human , for him ever to be able to grasp their meaning . 
He could not disavow his actions , belauded as they were by half the world , and so he had to repudiate truth , goodness , and all humanity . 
Not only on that day , as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men killed and maimed -LRB- by his will as he believed -RRB- , did he reckon as he looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and , deceiving himself , find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that there were five Russians for every Frenchman . 
Not on that day alone did he write in a letter to Paris that `` the battle field was superb , '' because fifty thousand corpses lay there , but even on the island of St. Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done , he wrote : The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times : it was a war of good sense , for real interests , for the tranquillity and security of all ; it was purely pacific and conservative . 
It was a war for a great cause , the end of uncertainties and the beginning of security . 
A new horizon and new labors were opening out , full of well-being and prosperity for all . 
The European system was already founded ; all that remained was to organize it . 
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere , I too should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance . 
Those ideas were stolen from me . 
In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have discussed our interests like one family , and have rendered account to the peoples as clerk to master . 
Europe would in this way soon have been , in fact , but one people , and anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the common fatherland . 
I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable rivers for everybody , that the seas should be common to all , and that the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards for the sovereigns . 
On returning to France , to the bosom of the great , strong , magnificent , peaceful , and glorious fatherland , I should have proclaimed her frontiers immutable ; all future wars purely defensive , all aggrandizement antinational . 
I should have associated my son in the Empire ; my dictatorship would have been finished , and his constitutional reign would have begun . 
Paris would have been the capital of the world , and the French the envy of the nations ! 
My leisure then , and my old age , would have been devoted , in company with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son , to leisurely visiting , with our own horses and like a true country couple , every corner of the Empire , receiving complaints , redressing wrongs , and scattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides and everywhere . 
Napoleon , predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner of the peoples , assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the peoples ' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by the employment of power confer benefactions . 
`` Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula , '' he wrote further of the Russian war , `` half were Austrians , Prussians , Saxons , Poles , Bavarians , Wurttembergers , Mecklenburgers , Spaniards , Italians , and Neapolitans . 
The Imperial army , strictly speaking , was one third composed of Dutch , Belgians , men from the borders of the Rhine , Piedmontese , Swiss , Genevese , Tuscans , Romans , inhabitants of the Thirty-second Military Division , of Bremen , of Hamburg , and so on : it included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French . 
The Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men ; the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various battles four times more men than the French army ; the burning of Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want in the woods ; finally , in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian army also suffered from the severity of the season ; so that by the the time it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand , and at Kalisch less than eighteen thousand . '' 
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will , and the horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul . 
He boldly took the whole responsibility for what happened , and his darkened mind found justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians . 
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov family and to the crown serfs -- those fields and meadows where for hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino , Gorki , Shevardino , and Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle . 
At the dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space of some three acres around . 
Crowds of men of various arms , wounded and unwounded , with frightened faces , dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other . 
Other crowds , exhausted and hungry , went forward led by their officers . 
Others held their ground and continued to fire . 
Over the whole field , previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun , there now spread a mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood . 
Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded , on the frightened , exhausted , and hesitating men , as if to say : `` Enough , men ! 
Enough ! 
Cease ... bethink yourselves ! 
What are you doing ? '' 
To the men of both sides alike , worn out by want of food and rest , it began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to slaughter one another ; all the faces expressed hesitation , and the question arose in every soul : `` For what , for whom , must I kill and be killed ? 
... You may go and kill whom you please , but I do n't want to do so anymore ! '' 
By evening this thought had ripened in every soul . 
At any moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere . 
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of what they were doing , though they would have been glad to leave off , some incomprehensible , mysterious power continued to control them , and they still brought up the charges , loaded , aimed , and applied the match , though only one artilleryman survived out of every three , and though they stumbled and panted with fatigue , perspiring and stained with blood and powder . 
The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both sides , crushing human bodies , and that terrible work which was not done by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds continued . 
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have said that , if only the French made one more slight effort , it would disappear ; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the French would be destroyed . 
But neither the French nor the Russians made that effort , and the flame of battle burned slowly out . 
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking the French . 
At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the beginning . 
But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French from their positions , they could not have made this last effort , for all the Russian troops had been broken up , there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in the battle , and though still holding their positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army . 
The French , with the memory of all their former victories during fifteen years , with the assurance of Napoleon 's invincibility , with the consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact , twenty thousand strong , might easily have made that effort . 
The French had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position ought to have made that effort , for as long as the Russians continued to block the road to Moscow as before , the aim of the French had not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain . 
But the French did not make that effort . 
Some historians say that Napoleon need only have used his Old Guards , who were intact , and the battle would have been won . 
To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring . 
It could not be . 
Napoleon did not give his Guards , not because he did not want to , but because it could not be done . 
All the generals , officers , and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done , because the flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it . 
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling of the mighty arm being stricken powerless , but all the generals and soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not , after all their experience of previous battles -- when after one tenth of such efforts the enemy had fled -- experienced a similar feeling of terror before an enemy who , after losing HALF his men , stood as threateningly at the end as at the beginning of the battle . 
The moral force of the attacking French army was exhausted . 
Not that sort of victory which is defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks , called standards , and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were standing , but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the Russians at Borodino . 
The French invaders , like an infuriated animal that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound , felt that they were perishing , but could not stop , any more than the Russian army , weaker by one half , could help swerving . 
By impetus gained , the French army was still able to roll forward to Moscow , but there , without further effort on the part of the Russians , it had to perish , bleeding from the mortal wound it had received at Borodino . 
The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino was Napoleon 's senseless flight from Moscow , his retreat along the old Smolensk road , the destruction of the invading army of five hundred thousand men , and the downfall of Napoleonic France , on which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger spirit had been laid . 
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind . 
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion ; but at the same time , a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements . 
There is a well known , so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this , that Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following , in spite of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise . 
By the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the tortoise , the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead of him : when Achilles has covered that tenth , the tortoise has covered another one hundredth , and so on forever . 
This problem seemed to the ancients insoluble . 
The absurd answer -LRB- that Achilles could never overtake the tortoise -RRB- resulted from this : that motion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements , whereas the motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous . 
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a solution of the problem , but never reach it . 
Only when we have admitted the conception of the infinitely small , and the resulting geometrical progression with a common ratio of one tenth , and have found the sum of this progression to infinity , do we reach a solution of the problem . 
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble . 
This modern branch of mathematics , unknown to the ancients , when dealing with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small , and so conforms to the chief condition of motion -LRB- absolute continuity -RRB- and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind can not avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of examining continuous motion . 
In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens . 
The movement of humanity , arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary human wills , is continuous . 
To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of history . 
But to arrive at these laws , resulting from the sum of all those human wills , man 's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected units . 
The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected series of continuous events and examine it apart from others , though there is and can be no beginning to any event , for one event always flows uninterruptedly from another . 
The second method is to consider the actions of some one man -- a king or a commander -- as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills ; whereas the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a single historic personage . 
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually takes smaller and smaller units for examination . 
But however small the units it takes , we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others , or to assume a beginning of any phenomenon , or to say that the will of many men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personage , is in itself false . 
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions drawn from history . 
It is merely necessary to select some larger or smaller unit as the subject of observation -- as criticism has every right to do , seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be arbitrarily selected . 
Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation -LRB- the differential of history , that is , the individual tendencies of men -RRB- and attaining to the art of integrating them -LRB- that is , finding the sum of these infinitesimals -RRB- can we hope to arrive at the laws of history . 
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an extraordinary movement of millions of people . 
Men leave their customary pursuits , hasten from one side of Europe to the other , plunder and slaughter one another , triumph and are plunged in despair , and for some years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive movement which first increases and then slackens . 
What was the cause of this movement , by what laws was it governed ? 
asks the mind of man . 
The historians , replying to this question , lay before us the sayings and doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris , calling these sayings and doings `` the Revolution '' ; then they give a detailed biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him ; tell of the influence some of these people had on others , and say : that is why this movement took place and those are its laws . 
But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation , but plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious , because in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger . 
The sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon , and only the sum of those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them . 
`` But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors ; every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been great men , '' says history . 
And , indeed , human reason replies : every time conquerors appear there have been wars , but this does not prove that the conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of a war in the personal activity of a single man . 
Whenever I look at my watch and its hands point to ten , I hear the bells of the neighboring church ; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clock reach ten , I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells is caused by the position of the hands of the watch . 
Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see the valves opening and wheels turning ; but I have no right to conclude that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of the movement of the engine . 
The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks are budding , and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak is budding . 
But though I do not know what causes the cold winds to blow when the oak buds unfold , I can not agree with the peasants that the unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind , for the force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds . 
I see only a coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of life , and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the hands of the watch , and the valves and wheels of the engine , and the oak , I shall not discover the cause of the bells ringing , the engine moving , or of the winds of spring . 
To that I must entirely change my point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam , of the bells , and of the wind . 
History must do the same . 
And attempts in this direction have already been made . 
To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject of our observation , must leave aside kings , ministers , and generals , and the common , infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are moved . 
No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history ; but it is evident that only along that path does the possibility of discovering the laws of history lie , and that as yet not a millionth part as much mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has been devoted to describing the actions of various kings , commanders , and ministers and propounding the historians ' own reflections concerning these actions . 
The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia . 
The Russian army and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached , and again from Smolensk to Borodino . 
The French army pushed on to Moscow , its goal , its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim , just as the velocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth . 
Behind it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken , hostile country ; ahead were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal . 
Every soldier in Napoleon 's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum . 
The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatred of the enemy flared up , and while it retreated the army increased and consolidated . 
At Borodino a collision took place . 
Neither army was broken up , but the Russian army retreated immediately after the collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after colliding with another having a greater momentum , and with equal inevitability the ball of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for some distance , though the collision had deprived it of all its force . 
The Russians retreated eighty miles -- to beyond Moscow -- and the French reached Moscow and there came to a standstill . 
For five weeks after that there was not a single battle . 
The French did not move . 
As a bleeding , mortally wounded animal licks its wounds , they remained inert in Moscow for five weeks , and then suddenly , with no fresh reason , fled back : they made a dash for the Kaluga road , and -LRB- after a victory -- for at Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict again remained theirs -RRB- without undertaking a single serious battle , they fled still more rapidly back to Smolensk , beyond Smolensk , beyond the Berezina , beyond Vilna , and farther still . 
On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August , Kutuzov and the whole Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory . 
Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor . 
He gave orders to prepare for a fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone , but because he knew that the enemy was beaten , as everyone who had taken part in the battle knew it . 
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another of unheard-of losses , of the loss of half the army , and a fresh battle proved physically impossible . 
It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected , the wounded gathered in , the supplies of ammunition replenished , the slain reckoned up , new officers appointed to replace those who had been killed , and before the men had had food and sleep . 
And meanwhile , the very next morning after the battle , the French army advanced of itself upon the Russians , carried forward by the force of its own momentum now seemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance from its aim . 
Kutuzov 's wish was to attack next day , and the whole army desired to do so . 
But to make an attack the wish to do so is not sufficient , there must also be a possibility of doing it , and that possibility did not exist . 
It was impossible not to retreat a day 's march , and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another and a third day 's march , and at last , on the first of September when the army drew near Moscow -- despite the strength of the feeling that had arisen in all ranks -- the force of circumstances compelled it to retire beyond Moscow . 
And the troops retired one more , last , day 's march , and abandoned Moscow to the enemy . 
For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles are made by generals -- as any one of us sitting over a map in his study may imagine how he would have arranged things in this or that battle -- the questions present themselves : Why did Kutuzov during the retreat not do this or that ? 
Why did he not take up a position before reaching Fili ? 
Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga road , abandoning Moscow ? 
and so on . 
People accustomed to think in that way forget , or do not know , the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any commander in chief . 
The activity of a commander in chief does not all resemble the activity we imagine to ourselves when we sit at case in our studies examining some campaign on the map , with a certain number of troops on this and that side in a certain known locality , and begin our plans from some given moment . 
A commander in chief is never dealing with the beginning of any event - the position from which we always contemplate it . 
The commander in chief is always in the midst of a series of shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider the whole import of an event that is occurring . 
Moment by moment the event is imperceptibly shaping itself , and at every moment of this continuous , uninterrupted shaping of events the commander in chief is in the midst of a most complex play of intrigues , worries , contingencies , authorities , projects , counsels , threats , and deceptions and is continually obliged to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him , which constantly conflict with one another . 
Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov should have moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reaching Fili , and that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him . 
But a commander in chief , especially at a difficult moment , has always before him not one proposal but dozens simultaneously . 
And all these proposals , based on strategics and tactics , contradict each other . 
A commander in chief 's business , it would seem , is simply to choose one of these projects . 
But even that he can not do . 
Events and time do not wait . 
For instance , on the twenty-eighth it is suggested to him to cross to the Kaluga road , but just then an adjutant gallops up from Miloradovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire . 
An order must be given him at once , that instant . 
And the order to retreat carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road . 
And after the adjutant comes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken , and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go , and a courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow , and the commander in chief 's rival , the man who is undermining him -LRB- and there are always not merely one but several such -RRB- , presents a new project diametrically opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road , and the commander in chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of rewards comes to complain , and the inhabitants of the district pray to be defended , and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer previously sent ; and a spy , a prisoner , and a general who has been on reconnaissance , all describe the position of the enemy 's army differently . 
People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these inevitable conditions of a commander in chief 's actions describe to us , for instance , the position of the army at Fili and assume that the commander in chief could , on the first of September , quite freely decide whether to abandon Moscow or defend it ; whereas , with the Russian army less than four miles from Moscow , no such question existed . 
When had that question been settled ? 
At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpably of all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on the twenty-sixth at Borodino , and each day and hour and minute of the retreat from Borodino to Fili . 
When Ermolov , having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position , told the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscow and that they must retreat , Kutuzov looked at him in silence . 
`` Give me your hand , '' said he and , turning it over so as to feel the pulse , added : `` You are not well , my dear fellow . 
Think what you are saying ! '' 
Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow without a battle . 
On the Poklonny Hill , four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow , Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside . 
A great crowd of generals gathered round him , and Count Rostopchin , who had come out from Moscow , joined them . 
This brilliant company separated into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the position , the state of the army , the plans suggested , the situation of Moscow , and military questions generally . 
Though they had not been summoned for the purpose , and though it was not so called , they all felt that this was really a council of war . 
The conversations all dealt with public questions . 
If anyone gave or asked for personal news , it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general matters . 
No jokes , or laughter , or smiles even , were seen among all these men . 
They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the height the situation demanded . 
And all these groups , while talking among themselves , tried to keep near the commander in chief -LRB- whose bench formed the center of the gathering -RRB- and to speak so that he might overhear them . 
The commander in chief listened to what was being said and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks , but did not himself take part in the conversations or express any opinion . 
After hearing what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned away with an air of disappointment , as though they were not speaking of anything he wished to hear . 
Some discussed the position that had been chosen , criticizing not the position itself so much as the mental capacity of those who had chosen it . 
Others argued that a mistake had been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days before . 
Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca , which was described by Crosart , a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform . 
-LRB- This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russian army were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering the possibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner . -RRB- 
Count Rostopchin was telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the city train bands under the walls of the capital , but that he still could not help regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening , and that had he known it sooner things would have been different ... . 
A fifth group , displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions , discussed the direction the troops would now have to take . 
A sixth group was talking absolute nonsense . 
Kutuzov 's expression grew more and more preoccupied and gloomy . 
From all this talk he saw only one thing : that to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning of those words , that is to say , so utterly impossible that if any senseless commander were to give orders to fight , confusion would result but the battle would still not take place . 
It would not take place because the commanders not merely all recognized the position to be impossible , but in their conversations were only discussing what would happen after its inevitable abandonment . 
How could the commanders lead their troops to a field of battle they considered impossible to hold ? 
The lower-grade officers and even the soldiers -LRB- who too reason -RRB- also considered the position impossible and therefore could not go to fight , fully convinced as they were of defeat . 
If Bennigsen insisted on the position being defended and others still discussed it , the question was no longer important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue . 
This Kutuzov knew well . 
Bennigsen , who had chosen the position , warmly displayed his Russian patriotism -LRB- Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing -RRB- by insisting that Moscow must be defended . 
His aim was as clear as daylight to Kutuzov : if the defense failed , to throw the blame on Kutuzov who had brought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without giving battle ; if it succeeded , to claim the success as his own ; or if battle were not given , to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow . 
But this intrigue did not now occupy the old man 's mind . 
One terrible question absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone . 
The question for him now was : `` Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach Moscow , and when did I do so ? 
When was it decided ? 
Can it have been yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat , or was it the evening before , when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders ? 
Or was it earlier still ? 
... When , when was this terrible affair decided ? 
Moscow must be abandoned . 
The army must retreat and the order to do so must be given . '' 
To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to resigning the command of the army . 
And not only did he love power to which he was accustomed -LRB- the honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski , under whom he had served in Turkey , galled him -RRB- , but he was convinced that he was destined to save Russia and that that was why , against the Emperor 's wish and by the will of the people , he had been chosen commander in chief . 
He was convinced that he alone could maintain command of the army in these difficult circumstances , and that in all the world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear , and he was horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue . 
But something had to be decided , and these conversations around him which were assuming too free a character must be stopped . 
He called the most important generals to him . 
`` My head , be it good or bad , must depend on itself , '' said he , rising from the bench , and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting . 
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov 's hut . 
The men , women , and children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across the passage . 
Only Malasha , Andrew 's six-year-old granddaughter whom his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar while drinking his tea , remained on the top of the brick oven in the larger room . 
Malasha looked down from the oven with shy delight at the faces , uniforms , and decorations of the generals , who one after another came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner under the icons . 
`` Granddad '' himself , as Malasha in her own mind called Kutuzov , sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven . 
He sat , sunk deep in a folding armchair , and continually cleared his throat and pulled at the collar of his coat which , though it was unbuttoned , still seemed to pinch his neck . 
Those who entered went up one by one to the field marshal ; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others . 
His adjutant Kaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing Kutuzov , but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen . 
Round the peasant 's deal table , on which lay maps , plans , pencils , and papers , so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another bench and put it beside the table . 
Ermolov , Kaysarov , and Toll , who had just arrived , sat down on this bench . 
In the foremost place , immediately under the icons , sat Barclay de Tolly , his high forehead merging into his bald crown . 
He had a St. George 's Cross round his neck and looked pale and ill . 
He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering and in pain . 
Beside him sat Uvarov , who with rapid gesticulations was giving him some information , speaking in low tones as they all did . 
Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows raised and arms folded on his stomach . 
On the other side sat Count Ostermann-Tolstoy , seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts . 
His broad head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand . 
Raevski , twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his habit , glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of impatience . 
Konovnitsyn 's firm , handsome , and kindly face was lit up by a tender , sly smile . 
His glance met Malasha 's , and the expression of his eyes caused the little girl to smile . 
They were all waiting for Bennigsen , who on the pretext of inspecting the position was finishing his savory dinner . 
They waited for him from four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that time talked in low tones of other matters . 
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner and draw toward the table , but not near enough for the candles that had been placed there to light up his face . 
Bennigsen opened the council with the question : `` Are we to abandon Russia 's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle , or are we to defend it ? '' 
A prolonged and general silence followed . 
There was a frown on every face and only Kutuzov 's angry grunts and occasional cough broke the silence . 
All eyes were gazing at him . 
Malasha too looked at `` Granddad . '' 
She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered ; he seemed about to cry , but this did not last long . 
`` Russia 's ancient and sacred capital ! '' 
he suddenly said , repeating Bennigsen 's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the false note in them . 
`` Allow me to tell you , your excellency , that that question has no meaning for a Russian . '' 
-LRB- He lurched his heavy body forward . -RRB- 
`` Such a question can not be put ; it is senseless ! 
The question I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one . 
The question is that of saving Russia . 
Is it better to give up Moscow without a battle , or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well as Moscow ? 
That is the question on which I want your opinion , '' and he sank back in his chair . 
The discussion began . 
Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost . 
Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at Fili was impossible , but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love of Moscow , he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank during the night and attack the French right flank the following day . 
Opinions were divided , and arguments were advanced for and against that project . 
Ermolov , Dokhturov , and Raevski agreed with Bennigsen . 
Whether feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital or guided by other , personal considerations , these generals seemed not to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course of events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned . 
The other generals , however , understood it and , leaving aside the question of Moscow , of the direction the army should take in its retreat . 
Malasha , who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her , understood the meaning of the council differently . 
It seemed to her that it was only a personal struggle between `` Granddad '' and `` Long-coat '' as she termed Bennigsen . 
She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to one another , and in her heart she sided with `` Granddad . '' 
In the midst of the conversation she noticed `` Granddad '' give Bennigsen a quick , subtle glance , and then to her joys he saw that `` Granddad '' said something to `` Long-coat '' which settled him . 
Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced angrily up and down the room . 
What so affected him was Kutuzov 's calm and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen 's proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to attack the French right wing . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said Kutuzov , `` I can not approve of the count 's plan . 
Moving troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous , and military history supports that view . 
For instance ... '' Kutuzov seemed to reflect , searching for an example , then with a clear , naive look at Bennigsen he added : `` Oh yes ; take the battle of Friedland , which I think the count well remembers , and which was ... not fully successful , only because our troops were rearranged too near the enemy ... '' There followed a momentary pause , which seemed very long to them all . 
The discussion recommenced , but pauses frequently occurred and they all felt that there was no more to be said . 
During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to speak . 
They all looked at him . 
`` Well , gentlemen , I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken crockery , '' said he , and rising slowly he moved to the table . 
`` Gentlemen , I have heard your views . 
Some of you will not agree with me . 
But I , '' he paused , `` by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country , order a retreat . '' 
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and circumspect silence of people who are leaving , after a funeral . 
Some of the generals , in low tones and in a strain very different from the way they had spoken during the council , communicated something to their commander in chief . 
Malasha , who had long been expected for supper , climbed carefully backwards down from the oven , her bare little feet catching at its projections , and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted out of the room . 
When he had dismissed the generals Kutuzov sat a long time with his elbows on the table , thinking always of the same terrible question : `` When , when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable ? 
When was that done which settled the matter ? 
And who was to blame for it ? '' 
`` I did not expect this , '' said he to his adjutant Schneider when the latter came in late that night . 
`` I did not expect this ! 
I did not think this would happen . '' 
`` You should take some rest , your Serene Highness , '' replied Schneider . 
`` But no ! 
They shall eat horseflesh yet , like the Turks ! '' 
exclaimed Kutuzov without replying , striking the table with his podgy fist . 
`` They shall too , if only ... '' At that very time , in circumstances even more important than retreating without a battle , namely the evacuation and burning of Moscow , Rostopchin , who is usually represented as being the instigator of that event , acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov . 
After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscow was as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fighting . 
Every Russian might have predicted it , not by reasoning but by the feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers . 
The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk , without the participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets . 
The people awaited the enemy unconcernedly , did not riot or become excited or tear anyone to pieces , but faced its fate , feeling within it the strength to find what it should do at that most difficult moment . 
And as soon as the enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property , while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left . 
The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and is present in the heart of every Russian . 
And a consciousness of this , and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken , was present in Russian Moscow society in 1812 . 
Those who had quitted Moscow already in July and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this . 
Those who went away , taking what they could and abandoning their houses and half their belongings , did so from the latent patriotism which expresses itself not by phrases or by giving one 's children to save the fatherland and similar unnatural exploits , but unobtrusively , simply , organically , and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results . 
`` It is disgraceful to run away from danger ; only cowards are running away from Moscow , '' they were told . 
In his broadsheets Rostopchin impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful . 
They were ashamed to be called cowards , ashamed to leave , but still they left , knowing it had to be done . 
Why did they go ? 
It is impossible to suppose that Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had committed in conquered countries . 
The first people to go away were the rich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin had remained intact and that during Napoleon 's occupation the inhabitants had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmen whom the Russians , and especially the Russian ladies , then liked so much . 
They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow . 
It was out of the question to be under French rule , it would be the worst thing that could happen . 
They went away even before the battle of Borodino and still more rapidly after it , despite Rostopchin 's calls to defend Moscow or the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-working icon of the Iberian Mother of God and go to fight , or of the balloons that were to destroy the French , and despite all the nonsense Rostopchin wrote in his broadsheets . 
They knew that it was for the army to fight , and that if it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and house serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon , and that they must go away , sorry as they were to abandon their property to destruction . 
They went away without thinking of the tremendous significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to destruction , for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned . 
They went away each on his own account , and yet it was only in consequence of their going away that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the greatest glory of the Russian people . 
The lady who , afraid of being stopped by Count Rostopchin 's orders , had already in June moved with her Negroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate , with a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte 's servant , was really , simply , and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia . 
But Count Rostopchin , who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the government offices removed ; now distributed quite useless weapons to the drunken rabble ; now had processions displaying the icons , and now forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints ; now seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six of them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich ; now hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his own house ; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraiding them for having destroyed his Orphanage ; now claimed the glory of having hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed ; now ordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him , and now reproached them for doing so ; now expelled all the French residents from Moscow , and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme -LRB- the center of the whole French colony in Moscow -RRB- to remain , but ordered the venerable old postmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particular offense ; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fight the French and now , to get rid of them , handed over to them a man to be killed and himself drove away by a back gate ; now declared that he would not survive the fall of Moscow , and now wrote French verses in albums concerning his share in the affair -- this man did not understand the meaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himself that would astonish people , to perform some patriotically heroic feat ; and like a child he made sport of the momentous , and unavoidable event -- the abandonment and burning of Moscow -- and tried with his puny hand now to speed and now to stay the enormous , popular tide that bore him along with it . 
Helene , having returned with the court from Vilna to Petersburg , found herself in a difficult position . 
In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire . 
In Vilna she had formed an intimacy with a young foreign prince . 
When she returned to Petersburg both the magnate and the prince were there , and both claimed their rights . 
Helene was faced by a new problem -- how to preserve her intimacy with both without offending either . 
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova , who evidently deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman . 
Had she attempted concealment , or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position by cunning , she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself guilty . 
But Helene , like a really great man who can do whatever he pleases , at once assumed her own position to be correct , as she sincerely believed it to be , and that everyone else was to blame . 
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her , she lifted her beautiful head and , half turning to him , said firmly : `` That 's just like a man -- selfish and cruel ! 
I expected nothing else . 
A woman sacrifices herself for you , she suffers , and this is her reward ! 
What right have you , monseigneur , to demand an account of my attachments and friendships ? 
He is a man who has been more than a father to me ! '' 
The prince was about to say something , but Helene interrupted him . 
`` Well , yes , '' said she , `` it may be that he has other sentiments for me than those of a father , but that is not a reason for me to shut my door on him . 
I am not a man , that I should repay kindness with ingratitude ! 
Know , monseigneur , that in all that relates to my intimate feelings I render account only to God and to my conscience , '' she concluded , laying her hand on her beautiful , fully expanded bosom and looking up to heaven . 
`` But for heaven 's sake listen to me ! '' 
`` Marry me , and I will be your slave ! '' 
`` But that 's impossible . '' 
`` You wo n't deign to demean yourself by marrying me , you ... '' said Helene , beginning to cry . 
The prince tried to comfort her , but Helene , as if quite distraught , said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying , that there were precedents -LRB- there were up to that time very few , but she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages -RRB- , that she had never been her husband 's wife , and that she had been sacrificed . 
`` But the law , religion ... '' said the prince , already yielding . 
`` The law , religion ... What have they been invented for if they ca n't arrange that ? '' 
said Helene . 
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him , and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus , with whom he was on intimate terms . 
A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Helene gave at her country house on the Stone Island , the charming Monsieur de Jobert , a man no longer young , with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes , a Jesuit a robe courte * was presented to her , and in the garden by the light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a long time of the love of God , of Christ , of the Sacred Heart , and of the consolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world and the next . 
Helene was touched , and more than once tears rose to her eyes and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled . 
A dance , for which her partner came to seek her , put an end to her discourse with her future directeur de conscience , but the next evening Monsieur de Jobert came to see Helene when she was alone , and after that often came again . 
* Lay member of the Society of Jesus . 
One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church , where she knelt down before the altar to which she was led . 
The enchanting , middle-aged Frenchman laid his hands on her head and , as she herself afterward described it , she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her soul . 
It was explained to her that this was la grace . 
After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her . 
She confessed to him , and he absolved her from her sins . 
Next day she received a box containing the Sacred Host , which was left at her house for her to partake of . 
A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she had now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document . 
All that was done around her and to her at this time , all the attention devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant , refined ways , and the state of dove-like purity she was now in -LRB- she wore only white dresses and white ribbons all that time -RRB- gave her pleasure , but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim . 
And as it always happens in contests of cunning that a stupid person gets the better of cleverer ones , Helene - having realized that the main object of all these words and all this trouble was , after converting her to Catholicism , to obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions -LRB- as to which she received indications -RRB- - before parting with her money insisted that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband should be performed . 
In her view the aim of every religion was merely to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to human desires . 
And with this aim , in one of her talks with her Father Confessor , she insisted on an answer to the question , in how far was she bound by her marriage ? 
They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room . 
The scent of flowers came in at the window . 
Helene was wearing a white dress , transparent over her shoulders and bosom . 
The abbe , a well-fed man with a plump , clean-shaven chin , a pleasant firm mouth , and white hands meekly folded on his knees , sat close to Helene and , with a subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at her beauty , occasionally glanced at her face as he explained his opinion on the subject . 
Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his plump , clean-shaven , blackish cheeks and every moment expected the conversation to take a fresh turn . 
But the abbe , though he evidently enjoyed the beauty of his companion , was absorbed in his mastery of the matter . 
The course of the Father Confessor 's arguments ran as follows : `` Ignorant of the import of what you were undertaking , you made a vow of conjugal fidelity to a man who on his part , by entering the married state without faith in the religious significance of marriage , committed an act of sacrilege . 
That marriage lacked the dual significance it should have had . 
Yet in spite of this your vow was binding . 
You swerved from it . 
What did you commit by so acting ? 
A venial , or a mortal , sin ? 
A venial sin , for you acted without evil intention . 
If now you married again with the object of bearing children , your sin might be forgiven . 
But the question is again a twofold one : firstly ... '' But suddenly Helene , who was getting bored , said with one of her bewitching smiles : `` But I think that having espoused the true religion I can not be bound by what a false religion laid upon me . '' 
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus ' egg . 
He was delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil 's progress , but could not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed . 
`` Let us understand one another , Countess , '' said he with a smile , and began refuting his spiritual daughter 's arguments . 
Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from the ecclesiastical point of view , and that her directors were making difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter would be regarded by the secular authorities . 
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society . 
She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what she had told her other suitor ; that is , she put the matter so that the only way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her . 
The elderly magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage with a woman whose husband was alive , as the younger man had been , but Helene 's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as marrying a maiden had its effect on him too . 
Had Helene herself shown the least sign of hesitation , shame , or secrecy , her cause would certainly have been lost ; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy or shame , on the contrary , with good-natured naivete she told her intimate friends -LRB- and these were all Petersburg -RRB- that both the prince and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was afraid of grieving either . 
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg , not that Helene wanted to be divorced from her husband -LRB- had such a report spread many would have opposed so illegal an intention -RRB- but simply that the unfortunate and interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry . 
The question was no longer whether this was possible , but only which was the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court . 
There were , it is true , some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of such a question , who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament of marriage , but there were not many such and they remained silent , while the majority were interested in Helene 's good fortune and in the question which match would be the more advantageous . 
Whether it was right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not discuss , for that question had evidently been settled by people `` wiser than you or me , '' as they said , and to doubt the correctness of that decision would be to risk exposing one 's stupidity and incapacity to live in society . 
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova , had come to Petersburg that summer to see one of her sons , allowed herself plainly to express an opinion contrary to the general one . 
Meeting Helene at a ball she stopped her in the middle of the room and , amid general silence , said in her gruff voice : `` So wives of living men have started marrying again ! 
Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty ? 
You have been forestalled , my dear ! 
It was thought of long ago . 
It is done in all the brothels , '' and with these words Marya Dmitrievna , turning up her wide sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round , moved across the room . 
Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded in Petersburg as a buffoon , and so of what she had said they only noticed , and repeated in a whisper , the one coarse word she had used , supposing the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word . 
Prince Vasili , who of late very often forgot what he had said and repeated one and the same thing a hundred times , remarked to his daughter whenever he chanced to see her : `` Helene , I have a word to say to you , '' and he would lead her aside , drawing her hand downward . 
`` I have heard of certain projects concerning ... you know . 
Well my dear child , you know how your father 's heart rejoices to know that you ... You have suffered so much ... . 
But , my dear child , consult only your own heart . 
That is all I have to say , '' and concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his daughter 's and move away . 
Bilibin , who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man , and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as Helene always has -- men friends who can never change into lovers -- once gave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering . 
`` Listen , Bilibin , '' said Helene -LRB- she always called friends of that sort by their surnames -RRB- , and she touched his coat sleeve with her white , beringed fingers . 
`` Tell me , as you would a sister , what I ought to do . 
Which of the two ? '' 
Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered , with a smile on his lips . 
`` You are not taking me unawares , you know , '' said he . 
`` As a true friend , I have thought and thought again about your affair . 
You see , if you marry the prince '' -- he meant the younger man -- and he crooked one finger , `` you forever lose the chance of marrying the other , and you will displease the court besides . 
-LRB- You know there is some kind of connection . -RRB- 
But if you marry the old count you will make his last days happy , and as widow of the Grand ... the prince would no longer be making a mesalliance by marrying you , '' and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead . 
`` That 's a true friend ! '' 
said Helene beaming , and again touching Bilibin 's sleeve . 
`` But I love them , you know , and do n't want to distress either of them . 
I would give my life for the happiness of them both . '' 
Bilibin shrugged his shoulders , as much as to say that not even he could help in that difficulty . 
`` Une maitresse-femme ! 
* That 's what is called putting things squarely . 
She would like to be married to all three at the same time , '' thought he . 
* A masterly woman . 
`` But tell me , how will your husband look at the matter ? '' 
Bilibin asked , his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so naive a question . 
`` Will he agree ? '' 
`` Oh , he loves me so ! '' 
said Helene , who for some reason imagined that Pierre too loved her . 
`` He will do anything for me . '' 
Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty . 
`` Even divorce you ? '' 
said he . 
Helene laughed . 
Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposed marriage was Helene 's mother , Princess Kuragina . 
She was continually tormented by jealousy of her daughter , and now that jealousy concerned a subject near to her own heart , she could not reconcile herself to the idea . 
She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility of divorce and remarriage during a husband 's lifetime , and the priest told her that it was impossible , and to her delight showed her a text in the Gospel which -LRB- as it seemed to him -RRB- plainly remarriage while the husband is alive . 
Armed with these arguments , which appeared to her unanswerable , she drove to her daughter 's early one morning so as to find her alone . 
Having listened to her mother 's objections , Helene smiled blandly and ironically . 
`` But it says plainly : ` Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced ... ' '' said the old princess . 
`` Ah , Maman , ne dites pas de betises . 
Vous ne comprenez rein . 
Dans ma position j' ai des devoirs , '' * said Helene changing from Russian , in which language she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear , into French which suited it better . 
* `` Oh , Mamma , do n't talk nonsense ! 
You do n't understand anything . 
In my position I have obligations . 
`` But , my dear ... '' `` Oh , Mamma , how is it you do n't understand that the Holy Father , who has the right to grant dispensations ... '' Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in to announce that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her . 
`` Non , dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir , que je suis furieuse contre lui , parce qu'il m ' a manque parole . '' 
* * `` No , tell him I do n't wish to see him , I am furious with him for not keeping his word to me . '' 
`` Comtesse , a tout peche misericorde , '' * said a fair-haired young man with a long face and nose , as he entered the room . 
* `` Countess , there is mercy for every sin . '' 
The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied . 
The young man who had entered took no notice of her . 
The princess nodded to her daughter and sidled out of the room . 
`` Yes , she is right , '' thought the old princess , all her convictions dissipated by the appearance of His Highness . 
`` She is right , but how is it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it ? 
Yet it is so simple , '' she thought as she got into her carriage . 
By the beginning of August Helene 's affairs were clearly defined and she wrote a letter to her husband -- who , as she imagined , loved her very much -- informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her having embraced the one true faith , and asking him to carry out all the formalities necessary for a divorce , which would be explained to him by the bearer of the letter . 
And so I pray God to have you , my friend , in His holy and powerful keeping -- Your friend Helene . 
This letter was brought to Pierre 's house when he was on the field of Borodino . 
Toward the end of the battle of Borodino , Pierre , having run down from Raevski 's battery a second time , made his way through a gully to Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers , reached the dressing station , and seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on , still entangled in the crowds of soldiers . 
The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away quickly from the terrible sensations amid which he had lived that day and return to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his own bed . 
He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he be able to understand himself and all he had seen and felt . 
But such ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found . 
Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which he was going , still on all sides there was what there had been on the field of battle . 
There were still the same suffering , exhausted , and sometimes strangely indifferent faces , the same blood , the same soldiers ' overcoats , the same sounds of firing which , though distant now , still aroused terror , and besides this there were the foul air and the dust . 
Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozhaysk road , Pierre sat down by the roadside . 
Dusk had fallen , and the roar of guns died away . 
Pierre lay leaning on his elbow for a long time , gazing at the shadows that moved past him in the darkness . 
He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flying toward him with a terrific whizz , and then he shuddered and sat up . 
He had no idea how long he had been there . 
In the middle of the night three soldiers , having brought some firewood , settled down near him and began lighting a fire . 
The soldiers , who threw sidelong glances at Pierre , got the fire to burn and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and put a little dripping . 
The pleasant odor of greasy viands mingled with the smell of smoke . 
Pierre sat up and sighed . 
The three soldiers were eating and talking among themselves , taking no notice of him . 
`` And who may you be ? '' 
one of them suddenly asked Pierre , evidently meaning what Pierre himself had in mind , namely : `` If you want to eat we 'll give you some food , only let us know whether you are an honest man . '' 
`` I , I. . . '' 
said Pierre , feeling it necessary to minimize his social position as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers and better understood by them . 
`` By rights I am a militia officer , but my men are not here . 
I came to the battle and have lost them . '' 
`` There now ! '' 
said one of the soldiers . 
Another shook his head . 
`` Would you like a little mash ? '' 
the first soldier asked , and handed Pierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean . 
Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash , as they called the food in the cauldron , and he thought it more delicious than any food he had ever tasted . 
As he sat bending greedily over it , helping himself to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another , his was lit up by the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence . 
`` Where have you to go to ? 
Tell us ! '' 
said one of them . 
`` To Mozhaysk . '' 
`` You 're a gentleman , are n't you ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And what 's your name ? '' 
`` Peter Kirilych . '' 
`` Well then , Peter Kirilych , come along with us , we 'll take you there . '' 
In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk . 
By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steep hill into the town , the cocks were already crowing . 
Pierre went on with the soldiers , quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottom of the hill and that he had already passed it . 
He would not soon have remembered this , such was his state of forgetfulness , had he not halfway up the hill stumbled upon his groom , who had been to look for him in the town and was returning to the inn . 
The groom recognized Pierre in the darkness by his white hat . 
`` Your excellency ! '' 
he said . 
`` Why , we were beginning to despair ! 
How is it you are on foot ? 
And where are you going , please ? '' 
`` Oh , yes ! '' 
said Pierre . 
The soldiers stopped . 
`` So you 've found your folk ? '' 
said one of them . 
`` Well , good-by , Peter Kirilych -- is n't it ? '' 
`` Good-by , Peter Kirilych ! '' 
Pierre heard the other voices repeat . 
`` Good-by ! '' 
he said and turned with his groom toward the inn . 
`` I ought to give them something ! '' 
he thought , and felt in his pocket . 
`` No , better not ! '' 
said another , inner voice . 
There was not a room to be had at the inn , they were all occupied . 
Pierre went out into the yard and , covering himself up head and all , lay down in his carriage . 
Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himself falling asleep , but suddenly , almost with the distinctness of reality , he heard the boom , boom , boom of firing , the thud of projectiles , groans and cries , and smelled blood and powder , and a feeling of horror and dread of death seized him . 
Filled with fright he opened his eyes and lifted his head from under his cloak . 
All was tranquil in the yard . 
Only someone 's orderly passed through the gateway , splashing through the mud , and talked to the innkeeper . 
Above Pierre 's head some pigeons , disturbed by the movement he had made in sitting up , fluttered under the dark roof of the penthouse . 
The whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful smell of stable yards , delightful to Pierre at that moment . 
He could see the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses . 
`` Thank God , there is no more of that ! '' 
he thought , covering up his head again . 
`` Oh , what a terrible thing is fear , and how shamefully I yielded to it ! 
But they ... they were steady and calm all the time , to the end ... '' thought he . 
They , in Pierre 's mind , were the soldiers , those who had been at the battery , those who had given him food , and those who had prayed before the icon . 
They , those strange men he had not previously known , stood out clearly and sharply from everyone else . 
`` To be a soldier , just a soldier ! '' 
thought Pierre as he fell asleep , `` to enter communal life completely , to be imbued by what makes them what they are . 
But how cast off all the superfluous , devilish burden of my outer man ? 
There was a time when I could have done it . 
I could have run away from my father , as I wanted to . 
Or I might have been sent to serve as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov . '' 
And the memory of the dinner at the English Club when he had challenged Dolokhov flashed through Pierre 's mind , and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhok . 
And now a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind . 
It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to him sat at the end of the table . 
`` Yes , that is he ! 
It is my benefactor . 
But he died ! '' 
thought Pierre . 
`` Yes , he died , and I did not know he was alive . 
How sorry I am that he died , and how glad I am that he is alive again ! '' 
On one side of the table sat Anatole , Dolokhov , Nesvitski , Denisov , and others like them -LRB- in his dream the category to which these men belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of those he termed they -RRB- , and he heard those people , Anatole and Dolokhov , shouting and singing loudly ; yet through their shouting the voice of his benefactor was heard speaking all the time and the sound of his words was as weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield , but pleasant and comforting . 
Pierre did not understand what his benefactor was saying , but he knew -LRB- the categories of thoughts were also quite distinct in his dream -RRB- that he was talking of goodness and the possibility of being what they were . 
And they with their simple , kind , firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides . 
But though they were kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him . 
Wishing to speak and to attract their attention , he got up , but at that moment his legs grew cold and bare . 
He felt ashamed , and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak had in fact slipped . 
For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierre opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs , posts , and yard , but now they were all bluish , lit up , and glittering with frost or dew . 
`` It is dawn , '' thought Pierre . 
`` But that 's not what I want . 
I want to hear and understand my benefactor 's words . '' 
Again he covered himself up with his cloak , but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there . 
There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words , thoughts that someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating . 
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that someone outside himself had spoken them , though the impressions of that day had evoked them . 
He had never , it seemed to him , been able to think and express his thoughts like that when awake . 
`` To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man 's freedom to the law of God , '' the voice had said . 
`` Simplicity is submission to the will of God ; you can not escape from Him . 
And they are simple . 
They do not talk , but act . 
The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden . 
Man can be master of nothing while he fears death , but he who does not fear it possesses all . 
If there were no suffering , man would not know his limitations , would not know himself . 
The hardest thing -LSB- Pierre went on thinking , or hearing , in his dream -RSB- is to be able in your soul to unite the meaning of all . 
To unite all ? '' 
he asked himself . 
`` No , not to unite . 
Thoughts can not be united , but to harness all these thoughts together is what we need ! 
Yes , one must harness them , must harness them ! '' 
he repeated to himself with inward rapture , feeling that these words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the question that tormented him . 
`` Yes , one must harness , it is time to harness . '' 
`` Time to harness , time to harness , your excellency ! 
Your excellency ! '' 
some voice was repeating . 
`` We must harness , it is time to harness ... '' It was the voice of the groom , trying to wake him . 
The sun shone straight into Pierre 's face . 
He glanced at the dirty innyard in the middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump while carts were passing out of the gate . 
Pierre turned away with repugnance , and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat . 
`` No , I do n't want that , I do n't want to see and understand that . 
I want to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream . 
One second more and I should have understood it all ! 
But what am I to do ? 
Harness , but how can I harness everything ? '' 
and Pierre felt with horror that the meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed . 
The groom , the coachman , and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer had come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that our men were leaving it . 
Pierre got up and , having told them to harness and overtake him , went on foot through the town . 
The troops were moving on , leaving about ten thousand wounded behind them . 
There were wounded in the yards , at the windows of the houses , and the streets were crowded with them . 
In the streets , around carts that were to take some of the wounded away , shouts , curses , and blows could be heard . 
Pierre offered the use of his carriage , which had overtaken him , to a wounded general he knew , and drove with him to Moscow . 
On the way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of that of Prince Andrew . 
On the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow . 
Close to the gates of the city he was met by Count Rostopchin 's adjutant . 
`` We have been looking for you everywhere , '' said the adjutant . 
`` The count wants to see you particularly . 
He asks you to come to him at once on a very important matter . '' 
Without going home , Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow commander in chief . 
Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his summer villa at Sokolniki . 
The anteroom and reception room of his house were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders . 
Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to him that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be surrendered . 
Though this news was being concealed from the inhabitants , the officials -- the heads of the various government departments -- knew that Moscow would soon be in the enemy 's hands , just as Count Rostopchin himself knew it , and to escape personal responsibility they had all come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various departments . 
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came out of Rostopchin 's private room . 
In answer to questions with which he was greeted , the courier made a despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room . 
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the various officials , old and young , military and civilian , who were there . 
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy . 
Pierre went up to a group of men , one of whom he knew . 
After greeting Pierre they continued their conversation . 
`` If they 're sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm , but as things are now one ca n't answer for anything . '' 
`` But you see what he writes ... '' said another , pointing to a printed sheet he held in his hand . 
`` That 's another matter . 
That 's necessary for the people , '' said the first . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Oh , it 's a fresh broadsheet . '' 
Pierre took it and began reading . 
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join up with the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where the enemy will not soon attack him . 
