`` Where is the Emperor ? 
Where is Kutuzov ? '' 
Rostov kept asking everyone he could stop , but got no answer from anyone . 
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer . 
`` Eh , brother ! 
They 've all bolted long ago ! '' 
said the soldier , laughing for some reason and shaking himself free . 
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk , Rostov stopped the horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to question him . 
The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and that he was dangerously wounded . 
`` It ca n't be ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` It must have been someone else . '' 
`` I saw him myself . '' 
replied the man with a self-confident smile of derision . 
`` I ought to know the Emperor by now , after the times I 've seen him in Petersburg . 
I saw him just as I see you ... . 
There he sat in the carriage as pale as anything . 
How they made the four black horses fly ! 
Gracious me , they did rattle past ! 
It 's time I knew the Imperial horses and Ilya Ivanych . 
I do n't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar ! '' 
Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on , when a wounded officer passing by addressed him : `` Who is it you want ? '' 
he asked . 
`` The commander in chief ? 
He was killed by a cannon ball -- struck in the breast before our regiment . '' 
`` Not killed -- wounded ! '' 
another officer corrected him . 
`` Who ? 
Kutuzov ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Not Kutuzov , but what 's his name -- well , never mind ... there are not many left alive . 
Go that way , to that village , all the commanders are there , '' said the officer , pointing to the village of Hosjeradek , and he walked on . 
Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now going . 
The Emperor was wounded , the battle lost . 
It was impossible to doubt it now . 
Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him , in which he saw turrets and a church . 
What need to hurry ? 
What was he now to say to the Tsar or to Kutuzov , even if they were alive and unwounded ? 
`` Take this road , your honor , that way you will be killed at once ! '' 
a soldier shouted to him . 
`` They 'd kill you there ! '' 
`` Oh , what are you talking about ? '' 
said another . 
`` Where is he to go ? 
That way is nearer . '' 
Rostov considered , and then went in the direction where they said he would be killed . 
`` It 's all the same now . 
If the Emperor is wounded , am I to try to save myself ? '' 
he thought . 
He rode on to the region where the greatest number of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen . 
The French had not yet occupied that region , and the Russians -- the uninjured and slightly wounded -- had left it long ago . 
All about the field , like heaps of manure on well-kept plowland , lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each couple of acres . 
The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one could hear their distressing screams and groans , sometimes feigned -- or so it seemed to Rostov . 
He put his horse to a trot to avoid seeing all these suffering men , and he felt afraid -- afraid not for his life , but for the courage he needed and which he knew would not stand the sight of these unfortunates . 
The French , who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and wounded where there was no one left to fire at , on seeing an adjutant riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots . 
The sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around him merged in Rostov 's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity for himself . 
He remembered his mother 's last letter . 
`` What would she feel , '' thought he , `` if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed at me ? '' 
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from the field of battle , who though still in some confusion were less disordered . 
The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire sounded far away . 
Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle was lost . 
No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emperor or Kutuzov was . 
Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was correct , others that it was not , and explained the false rumor that had spread by the fact that the Emperor 's carriage had really galloped from the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal Count Tolstoy , who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in the Emperor 's suite . 
One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone from headquarters behind the village to the left , and thither Rostov rode , not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience . 
When he had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops , he saw , near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it , two men on horseback facing the ditch . 
One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to Rostov ; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse -LRB- which Rostov fancied he had seen before -RRB- rode up to the ditch , struck his horse with his spurs , and giving it the rein leaped lightly over . 
Only a little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse 's hind hoofs . 
Turning the horse sharply , he again jumped the ditch , and deferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes , evidently suggesting that he should do the same . 
The rider , whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted his attention , made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adored monarch . 
`` But it ca n't be he , alone in the midst of this empty field ! '' 
thought Rostov . 
At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory . 
The Emperor was pale , his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow , but the charm , the mildness of his features , was all the greater . 
Rostov was happy in the assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false . 
He was happy to be seeing him . 
He knew that he might and even ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him to deliver . 
But as a youth in love trembles , is unnerved , and dares not utter the thoughts he has dreamed of for nights , but looks around for help or a chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is alone with her , so Rostov , now that he had attained what he had longed for more than anything else in the world , did not know how to approach the Emperor , and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be inconvenient , unseemly , and impossible to do so . 
`` What ! 
It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his being alone and despondent ! 
A strange face may seem unpleasant or painful to him at this moment of sorrow ; besides , what can I say to him now , when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of him ? '' 
Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall . 
Those speeches were intended for quite other conditions , they were for the most part to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph , generally when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic deeds , and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved . 
`` Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost ? 
No , certainly I must not approach him , I must not intrude on his reflections . 
Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind look or bad opinion from him , '' Rostov decided ; and sorrowfully and with a heart full despair he rode away , continually looking back at the Tsar , who still remained in the same attitude of indecision . 
While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away , Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot , and seeing the Emperor at once rode up to him , offered his services , and assisted him to cross the ditch on foot . 
The Emperor , wishing to rest and feeling unwell , sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him . 
Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor , evidently weeping , covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll 's hand . 
`` And I might have been in his place ! '' 
thought Rostov , and hardly restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor , he rode on in utter despair , not knowing where to or why he was now riding . 
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was the cause his grief . 
He might ... not only might but should , have gone up to the sovereign . 
It was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not made use of it ... `` What have I done ? '' 
thought he . 
And he turned round and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor , but there was no one beyond the ditch now . 
Only some carts and carriages were passing by . 
From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov 's staff were not far off , in the village the vehicles were going to . 
Rostov followed them . 
In front of him walked Kutuzov 's groom leading horses in horsecloths . 
Then came a cart , and behind that walked an old , bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat . 
`` Tit ! 
I say , Tit ! '' 
said the groom . 
`` What ? '' 
answered the old man absent-mindedly . 
`` Go , Tit ! 
Thresh a bit ! '' 
`` Oh , you fool ! '' 
said the old man , spitting angrily . 
Some time passed in silence , and then the same joke was repeated . 
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points . 
More than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French . 
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms . 
Other columns after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused masses . 
The remains of Langeron 's and Dokhturov 's mingled forces were crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd . 
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade -LRB- delivered by the French alone -RRB- was still to be heard from numerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights , directed at our retreating forces . 
In the rearguard , Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops . 
It was growing dusk . 
On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully angling , while his grandson , with shirt sleeves rolled up , handled the floundering silvery fish in the watering can , on that dam over which for so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their carts -- on that narrow dam amid the wagons and the cannon , under the horses ' hoofs and between the wagon wheels , men disfigured by fear of death now crowded together , crushing one another , dying , stepping over the dying and killing one another , only to move on a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way . 
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around , or a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng , killing some and splashing with blood those near them . 
Dolokhov -- now an officer -- wounded in the arm , and on foot , with the regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company , represented all that was left of that whole regiment . 
Impelled by the crowd , they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and , jammed in on all sides , had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a cannon and the crowd were dragging it out . 
A cannon ball killed someone behind them , another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood . 
The crowd , pushing forward desperately , squeezed together , moved a few steps , and again stopped . 
`` Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved , remain here another two minutes and it is certain death , '' thought each one . 
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of the dam , throwing two soldiers off their feet , and ran onto the slippery ice that covered the millpool . 
`` Turn this way ! '' 
he shouted , jumping over the ice which creaked under him ; `` turn this way ! '' 
he shouted to those with the gun . 
`` It bears ! 
... '' The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked , and it was plain that it would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd , but very soon even under his weight alone . 
The men looked at him and pressed to the bank , hesitating to step onto the ice . 
The general on horseback at the entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address Dolokhov . 
Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that everyone ducked . 
It flopped into something moist , and the general fell from his horse in a pool of blood . 
Nobody gave him a look or thought of raising him . 
`` Get onto the ice , over the ice ! 
Go on ! 
Turn ! 
Do n't you hear ? 
Go on ! '' 
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the general , the men themselves not knowing what , or why , they were shouting . 
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the ice . 
Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond . 
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers , and one leg slipped into the water . 
He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist . 
The nearest soldiers shrank back , the gun driver stopped his horse , but from behind still came the shouts : `` Onto the ice , why do you stop ? 
Go on ! 
Go on ! '' 
And cries of horror were heard in the crowd . 
The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and move on . 
The horses moved off the bank . 
The ice , that had held under those on foot , collapsed in a great mass , and some forty men who were on it dashed , some forward and some back , drowning one another . 
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered the dam , the pond , and the bank . 
On the Pratzen Heights , where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his hand , lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously uttering a gentle , piteous , and childlike moan . 
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still . 
He did not know how long his unconsciousness lasted . 
Suddenly he again felt that he was alive and suffering from a burning , lacerating pain in his head . 
`` Where is it , that lofty sky that I did not know till now , but saw today ? '' 
was his first thought . 
`` And I did not know this suffering either , '' he thought . 
`` Yes , I did not know anything , anything at all till now . 
But where am I ? '' 
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses , and voices speaking French . 
He opened his eyes . 
Above him again was the same lofty sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher , and between them gleamed blue infinity . 
He did not turn his head and did not see those who , judging by the sound of hoofs and voices , had ridden up and stopped near him . 
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp . 
Bonaparte riding over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left on the field . 
`` Fine men ! '' 
remarked Napoleon , looking at a dead Russian grenadier , who , with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape , lay on his stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide . 
`` The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted , Your Majesty , '' said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at Augesd . 
`` Have some brought from the reserve , '' said Napoleon , and having gone on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew , who lay on his back with the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him . 
-LRB- The flag had already been taken by the French as a trophy . -RRB- 
`` That 's a fine death ! '' 
said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski . 
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was Napoleon who said it . 
He heard the speaker addressed as Sire . 
But he heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly . 
Not only did they not interest him , but he took no notice of them and at once forgot them . 
His head was burning , he felt himself bleeding to death , and he saw above him the remote , lofty , and everlasting sky . 
He knew it was Napoleon -- his hero -- but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a small , insignificant creature compared with what was passing now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it . 
At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him , or what was said of him ; he was only glad that people were standing near him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to life , which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to understand it so differently . 
He collected all his strength , to stir and utter a sound . 
He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak , sickly groan which aroused his own pity . 
`` Ah ! 
He is alive , '' said Napoleon . 
`` Lift this young man up and carry him to the dressing station . '' 
Having said this , Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes , who , hat in hand , rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory . 
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more : he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher , the jolting while being moved , and the probing of his wound at the dressing station . 
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day , when with other wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital . 
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look about him and even speak . 
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French convoy officer , who said rapidly : `` We must halt here : the Emperor will pass here immediately ; it will please him to see these gentlemen prisoners . '' 
`` There are so many prisoners today , nearly the whole Russian army , that he is probably tired of them , '' said another officer . 
`` All the same ! 
They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor Alexander 's Guards , '' said the first one , indicating a Russian officer in the white uniform of the Horse Guards . 
Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburg society . 
Beside him stood a lad of nineteen , also a wounded officer of the Horse Guards . 
Bonaparte , having come up at a gallop , stopped his horse . 
`` Which is the senior ? '' 
he asked , on seeing the prisoners . 
They named the colonel , Prince Repnin . 
`` You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander 's regiment of Horse Guards ? '' 
asked Napoleon . 
`` I commanded a squadron , '' replied Repnin . 
`` Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably , '' said Napoleon . 
`` The praise of a great commander is a soldier 's highest reward , '' said Repnin . 
`` I bestow it with pleasure , '' said Napoleon . 
`` And who is that young man beside you ? '' 
Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen . 
After looking at him Napoleon smiled . 
`` He 's very young to come to meddle with us . '' 
`` Youth is no hindrance to courage , '' muttered Sukhtelen in a failing voice . 
`` A splendid reply ! '' 
said Napoleon . 
`` Young man , you will go far ! '' 
Prince Andrew , who had also been brought forward before the Emperor 's eyes to complete the show of prisoners , could not fail to attract his attention . 
Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield and , addressing him , again used the epithet `` young man '' that was connected in his memory with Prince Andrew . 
`` Well , and you , young man , '' said he . 
`` How do you feel , mon brave ? '' 
Though five minutes before , Prince Andrew had been able to say a few words to the soldiers who were carrying him , now with his eyes fixed straight on Napoleon , he was silent ... . 
So insignificant at that moment seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon , so mean did his hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear , compared to the lofty , equitable , and kindly sky which he had seen and understood , that he could not answer him . 
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood , suffering , and the nearness of death aroused in him . 
Looking into Napoleon 's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of greatness , the unimportance of life which no one could understand , and the still greater unimportance of death , the meaning of which no one alive could understand or explain . 
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of the officers as he went : `` Have these gentlemen attended to and taken to my bivouac ; let my doctor , Larrey , examine their wounds . 
Au revoir , Prince Repnin ! '' 
and he spurred his horse and galloped away . 
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure . 
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother 's neck , but seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners , they now hastened to return the holy image . 
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced , but the little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest outside his uniform . 
`` It would be good , '' thought Prince Andrew , glancing at the icon his sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence , `` it would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to Mary . 
How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life , and what to expect after it beyond the grave ! 
How happy and calm I should be if I could now say : ` Lord , have mercy on me ! ' 
... But to whom should I say that ? 
Either to a Power indefinable , incomprehensible , which I not only can not address but which I can not even express in words -- the Great All or Nothing - '' said he to himself , `` or to that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary ! 
There is nothing certain , nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand , and the greatness of something incomprehensible but all-important . '' 
The stretchers moved on . 
At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain ; his feverishness increased and he grew delirious . 
Visions of his father , wife , sister , and future son , and the tenderness he had felt the night before the battle , the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon , and above all this the lofty sky , formed the chief subjects of his delirious fancies . 
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented itself to him . 
He was already enjoying that happiness when that little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of shortsighted delight at the misery of others , and doubts and torments had followed , and only the heavens promised peace . 
Toward morning all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon 's doctor , Larrey , was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence . 
`` He is a nervous , bilious subject , '' said Larrey , `` and will not recover . '' 
And Prince Andrew , with others fatally wounded , was left to the care of the inhabitants of the district . 
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave . 
Denisov was going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him as far as Moscow and to stay with him there . 
Meeting a comrade at the last post station but one before Moscow , Denisov had drunk three bottles of wine with him and , despite the jolting ruts across the snow-covered road , did not once wake up on the way to Moscow , but lay at the bottom of the sleigh beside Rostov , who grew more and more impatient the nearer they got to Moscow . 
`` How much longer ? 
How much longer ? 
Oh , these insufferable streets , shops , bakers ' signboards , street lamps , and sleighs ! '' 
thought Rostov , when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they had entered Moscow . 
`` Denisov ! 
We 're here ! 
He 's asleep , '' he added , leaning forward with his whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of the sleigh . 
Denisov gave no answer . 
`` There 's the corner at the crossroads , where the cabman , Zakhar , has his stand , and there 's Zakhar himself and still the same horse ! 
And here 's the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread ! 
Ca n't you hurry up ? 
Now then ! '' 
`` Which house is it ? '' 
asked the driver . 
`` Why , that one , right at the end , the big one . 
Do n't you see ? 
That 's our house , '' said Rostov . 
`` Of course , it 's our house ! 
Denisov , Denisov ! 
We 're almost there ! '' 
Denisov raised his head , coughed , and made no answer . 
`` Dmitri , '' said Rostov to his valet on the box , `` those lights are in our house , are n't they ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , and there 's a light in your father 's study . '' 
`` Then they 've not gone to bed yet ? 
What do you think ? 
Mind now , do n't forget to put out my new coat , '' added Rostov , fingering his new mustache . 
`` Now then , get on , '' he shouted to the driver . 
`` Do wake up , Vaska ! '' 
he went on , turning to Denisov , whose head was again nodding . 
`` Come , get on ! 
You shall have three rubles for vodka -- get on ! '' 
Rostov shouted , when the sleigh was only three houses from his door . 
It seemed to him the horses were not moving at all . 
At last the sleigh bore to the right , drew up at an entrance , and Rostov saw overhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster broken off , the porch , and the post by the side of the pavement . 
He sprang out before the sleigh stopped , and ran into the hall . 
The house stood cold and silent , as if quite regardless of who had come to it . 
There was no one in the hall . 
`` Oh God ! 
Is everyone all right ? '' 
he thought , stopping for a moment with a sinking heart , and then immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of the familiar staircase . 
The well-known old door handle , which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned , turned as loosely as ever . 
A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom . 
Old Michael was asleep on the chest . 
Prokofy , the footman , who was so strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind , sat plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges . 
He looked up at the opening door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one of delighted amazement . 
`` Gracious heavens ! 
The young count ! '' 
he cried , recognizing his young master . 
`` Can it be ? 
My treasure ! '' 
and Prokofy , trembling with excitement , rushed toward the drawing-room door , probably in order to announce him , but , changing his mind , came back and stooped to kiss the young man 's shoulder . 
`` All well ? '' 
asked Rostov , drawing away his arm . 
`` Yes , God be thanked ! 
Yes ! 
They 've just finished supper . 
Let me have a look at you , your excellency . '' 
`` Is everything quite all right ? '' 
`` The Lord be thanked , yes ! '' 
Rostov , who had completely forgotten Denisov , not wishing anyone to forestall him , threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the large dark ballroom . 
All was the same : there were the same old card tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it ; but someone had already seen the young master , and , before he had reached the drawing room , something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began hugging and kissing him . 
Another and yet another creature of the same kind sprang from a second door and a third ; more hugging , more kissing , more outcries , and tears of joy . 
He could not distinguish which was Papa , which Natasha , and which Petya . 
Everyone shouted , talked , and kissed him at the same time . 
Only his mother was not there , he noticed that . 
`` And I did not know ... Nicholas ... My darling ! 
... '' `` Here he is ... our own ... Kolya , * dear fellow ... How he has changed ! 
... Where are the candles ? 
... Tea ! 
... '' * Nicholas . 
`` And me , kiss me ! '' 
`` Dearest ... and me ! '' 
Sonya , Natasha , Petya , Anna Mikhaylovna , Vera , and the old count were all hugging him , and the serfs , men and maids , flocked into the room , exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing . 
Petya , clinging to his legs , kept shouting , `` And me too ! '' 
Natasha , after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face with kisses , holding him tight by the skirt of his coat , sprang away and pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly . 
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy , and all around were lips seeking a kiss . 
Sonya too , all rosy red , clung to his arm and , radiant with bliss , looked eagerly toward his eyes , waiting for the look for which she longed . 
Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty , especially at this moment of happy , rapturous excitement . 
She gazed at him , not taking her eyes off him , and smiling and holding her breath . 
He gave her a grateful look , but was still expectant and looking for someone . 
The old countess had not yet come . 
But now steps were heard at the door , steps so rapid that they could hardly be his mother 's . 
Yet it was she , dressed in a new gown which he did not know , made since he had left . 
All the others let him go , and he ran to her . 
When they met , she fell on his breast , sobbing . 
She could not lift her face , but only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar 's jacket . 
Denisov , who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone , stood there and wiped his eyes at the sight . 
`` Vasili Denisov , your son 's friend , '' he said , introducing himself to the count , who was looking inquiringly at him . 
`` You are most welcome ! 
I know , I know , '' said the count , kissing and embracing Denisov . 
`` Nicholas wrote us ... Natasha , Vera , look ! 
Here is Denisov ! '' 
The same happy , rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denisov . 
`` Darling Denisov ! '' 
screamed Natasha , beside herself with rapture , springing to him , putting her arms round him , and kissing him . 
This escapade made everybody feel confused . 
Denisov blushed too , but smiled and , taking Natasha 's hand , kissed it . 
Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him , and the Rostovs all gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room . 
The old countess , not letting go of his hand and kissing it every moment , sat beside him : the rest , crowding round him , watched every movement , word , or look of his , never taking their blissfully adoring eyes off him . 
His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea , handkerchief , and pipe . 
Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him ; but the first moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed insufficient , and he kept expecting something more , more and yet more . 
Next morning , after the fatigues of their journey , the travelers slept till ten o'clock . 
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers , satchels , sabretaches , open portmanteaus , and dirty boots . 
Two freshly cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall . 
The servants were bringing in jugs and basins , hot water for shaving , and their well-brushed clothes . 
There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco . 
`` Hallo , Gwiska -- my pipe ! '' 
came Vasili Denisov 's husky voice . 
`` Wostov , get up ! '' 
Rostov , rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together , raised his disheveled head from the hot pillow . 
`` Why , is it late ? '' 
`` Late ! 
It 's nearly ten o'clock , '' answered Natasha 's voice . 
A rustle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls ' voices came from the adjoining room . 
The door was opened a crack and there was a glimpse of something blue , of ribbons , black hair , and merry faces . 
It was Natasha , Sonya , and Petya , who had come to see whether they were getting up . 
`` Nicholas ! 
Get up ! '' 
Natasha 's voice was again heard at the door . 
`` Directly ! '' 
Meanwhile , Petya , having found and seized the sabers in the outer room , with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother , and forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed , opened the bedroom door . 
`` Is this your saber ? '' 
he shouted . 
The girls sprang aside . 
Denisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket , looking with a scared face at his comrade for help . 
The door , having let Petya in , closed again . 
A sound of laughter came from behind it . 
`` Nicholas ! 
Come out in your dressing gown ! '' 
said Natasha 's voice . 
`` Is this your saber ? '' 
asked Petya . 
`` Or is it yours ? '' 
he said , addressing the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference . 
Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet , drew on his dressing gown , and went out . 
Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting her foot into the other . 
Sonya , when he came in , was twirling round and was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down . 
They were dressed alike , in new pale-blue frocks , and were both fresh , rosy , and bright . 
Sonya ran away , but Natasha , taking her brother 's arm , led him into the sitting room , where they began talking . 
They hardly gave one another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves . 
Natasha laughed at every word he said or that she said herself , not because what they were saying was amusing , but because she felt happy and was unable to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter . 
`` Oh , how nice , how splendid ! '' 
she said to everything . 
Rostov felt that , under the influence of the warm rays of love , that childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his soul and his face . 
`` No , but listen , '' she said , `` now you are quite a man , are n't you ? 
I 'm awfully glad you 're my brother . '' 
She touched his mustache . 
`` I want to know what you men are like . 
Are you the same as we ? 
No ? '' 
`` Why did Sonya run away ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Ah , yes ! 
That 's a whole long story ! 
How are you going to speak to her -- thou or you ? '' 
`` As may happen , '' said Rostov . 
`` No , call her you , please ! 
I 'll tell you all about it some other time . 
No , I 'll tell you now . 
You know Sonya 's my dearest friend . 
Such a friend that I burned my arm for her sake . 
Look here ! '' 
She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long , slender , delicate arm , high above the elbow on that part that is covered even by a ball dress . 
`` I burned this to prove my love for her . 
I just heated a ruler in the fire and pressed it there ! '' 
Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms , in what used to be his old schoolroom , and looking into Natasha 's wildly bright eyes , Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no meaning for anyone else , but gave him some of the best joys of his life ; and the burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to him senseless , he understood and was not surprised at it . 
`` Well , and is that all ? '' 
he asked . 
`` We are such friends , such friends ! 
All that ruler business was just nonsense , but we are friends forever . 
She , if she loves anyone , does it for life , but I do n't understand that , I forget quickly . '' 
`` Well , what then ? '' 
`` Well , she loves me and you like that . '' 
Natasha suddenly flushed . 
`` Why , you remember before you went away ? 
... Well , she says you are to forget all that ... . 
She says : ' I shall love him always , but let him be free . ' 
Is n't that lovely and noble ! 
Yes , very noble ? 
Is n't it ? '' 
asked Natasha , so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what she was now saying she had talked of before , with tears . 
Rostov became thoughtful . 
`` I never go back on my word , '' he said . 
`` Besides , Sonya is so charming that only a fool would renounce such happiness . '' 
`` No , no ! '' 
cried Natasha , `` she and I have already talked it over . 
We knew you 'd say so . 
But it wo n't do , because you see , if you say that -- if you consider yourself bound by your promise -- it will seem as if she had not meant it seriously . 
It makes it as if you were marrying her because you must , and that would n't do at all . '' 
Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them . 
Sonya had already struck him by her beauty on the preceding day . 
Today , when he had caught a glimpse of her , she seemed still more lovely . 
She was a charming girl of sixteen , evidently passionately in love with him -LRB- he did not doubt that for an instant -RRB- . 
Why should he not love her now , and even marry her , Rostov thought , but just now there were so many other pleasures and interests before him ! 
`` Yes , they have taken a wise decision , '' he thought , `` I must remain free . '' 
`` Well then , that 's excellent , '' said he . 
`` We 'll talk it over later on . 
Oh , how glad I am to have you ! '' 
`` Well , and are you still true to Boris ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Oh , what nonsense ! '' 
cried Natasha , laughing . 
`` I do n't think about him or anyone else , and I do n't want anything of the kind . '' 
`` Dear me ! 
Then what are you up now ? '' 
`` Now ? '' 
repeated Natasha , and a happy smile lit up her face . 
`` Have you seen Duport ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Not seen Duport -- the famous dancer ? 
Well then , you wo n't understand . 
That 's what I 'm up to . '' 
Curving her arms , Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do , ran back a few steps , turned , cut a caper , brought her little feet sharply together , and made some steps on the very tips of her toes . 
`` See , I 'm standing ! 
See ! '' 
she said , but could not maintain herself on her toes any longer . 
`` So that 's what I 'm up to ! 
I 'll never marry anyone , but will be a dancer . 
Only do n't tell anyone . '' 
Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov , in his bedroom , felt envious and Natasha could not help joining in . 
`` No , but do n't you think it 's nice ? '' 
she kept repeating . 
`` Nice ! 
And so you no longer wish to marry Boris ? '' 
Natasha flared up . 
`` I do n't want to marry anyone . 
And I 'll tell him so when I see him ! '' 
`` Dear me ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` But that 's all rubbish , '' Natasha chattered on . 
`` And is Denisov nice ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Yes , indeed ! '' 
`` Oh , well then , good-by : go and dress . 
Is he very terrible , Denisov ? '' 
`` Why terrible ? '' 
asked Nicholas . 
`` No , Vaska is a splendid fellow . '' 
`` You call him Vaska ? 
That 's funny ! 
And is he very nice ? '' 
`` Very . '' 
`` Well then , be quick . 
We 'll all have breakfast together . '' 
And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe , like a ballet dancer , but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile . 
When Rostov met Sonya in the drawing room , he reddened . 
He did not know how to behave with her . 
The evening before , in the first happy moment of meeting , they had kissed each other , but today they felt it could not be done ; he felt that everybody , including his mother and sisters , was looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave with her . 
He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you - Sonya . 
But their eyes met and said thou , and exchanged tender kisses . 
Her looks asked him to forgive her for having dared , by Natasha 's intermediacy , to remind him of his promise , and then thanked him for his love . 
His looks thanked her for offering him his freedom and told her that one way or another he would never cease to love her , for that would be impossible . 
`` How strange it is , '' said Vera , selecting a moment when all were silent , `` that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like strangers . '' 
Vera 's remark was correct , as her remarks always were , but , like most of her observations , it made everyone feel uncomfortable , not only Sonya , Nicholas , and Natasha , but even the old countess , who - dreading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant match -- blushed like a girl . 
Denisov , to Rostov 's surprise , appeared in the drawing room with pomaded hair , perfumed , and in a new uniform , looking just as smart as he made himself when going into battle , and he was more amiable to the ladies and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him . 
On his return to Moscow from the army , Nicholas Rostov was welcomed by his home circle as the best of sons , a hero , and their darling Nikolenka ; by his relations as a charming , attractive , and polite young man ; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars , a good dancer , and one of the best matches in the city . 
The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow . 
The old count had money enough that year , as all his estates had been remortgaged , and so Nicholas , acquiring a trotter of his own , very stylish riding breeches of the latest cut , such as no one else yet had in Moscow , and boots of the latest fashion , with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs , passed his time very gaily . 
After a short period of adapting himself to the old conditions of life , Nicholas found it very pleasant to be at home again . 
He felt that he had grown up and matured very much . 
His despair at failing in a Scripture examination , his borrowing money from Gavril to pay a sleigh driver , his kissing Sonya on the sly -- he now recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind . 
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars , in a jacket laced with silver , and wearing the Cross of St. George , awarded to soldiers for bravery in action , and in the company of well-known , elderly , and respected racing men was training a trotter of his own for a race . 
He knew a lady on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening . 
He led the mazurka at the Arkharovs ' ball , talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski , visited the English Club , and was on intimate terms with a colonel of forty to whom Denisov had introduced nim . 
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow . 
But still , as he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him , he often spoke about him and about his love for him , letting it be understood that he had not told all and that there was something in his feelings for the Emperor not everyone could understand , and with his whole soul he shared the adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor , who was spoken of as the `` angel incarnate . '' 
During Rostov 's short stay in Moscow , before rejoining the army , he did not draw closer to Sonya , but rather drifted away from her . 
She was very pretty and sweet , and evidently deeply in love with him , but he was at the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no time for that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and prizes his freedom which he needs for so many other things . 
When he thought of Sonya , during this stay in Moscow , he said to himself , `` Ah , there will be , and there are , many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet know . 
There will be time enough to think about love when I want to , but now I have no time . '' 
Besides , it seemed to him that the society of women was rather derogatory to his manhood . 
He went to balls and into ladies ' society with an affectation of doing so against his will . 
The races , the English Club , sprees with Denisov , and visits to a certain house -- that was another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar ! 
At the beginning of March , old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club . 
The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown , giving orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist , the Club 's head cook , about asparagus , fresh cucumbers , strawberries , veal , and fish for this dinner . 
The count had been a member and on the committee of the Club from the day it was founded . 
To him the Club entrusted the arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration , for few men knew so well how to arrange a feast on an open-handed , hospitable scale , and still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete . 
The club cook and the steward listened to the count 's orders with pleased faces , for they knew that under no other management could they so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costing several thousand rubles . 
`` Well then , mind and have cocks ' comb in the turtle soup , you know ! '' 
`` Shall we have three cold dishes then ? '' 
asked the cook . 
The count considered . 
`` We ca n't have less -- yes , three ... the mayonnaise , that 's one , '' said he , bending down a finger . 
`` Then am I to order those large sterlets ? '' 
asked the steward . 
`` Yes , it ca n't be helped if they wo n't take less . 
Ah , dear me ! 
I was forgetting . 
We must have another entree . 
Ah , goodness gracious ! '' 
he clutched at his head . 
`` Who is going to get me the flowers ? 
Dmitri ! 
Eh , Dmitri ! 
Gallop off to our Moscow estate , '' he said to the factotum who appeared at his call . 
`` Hurry off and tell Maksim , the gardener , to set the serfs to work . 
Say that everything out of the hothouses must be brought here well wrapped up in felt . 
I must have two hundred pots here on Friday . '' 
Having given several more orders , he was about to go to his `` little countess '' to have a rest , but remembering something else of importance , he returned again , called back the cook and the club steward , and again began giving orders . 
A light footstep and the clinking of spurs were heard at the door , and the young count , handsome , rosy , with a dark little mustache , evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life in Moscow , entered the room . 
`` Ah , my boy , my head 's in a whirl ! '' 
said the old man with a smile , as if he felt a little confused before his son . 
`` Now , if you would only help a bit ! 
I must have singers too . 
I shall have my own orchestra , but should n't we get the gypsy singers as well ? 
You military men like that sort of thing . '' 
`` Really , Papa , I believe Prince Bagration worried himself less before the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now , '' said his son with a smile . 
The old count pretended to be angry . 
`` Yes , you talk , but try it yourself ! '' 
And the count turned to the cook , who , with a shrewd and respectful expression , looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and son . 
`` What have the young people come to nowadays , eh , Feoktist ? '' 
said he . 
`` Laughing at us old fellows ! '' 
`` That 's so , your excellency , all they have to do is to eat a good dinner , but providing it and serving it all up , that 's not their business ! '' 
`` That 's it , that 's it ! '' 
exclaimed the count , and gaily seizing his son by both hands , he cried , `` Now I 've got you , so take the sleigh and pair at once , and go to Bezukhob 's , and tell him ` Count Ilya has sent you to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples . ' 
We ca n't get them from anyone else . 
He 's not there himself , so you 'll have to go in and ask the princesses ; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay -- the coachman Ipatka knows -- and look up the gypsy Ilyushka , the one who danced at Count Orlov 's , you remember , in a white Cossack coat , and bring him along to me . '' 
`` And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him ? '' 
asked Nicholas , laughing . 
`` Dear , dear ! 
... '' At that moment , with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike , preoccupied , yet meekly Christian look which never left her face , Anna Mikhaylovna entered the hall . 
Though she came upon the count in his dressing gown every day , he invariably became confused and begged her to excuse his costume . 
`` No matter at all , my dear count , '' she said , meekly closing her eyes . 
`` But I 'll go to Bezukhov 's myself . 
Pierre has arrived , and now we shall get anything we want from his hothouses . 
I have to see him in any case . 
He has forwarded me a letter from Boris . 
Thank God , Boris is now on the staff . '' 
The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna 's taking upon herself one of his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her . 
`` Tell Bezukhov to come . 
I 'll put his name down . 
Is his wife with him ? '' 
he asked . 
Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes , and profound sadness was depicted on her face . 
`` Ah , my dear friend , he is very unfortunate , '' she said . 
`` If what we hear is true , it is dreadful . 
How little we dreamed of such a thing when we were rejoicing at his happiness ! 
And such a lofty angelic soul as young Bezukhov ! 
Yes , I pity him from my heart , and shall try to give him what consolation I can . '' 
`` Wh-what is the matter ? '' 
asked both the young and old Rostov . 
Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply . 
`` Dolokhov , Mary Ivanovna 's son , '' she said in a mysterious whisper , `` has compromised her completely , they say . 
Pierre took him up , invited him to his house in Petersburg , and now ... she has come here and that daredevil after her ! '' 
said Anna Mikhaylovna , wishing to show her sympathy for Pierre , but by involuntary intonations and a half smile betraying her sympathy for the `` daredevil , '' as she called Dolokhov . 
`` They say Pierre is quite broken by his misfortune . '' 
`` Dear , dear ! 
But still tell him to come to the Club -- it will all blow over . 
It will be a tremendous banquet . '' 
Next day , the third of March , soon after one o'clock , two hundred and fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting the guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign , Prince Bagration , to dinner . 
On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz , Moscow had been bewildered . 
At that time , the Russians were so used to victories that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it , while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange an event . 
In the English Club , where all who were distinguished , important , and well informed forgathered when the news began to arrive in December , nothing was said about the war and the last battle , as though all were in a conspiracy of silence . 
The men who set the tone in conversation -- Count Rostopchin , Prince Yuri Dolgorukov , Valuev , Count Markov , and Prince Vyazemski -- did not show themselves at the Club , but met in private houses in intimate circles , and the Moscovites who took their opinions from others -- Ilya Rostov among them -- remained for a while without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without leaders . 
The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult , and so it was best to be silent . 
But after a while , just as a jury comes out of its room , the bigwigs who guided the Club 's opinion reappeared , and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely . 
Reasons were found for the incredible , unheard-of , and impossible event of a Russian defeat , everything became clear , and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be said . 
These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians , a defective commissariat , the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron , Kutuzov 's incapacity , and -LRB- it was whispered -RRB- the youth and inexperience of the sovereign , who had trusted worthless and insignificant people . 
But the army , the Russian army , everyone declared , was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor . 
The soldiers , officers , and generals were heroes . 
But the hero of heroes was Prince Bagration , distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat from Austerlitz , where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own . 
What also conduced to Bagration 's being selected as Moscow 's hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city and was a stranger there . 
In his person , honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian soldier without connections and intrigues , and to one who was associated by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov . 
Moreover , paying such honor to Bagration was the best way of expressing disapproval and dislike of Kutuzov . 
`` Had there been no Bagration , it would have been necessary to invent him , '' said the wit Shinshin , parodying the words of Voltaire . 
Kutuzov no one spoke of , except some who abused him in whispers , calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr . 
All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov 's saying : `` If you go on modeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay , '' suggesting consolation for our defeat by the memory of former victories ; and the words of Rostopchin , that French soldiers have to be incited to battle by highfalutin words , and Germans by logical arguments to show them that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance , but that Russian soldiers only need to be restrained and held back ! 
On all sides , new and fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our officers and men at Austerlitz . 
One had saved a standard , another had killed five Frenchmen , a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded . 
Berg was mentioned , by those who did not know him , as having , when wounded in the right hand , taken his sword in the left , and gone forward . 
Of Bolkonski , nothing was said , and only those who knew him intimately regretted that he had died so young , leaving a pregnant wife with his eccentric father . 
On that third of March , all the rooms in the English Club were filled with a hum of conversation , like the hum of bees swarming in springtime . 
The members and guests of the Club wandered hither and thither , sat , stood , met , and separated , some in uniform and some in evening dress , and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans . 
Powdered footmen , in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings , stood at every door anxiously noting visitors ' every movement in order to offer their services . 
Most of those present were elderly , respected men with broad , self-confident faces , fat fingers , and resolute gestures and voices . 
This class of guests and members sat in certain habitual places and met in certain habitual groups . 
A minority of those present were casual guests -- chiefly young men , among whom were Denisov , Rostov , and Dolokhov -- who was now again an officer in the Semenov regiment . 
The faces of these young people , especially those who were militarymen , bore that expression of condescending respect for their elders which seems to say to the older generation , `` We are prepared to respect and honor you , but all the same remember that the future belongs to us . '' 
Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club . 
Pierre , who at his wife 's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles , went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull . 
Here , as elsewhere , he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his wealth , and being in the habit of lording it over these people , he treated them with absent-minded contempt . 
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men , but by his wealth and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored guests , and so he went from one group to another . 
Some of the most important old men were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully to hear the voices of well-known men . 
The largest circles formed round Count Rostopchin , Valuev , and Naryshkin . 
Rostopchin was describing how the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to force their way through them with bayonets . 
Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz . 
In the third circle , Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of the Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply to the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals . 
Shinshin , standing close by , tried to make a joke , saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed to learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a cock , but the elder members glanced severely at the wit , making him feel that in that place and on that day , it was improper to speak so of Kutuzov . 
Count Ilya Rostov , hurried and preoccupied , went about in his soft boots between the dining and drawing rooms , hastily greeting the important and unimportant , all of whom he knew , as if they were all equals , while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up young son , resting on him and winking joyfully at him . 
Young Rostov stood at a window with Dolokhov , whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued . 
The old count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov 's hand . 
`` Please come and visit us ... you know my brave boy ... been together out there ... both playing the hero ... Ah , Vasili Ignatovich ... How d'ye do , old fellow ? '' 
he said , turning to an old man who was passing , but before he had finished his greeting there was a general stir , and a footman who had run in announced , with a frightened face : `` He 's arrived ! '' 
Bells rang , the stewards rushed forward , and -- like rye shaken together in a shovel -- the guests who had been scattered about in different rooms came together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of the ballroom . 
Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword , which , in accord with the Club custom , he had given up to the hall porter . 
He had no lambskin cap on his head , nor had he a loaded whip over his shoulder , as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of the battle of Austerlitz , but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreign Orders , and the Star of St. George on his left breast . 
Evidently just before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed , which changed his appearance for the worse . 
There was something naively festive in his air , which , in conjunction with his firm and virile features , gave him a rather comical expression . 
Bekleshev and Theodore Uvarov , who had arrived with him , paused at the doorway to allow him , as the guest of honor , to enter first . 
Bagration was embarrassed , not wishing to avail himself of their courtesy , and this caused some delay at the doors , but after all he did at last enter first . 
He walked shyly and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room , not knowing what to do with his hands ; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed field under fire , as he had done at the head of the Kursk regiment at Schon Grabern -- and he would have found that easier . 
The committeemen met him at the first door and , expressing their delight at seeing such a highly honored guest , took possession of him as it were , without waiting for his reply , surrounded him , and led him to the drawing room . 
It was at first impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at Bagration over each other 's shoulders , as if he were some rare animal . 
Count Ilya Rostov , laughing and repeating the words , `` Make way , dear boy ! 
Make way , make way ! '' 
pushed through the crowd more energetically than anyone , led the guests into the drawing room , and seated them on the center sofa . 
The bigwigs , the most respected members of the Club , beset the new arrivals . 
Count Ilya , again thrusting his way through the crowd , went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with another committeeman , carrying a large silver salver which he presented to Prince Bagration . 
On the salver lay some verses composed and printed in the hero 's honor . 
Bagration , on seeing the salver , glanced around in dismay , as though seeking help . 
But all eyes demanded that he should submit . 
Feeling himself in their power , he resolutely took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count who had presented it to him . 
Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration -LRB- or he would , it seemed , have held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it -RRB- and drew his attention to the verses . 
`` Well , I will read them , then ! '' 
Bagration seemed to say , and , fixing his weary eyes on the paper , began to read them with a fixed and serious expression . 
But the author himself took the verses and began reading them aloud . 
Bagration bowed his bead and listened : Bring glory then to Alexander 's reign And on the throne our Titus shield . 
A dreaded foe be thou , kindhearted as a man , A Rhipheus at home , a Caesar in the field ! 
E'en fortunate Napoleon Knows by experience , now , Bagration , And dare not Herculean Russians trouble ... But before he had finished reading , a stentorian major-domo announced that dinner was ready ! 
The door opened , and from the dining room came the resounding strains of the polonaise : Conquest 's joyful thunder waken , Triumph , valiant Russians , now ! 
... and Count Rostov , glancing angrily at the author who went on reading his verses , bowed to Bagration . 
Everyone rose , feeling that dinner was more important than verses , and Bagration , again preceding all the rest , went in to dinner . 
He was seated in the place of honor between two Alexanders -- Bekleshev and Naryshkin -- which was a significant allusion to the name of the sovereign . 
Three hundred persons took their seats in the dining room , according to their rank and importance : the more important nearer to the honored guest , as naturally as water flows deepest where the land lies lowest . 
Just before dinner , Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to Bagration , who recognized him and said a few words to him , disjointed and awkward , as were all the words he spoke that day , and Count Ilya looked joyfully and proudly around while Bagration spoke to his son . 
Nicholas Rostov , with Denisov and his new acquaintance , Dolokhov , sat almost at the middle of the table . 
Facing them sat Pierre , beside Prince Nesvitski . 
Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of the committee sat facing Bagration and , as the very personification of Moscow hospitality , did the honors to the prince . 
His efforts had not been in vain . 
The dinner , both the Lenten and the other fare , was splendid , yet he could not feel quite at ease till the end of the meal . 
He winked at the butler , whispered directions to the footmen , and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety . 
Everything was excellent . 
With the second course , a gigantic sterlet -LRB- at sight of which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure -RRB- , the footmen began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses . 
After the fish , which made a certain sensation , the count exchanged glances with the other committeemen . 
`` There will be many toasts , it 's time to begin , '' he whispered , and taking up his glass , he rose . 
All were silent , waiting for what he would say . 
`` To the health of our Sovereign , the Emperor ! '' 
he cried , and at the same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm . 
The band immediately struck up `` Conquest 's joyful thunder waken ... '' All rose and cried `` Hurrah ! '' 
Bagration also rose and shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Schon Grabern . 
Young Rostov 's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundred others . 
He nearly wept . 
`` To the health of our Sovereign , the Emperor ! '' 
he roared , `` Hurrah ! '' 
and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor . 
Many followed his example , and the loud shouting continued for a long time . 
When the voices subsided , the footmen cleared away the broken glass and everybody sat down again , smiling at the noise they had made and exchanging remarks . 
The old count rose once more , glanced at a note lying beside his plate , and proposed a toast , `` To the health of the hero of our last campaign , Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration ! '' 
and again his blue eyes grew moist . 
`` Hurrah ! '' 
cried the three hundred voices again , but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov : Russians ! 
O'er all barriers on ! 
Courage conquest guarantees ; Have we not Bagration ? 
He brings foe men to their knees , ... etc. . 
As soon as the singing was over , another and another toast was proposed and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved , more glass was smashed , and the shouting grew louder . 
They drank to Bekleshev , Naryshkin , Uvarov , Dolgorukov , Apraksin , Valuev , to the committee , to all the Club members and to all the Club guests , and finally to Count Ilya Rostov separately , as the organizer of the banquet . 
At that toast , the count took out his handkerchief and , covering his face , wept outright . 
Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov . 
As usual , he ate and drank much , and eagerly . 
But those who knew him intimately noticed that some great change had come over him that day . 
He was silent all through dinner and looked about , blinking and scowling , or , with fixed eyes and a look of complete absent-mindedness , kept rubbing the bridge of his nose . 
His face was depressed and gloomy . 
He seemed to see and hear nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some depressing and unsolved problem . 
The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the princess , his cousin , at Moscow , concerning Dolokhov 's intimacy with his wife , and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning , which in the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badly through his spectacles , but that his wife 's connection with Dolokhov was a secret to no one but himself . 
Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the princess ' hints and the letter , but he feared now to look at Dolokhov , who was sitting opposite him . 
Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov 's handsome insolent eyes , Pierre felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and turned quickly away . 
Involuntarily recalling his wife 's past and her relations with Dolokhov , Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might be true , or might at least seem to be true had it not referred to his wife . 
He involuntarily remembered how Dolokhov , who had fully recovered his former position after the campaign , had returned to Petersburg and come to him . 
Availing himself of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion , Dolokhov had come straight to his house , and Pierre had put him up and lent him money . 
Pierre recalled how Helene had smilingly expressed disapproval of Dolokhov 's living at their house , and how cynically Dolokhov had praised his wife 's beauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow had not left them for a day . 
`` Yes , he is very handsome , '' thought Pierre , `` and I know him . 
It would be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me , just because I have exerted myself on his behalf , befriended him , and helped him . 
I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasure of deceiving me , if it really were true . 
Yes , if it were true , but I do not believe it . 
I have no right to , and ca n't , believe it . '' 
He remembered the expression Dolokhov 's face assumed in his moments of cruelty , as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them into the water , or when he challenged a man to a duel without any reason , or shot a post-boy 's horse with a pistol . 
That expression was often on Dolokhov 's face when looking at him . 
`` Yes , he is a bully , '' thought Pierre , `` to kill a man means nothing to him . 
It must seem to him that everyone is afraid of him , and that must please him . 
He must think that I , too , am afraid of him -- and in fact I am afraid of him , '' he thought , and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul . 
Dolokhov , Denisov , and Rostov were now sitting opposite Pierre and seemed very gay . 
Rostov was talking merrily to his two friends , one of whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious duelist and rake , and every now and then he glanced ironically at Pierre , whose preoccupied , absent-minded , and massive figure was a very noticeable one at the dinner . 
Rostov looked inimically at Pierre , first because Pierre appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian , the husband of a beauty , and in a word -- an old woman ; and secondly because Pierre in his preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized Rostov and had not responded to his greeting . 
When the Emperor 's health was drunk , Pierre , lost in thought , did not rise or lift his glass . 
`` What are you about ? '' 
shouted Rostov , looking at him in an ecstasy of exasperation . 
`` Do n't you hear it 's His Majesty the Emperor 's health ? '' 
Pierre sighed , rose submissively , emptied his glass , and , waiting till all were seated again , turned with his kindly smile to Rostov . 
`` Why , I did n't recognize you ! '' 
he said . 
But Rostov was otherwise engaged ; he was shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
`` Why do n't you renew the acquaintance ? '' 
said Dolokhov to Rostov . 
`` Confound him , he 's a fool ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` One should make up to the husbands of pretty women , '' said Denisov . 
Pierre did not catch what they were saying , but knew they were talking about him . 
He reddened and turned away . 
`` Well , now to the health of handsome women ! '' 
said Dolokhov , and with a serious expression , but with a smile lurking at the corners of his mouth , he turned with his glass to Pierre . 
`` Here 's to the health of lovely women , Peterkin -- and their lovers ! '' 
he added . 
Pierre , with downcast eyes , drank out of his glass without looking at Dolokhov or answering him . 
The footman , who was distributing leaflets with Kutuzov 's cantata , laid one before Pierre as one of the principal guests . 
He was just going to take it when Dolokhov , leaning across , snatched it from his hand and began reading it . 
Pierre looked at Dolokhov and his eyes dropped , the something terrible and monstrous that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him . 
He leaned his whole massive body across the table . 
`` How dare you take it ? '' 
he shouted . 
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed , Nesvitski and the neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov . 
`` Do n't ! 
Do n't ! 
What are you about ? '' 
whispered their frightened voices . 
Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear , mirthful , cruel eyes , and that smile of his which seemed to say , `` Ah ! 
This is what I like ! '' 
`` You sha n't have it ! '' 
he said distinctly . 
Pale , with quivering lips , Pierre snatched the copy . 
`` You ... ! 
you ... scoundrel ! 
I challenge you ! '' 
he ejaculated , and , pushing back his chair , he rose from the table . 
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words , Pierre felt that the question of his wife 's guilt which had been tormenting him the whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative . 
He hated her and was forever sundered from her . 
Despite Denisov 's request that he would take no part in the matter , Rostov agreed to be Dolokhov 's second , and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for the duel with Nesvitski , Bezukhov 's second . 
Pierre went home , but Rostov with Dolokhov and Denisov stayed on at the Club till late , listening to the gypsies and other singers . 
`` Well then , till tomorrow at Sokolniki , '' said Dolokhov , as he took leave of Rostov in the Club porch . 
`` And do you feel quite calm ? '' 
Rostov asked . 
Dolokhov paused . 
`` Well , you see , I 'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two words . 
If you are going to fight a duel , and you make a will and write affectionate letters to your parents , and if you think you may be killed , you are a fool and are lost for certain . 
But go with the firm intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible , and then all will be right , as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tell me . 
` Everyone fears a bear , ' he says , ` but when you see one your fear 's all gone , and your only thought is not to let him get away ! ' 
And that 's how it is with me . 
A demain , mon cher . '' 
* * Till tomorrow , my dear fellow . 
Next day , at eight in the morning , Pierre and Nesvitski drove to the Sokolniki forest and found Dolokhov , Denisov , and Rostov already there . 
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no connection with the matter in hand . 
His haggard face was yellow . 
He had evidently not slept that night . 
He looked about distractedly and screwed up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun . 
He was entirely absorbed by two considerations : his wife 's guilt , of which after his sleepless night he had not the slightest doubt , and the guiltlessness of Dolokhov , who had no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothing to him ... `` I should perhaps have done the same thing in his place , '' thought Pierre . 
`` It 's even certain that I should have done the same , then why this duel , this murder ? 
Either I shall kill him , or he will hit me in the head , or elbow , or knee . 
Ca n't I go away from here , run away , bury myself somewhere ? '' 
passed through his mind . 
But just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him , he would ask in a particularly calm and absent-minded way , which inspired the respect of the onlookers , `` Will it be long ? 
Are things ready ? '' 
When all was ready , the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers , and the pistols loaded , Nesvitski went up to Pierre . 
`` I should not be doing my duty , Count , '' he said in timid tones , `` and should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me in choosing me for your second , if at this grave , this very grave , moment I did not tell you the whole truth . 
I think there is no sufficient ground for this affair , or for blood to be shed over it ... . 
You were not right , not quite in the right , you were impetuous ... '' `` Oh yes , it is horribly stupid , '' said Pierre . 
`` Then allow me to express your regrets , and I am sure your opponent will accept them , '' said Nesvitski -LRB- who like the others concerned in the affair , and like everyone in similar cases , did not yet believe that the affair had come to an actual duel -RRB- . 
`` You know , Count , it is much more honorable to admit one 's mistake than to let matters become irreparable . 
There was no insult on either side . 
Allow me to convey ... '' `` No ! 
What is there to talk about ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` It 's all the same ... . 
Is everything ready ? '' 
he added . 
`` Only tell me where to go and where to shoot , '' he said with an unnaturally gentle smile . 
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the trigger , as he had not before held a pistol in his hand -- a fact that he did not to confess . 
`` Oh yes , like that , I know , I only forgot , '' said he . 
`` No apologies , none whatever , '' said Dolokhov to Denisov -LRB- who on his side had been attempting a reconciliation -RRB- , and he also went up to the appointed place . 
The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road , where the sleighs had been left , in a small clearing in the pine forest covered with melting snow , the frost having begun to break up during the last few days . 
The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther edge of the clearing . 
The seconds , measuring the paces , left tracks in the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and Nesvitski 's and Dolokhov 's sabers , which were stuck intothe ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier . 
It was thawing and misty ; at forty paces ' distance nothing could be seen . 
For three minutes all had been ready , but they still delayed and all were silent . 
`` Well begin ! '' 
said Dolokhov . 
`` All right , '' said Pierre , still smiling in the same way . 
A feeling of dread was in the air . 
It was evident that the affair so lightly begun could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of men 's will . 
Denisov first went to the barrier and announced : `` As the adve ` sawies have wefused a weconciliation , please pwoceed . 
Take your pistols , and at the word thwee begin to advance . 
`` O-ne ! 
T-wo ! 
Thwee ! '' 
he shouted angrily and stepped aside . 
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks , nearer and nearer to one another , beginning to see one another through the mist . 
They had the right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier . 
Dolokhov walked slowly without raising his pistol , looking intently with his bright , sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist 's face . 
His mouth wore its usual semblance of a smile . 
`` So I can fire when I like ! '' 
said Pierre , and at the word `` three , '' he went quickly forward , missing the trodden path and stepping into the deep snow . 
He held the pistol in his right hand at arm 's length , apparently afraid of shooting himself with it . 
His left hand he held carefully back , because he wished to support his right hand with it and knew he must not do so . 
Having advanced six paces and strayed off the track into the snow , Pierre looked down at his feet , then quickly glanced at Dolokhov and , bending his finger as he had been shown , fired . 
Not at all expecting so loud a report , Pierre shuddered at the sound and then , smiling at his own sensations , stood still . 
The smoke , rendered denser by the mist , prevented him from seeing anything for an instant , but there was no second report as he had expected . 
He only heard Dolokhov 's hurried steps , and his figure came in view through the smoke . 
He was pressing one hand to his left side , while the other clutched his drooping pistol . 
His face was pale . 
Rostov ran toward him and said something . 
`` No-o-o ! '' 
muttered Dolokhov through his teeth , `` no , it 's not over . '' 
And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber , he sank on the snow beside it . 
His left hand was bloody ; he wiped it on his coat and supported himself with it . 
His frowning face was pallid and quivered . 
`` Plea ... '' began Dolokhov , but could not at first pronounce the word . 
`` Please , '' he uttered with an effort . 
Pierre , hardly restraining his sobs , began running toward Dolokhov and was about to cross the space between the barriers , when Dolokhov cried : `` To your barrier ! '' 
and Pierre , grasping what was meant , stopped by his saber . 
Only ten paces divided them . 
Dolokhov lowered his head to the snow , greedily bit at it , again raised his head , adjusted himself , drew in his legs and sat up , seeking a firm center of gravity . 
He sucked and swallowed the cold snow , his lips quivered but his eyes , still smiling , glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining strength . 
He raised his pistol and aimed . 
`` Sideways ! 
Cover yourself with your pistol ! '' 
ejaculated Nesvitski . 
`` Cover yourself ! '' 
even Denisov cried to his adversary . 
Pierre , with a gentle smile of pity and remorse , his arms and legs helplessly spread out , stood with his broad chest directly facing Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him . 
Denisov , Rostov , and Nesvitski closed their eyes . 
At the same instant they heard a report and Dolokhov 's angry cry . 
`` Missed ! '' 
shouted Dolokhov , and he lay helplessly , face downwards on the snow . 
Pierre clutched his temples , and turning round went into the forest , trampling through the deep snow , and muttering incoherent words : `` Folly ... folly ! 
Death ... lies ... '' he repeated , puckering his face . 
Nesvitski stopped him and took him home . 
Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov . 
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer a word to the questions addressed to him . 
But on entering Moscow he suddenly came to and , lifting his head with an effort , took Rostov , who was sitting beside him , by the hand . 
Rostov was struck by the totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov 's face . 
`` Well ? 
How do you feel ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Bad ! 
But it 's not that , my friend - '' said Dolokhov with a gasping voice . 
`` Where are we ? 
In Moscow , I know . 
I do n't matter , but I have killed her , killed ... She wo n't get over it ! 
She wo n't survive ... '' `` Who ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` My mother ! 
My mother , my angel , my adored angel mother , '' and Dolokhov pressed Rostov 's hand and burst into tears . 
When he had become a little quieter , he explained to Rostov that he was living with his mother , who , if she saw him dying , would not survive it . 
He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her . 
Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked , and to his great surprise learned that Dolokhov the brawler , Dolokhov the bully , lived in Moscow with an old mother and a hunchback sister , and was the most affectionate of sons and brothers . 
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone . 
Both in Petersburg and in Moscow their house was always full of visitors . 
The night after the duel he did not go to his bedroom but , as he often did , remained in his father 's room , that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died . 
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that had happened to him , but could not do so . 
Such a storm of feelings , thoughts , and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall asleep , nor even remain in one place , but had to jump up and pace the room with rapid steps . 
Now he seemed to see her in the early days of their marriage , with bare shoulders and a languid , passionate look on her face , and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov 's handsome , insolent , hard , and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet , and then that same face pale , quivering , and suffering , as it had been when he reeled and sank on the snow . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
he asked himself . 
`` I have killed her lover , yes , killed my wife 's lover . 
Yes , that was it ! 
And why ? 
How did I come to do it ? '' 
-- `` Because you married her , '' answered an inner voice . 
`` But in what was I to blame ? '' 
he asked . 
`` In marrying her without loving her ; in deceiving yourself and her . '' 
And he vividly recalled that moment after supper at Prince Vasili 's , when he spoke those words he had found so difficult to utter : `` I love you . '' 
`` It all comes from that ! 
Even then I felt it , '' he thought . 
`` I felt then that it was not so , that I had no right to do it . 
And so it turns out . '' 
He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection . 
Particularly vivid , humiliating , and shameful was the recollection of how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into his study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his head steward there , who , bowing respectfully , looked into his face and at his dressing gown and smiled slightly , as if expressing respectful understanding of his employer 's happiness . 
`` But how often I have felt proud of her , proud of her majestic beauty and social tact , '' thought he ; `` been proud of my house , in which she received all Petersburg , proud of her unapproachability and beauty . 
So this is what I was proud of ! 
I then thought that I did not understand her . 
How often when considering her character I have told myself that I was to blame for not understanding her , for not understanding that constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires , and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved woman . 
Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become clear . 
`` Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her naked shoulders . 
She did not give him the money , but let herself be kissed . 
Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy , and she replied with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous : ` Let him do what he pleases , ' she used to say of me . 
One day I asked her if she felt any symptoms of pregnancy . 
She laughed contemptuously and said she was not a fool to want to have children , and that she was not going to have any children by me . '' 
Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her , though she had been brought up in the most aristocratic circles . 
`` I 'm not such a fool ... . 
Just you try it on ... . 
Allez-vous promener , '' * she used to say . 
Often seeing the success she had with young and old men and women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her . 
* `` You clear out of this . '' 
`` Yes , I never loved her , '' said he to himself ; `` I knew she was a depraved woman , '' he repeated , `` but dared not admit it to myself . 
And now there 's Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying , while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado ! '' 
Pierre was one of those people who , in spite of an appearance of what is called weak character , do not seek a confidant in their troubles . 
He digested his sufferings alone . 
`` It is all , all her fault , '' he said to himself ; `` but what of that ? 
Why did I bind myself to her ? 
Why did I say ` Je vous aime ' * to her , which was a lie , and worse than a lie ? 
I am guilty and must endure ... what ? 
A slur on my name ? 
A misfortune for life ? 
Oh , that 's nonsense , '' he thought . 
`` The slur on my name and honor -- that 's all apart from myself . 
* I love you . 
`` Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and a criminal , '' came into Pierre 's head , `` and from their point of view they were right , as were those too who canonized him and died a martyr 's death for his sake . 
Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot . 
Who is right and who is wrong ? 
No one ! 
But if you are alive - live : tomorrow you 'll die as I might have died an hour ago . 
And is it worth tormenting oneself , when one has only a moment of life in comparison with eternity ? '' 
But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections , she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had most strongly expressed his insincere love for her , and he felt the blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break and tear whatever came to his hand . 
`` Why did I tell her that ` Je vous aime ' ? '' 
he kept repeating to himself . 
And when he had said it for the tenth time , Molibre 's words : `` Mais que diable alloit-il faire dans cette galere ? '' 
occurred to him , and he began to laugh at himself . 
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to Petersburg . 
He could not imagine how he could speak to her now . 
He resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his intention to part from her forever . 
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee , Pierre was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand . 
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression , unable to realize where he was . 
`` The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home , '' said the valet . 
But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send , the countess herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with simply dressed hair -LRB- two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like a coronet -RRB- entered the room , calm and majestic , except that there was a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow . 
With her imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet . 
She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it . 
She waited till the valet had set down the coffee things and left the room . 
Pierre looked at her timidly over his spectacles , and like a hare surrounded by hounds who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her enemies , he tried to continue reading . 
But feeling this to be senseless and impossible , he again glanced timidly at her . 
She did not sit down but looked at him with a contemptuous smile , waiting for the valet to go . 
`` Well , what 's this now ? 
What have you been up to now , I should like to know ? '' 
she asked sternly . 
`` I ? 
What have I. . . ? '' 
stammered Pierre . 
`` So it seems you 're a hero , eh ? 
Come now , what was this duel about ? 
What is it meant to prove ? 
What ? 
I ask you . '' 
Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth , but could not reply . 
`` If you wo n't answer , I 'll tell you ... '' Helene went on . 
`` You believe everything you 're told . 
You were told ... '' Helene laughed , `` that Dolokhov was my lover , '' she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech , uttering the word amant as casually as any other word , `` and you believed it ! 
Well , what have you proved ? 
What does this duel prove ? 
That you 're a fool , que vous etes un sot , but everybody knew that . 
What will be the result ? 
That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow , that everyone will say that you , drunk and not knowing what you were about , challenged a man you are jealous of without cause . '' 
Helene raised her voice and became more and more excited , `` A man who 's a better man than you in every way ... '' `` Hm ... Hm ... ! '' 
growled Pierre , frowning without looking at her , and not moving a muscle . 
`` And how could you believe he was my lover ? 
Why ? 
Because I like his company ? 
If you were cleverer and more agreeable , I should prefer yours . '' 
`` Do n't speak to me ... I beg you , '' muttered Pierre hoarsely . 
`` Why should n't I speak ? 
I can speak as I like , and I tell you plainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would not have taken lovers -LRB- des amants -RRB- , but I have not done so , '' said she . 
Pierre wished to say something , looked at her with eyes whose strange expression she did not understand , and lay down again . 
He was suffering physically at that moment , there was a weight on his chest and he could not breathe . 
He knew that he must do something to put an end to this suffering , but what he wanted to do was too terrible . 
