At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a whole day . 
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry , one of which was occupied by Prince Andrew . 
The wounded man was much better that day and Natasha was sitting with him . 
In the next room sat the count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior , who was calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery . 
Sonya was there too , tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and Natasha were talking about . 
She heard the sound of their voices through the door . 
That door opened and Natasha came out , looking excited . 
Not noticing the monk , who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the wide sleeve on his right arm , she went up to Sonya and took her hand . 
`` Natasha , what are you about ? 
Come here ! '' 
said the countess . 
Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing , and advised her to pray for aid to God and His saint . 
As soon as the prior withdrew , Natasha took her friend by the hand and went with her into the unoccupied room . 
`` Sonya , will he live ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Sonya , how happy I am , and how unhappy ! 
... Sonya , dovey , everything is as it used to be . 
If only he lives ! 
He can not ... because ... because ... of '' and Natasha burst into tears . 
`` Yes ! 
I knew it ! 
Thank God ! '' 
murmured Sonya . 
`` He will live . '' 
Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter 's fear and grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one . 
Sobbing , she kissed and comforted Natasha . 
`` If only he lives ! '' 
she thought . 
Having wept , talked , and wiped away their tears , the two friends went together to Prince Andrew 's door . 
Natasha opened it cautiously and glanced into the room , Sonya standing beside her at the half-open door . 
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows . 
His pale face was calm , his eyes closed , and they could see his regular breathing . 
`` O , Natasha ! '' 
Sonya suddenly almost screamed , catching her companion 's arm and stepping back from the door . 
`` What ? 
What is it ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` It 's that , that ... '' said Sonya , with a white face and trembling lips . 
Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window , not yet understanding what the latter was telling her . 
`` You remember , '' said Sonya with a solemn and frightened expression . 
`` You remember when I looked in the mirror for you ... at Otradnoe at Christmas ? 
Do you remember what I saw ? '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
cried Natasha opening her eyes wide , and vaguely recalling that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen lying down . 
`` You remember ? '' 
Sonya went on . 
`` I saw it then and told everybody , you and Dunyasha . 
I saw him lying on a bed , '' said she , making a gesture with her hand and a lifted finger at each detail , `` and that he had his eyes closed and was covered just with a pink quilt , and that his hands were folded , '' she concluded , convincing herself that the details she had just seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror . 
She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that came into her head , but what she had invented then seemed to her now as real as any other recollection . 
She not only remembered what she had then said -- that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with something red -- but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed . 
`` Yes , yes , it really was pink ! '' 
cried Natasha , who now thought she too remembered the word pink being used , and saw in this the most extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction . 
`` But what does it mean ? '' 
she added meditatively . 
`` Oh , I do n't know , it is all so strange , '' replied Sonya , clutching at her head . 
A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him , but Sonya , feeling unusually excited and touched , remained at the window thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred . 
They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army , and the countess was writing to her son . 
`` Sonya ! '' 
said the countess , raising her eyes from her letter as her niece passed , `` Sonya , wo n't you write to Nicholas ? '' 
She spoke in a soft , tremulous voice , and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words . 
Those eyes expressed entreaty , shame at having to ask , fear of a refusal , and readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal . 
Sonya went up to the countess and , kneeling down , kissed her hand . 
`` Yes , Mamma , I will write , '' said she . 
Sonya was softened , excited , and touched by all that had occurred that day , especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her vision . 
Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha 's relations with Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary , she was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in which she was accustomed to live and loved to live . 
So with a joyful consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed -- interrupted several times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes -- she wrote that touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas . 
The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with hostility but yet with respect , in the guardhouse to which he was taken . 
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as to who he might be -- perhaps a very important person - and hostility as a result of their recent personal conflict with him . 
But when the guard was relieved next morning , Pierre felt that for the new guard -- both officers and men -- he was not as interesting as he had been to his captors ; and in fact the guard of the second day did not recognize in this big , stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person who had fought so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and had uttered those solemn words about saving a child ; they saw in him only No. 17 of the captured Russians , arrested and detained for some reason by order of the Higher Command . 
If they noticed anything remarkable about Pierre , it was only his unabashed , meditative concentration and thoughtfulness , and the way he spoke French , which struck them as surprisingly good . 
In spite of this he was placed that day with the other arrested suspects , as the separate room he had occupied was required by an officer . 
All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and , recognizing him as a gentleman , they all avoided him , more especially as he spoke French . 
Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him . 
That evening he learned that all these prisoners -LRB- he , probably , among them -RRB- were to be tried for incendiarism . 
On the third day he was taken with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms . 
With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners , and which is supposed to preclude human frailty , Pierre like the others was questioned as to who he was , where he had been , with what object , and so on . 
These questions , like questions put at trials generally , left the essence of the matter aside , shut out the possibility of that essence 's being revealed , and were designed only to form a channel through which the judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to the desired result , namely a conviction . 
As soon as Pierre began to say anything that did not fit in with that aim , the channel was removed and the water could flow to waste . 
Pierre felt , moreover , what the accused always feel at their trial , perplexity as to why these questions were put to him . 
He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed . 
He knew he was in these men 's power , that only by force had they brought him there , that force alone gave them the right to demand answers to their questions , and that the sole object of that assembly was to inculpate him . 
And so , as they had the power and wish to inculpate him , this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary . 
It was evident that any answer would lead to conviction . 
When asked what he was doing when he was arrested , Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner that he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from the flames . 
Why had he fought the marauder ? 
Pierre answered that he `` was protecting a woman , '' and that `` to protect a woman who was being insulted was the duty of every man ; that ... '' They interrupted him , for this was not to the point . 
Why was he in the yard of a burning house where witnesses had seen him ? 
He replied that he had gone out to see what was happening in Moscow . 
Again they interrupted him : they had not asked where he was going , but why he was found near the fire ? 
Who was he ? 
they asked , repeating their first question , which he had declined to answer . 
Again he replied that he could not answer it . 
`` Put that down , that 's bad ... very bad , '' sternly remarked the general with the white mustache and red flushed face . 
On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart . 
Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant 's house near the Crimean bridge . 
On his way through the streets Pierre felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole city . 
Fires were visible on all sides . 
He did not then realize the significance of the burning of Moscow , and looked at the fires with horror . 
He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge and during that time learned , from the talk of the French soldiers , that all those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day from the marshal . 
What marshal this was , Pierre could not learn from the soldiers . 
Evidently for them `` the marshal '' represented a very high and rather mysterious power . 
These first days , before the eighth of September when the prisoners were had up for a second examination , were the hardest of all for Pierre . 
On the eighth of September an officer -- a very important one judging by the respect the guards showed him -- entered the coach house where the prisoners were . 
This officer , probably someone on the staff , was holding a paper in his hand , and called over all the Russians there , naming Pierre as `` the man who does not give his name . '' 
Glancing indolently and indifferently at all the prisoners , he ordered the officer in charge to have them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to the marshal . 
An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with thirteen others was led to the Virgin 's Field . 
It was a fine day , sunny after rain , and the air was unusually pure . 
The smoke did not hang low as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the Zubovski rampart , but rose through the pure air in columns . 
No flames were seen , but columns of smoke rose on all sides , and all Moscow as far as Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin . 
On all sides there were waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing , and here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses . 
Pierre gazed at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well . 
Here and there he could see churches that had not been burned . 
The Kremlin , which was not destroyed , gleamed white in the distance with its towers and the belfry of Ivan the Great . 
The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin glittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly . 
These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of the Nativity of the Virgin . 
But there seemed to be no one to celebrate this holiday : everywhere were blackened ruins , and the few Russians to be seen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide when they saw the French . 
It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed , but in place of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed , Pierre unconsciously felt that a quite different , firm , French order had been established over this ruined nest . 
He felt this in the looks of the soldiers who , marching in regular ranks briskly and gaily , were escorting him and the other criminals ; he felt it in the looks of an important French official in a carriage and pair driven by a soldier , whom they met on the way . 
He felt it in the merry sounds of regimental music he heard from the left side of the field , and felt and realized it especially from the list of prisoners the French officer had read out when he came that morning . 
Pierre had been taken by one set of soldiers and led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men , and it seemed that they might have forgotten him , or confused him with the others . 
But no : the answers he had given when questioned had come back to him in his designation as `` the man who does not give his name , '' and under that appellation , which to Pierre seemed terrible , they were now leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces that he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted and that they were being taken to the proper place . 
Pierre felt himself to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whose action he did not understand but which was working well . 
He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin 's Field , to a large white house with an immense garden not far from the convent . 
This was Prince Shcherbitov 's house , where Pierre had often been in other days , and which , as he learned from the talk of the soldiers , was now occupied by the marshal , the Duke of Eckmuhl -LRB- Davout -RRB- . 
They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one . 
Pierre was the sixth to enter . 
He was conducted through a glass gallery , an anteroom , and a hall , which were familiar to him , into a long low study at the door of which stood an adjutant . 
Davout , spectacles on nose , sat bent over a table at the further end of the room . 
Pierre went close up to him , but Davout , evidently consulting a paper that lay before him , did not look up . 
Without raising his eyes , he said in a low voice : `` Who are you ? '' 
Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word . 
To him Davout was not merely a French general , but a man notorious for his cruelty . 
Looking at his cold face , as he sat like a stern schoolmaster who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer , Pierre felt that every instant of delay might cost him his life ; but he did not know what to say . 
He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first examination , yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous and embarrassing . 
So he was silent . 
But before he had decided what to do , Davout raised his head , pushed his spectacles back on his forehead , screwed up his eyes , and looked intently at him . 
`` I know that man , '' he said in a cold , measured tone , evidently calculated to frighten Pierre . 
The chill that had been running down Pierre 's back now seized his head as in a vise . 
`` You can not know me , General , I have never seen you ... '' `` He is a Russian spy , '' Davout interrupted , addressing another general who was present , but whom Pierre had not noticed . 
Davout turned away . 
With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre rapidly began : `` No , monseigneur , '' he said , suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke . 
`` No , monseigneur , you can not have known me . 
I am a militia officer and have not quitted Moscow . '' 
`` Your name ? '' 
asked Davout . 
`` Bezukhov . '' 
`` What proof have I that you are not lying ? '' 
`` Monseigneur ! '' 
exclaimed Pierre , not in an offended but in a pleading voice . 
Davout looked up and gazed intently at him . 
For some seconds they looked at one another , and that look saved Pierre . 
Apart from conditions of war and law , that look established human relations between the two men . 
At that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their minds , and they realized that they were both children of humanity and were brothers . 
At the first glance , when Davout had only raised his head from the papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers , Pierre was merely a circumstance , and Davout could have shot him without burdening his conscience with an evil deed , but now he saw in him a human being . 
He reflected for a moment . 
`` How can you show me that you are telling the truth ? '' 
said Davout coldly . 
Pierre remembered Ramballe , and named him and his regiment and the street where the house was . 
`` You are not what you say , '' returned Davout . 
In a trembling , faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the truth of his statements . 
But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout . 
Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought , and began buttoning up his uniform . 
It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre . 
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner , he jerked his head in Pierre 's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away . 
But where they were to take him Pierre did not know : back to the coach house or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as they crossed the Virgin 's Field . 
He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another question to Davout . 
`` Yes , of course ! '' 
replied Davout , but what this `` yes '' meant , Pierre did not know . 
Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went , whether it was far , or in which direction . 
His faculties were quite numbed , he was stupefied , and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others did till they all stopped and he stopped too . 
The only thought in his mind at that time was : who was it that had really sentenced him to death ? 
Not the men on the commission that had first examined him -- not one of them wished to or , evidently , could have done it . 
It was not Davout , who had looked at him in so human a way . 
In another moment Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong , but just then the adjutant had come in and interrupted him . 
The adjutant , also , had evidently had no evil intent though he might have refrained from coming in . 
Then who was executing him , killing him , depriving him of life -- him , Pierre , with all his memories , aspirations , hopes , and thoughts ? 
Who was doing this ? 
And Pierre felt that it was no one . 
It was a system -- a concurrence of circumstances . 
A system of some sort was killing him -- Pierre -- depriving him of life , of everything , annihilating him . 
From Prince Shcherbatov 's house the prisoners were led straight down the Virgin 's Field , to the left of the nunnery , as far as a kitchen garden in which a post had been set up . 
Beyond that post a fresh pit had been dug in the ground , and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood in a semicircle . 
The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of Napoleon 's soldiers who were not on duty -- Germans , Italians , and Frenchmen , in a variety of uniforms . 
To the right and left of the post stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high boots and shakos . 
The prisoners were placed in a certain order , according to the list -LRB- Pierre was sixth -RRB- , and were led to the post . 
Several drums suddenly began to beat on both sides of them , and at that sound Pierre felt as if part of his soul had been torn away . 
He lost the power of thinking or understanding . 
He could only hear and see . 
And he had only one wish -- that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly . 
Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them . 
The two first were convicts with shaven heads . 
One was tall and thin , the other dark , shaggy , and sinewy , with a flat nose . 
The third was a domestic serf , about forty-five years old , with grizzled hair and a plump , well-nourished body . 
The fourth was a peasant , a very handsome man with a broad , light-brown beard and black eyes . 
The fifth was a factory hand , a thin , sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat . 
Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or two at a time . 
`` In couples , '' replied the officer in command in a calm voice . 
There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident that they were all hurrying -- not as men hurry to do something they understand , but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and incomprehensible task . 
A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French . 
Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the officer 's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row . 
The convicts stopped when they reached the post and , while sacks were being brought , looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching huntsman . 
One crossed himself continually , the other scratched his back and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile . 
With hurried hands the soldiers blindfolded them , drawing the sacks over their heads , and bound them to the post . 
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm regular tread and halted eight paces from the post . 
Pierre turned away to avoid seeing what was going to happen . 
Suddenly a crackling , rolling noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific thunder , and he looked round . 
There was some smoke , and the Frenchmen were doing something near the pit , with pale faces and trembling hands . 
Two more prisoners were led up . 
In the same way and with similar looks , these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for protection in their eyes , evidently unable to understand or believe what was going to happen to them . 
They could not believe it because they alone knew what their life meant to them , and so they neither understood nor believed that it could be taken from them . 
Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away ; but again the sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear , and at the same moment he saw smoke , blood , and the pale , scared faces of the Frenchmen who were again doing something by the post , their trembling hands impeding one another . 
Pierre , breathing heavily , looked around as if asking what it meant . 
The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his . 
On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers without exception , he read the same dismay , horror , and conflict that were in his own heart . 
`` But who , after all , is doing this ? 
They are all suffering as I am . 
Who then is it ? 
Who ? '' 
flashed for an instant through his mind . 
`` Sharpshooters of the 86th , forward ! '' 
shouted someone . 
The fifth prisoner , the one next to Pierre , was led away -- alone . 
Pierre did not understand that he was saved , that he and the rest had been brought there only to witness the execution . 
With ever-growing horror , and no sense of joy or relief , he gazed at what was taking place . 
The fifth man was the factory lad in the loose cloak . 
The moment they laid hands on him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre . 
-LRB- Pierre shuddered and shook himself free . -RRB- 
The lad was unable to walk . 
They dragged him along , holding him up under the arms , and he screamed . 
When they got him to the post he grew quiet , as if he suddenly understood something . 
Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought it incredible that men should kill him , at any rate he took his stand at the post , waiting to be blindfolded like the others , and like a wounded animal looked around him with glittering eyes . 
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes . 
His curiosity and agitation , like that of the whole crowd , reached the highest pitch at this fifth murder . 
Like the others this fifth man seemed calm ; he wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other . 
When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which hurt the back of his head ; then when they propped him against the bloodstained post , he leaned back and , not being comfortable in that position , straightened himself , adjusted his feet , and leaned back again more comfortably . 
Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss his slightest movement . 
Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of eight muskets ; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember having heard the slightest sound of the shots . 
He only saw how the workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him , how blood showed itself in two places , how the ropes slackened under the weight of the hanging body , and how the workman sat down , his head hanging unnaturally and one leg bent under him . 
Pierre ran up to the post . 
No one hindered him . 
Pale , frightened people were doing something around the workman . 
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he untied the ropes . 
The body collapsed . 
The soldiers dragged it awkwardly from the post and began pushing it into the pit . 
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible . 
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other . 
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively , but spadefuls of earth were already being thrown over the whole body . 
One of the soldiers , evidently suffering , shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to go back . 
But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post , and no one drove him away . 
When the pit had been filled up a command was given . 
Pierre was taken back to his place , and the rows of troops on both sides of the post made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace . 
The twenty-four sharpshooters with discharged muskets , standing in the center of the circle , ran back to their places as the companies passed by . 
Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in couples out of the circle . 
All but one rejoined their companies . 
This one , a young soldier , his face deadly pale , his shako pushed back , and his musket resting on the ground , still stood near the pit at the spot from which he had fired . 
He swayed like a drunken man , taking some steps forward and back to save himself from falling . 
An old , noncommissioned officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to his company . 
The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse . 
They all went away silently and with drooping heads . 
`` That will teach them to start fires , '' said one of the Frenchmen . 
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who was trying to find some relief after what had been done , but was not able to do so . 
Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a hopeless movement with his arm and went away . 
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners and placed alone in a small , ruined , and befouled church . 
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for the prisoners of war . 
Without understanding what was said to him , Pierre got up and went with the soldiers . 
They took him to the upper end of the field , where there were some sheds built of charred planks , beams , and battens , and led him into one of them . 
In the darkness some twenty different men surrounded Pierre . 
He looked at them without understanding who they were , why they were there , or what they wanted of him . 
He heard what they said , but did not understand the meaning of the words and made no kind of deduction from or application of them . 
He replied to questions they put to him , but did not consider who was listening to his replies , nor how they would understand them . 
He looked at their faces and figures , but they all seemed to him equally meaningless . 
From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by men who did not wish to commit them , it was as if the mainspring of his life , on which everything depended and which made everything appear alive , had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed into a heap of meaningless rubbish . 
Though he did not acknowledge it to himself , his faith in the right ordering of the universe , in humanity , in his own soul , and in God , had been destroyed . 
He had experienced this before , but never so strongly as now . 
When similar doubts had assailed him before , they had been the result of his own wrongdoing , and at the bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from those doubts was to be found within himself . 
But now he felt that the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins remained , and this not by any fault of his own . 
He felt that it was not in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life . 
Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something about him interested them greatly . 
They were telling him something and asking him something . 
Then they led him away somewhere , and at last he found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and talking on all sides . 
`` Well , then , mates ... that very prince who ... '' some voice at the other end of the shed was saying , with a strong emphasis on the word who . 
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall , Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes . 
But as soon as he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory lad -- especially dreadful because of its simplicity -- and the faces of the murderers , even more dreadful because of their disquiet . 
And he opened his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him . 
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he was first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from him every time he moved . 
This man was doing something to his legs in the darkness , and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man continually glanced at him . 
On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw that the man was taking off his leg bands , and the way he did it aroused Pierre 's interest . 
Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg , he carefully coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg , glancing up at Pierre . 
While one hand hung up the first string the other was already unwinding the band on the second leg . 
In this way , having carefully removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following one another uninterruptedly , the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs fixed above his head . 
Then he took out a knife , cut something , closed the knife , placed it under the head of his bed , and , seating himself comfortably , clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes on Pierre . 
The latter was conscious of something pleasant , comforting , and well rounded in these deft movements , in the man 's well-ordered arrangements in his corner , and even in his very smell , and he looked at the man without taking his eyes from him . 
`` You 've seen a lot of trouble , sir , eh ? '' 
the little man suddenly said . 
And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice that Pierre tried to reply , but his jaw trembled and he felt tears rising to his eyes . 
The little fellow , giving Pierre no time to betray his confusion , instantly continued in the same pleasant tones : `` Eh , lad , do n't fret ! '' 
said he , in the tender singsong caressing voice old Russian peasant women employ . 
`` Do n't fret , friend -- ` suffer an hour , live for an age ! ' 
that 's how it is , my dear fellow . 
And here we live , thank heaven , without offense . 
Among these folk , too , there are good men as well as bad , '' said he , and still speaking , he turned on his knees with a supple movement , got up , coughed , and went off to another part of the shed . 
`` Eh , you rascal ! '' 
Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other end of the shed . 
`` So you 've come , you rascal ? 
She remembers ... Now , now , that 'll do ! '' 
And the soldier , pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at him , returned to his place and sat down . 
In his hands he had something wrapped in a rag . 
`` Here , eat a bit , sir , '' said he , resuming his former respectful tone as he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes . 
`` We had soup for dinner and the potatoes are grand ! '' 
Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed extremely pleasant to him . 
He thanked the soldier and began to eat . 
`` Well , are they all right ? '' 
said the soldier with a smile . 
`` You should do like this . '' 
He took a potato , drew out his clasp knife , cut the potato into two equal halves on the palm of his hand , sprinkled some salt on it from the rag , and handed it to Pierre . 
`` The potatoes are grand ! '' 
he said once more . 
`` Eat some like that ! '' 
Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better . 
`` Oh , I 'm all right , '' said he , `` but why did they shoot those poor fellows ? 
The last one was hardly twenty . '' 
`` Tss , tt ... ! '' 
said the little man . 
`` Ah , what a sin ... what a sin ! '' 
he added quickly , and as if his words were always waiting ready in his mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on : `` How was it , sir , that you stayed in Moscow ? '' 
`` I did n't think they would come so soon . 
I stayed accidentally , '' replied Pierre . 
`` And how did they arrest you , dear lad ? 
At your house ? '' 
`` No , I went to look at the fire , and they arrested me there , and tried me as an incendiary . '' 
`` Where there 's law there 's injustice , '' put in the little man . 
`` And have you been here long ? '' 
Pierre asked as he munched the last of the potato . 
`` I ? 
It was last Sunday they took me , out of a hospital in Moscow . '' 
`` Why , are you a soldier then ? '' 
`` Yes , we are soldiers of the Apsheron regiment . 
I was dying of fever . 
We were n't told anything . 
There were some twenty of us lying there . 
We had no idea , never guessed at all . '' 
`` And do you feel sad here ? '' 
Pierre inquired . 
`` How can one help it , lad ? 
My name is Platon , and the surname is Karataev , '' he added , evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre to address him . 
`` They call me ` little falcon ' in the regiment . 
How is one to help feeling sad ? 
Moscow -- she 's the mother of cities . 
How can one see all this and not feel sad ? 
But ` the maggot gnaws the cabbage , yet dies first ' ; that 's what the old folks used to tell us , '' he added rapidly . 
`` What ? 
What did you say ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Who ? 
I ? '' 
said Karataev . 
`` I say things happen not as we plan but as God judges , '' he replied , thinking that he was repeating what he had said before , and immediately continued : `` Well , and you , have you a family estate , sir ? 
And a house ? 
So you have abundance , then ? 
And a housewife ? 
And your old parents , are they still living ? '' 
he asked . 
And though it was too dark for Pierre to see , he felt that a suppressed smile of kindliness puckered the soldier 's lips as he put these questions . 
He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents , especially that he had no mother . 
`` A wife for counsel , a mother-in-law for welcome , but there 's none as dear as one 's own mother ! '' 
said he . 
`` Well , and have you little ones ? '' 
he went on asking . 
Again Pierre 's negative answer seemed to distress him , and he hastened to add : `` Never mind ! 
You 're young folks yet , and please God may still have some . 
The great thing is to live in harmony ... '' `` But it 's all the same now , '' Pierre could not help saying . 
`` Ah , my dear fellow ! '' 
rejoined Karataev , `` never decline a prison or a beggar 's sack ! '' 
He seated himself more comfortably and coughed , evidently preparing to tell a long story . 
`` Well , my dear fellow , I was still living at home , '' he began . 
`` We had a well-to-do homestead , plenty of land , we peasants lived well and our house was one to thank God for . 
When Father and we went out mowing there were seven of us . 
We lived well . 
We were real peasants . 
It so happened ... '' And Platon Karataev told a long story of how he had gone into someone 's copse to take wood , how he had been caught by the keeper , had been tried , flogged , and sent to serve as a soldier . 
`` Well , lad , '' and a smile changed the tone of his voice `` we thought it was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing ! 
If it had not been for my sin , my brother would have had to go as a soldier . 
But he , my younger brother , had five little ones , while I , you see , only left a wife behind . 
We had a little girl , but God took her before I went as a soldier . 
I come home on leave and I 'll tell you how it was , I look and see that they are living better than before . 
The yard full of cattle , the women at home , two brothers away earning wages , and only Michael the youngest , at home . 
Father , he says , ` All my children are the same to me : it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten . 
But if Platon had n't been shaved for a soldier , Michael would have had to go . ' 
called us all to him and , will you believe it , placed us in front of the icons . 
` Michael , ' he says , ` come here and bow down to his feet ; and you , young woman , you bow down too ; and you , grandchildren , also bow down before him ! 
Do you understand ? ' 
he says . 
That 's how it is , dear fellow . 
Fate looks for a head . 
But we are always judging , ` that 's not well -- that 's not right ! ' 
Our luck is like water in a dragnet : you pull at it and it bulges , but when you 've drawn it out it 's empty ! 
That 's how it is . '' 
And Platon shifted his seat on the straw . 
After a short silence he rose . 
`` Well , I think you must be sleepy , '' said he , and began rapidly crossing himself and repeating : `` Lord Jesus Christ , holy Saint Nicholas , Frola and Lavra ! 
Lord Jesus Christ , holy Saint Nicholas , Frola and Lavra ! 
Lord Jesus Christ , have mercy on us and save us ! '' 
he concluded , then bowed to the ground , got up , sighed , and sat down again on his heap of straw . 
`` That 's the way . 
Lay me down like a stone , O God , and raise me up like a loaf , '' he muttered as he lay down , pulling his coat over him . 
`` What prayer was that you were saying ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Eh ? '' 
murmured Platon , who had almost fallen asleep . 
`` What was I saying ? 
I was praying . 
Do n't you pray ? '' 
`` Yes , I do , '' said Pierre . 
`` But what was that you said : Frola and Lavra ? '' 
`` Well , of course , '' replied Platon quickly , `` the horses ' saints . 
One must pity the animals too . 
Eh , the rascal ! 
Now you 've curled up and got warm , you daughter of a bitch ! '' 
said Karataev , touching the dog that lay at his feet , and again turning over he fell asleep immediately . 
Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance outside , and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed , but inside it was quiet and dark . 
For a long time Pierre did not sleep , but lay with eyes open in the darkness , listening to the regular snoring of Platon who lay beside him , and he felt that the world that had been shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on new and unshakable foundations . 
Twenty-three soldiers , three officers , and two officials were confined in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for four weeks . 
When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to him except Platon Karataev , who always remained in his mind a most vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian , kindly , and round . 
When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn the first impression of him , as of something round , was fully confirmed : Platon 's whole figure -- in a French overcoat girdled with a cord , a soldier 's cap , and bast shoes -- was round . 
His head was quite round , his back , chest , shoulders , and even his arms , which he held as if ever ready to embrace something , were rounded , his pleasant smile and his large , gentle brown eyes were also round . 
Platon Karataev must have been fifty , judging by his stories of campaigns he had been in , told as by an old soldier . 
He did not himself know his age and was quite unable to determine it . 
But his brilliantly white , strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he laughed -- as he often did -- were all sound and good , there was not a gray hair in his beard or on his head , and his whole body gave an impression of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance . 
His face , despite its fine , rounded wrinkles , had an expression of innocence and youth , his voice was pleasant and musical . 
But the chief peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness . 
It was evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say , and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an irresistible persuasiveness . 
His physical strength and agility during the first days of his imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and sickness meant . 
Every night before lying down , he said : `` Lord , lay me down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf ! '' 
and every morning on getting up , he said : `` I lay down and curled up , I get up and shake myself . '' 
And indeed he only had to lie down , to fall asleep like a stone , and he only had to shake himself , to be ready without a moment 's delay for some work , just as children are ready to play directly they awake . 
He could do everything , not very well but not badly . 
He baked , cooked , sewed , planed , and mended boots . 
He was always busy , and only at night allowed himself conversation -- of which he was fond -- and songs . 
He did not sing like a trained singer who knows he is listened to , but like the birds , evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches oneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness , and the sounds were always high-pitched , mournful , delicate , and almost feminine , and his face at such times was very serious . 
Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow , he seemed to have thrown off all that had been forced upon him - everything military and alien to himself -- and had returned to his former peasant habits . 
`` A soldier on leave -- a shirt outside breeches , '' he would say . 
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier , though he did not complain , and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during the whole of his army service . 
When he related anything it was generally some old and evidently precious memory of his `` Christian '' life , as he called his peasant existence . 
The proverbs , of which his talk was full , were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers employ , but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so insignificant , but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance of profound wisdom . 
He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous occasion , yet both would be right . 
He liked to talk and he talked well , adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which Pierre thought he invented himself , but the chief charm of his talk lay in the fact that the commonest events -- sometimes just such as Pierre had witnessed without taking notice of them - assumed in Karataev 's a character of solemn fitness . 
He liked to hear the folk tales one of the soldiers used to tell of an evening -LRB- they were always the same -RRB- , but most of all he liked to hear stories of real life . 
He would smile joyfully when listening to such stories , now and then putting in a word or asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear to himself . 
Karataev had no attachments , friendships , or love , as Pierre understood them , but loved and lived affectionately with everything life brought him in contact with , particularly with man -- not any particular man , but those with whom he happened to be . 
He loved his dog , his comrades , the French , and Pierre who was his neighbor , but Pierre felt that in spite of Karataev 's affectionate tenderness for him -LRB- by which he unconsciously gave Pierre 's spiritual life its due -RRB- he would not have grieved for a moment at parting from him . 
And Pierre began to feel in the same way toward Karataev . 
To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinary soldier . 
They called him `` little falcon '' or `` Platosha , '' chaffed him good-naturedly , and sent him on errands . 
But to Pierre he always remained what he had seemed that first night : an unfathomable , rounded , eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth . 
Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers . 
When he began to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude . 
Sometimes Pierre , struck by the meaning of his words , would ask him to repeat them , but Platon could never recall what he had said a moment before , just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his favorite song : native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in it , but when spoken and not sung , no meaning could be got out of it . 
He did not , and could not , understand the meaning of words apart from their context . 
Every word and action of his was the manifestation of an activity unknown to him , which was his life . 
But his life , as he regarded it , had no meaning as a separate thing . 
It had meaning only as part of a whole of which he was always conscious . 
His words and actions flowed from him as evenly , inevitably , and spontaneously as fragrance exhales from a flower . 
He could not understand the value or significance of any word or deed taken separately . 
When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the Rostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there , in spite of her aunt 's efforts to dissuade her -- and not merely to go herself but to take her nephew with her . 
Whether it were difficult or easy , possible or impossible , she did not ask and did not want to know : it was her duty not only herself to be near her brother who was perhaps dying , but to do everything possible to take his son to him , and so she prepared to set off . 
That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself , Princess Mary attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the long journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son . 
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start . 
Her equipages were the huge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh , a semiopen trap , and a baggage cart . 
With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne , little Nicholas and his tutor , her old nurse , three maids , Tikhon , and a young footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her . 
The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of , and the roundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk , Ryazan , Vladimir , and Shuya was very long and , as post horses were not everywhere obtainable , very difficult , and near Ryazan where the French were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous . 
During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne , Dessalles , and Princess Mary 's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of spirit . 
She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them , and no difficulties daunted her . 
Thanks to her activity and energy , which infected her fellow travelers , they approached Yaroslavl by the end of the second week . 
The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life . 
Her love for Rostov no longer tormented or agitated her . 
It filled her whole soul , had become an integral part of herself , and she no longer struggled against it . 
Latterly she had become convinced that she loved and was beloved , though she never said this definitely to herself in words . 
She had become convinced of it at her last interview with Nicholas , when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the Rostovs . 
Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that Prince Andrew 's relations with Natasha might , if he recovered , be renewed , but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of this . 
Yet in spite of that , his relation to her -- considerate , delicate , and loving -- not only remained unchanged , but it sometimes seemed to Princess Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them allowed him to express his friendship more freely . 
She knew that she loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was beloved , and was happy in regard to it . 
But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not prevent her feeling grief for her brother with full force ; on the contrary , that spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her to give full play to her feeling for her brother . 
That feeling was so strong at the moment of leaving Voronezh that those who saw her off , as they looked at her careworn , despairing face , felt sure she would fall ill on the journey . 
But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the journey , which she took so actively in hand , saved her for a while from her grief and gave her strength . 
As always happens when traveling , Princess Mary thought only of the journey itself , forgetting its object . 
But as she approached Yaroslavl the thought of what might await her there -- not after many days , but that very evening -- again presented itself to her and her agitation increased to its utmost limit . 
The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the Rostovs were staying in Yaroslavl , and in what condition Prince Andrew was , when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled by the terrible pallor of the princess ' face that looked out at him from the window . 
`` I have found out everything , your excellency : the Rostovs are staying at the merchant Bronnikov 's house , in the Square not far from here , right above the Volga , '' said the courier . 
Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry , not understanding why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know : how was her brother ? 
Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her . 
`` How is the prince ? '' 
she asked . 
`` His excellency is staying in the same house with them . '' 
`` Then he is alive , '' thought Princess Mary , and asked in a low voice : `` How is he ? '' 
`` The servants say he is still the same . '' 
What `` still the same '' might mean Princess Mary did not ask , but with an unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas , who was sitting in front of her looking with pleasure at the town , she bowed her head and did not raise it again till the heavy coach , rumbling , shaking and swaying , came to a stop . 
The carriage steps clattered as they were let down . 
The carriage door was opened . 
On the left there was water -- a great river -- and on the right a porch . 
There were people at the entrance : servants , and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair , smiling as it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way . 
-LRB- This was Sonya . -RRB- 
Princess Mary ran up the steps . 
`` This way , this way ! '' 
said the girl , with the same artificial smile , and the princess found herself in the hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type , who came rapidly to meet her with a look of emotion . 
This was the countess . 
She embraced Princess Mary and kissed her . 
`` Mon enfant ! '' 
she muttered , `` je vous aime et vous connais depuis longtemps . '' 
* * `` My child ! 
I love you and have known you a long time . '' 
Despite her excitement , Princess Mary realized that this was the countess and that it was necessary to say something to her . 
Hardly knowing how she did it , she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her , and asked : `` How is he ? '' 
`` The doctor says that he is not in danger , '' said the countess , but as she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh , and her gesture conveyed a contradiction of her words . 
`` Where is he ? 
Can I see him -- can I ? '' 
asked the princess . 
`` One moment , Princess , one moment , my dear ! 
Is this his son ? '' 
said the countess , turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles . 
`` There will be room for everybody , this is a big house . 
Oh , what a lovely boy ! '' 
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room , where Sonya was talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
The countess caressed the boy , and the old count came in and welcomed the princess . 
He had changed very much since Princess Mary had last seen him . 
Then he had been a brisk , cheerful , self-assured old man ; now he seemed a pitiful , bewildered person . 
While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as if asking everyone whether he was doing the right thing . 
After the destruction of Moscow and of his property , thrown out of his accustomed groove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own significance and to feel that there was no longer a place for him in life . 
In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible , and her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew , the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the necessity of submitting , for a time , to this new order of things which she had entered . 
She knew it to be necessary , and though it was hard for her she was not vexed with these people . 
`` This is my niece , '' said the count , introducing Sonya -- `` You do n't know her , Princess ? '' 
Princess Mary turned to Sonya and , trying to stifle the hostile feeling that arose in her toward the girl , she kissed her . 
But she felt oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far from what was in her own heart . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
she asked again , addressing them all . 
`` He is downstairs . 
Natasha is with him , '' answered Sonya , flushing . 
`` We have sent to ask . 
I think you must be tired , Princess . '' 
Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary 's eyes . 
She turned away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him , when light , impetuous , and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the door . 
The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in , almost running -- that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in Moscow long since . 
But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha 's face before she realized that here was a real comrade in her grief , and consequently a friend . 
She ran to meet her , embraced her , and began to cry on her shoulder . 
As soon as Natasha , sitting at the head of Prince Andrew 's bed , heard of Princess Mary 's arrival , she softly left his room and hastened to her with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary . 
There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the drawing room -- that of love -- boundless love for him , for her , and for all that was near to the man she loved ; and of pity , suffering for others , and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them . 
It was plain that at that moment there was in Natasha 's heart no thought of herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew . 
Princess Mary , with her acute sensibility , understood all this at the first glance at Natasha 's face , and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful pleasure . 
`` Come , come to him , Mary , '' said Natasha , leading her into the other room . 
Princess Mary raised her head , dried her eyes , and turned to Natasha . 
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn everything . 
`` How ... '' she began her question but stopped short . 
She felt that it was impossible to ask , or to answer , in words . 
Natasha 's face eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and profoundly . 
Natasha was gazing at her , but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say all she knew or not ; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes which penetrated into the very depths of her heart , it was impossible not to tell the whole truth which she saw . 
And suddenly , Natasha 's lips twitched , ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth , and covering her face with her hands she burst into sobs . 
Princess Mary understood . 
But she still hoped , and asked , in words she herself did not trust : `` But how is his wound ? 
What is his general condition ? '' 
`` You , you ... will see , '' was all Natasha could say . 
They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off crying and were able to go to him with calm faces . 
`` How has his whole illness gone ? 
Is it long since he grew worse ? 
When did this happen ? '' 
Princess Mary inquired . 
Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish condition and the pain he suffered , but at Troitsa that had passed and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene . 
That danger had also passed . 
When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had begun to fester -LRB- Natasha knew all about such things as festering -RRB- and the doctor had said that the festering might take a normal course . 
Then fever set in , but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious . 
`` But two days ago this suddenly happened , '' said Natasha , struggling with her sobs . 
`` I do n't know why , but you will see what he is like . '' 
`` Is he weaker ? 
Thinner ? '' 
asked the princess . 
`` No , it 's not that , but worse . 
You will see . 
O , Mary , he is too good , he can not , can not live , because ... '' When Natasha opened Prince Andrew 's door with a familiar movement and let Princess Mary pass into the room before her , the princess felt the sobs in her throat . 
Hard as she had tried to prepare herself , and now tried to remain tranquil , she knew that she would be unable to look at him without tears . 
The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words : `` two days ago this suddenly happened . '' 
She understood those words to mean that he had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs of approaching death . 
As she stepped to the door she already saw in imagination Andrew 's face as she remembered it in childhood , a gentle , mild , sympathetic face which he had rarely shown , and which therefore affected her very strongly . 
She was sure he would speak soft , tender words to her such as her father had uttered before his death , and that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his presence . 
Yet sooner or later it had to be , and she went in . 
The sobs rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his features , and then she saw his face and met his gaze . 
He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan , surrounded by pillows . 
He was thin and pale . 
In one thin , translucently white hand he held a handkerchief , while with the other he stroked the delicate mustache he had grown , moving his fingers slowly . 
His eyes gazed at them as they entered . 
On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary 's pace suddenly slackened , she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased . 
She suddenly felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and eyes . 
`` But in what am I to blame ? '' 
she asked herself . 
And his cold , stern look replied : `` Because you are alive and thinking of the living , while I. . . '' 
In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and Natasha . 
He kissed his sister , holding her hand in his as was their wont . 
`` How are you , Mary ? 
How did you manage to get here ? '' 
said he in a voice as calm and aloof as his look . 
Had he screamed in agony , that scream would not have struck such horror into Princess Mary 's heart as the tone of his voice . 
`` And have you brought little Nicholas ? '' 
he asked in the same slow , quiet manner and with an obvious effort to remember . 
`` How are you now ? '' 
said Princess Mary , herself surprised at what she was saying . 
`` That , my dear , you must ask the doctor , '' he replied , and again making an evident effort to be affectionate , he said with his lips only -LRB- his words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts -RRB- : `` Merci , chere amie , d'etre venue . '' 
* * `` Thank you for coming , my dear . '' 
Princess Mary pressed his hand . 
The pressure made him wince just perceptibly . 
He was silent , and she did not know what to say . 
She now understood what had happened to him two days before . 
In his words , his tone , and especially in that calm , almost antagonistic look could be felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world , terrible in one who is alive . 
Evidently only with an effort did he understand anything living ; but it was obvious that he failed to understand , not because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood something else -- something the living did not and could not understand -- and which wholly occupied his mind . 
`` There , you see how strangely fate has brought us together , '' said he , breaking the silence and pointing to Natasha . 
`` She looks after me all the time . '' 
Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a thing . 
He , the sensitive , tender Prince Andrew , how could he say that , before her whom he loved and who loved him ? 
Had he expected to live he could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone . 
If he had not known that he was dying , how could he have failed to pity her and how could he speak like that in her presence ? 
The only explanation was that he was indifferent , because something else , much more important , had been revealed to him . 
The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off . 
`` Mary came by way of Ryazan , '' said Natasha . 
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary , and only after calling her so in his presence did Natasha notice it herself . 
`` Really ? '' 
he asked . 
`` They told her that all Moscow has been burned down , and that ... '' Natasha stopped . 
It was impossible to talk . 
It was plain that he was making an effort to listen , but could not do so . 
`` Yes , they say it 's burned , '' he said . 
`` It 's a great pity , '' and he gazed straight before him , absently stroking his mustache with his fingers . 
`` And so you have met Count Nicholas , Mary ? '' 
Prince Andrew suddenly said , evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them . 
`` He wrote here that he took a great liking to you , '' he went on simply and calmly , evidently unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for living people . 
`` If you liked him too , it would be a good thing for you to get married , '' he added rather more quickly , as if pleased at having found words he had long been seeking . 
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her , except as a proof of how far away he now was from everything living . 
`` Why talk of me ? '' 
she said quietly and glanced at Natasha . 
Natasha , who felt her glance , did not look at her . 
All three were again silent . 
`` Andrew , would you like ... '' Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling voice , `` would you like to see little Nicholas ? 
He is always talking about you ! '' 
Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time , but Princess Mary , who knew his face so well , saw with horror that he did not smile with pleasure or affection for his son , but with quiet , gentle irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last means of arousing him . 
`` Yes , I shall be very glad to see him . 
Is he quite well ? '' 
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew 's room he looked at his father with frightened eyes , but did not cry , because no one else was crying . 
Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to say to him . 
When Nicholas had been led away , Princess Mary again went up to her brother , kissed him , and unable to restrain her tears any longer began to cry . 
He looked at her attentively . 
`` Is it about Nicholas ? '' 
he asked . 
Princess Mary nodded her head , weeping . 
`` Mary , you know the Gosp ... '' but he broke off . 
`` What did you say ? '' 
`` Nothing . 
You must n't cry here , '' he said , looking at her with the same cold expression . 
When Princess Mary began to cry , he understood that she was crying at the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father . 
With a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their point of view . 
`` Yes , to them it must seem sad ! '' 
he thought . 
`` But how simple it is . 
`` The fowls of the air sow not , neither do they reap , yet your Father feedeth them , '' he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary ; `` but no , they will take it their own way , they wo n't understand ! 
They ca n't understand that all those feelings they prize so -- all our feelings , all those ideas that seem so important to us , are unnecessary . 
We can not understand one another , '' and he remained silent . 
Prince Andrew 's little son was seven . 
He could scarcely read , and knew nothing . 
After that day he lived through many things , gaining knowledge , observation , and experience , but had he possessed all the faculties he afterwards acquired , he could not have had a better or more profound understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between his father , Mary , and Natasha , than he had then . 
He understood it completely , and , leaving the room without crying , went silently up to Natasha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with his beautiful , thoughtful eyes , then his uplifted , rosy upper lip trembled and leaning his head against her he began to cry . 
After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary , or to Natasha of whom he seemed even fonder than of his aunt , and clung to them quietly and shyly . 
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what Natasha 's face had told her . 
She did not speak any more to Natasha of hopes of saving his life . 
She took turns with her beside his sofa , and did not cry any more , but prayed continually , turning in soul to that Eternal and Unfathomable , whose presence above the dying man was now so evident . 
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die , but he felt that he was dying and was already half dead . 
He was conscious of an aloofness from everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence . 
Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming . 
That inexorable , eternal , distant , and unknown the presence of which he had felt continually all his life -- was now near to him and , by the strange lightness he experienced , almost comprehensible and palpable ... Formerly he had feared the end . 
He had twice experienced that terribly tormenting fear of death -- the end -- but now he no longer understood that fear . 
He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top before him , and he looked at the fallow field , the bushes , and the sky , and knew that he was face to face with death . 
When he came to himself after being wounded and the flower of eternal , unfettered love had instantly unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of life that had restrained it , he no longer feared death and ceased to think about it . 
During the hours of solitude , suffering , and partial delirium he spent after he was wounded , the more deeply he penetrated into the new principle of eternal love revealed to him , the more he unconsciously detached himself from earthly life . 
To love everything and everybody and always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone , not to live this earthly life . 
And the more imbued he became with that principle of love , the more he renounced life and the more completely he destroyed that dreadful barrier which -- in the absence of such love -- stands between life and death . 
When during those first days he remembered that he would have to die , he said to himself : `` Well , what of it ? 
So much the better ! '' 
But after the night in Mytishchi when , half delirious , he had seen her for whom he longed appear before him and , having pressed her hand to his lips , had shed gentle , happy tears , love for a particular woman again crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life . 
And joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind . 
Recalling the moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kuragin , he could not now regain the feeling he then had , but was tormented by the question whether Kuragin was alive . 
And he dared not inquire . 
His illness pursued its normal physical course , but what Natasha referred to when she said : `` This suddenly happened , '' had occurred two days before Princess Mary arrived . 
It was the last spiritual struggle between life and death , in which death gained the victory . 
It was the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha , and a last , though ultimately vanquished , attack of terror before the unknown . 
It was evening . 
As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish , and his thoughts were preternaturally clear . 
Sonya was sitting by the table . 
He began to doze . 
Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him . 
`` Ah , she has come ! '' 
thought he . 
And so it was : in Sonya 's place sat Natasha who had just come in noiselessly . 
Since she had begun looking after him , he had always experienced this physical consciousness of her nearness . 
She was sitting in an armchair placed sideways , screening the light of the candle from him , and was knitting a stocking . 
She had learned to knit stockings since Prince Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old nurses who knit stockings , and that there is something soothing in the knitting of stockings . 
The needles clicked lightly in her slender , rapidly moving hands , and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile of her drooping face . 
She moved , and the ball rolled off her knees . 
She started , glanced round at him , and screening the candle with her hand stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement , picked up the ball , and regained her former position . 
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a deep breath after stooping , but refrained from doing so and breathed cautiously . 
At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past , and he had told her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had brought them together again , but after that they never spoke of the future . 
`` Can it or can it not be ? '' 
he now thought as he looked at her and listened to the light click of the steel needles . 
`` Can fate have brought me to her so strangely only for me to die ? 
... Is it possible that the truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent my life in falsity ? 
I love her more than anything in the world ! 
But what am I to do if I love her ? '' 
he thought , and he involuntarily groaned , from a habit acquired during his sufferings . 
On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking , leaned nearer to him , and suddenly , noticing his shining eyes , stepped lightly up to him and bent over him . 
`` You are not asleep ? '' 
`` No , I have been looking at you a long time . 
I felt you come in . 
No one else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do ... that light . 
I want to weep for joy . '' 
Natasha drew closer to him . 
Her face shone with rapturous joy . 
`` Natasha , I love you too much ! 
More than anything in the world . '' 
`` And I ! '' 
-- She turned away for an instant . 
`` Why too much ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Why too much ? 
... Well , what do you , what do you feel in your soul , your whole soul -- shall I live ? 
What do you think ? '' 
`` I am sure of it , sure ! '' 
Natasha almost shouted , taking hold of both his hands with a passionate movement . 
He remained silent awhile . 
`` How good it would be ! '' 
and taking her hand he kissed it . 
Natasha felt happy and agitated , but at once remembered that this would not do and that he had to be quiet . 
`` But you have not slept , '' she said , repressing her joy . 
`` Try to sleep ... please ! '' 
He pressed her hand and released it , and she went back to the candle and sat down again in her former position . 
Twice she turned and looked at him , and her eyes met his beaming at her . 
She set herself a task on her stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished . 
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep . 
He did not sleep long and suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration . 
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now always occupied his mind -- about life and death , and chiefly about death . 
He felt himself nearer to it . 
`` Love ? 
What is love ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Love hinders death . 
Love is life . 
All , everything that I understand , I understand only because I love . 
Everything is , everything exists , only because I love . 
Everything is united by it alone . 
Love is God , and to die means that I , a particle of love , shall return to the general and eternal source . '' 
These thoughts seemed to him comforting . 
But they were only thoughts . 
Something was lacking in them , they were not clear , they were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun . 
And there was the former agitation and obscurity . 
He fell asleep . 
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in , but that he was quite well and unwounded . 
Many various , indifferent , and insignificant people appeared before him . 
He talked to them and discussed something trivial . 
They were preparing to go away somewhere . 
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had more important cares , but he continued to speak , surprising them by empty witticisms . 
Gradually , unnoticed , all these persons began to disappear and a single question , that of the closed door , superseded all else . 
He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it . 
Everything depended on whether he was , or was not , in time to lock it . 
He went , and tried to hurry , but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be in time to lock the door though he painfully strained all his powers . 
He was seized by an agonizing fear . 
And that fear was the fear of death . 
It stood behind the door . 
But just when he was clumsily creeping toward the door , that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing against it and forcing its way in . 
Something not human -- death -- was breaking in through that door , and had to be kept out . 
He seized the door , making a final effort to hold it back -- to lock it was no longer possible -- but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door , pushed from behind by that terror , opened and closed again . 
Once again it pushed from outside . 
His last superhuman efforts were vain and both halves of the door noiselessly opened . 
It entered , and it was death , and Prince Andrew died . 
But at the instant he died , Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep , and at the very instant he died , having made an effort , he awoke . 
`` Yes , it was death ! 
I died -- and woke up . 
Yes , death is an awakening ! '' 
And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision . 
He felt as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated , and that strange lightness did not again leave him . 
When , waking in a cold perspiration , he moved on the divan , Natasha went up and asked him what was the matter . 
He did not answer and looked at her strangely , not understanding . 
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary 's arrival . 
From that day , as the doctor expressed it , the wasting fever assumed a malignant character , but what the doctor said did not interest Natasha , she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more convincing . 
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with his awakening from sleep . 
And compared to the duration of life it did not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the duration of a dream . 
There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow awakening . 
His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way . 
Both Princess Mary and Natasha , who did not leave him , felt this . 
They did not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt that they were not attending on him -LRB- he was no longer there , he had left them -RRB- but on what reminded them most closely of him -- his body . 
Both felt this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief . 
Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep , nor did they ever talk to one another about him . 
They felt that they could not express in words what they understood . 
They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly , deeper and deeper , away from them , and they both knew that this had to be so and that it was right . 
He confessed , and received communion : everyone came to take leave of him . 
When they brought his son to him , he pressed his lips to the boy 's and turned away , not because he felt it hard and sad -LRB- Princess Mary and Natasha understood that -RRB- but simply because he thought it was all that was required of him , but when they told him to bless the boy , he did what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was anything else he should do . 
When the last convulsions of the body , which the spirit was leaving , occurred , Princess Mary and Natasha were present . 
`` Is it over ? '' 
said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes lain motionless , growing cold before them . 
Natasha went up , looked at the dead eyes , and hastened to close them . 
She closed them but did not kiss them , but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him -- his body . 
`` Where has he gone ? 
Where is he now ? 
... '' When the body , washed and dressed , lay in the coffin on a table , everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept . 
Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity . 
The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha and because he was no more . 
The old count cried because he felt that before long , he , too , must take the same terrible step . 
Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now , but not because of their own personal grief ; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their presence . 
Man 's mind can not grasp the causes of events in their completeness , but the desire to find those causes is implanted in man 's soul . 
And without considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one of which taken separately may seem to be the cause , he snatches at the first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says : `` This is the cause ! '' 
In historical events -LRB- where the actions of men are the subject of observation -RRB- the first and most primitive approximation to present itself was the will of the gods and , after that , the will of those who stood in the most prominent position -- the heroes of history . 
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event -- which lies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it -- to be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled . 
It may seem to be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning of historical events this way or that ; yet there is the same difference between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because it had to happen , as there is between those who declared that the earth was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth , but knew there were laws directing its movement and that of the other planets . 
There is , and can be , no cause of an historical event except the one cause of all causes . 
But there are laws directing events , and some of these laws are known to us while we are conscious of others we can not comprehend . 
The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man , just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the earth . 
The historians consider that , next to the battle of Borodino and the occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire , the most important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp -- the so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River . 
They ascribe the glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to whom the honor is due . 
Even foreign historians , including the French , acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of that flank march . 
But it is hard to understand why military writers , and following them others , consider this flank march to be the profound conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon . 
In the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius of this movement lay , for not much mental effort was needed to see that the best position for an army when it is not being attacked is where there are most provisions ; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have guessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow in 1812 was on the Kaluga road . 
So it is impossible to understand by what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver was a profound one . 
And it is even more difficult to understand just why they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy the French ; for this flank march , had it been preceded , accompanied , or followed by other circumstances , might have proved ruinous to the Russians and salutary for the French . 
If the position of the Russian army really began to improve from the time of that march , it does not at all follow that the march was the cause of it . 
That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to the Russian army , but might in other circumstances have led to its destruction . 
What would have happened had Moscow not burned down ? 
If Murat had not lost sight of the Russians ? 
If Napoleon had not remained inactive ? 
If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle as Bennigsen and Barclay advised ? 
What would have happened had the French attacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra ? 
What would have happened if on approaching Tarutino , Napoleon had attacked the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he attacked them at Smolensk ? 
What would have happened had the French moved on Petersburg ? 
... In any of these eventualities the flank march that brought salvation might have proved disastrous . 
The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march can not be attributed to any one man , that no one ever foresaw it , and that in reality , like the retreat from Fili , it did not suggest itself to anyone in its entirety , but resulted -- moment by moment , step by step , event by event -- from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the past . 
At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of the Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself , namely , a direct retreat by the Nizhni road . 
In proof of this there is the fact that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat , and above all there is the well-known conversation after the council , between the commander in chief and Lanskoy , who was in charge of the commissariat department . 
Lanskoy informed the commander in chief that the army supplies were for the most part stored along the Oka in the Tula and Ryazan provinces , and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would be separated from its supplies by the broad river Oka , which can not be crossed early in winter . 
This was the first indication of the necessity of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course -- a direct retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod . 
The army turned more to the south , along the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies . 
Subsequently the inactivity of the French -LRB- who even lost sight of the Russian army -RRB- , concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula , and especially the advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn still further south to the Tula road . 
Having crossed over , by a forced march , to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra , the Russian commanders intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutino position ; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians , and projects of giving battle , and above all the abundance of provisions in Kaluga province , obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross from the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino , which was between the roads along which those supplies lay . 
Just as it is impossible to say when it was decided to abandon Moscow , so it is impossible to say precisely when , or by whom , it was decided to move to Tarutino . 
Only when the army had got there , as the result of innumerable and varying forces , did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this movement and long ago foreseen its result . 
The famous flank movement merely consisted in this : after the advance of the French had ceased , the Russian army , which had been continually retreating straight back from the invaders , deviated from that direct course and , not finding itself pursued , was naturally drawn toward the district where supplies were abundant . 
If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the Russian army , we picture that army without any leaders , it could not have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow , describing an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where the country was richest . 
That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan , Tula , and Kaluga roads was so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction , and demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to take his army that way . 
At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road , and the Emperor 's letter indicated to him the very position he had already occupied near Kaluga . 
Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino , the Russian army - when the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was received -- assumed the position natural to it . 
Kutuzov 's merit lay , not in any strategic maneuver of genius , as it is called , but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of what had happened . 
He alone then understood the meaning of the French army 's inactivity , he alone continued to assert that the battle of Borodino had been a victory , he alone -- who as commander in chief might have been expected to be eager to attack -- employed his whole strength to restrain the Russian army from useless engagements . 
The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter had left him ; but whether he was still alive , whether he was strong and merely lying low , the hunter did not know . 
Suddenly the beast was heard to moan . 
The moan of that wounded beast -LRB- the French army -RRB- which betrayed its calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov 's camp with overtures for peace . 
Napoleon , with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was right , wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him , though they were meaningless . 
MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV : I am sending one of my adjutants-general to discuss several interesting questions with you . 
I beg your Highness to credit what he says to you , especially when he expresses the sentiment of esteem and special regard I have long entertained for your person . 
This letter having no other object , I pray God , monsieur le Prince Koutouzov , to keep you in His holy and gracious protection ! 
NAPOLEON MOSCOW , OCTOBER 30 , 1812 Kutuzov replied : `` I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as the initiator of a settlement of any sort . 
Such is the present spirit of my nation . '' 
But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his troops from attacking . 
During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino , a change had taken place in the relative strength of the two armies -- both in spirit and in number -- as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian side . 
Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown to the Russians , as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking at once showed itself by countless signs . 
These signs were : Lauriston 's mission ; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino ; the reports coming in from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French ; the flow of recruits to our regiments ; the fine weather ; the long rest the Russian soldiers had enjoyed , and the impatience to do what they had been assembled for , which usually shows itself in an army that has been resting ; curiosity as to what the French army , so long lost sight of , was doing ; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to the French stationed at Tarutino ; the news of easy successes gained by peasants and guerrilla troops over the French , the envy aroused by this ; the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as the French were in Moscow , and -LRB- above all -RRB- a dim consciousness in every soldier 's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and that the advantage was now on our side . 
There was a substantial change in the relative strength , and an advance had become inevitable . 
And at once , as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand has completed a full circle , this change was shown by an increased activity , whirring , and chiming in the higher spheres . 
The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff , and also by the Emperor from Petersburg . 
Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow had been received in Petersburg , a detailed plan of the whole campaign had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance . 
Though this plan had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands , it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action . 
Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always difficult to execute . 
So fresh instructions were sent for the solution of difficulties that might be encountered , as well as fresh people who were to watch Kutuzov 's actions and report upon them . 
Besides this , the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized . 
The posts left vacant by Bagration , who had been killed , and by Barclay , who had gone away in dudgeon , had to be filled . 
Very serious consideration was given to the question whether it would be better to put A in B 's place and B in D 's , or on the contrary to put D in A 's place , and so on -- as if anything more than A 's or B 's satisfaction depended on this . 
As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen , his Chief of Staff , the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor , and these transfers , a more than usually complicated play of parties was going on among the staff of the army . 
A was undermining B , D was undermining C , and so on in all possible combinations and permutations . 
In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct of the war , which all these men believed they were directing ; but this affair of the war went on independently of them , as it had to go : that is , never in the way people devised , but flowing always from the essential attitude of the masses . 
Only in the highest spheres did all these schemes , crossings , and interminglings appear to be a true reflection of what had to happen . 
Prince Michael Ilarionovich ! 
-LRB- wrote the Emperor on the second of October in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino -RRB- Since September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy . 
Your last reports were written on the twentieth , and during all this time not only has no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancient capital , but according to your last report you have even retreated farther . 
Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tula with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army , is in danger . 
From General Wintzingerode 's reports , I see that an enemy corps of ten thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road . 
Another corps of several thousand men is moving on Dmitrov . 
A third has advanced along the Vladimir road , and a fourth , rather considerable detachment is stationed between Ruza and Mozhaysk . 
Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as the twenty-fifth . 
In view of all this information , when the enemy has scattered his forces in large detachments , and with Napoleon and his Guards in Moscow , is it possible that the enemy 's forces confronting you are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive ? 
On the contrary , he is probably pursuing you with detachments , or at most with an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you . 
It would seem that , availing yourself of these circumstances , you might advantageously attack a weaker one and annihilate him , or at least oblige him to retreat , retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now occupied by the enemy , and thereby averting danger from Tula and other towns in the interior . 
You will be responsible if the enemy is able to direct a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capital in which it has not been possible to retain many troops ; for with the army entrusted to you , and acting with resolution and energy , you have ample means to avert this fresh calamity . 
Remember that you have still to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow . 
You have experienced my readiness to reward you . 
That readiness will not weaken in me , but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal , firmness , and success which your intellect , military talent , and the courage of the troops you command justify us in expecting . 
But by the time this letter , which proved that the real relation of the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg , was dispatched , Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army he commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place . 
On the second of October a Cossack , Shapovalov , who was out scouting , killed one hare and wounded another . 
Following the wounded hare he made his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat 's army , encamped there without any precautions . 
The Cossack laughingly told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French . 
A cornet , hearing the story , informed his commander . 
The Cossack was sent for and questioned . 
The Cossack officers wished to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses , but one of the superior officers , who was acquainted with the higher authorities , reported the incident to a general on the staff . 
The state of things on the staff had of late been exceedingly strained . 
Ermolov had been to see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the offensive . 
`` If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are asking for . 
I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to do the opposite , '' replied Bennigsen . 
The Cossack 's report , confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out , was the final proof that events had matured . 
The tightly coiled spring was released , the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play . 
Despite all his supposed power , his intellect , his experience , and his knowledge of men , Kutuzov -- having taken into consideration the Cossack 's report , a note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor , the wishes he supposed the Emperor to hold , and the fact that all the generals expressed the same wish -- could no longer check the inevitable movement , and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful -- gave his approval , that is , to the accomplished fact . 
Bennigsen 's note and the Cossack 's information that the left flank of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was necessary to order an attack , and it was fixed for the fifth of October . 
On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions . 
Toll read them to Ermolov , asking him to attend to the further arrangements . 
`` All right -- all right . 
I have n't time just now , '' replied Ermolov , and left the hut . 
The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good . 
As in the Austerlitz dispositions , it was written -- though not in German this time : `` The First Column will march here and here , '' `` the Second Column will march there and there , '' and so on ; and on paper , all these columns arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy . 
Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions , and as is always the case , not a single column reached its place at the appointed time . 
When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been prepared , an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov to deal with . 
A young officer of the Horse Guards , Kutuzov 's orderly , pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him , went to Ermolov 's quarters . 
`` Gone away , '' said Ermolov 's orderly . 
The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermolov was often to be found . 
`` No , and the general 's out too . '' 
The officer , mounting his horse , rode off to someone else . 
`` No , he 's gone out . '' 
`` If only they do n't make me responsible for this delay ! 
What a nuisance it is ! '' 
thought the officer , and he rode round the whole camp . 
One man said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals , others said he must have returned home . 
The officer searched till six o'clock in the evening without even stopping to eat . 
Ermolov was nowhere to be found and no one knew where he was . 
The officer snatched a little food at a comrade 's , and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich . 
Miloradovich too was away , but here he was told that he had gone to a ball at General Kikin 's and that Ermolov was probably there too . 
`` But where is it ? '' 
`` Why , there , over at Echkino , '' said a Cossack officer , pointing to a country house in the far distance . 
`` What , outside our line ? '' 
`` They 've put two regiments as outposts , and they 're having such a spree there , it 's awful ! 
Two bands and three sets of singers ! '' 
The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino . 
While still at a distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier 's dance song proceeding from the house . 
`` In the meadows ... in the meadows ! '' 
he heard , accompanied by whistling and the sound of a torban , drowned every now and then by shouts . 
These sounds made his spirits rise , but at the same time he was afraid that he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order entrusted to him . 
It was already past eight o'clock . 
He dismounted and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained intact between the Russian and French forces . 
In the refreshment room and the hall , footmen were bustling about with wine and viands . 
Groups of singers stood outside the windows . 
The officer was admitted and immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together , and among them Ermolov 's big imposing figure . 
They all had their coats unbuttoned and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces , laughing loudly . 
In the middle of the room a short handsome general with a red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility . 
`` Ha , ha , ha ! 
Bravo , Nicholas Ivanych ! 
Ha , ha , ha ! '' 
The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment he was doubly to blame , and he would have preferred to wait ; but one of the generals espied him and , hearing what he had come about , informed Ermolov . 
Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and , hearing what the officer had to say , took the papers from him without a word . 
`` You think he went off just by chance ? '' 
said a comrade , who was on the staff that evening , to the officer of the Horse Guards , referring to Ermolov . 
`` It was a trick . 
It was done on purpose to get Konovnitsyn into trouble . 
You 'll see what a mess there 'll be tomorrow . '' 
Next day the decrepit Kutuzov , having given orders to be called early , said his prayers , dressed , and , with an unpleasant consciousness of having to direct a battle he did not approve of , got into his caleche and drove from Letashovka -LRB- a village three and a half miles from Tarutino -RRB- to the place where the attacking columns were to meet . 
He sat in the caleche , dozing and waking up by turns , and listening for any sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun . 
But all was still quiet . 
A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning . 
On approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to water across the road along which he was driving . 
Kutuzov looked at them searchingly , stopped his carriage , and inquired what regiment they belonged to . 
They belonged to a column that should have been far in front and in ambush long before then . 
`` It may be a mistake , '' thought the old commander in chief . 
But a little further on he saw infantry regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers , only partly dressed , eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel . 
He sent for an officer . 
The officer reported that no order to advance had been received . 
`` How ! 
Not rec ... '' Kutuzov began , but checked himself immediately and sent for a senior officer . 
Getting out of his caleche , he waited with drooping head and breathing heavily , pacing silently up and down . 
When Eykhen , the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned , appeared , Kutuzov went purple in the face , not because that officer was to blame for the mistake , but because he was an object of sufficient importance for him to vent his wrath on . 
Trembling and panting the old man fell into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the ground , and he fell upon Eykhen , threatening him with his hands , shouting and loading him with gross abuse . 
Another man , Captain Brozin , who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame , suffered the same fate . 
`` What sort of another blackguard are you ? 
I 'll have you shot ! 
Scoundrels ! '' 
yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice , waving his arms and reeling . 
He was suffering physically . 
He , the commander in chief , a Serene Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had in Russia , to be placed in this position -- made the laughingstock of the whole army ! 
`` I need n't have been in such a hurry to pray about today , or have kept awake thinking everything over all night , '' thought he to himself . 
`` When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to mock me so ... and now ! '' 
He was in a state of physical suffering as if from corporal punishment , and could not avoid expressing it by cries of anger and distress . 
But his strength soon began to fail him , and looking about him , conscious of having said much that was amiss , he again got into his caleche and drove back in silence . 
His wrath , once expended , did not return , and blinking feebly he listened to excuses and self-justifications -LRB- Ermolov did not come to see him till the next day -RRB- and to the insistence of Bennigsen , Konovnitsyn , and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed next day . 
And once more Kutuzov had to consent . 
Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening and advanced during the night . 
It was an autumn night with dark purple clouds , but no rain . 
The ground was damp but not muddy , and the troops advanced noiselessly , only occasionally a jingling of the artillery could be faintly heard . 
The men were forbidden to talk out loud , to smoke their pipes , or to strike a light , and they tried to prevent their horses neighing . 
The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm and they marched gaily . 
Some columns , supposing they had reached their destination , halted , piled arms , and settled down on the cold ground , but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where they evidently should not have been . 
Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks -LRB- the least important detachment of all -RRB- got to his appointed place at the right time . 
This detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest , on the path leading from the village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk . 
Toward dawn , Count Orlov-Denisov , who had dozed off , was awakened by a deserter from the French army being brought to him . 
This was a Polish sergeant of Poniatowski 's corps , who explained in Polish that he had come over because he had been slighted in the service : that he ought long ago to have been made an officer , that he was braver than any of them , and so he had left them and wished to pay them out . 
He said that Murat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were , and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would capture him alive . 
Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers . 
The offer was too tempting to be refused . 
Everyone volunteered to go and everybody advised making the attempt . 
After much disputing and arguing , Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with the Polish sergeant . 
