For you see no one point precisely ; not one distinct feature is revealed ; no nose , eyes , ears , or mouth ; no face ; he has none , proper ; nothing but that one broad firmament of a forehead , pleated with riddles ; dumbly lowering with the doom of boats , and ships , and men . 
Nor , in profile , does this wondrous brow diminish ; though that way viewed its grandeur does not domineer upon you so . 
In profile , you plainly perceive that horizontal , semi-crescentic depression in the forehead 's middle , which , in a man , is Lavater 's mark of genius . 
But how ? 
Genius in the Sperm Whale ? 
Has the Sperm Whale ever written a book , spoken a speech ? 
No , his great genius is declared in his doing nothing particular to prove it . 
It is moreover declared in his pyramidical silence . 
And this reminds me that had the great Sperm Whale been known to the young Orient World , he would have been deified by their child-magian thoughts . 
They deified the crocodile of the Nile , because the crocodile is tongueless ; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue , or at least it is so exceedingly small , as to be incapable of protrusion . 
If hereafter any highly cultured , poetical nation shall lure back to their birth-right , the merry May-day gods of old ; and livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky ; in the now unhaunted hill ; then be sure , exalted to Jove 's high seat , the great Sperm Whale shall lord it . 
Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics . 
But there is no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man 's and every being 's face . 
Physiognomy , like every other human science , is but a passing fable . 
If then , Sir William Jones , who read in thirty languages , could not read the simplest peasant 's face in its profounder and more subtle meanings , how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale 's brow ? 
I but put that brow before you . 
Read if it if you can . 
The Nut If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx , to the phrenologist his brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to square . 
In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feet in length . 
Unhinge the lower jaw , and the side view of this skull is as the side view of a moderately inclined plane resting throughout on a level base . 
But in life -- as we have elsewhere seen -- this inclined plane is angularly filled up , and almost squared by the enormous superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm . 
At the high end the skull forms a crater to bed that part of the mass ; while under the long floor of this crater -- in another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length and as many in depth reposes the mere handful of this monster 's brain . 
The brain is at least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life ; it is hidden away behind its vast outworks , like the innermost citadel within the amplified fortifications of Quebec . 
So like a choice casket is it secreted in him , that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny that the Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable semblance of one formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine . 
Lying in strange folds , courses , and convolutions , to their apprehensions , it seems more in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard that mystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence . 
It is plain , then , that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan , in the creature 's living intact state , is an entire delusion . 
As for his true brain , you can then see no indications of it , nor feel any . 
The whale , like all things that are mighty , wears a false brow to the common world . 
If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view of its rear end , which is the high end , you will be struck by its resemblance to the human skull , beheld in the same situation , and from the same point of view . 
Indeed , place this reversed skull -LRB- scaled down to the human magnitude -RRB- among a plate of men 's skulls , and you would involuntarily confound it with them ; and remarking the depressions on one part of its summit , in phrenological phrase you would say -- This man had no self-esteem , and no veneration . 
And by those negations , considered along with the affirmative fact of his prodigious bulk and power , you can best form to yourself the truest , though not the most exhilarating conception of what the most exalted potency is . 
But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale 's proper brain , you deem it incapable of being adequately charted , then I have another idea for you . 
If you attentively regard almost any quadruped 's spine , you will be struck with the resemblance of its vertebrae to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls , all bearing rudimental resemblance to the skull proper . 
It is a German conceit , that the vertebrae are absolutely undeveloped skulls . 
But the curious external resemblance , I take it the Germans were not the first men to perceive . 
A foreign friend once pointed it out to me , in the skeleton of a foe he had slain , and with the vertebrae of which he was inlaying , in a sort of basso-relieve , the beaked prow of his canoe . 
Now , I consider that the phrenologists have omitted an important thing in not pushing their investigations from the cerebellum through the spinal canal . 
For I believe that much of a man 's character will be found betokened in his backbone . 
I would rather feel your spine than your skull , whoever you are . 
A thin joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul . 
I rejoice in my spine , as in the firm audacious staff of that flag which I fling half out to the world . 
Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale . 
His cranial cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra ; and in that vertebra the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches across , being eight in height , and of a triangular figure with the base downwards . 
As it passes through the remaining vertebrae the canal tapers in size , but for a considerable distance remains of large capacity . 
Now , of course , this canal is filled with much the same strangely fibrous substance -- the spinal cord -- as the brain ; and directly communicates with the brain . 
And what is still more , for many feet after emerging from the brain 's cavity , the spinal cord remains of an undecreasing girth , almost equal to that of the brain . 
Under all these circumstances , would it be unreasonable to survey and map out the whale 's spine phrenologically ? 
For , viewed in this light , the wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper is more than compensated by the wonderful comparative magnitude of his spinal cord . 
But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists , I would merely assume the spinal theory for a moment , in reference to the Sperm Whale 's hump . 
This august hump , if I mistake not , rises over one of the larger vertebrae , and is , therefore , in some sort , the outer convex mould of it . 
From its relative situation then , I should call this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness in the Sperm Whale . 
And that the great monster is indomitable , you will yet have reason to know . 
The Pequod Meets The Virgin The predestinated day arrived , and we duly met the ship Jungfrau , Derick De Deer , master , of Bremen . 
At one time the greatest whaling people in the world , the Dutch and Germans are now among the least ; but here and there at very wide intervals of latitude and longitude , you still occasionally meet with their flag in the Pacific . 
For some reason , the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects . 
While yet some distance from the Pequod , she rounded to , and dropping a boat , her captain was impelled towards us , impatiently standing in the bows instead of the stern . 
`` What has he in his hand there ? '' 
cried Starbuck , pointing to something wavingly held by the German . 
`` Impossible ! 
-- a lamp-feeder ! '' 
`` Not that , '' said Stubb , `` no , no , it 's a coffee-pot , Mr. Starbuck ; he 's coming off to make us our coffee , is the Yarman ; do n't you see that big tin can there alongside of him ? 
-- that 's his boiling water . 
Oh ! 
he 's all right , is the Yarman . '' 
`` Go along with you , '' cried Flask , `` it 's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can . 
He 's out of oil , and has come a-begging . '' 
However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil on the whale-ground , and however much it may invertedly contradict the old proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle , yet sometimes such a thing really happens ; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deer did indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare . 
As he mounted the deck , Ahab abruptly accosted him , without at all heeding what he had in his hand ; but in his broken lingo , the German soon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale ; immediately turning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can , with some remarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night in profound darkness -- his last drop of Bremen oil being gone , and not a single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency ; concluding by hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery is technically called a clean one -LRB- that is , an empty one -RRB- , well deserving the name of Jungfrau or the Virgin . 
His necessities supplied , Derick departed ; but he had not gained his ship 's side , when whales were almost simultaneously raised from the mast-heads of both vessels ; and so eager for the chase was Derick , that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard , he slewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders . 
Now , the game having risen to leeward , he and the other three German boats that soon followed him , had considerably the start of the Pequod 's keels . 
There were eight whales , an average pod . 
Aware of their danger , they were going all abreast with great speed straight before the wind , rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans of horses in harness . 
They left a great , wide wake , as though continually unrolling a great wide parchment upon the sea . 
Full in this rapid wake , and many fathoms in the rear , swam a huge , humped old bull , which by his comparatively slow progress , as well as by the unusual yellowish incrustations over-growing him , seemed afflicted with the jaundice , or some other infirmity . 
Whether this whale belonged to the pod in advance , seemed questionable ; for it is not customary for such venerable leviathans to be at all social . 
Nevertheless , he stuck to their wake , though indeed their back water must have retarded him , because the white-bone or swell at his broad muzzle was a dashed one , like the swell formed when two hostile currents meet . 
His spout was short , slow , and laborious ; coming forth with a choking sort of gush , and spending itself in torn shreds , followed by strange subterranean commotions in him , which seemed to have egress at his other buried extremity , causing the waters behind him to upbubble . 
`` Who 's got some paregoric ? '' 
said Stubb , `` he has the stomach-ache , I 'm afraid . 
Lord , think of having half an acre of stomach-ache ! 
Adverse winds are holding mad Christmas in him , boys . 
It 's the first foul wind I ever knew to blow from astern ; but look , did ever whale yaw so before ? 
it must be , he 's lost his tiller . '' 
As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deck load of frightened horses , careens , buries , rolls , and wallows on her way ; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk , and now and then partly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends , expose the cause of his devious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin . 
Whether he had lost that fin in battle , or had been born without it , it were hard to say . 
`` Only wait a bit , old chap , and I 'll give ye a sling for that wounded arm , '' cried cruel Flask , pointing to the whale-line near him . 
`` Mind he do n't sling thee with it , '' cried Starbuck . 
`` Give way , or the German will have him . '' 
With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for this one fish , because not only was he the largest , and therefore the most valuable whale , but he was nearest to them , and the other whales were going with such great velocity , moreover , as almost to defy pursuit for the time . 
At this juncture , the Pequod 's keels had shot by the three German boats last lowered ; but from the great start he had had , Derick 's boat still led the chase , though every moment neared by his foreign rivals . 
The only thing they feared , was , that from being already so nigh to his mark , he would be enabled to dart his iron before they could completely overtake and pass him . 
As for Derick , he seemed quite confident that this would be the case , and occasionally with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder at the other boats . 
`` The ungracious and ungrateful dog ! '' 
cried Starbuck ; `` he mocks and dares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes ago ! '' 
-- Then in his old intense whisper -- `` give way , greyhounds ! 
Dog to it ! '' 
`` I tell ye what it is , men '' -- cried Stubb to his crew -- It 's against my religion to get mad ; but I 'd like to eat that villainous Yarman -- Pull -- wo n't ye ? 
Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye ? 
Do ye love brandy ? 
A hogshead of brandy , then , to the best man . 
Come , why do n't some of ye burst a blood-vessel ? 
Who 's that been dropping an anchor overboard -- we do n't budge an inch -- we 're becalmed . 
Halloo , here 's grass growing in the boat 's bottom -- and by the Lord , the mast there 's budding . 
This wo n't do , boys . 
Look at that Yarman ! 
The short and long of it is , men , will ye spit fire or not ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
see the suds he makes ! '' 
cried Flask , dancing up and down -- `` What a hump -- Oh , do pile on the beef -- lays like a log ! 
Oh ! 
my lads , do spring -- slap-jacks and quahogs for supper , you know , my lads -- baked clams and muffins -- oh , do , do , spring , -- he 's a hundred barreler -- do n't lose him now -- do n't oh , do n't ! 
-- see that Yarman -- Oh , wo n't ye pull for your duff , my lads -- such a sog ! 
such a sogger ! 
Do n't ye love sperm ? 
There goes three thousand dollars , men ! 
-- a bank ! 
-- a whole bank ! 
The bank of England ! 
-- Oh , do , do , do ! 
-- What 's that Yarman about now ? '' 
At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at the advancing boats , and also his oil-can ; perhaps with the double view of retarding his rivals ' way , and at the same time economically accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss . 
`` The unmannerly Dutch dogger ! '' 
cried Stubb . 
`` Pull now , men , like fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils . 
What d'ye say , Tashtego ; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty pieces for the honor of old Gayhead ? 
What d'ye say ? '' 
`` I say , pull like god-dam , '' -- cried the Indian . 
Fiercely , but evenly incited by the taunts of the German , the Pequod 's three boats now began ranging almost abreast ; and , so disposed , momentarily neared him . 
In that fine , loose , chivalrous attitude of the headsman when drawing near to his prey , the three mates stood up proudly , occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating cry of , `` There she slides , now ! 
Hurrah for the white-ash breeze ! 
Down with the Yarman ! 
Sail over him ! '' 
But so decided an original start had Derick had , that spite of all their gallantry , he would have proved the victor in this race , had not a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught the blade of his midship oarsman . 
While this clumsy lubber was striving to free his white-ash , and while , in consequence , Derick 's boat was nigh to capsizing , and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage ; -- that was a good time for Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask . 
With a shout , they took a mortal start forwards , and slantingly ranged up on the German 's quarter . 
An instant more , and all four boats were diagonically in the whale 's immediate wake , while stretching from them , on both sides , was the foaming swell that he made . 
It was a terrific , most pitiable , and maddening sight . 
The whale was now going head out , and sending his spout before him in a continual tormented jet ; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of fright . 
Now to this hand , now to that , he yawed in his faltering flight , and still at every billow that he broke , he spasmodically sank in the sea , or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin . 
So have I seen a bird with clipped wing , making affrighted broken circles in the air , vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks . 
But the bird has a voice , and with plaintive cries will make known her fear ; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea , was chained up and enchanted in him ; he had no voice , save that choking respiration through his spiracle , and this made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable ; while still , in his amazing bulk , portcullis jaw , and omnipotent tail , there was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied . 
Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod 's boats the advantage , and rather than be thus foiled of his game , Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually long dart , ere the last chance would for ever escape . 
But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke , than all three tigers -- Queequeg , Tashtego , Daggoo -- instinctively sprang to their feet , and standing in a diagonal row , simultaneously pointed their barbs ; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer , their three Nantucket irons entered the whale . 
Blinding vapors of foam and white-fire ! 
The three boats , in the first fury of the whale 's headlong rush , bumped the German 's aside with such force , that both Derick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out , and sailed over by the three flying keels . 
`` Do n't be afraid , my butter-boxes , '' cried Stubb , casting a passing glance upon them as he shot by ; `` ye 'll be picked up presently -- all right -- I saw some sharks astern -- St. Bernard 's dogs , you know -- relieve distressed travellers . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way to sail now . 
Every keel a sunbeam ! 
Hurrah ! 
-- Here we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a mad cougar ! 
This puts me in mind of fastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain -- makes the wheelspokes fly , boys , when you fasten to him that way ; and there 's danger of being pitched out too , when you strike a hill . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way a fellow feels when he 's going to Davy Jones -- all a rush down an endless inclined plane ! 
Hurrah ! 
this whale carries the everlasting mail ! '' 
But the monster 's run was a brief one . 
Giving a sudden gasp , he tumultuously sounded . 
With a grating rush , the three lines flew round the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them ; while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding would soon exhaust the lines , that using all their dexterous might , they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on ; till at last -- owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks of the boats , whence the three ropes went straight down into the blue -- the gunwales of the bows were almost even with the water , while the three sterns tilted high in the air . 
And the whale soon ceasing to sound , for some time they remained in that attitude , fearful of expending more line , though the position was a little ticklish . 
But though boats have been taken down and lost in this way , yet it is this `` holding on , '' as it is called ; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live flesh from the back ; this it is that often torments the Leviathan into soon rising again to meet the sharp lance of his foes . 
Yet not to speak of the peril of the thing , it is to be doubted whether this course is always the best ; for it is but reasonable to presume , that the longer the stricken whale stays under water , the more he is exhausted . 
Because , owing to the enormous surface of him -- in a full grown sperm whale something less than 2000 square feet -- the pressure of the water is immense . 
We all know what an astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under ; even here , above-ground , in the air ; how vast , then , the burden of a whale , bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean ! 
It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres . 
One whaleman has estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships , with all their guns , and stores , and men on board . 
As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea , gazing down into its eternal blue noon ; and as not a single groan or cry of any sort , nay , not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths ; what landsman would have thought , that beneath all that silence and placidity , the utmost monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching in agony ! 
Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows . 
Seems it credible that by three such thin threads the great Leviathan was suspended like the big weight to an eight day clock . 
Suspended ? 
and to what ? 
To three bits of board . 
Is this the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said -- `` Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons ? 
or his head with fish-spears ? 
The sword of him that layeth at him can not hold , the spear , the dart , nor the habergeon : he esteemeth iron as straw ; the arrow can not make him flee ; darts are counted as stubble ; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear ! '' 
This the creature ? 
this he ? 
Oh ! 
that unfulfilments should follow the prophets . 
For with the strength of a thousand thighs in his tail , Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea , to hide him from the Pequod 's fishspears ! 
In that sloping afternoon sunlight , the shadows that the three boats sent down beneath the surface , must have been long enough and broad enough to shade half Xerxes ' army . 
Who can tell how appalling to the wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his head ! 
`` Stand by , men ; he stirs , '' cried Starbuck , as the three lines suddenly vibrated in the water , distinctly conducting upwards to them , as by magnetic wires , the life and death throbs of the whale , so that every oarsman felt them in his seat . 
The next moment , relieved in a great part from the downward strain at the bows , the boats gave a sudden bounce upwards , as a small icefield will , when a dense herd of white bears are scared from it into the sea . 
`` Haul in ! 
Haul in ! '' 
cried Starbuck again ; `` he 's rising . '' 
The lines , of which , hardly an instant before , not one hand 's breadth could have been gained , were now in long quick coils flung back all dripping into the boats , and soon the whale broke water within two ship 's length of the hunters . 
His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion . 
In most land animals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins , whereby when wounded , the blood is in some degree at least instantly shut off in certain directions . 
Not so with the whale ; one of whose peculiarities it is , to have an entire non-valvular structure of the blood-vessels , so that when pierced even by so small a point as a harpoon , a deadly drain is at once begun upon his whole arterial system ; and when this is heightened by the extraordinary pressure of water at a great distance below the surface , his life may be said to pour from him in incessant streams . 
Yet so vast is the quantity of blood in him , and so distant and numerous its interior fountains , that he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for a considerable period ; even as in a drought a river will flow , whose source is in the well-springs of far-off and indiscernible hills . 
Even now , when the boats pulled upon this whale , and perilously drew over his swaying flukes , and the lances were darted into him , they were followed by steady jets from the new made wound , which kept continually playing , while the natural spout-hole in his head was only at intervals , however rapid , sending its affrighted moisture into the air . 
From this last vent no blood yet came , because no vital part of him had thus far been struck . 
His life , as they significantly call it , was untouched . 
As the boats now more closely surrounded him , the whole upper part of his form , with much of it that is ordinarily submerged , was plainly revealed . 
His eyes , or rather the places where his eyes had been , were beheld . 
As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of the noblest oaks when prostrate , so from the points which the whale 's eyes had once occupied , now protruded blind bulbs , horribly pitiable to see . 
But pity there was none . 
For all his old age , and his one arm , and his blind eyes , he must die the death and be murdered , in order to light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men , and also to illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness by all to all . 
Still rolling in his blood , at last he partially disclosed a strangely discolored bunch or protuberance , the size of a bushel , low down on the flank . 
`` A nice spot , '' cried Flask ; `` just let me prick him there once . '' 
`` Avast ! '' 
cried Starbuck , `` there 's no need of that ! '' 
But humane Starbuck was too late . 
At the instant of the dart an ulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound , and goaded by it into more than sufferable anguish , the whale now spouting thick blood , with swift fury blindly darted at the craft , bespattering them and their glorying crews all over with showers of gore , capsizing Flask 's boat and marring the bows . 
It was his death stroke . 
For , by this time , so spent was he by loss of blood , that he helplessly rolled away from the wreck he had made ; lay panting on his side , impotently flapped with his stumped fin , then over and over slowly revolved like a waning world ; turned up the white secrets of his belly ; lay like a log , and died . 
It was most piteous , that last expiring spout . 
As when by unseen hands the water is gradually drawn off from some mighty fountain , and with half-stifled melancholy gurglings the spray-column lowers and lowers to the ground -- so the last long dying spout of the whale . 
Soon , while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship , the body showed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled . 
Immediately , by Starbuck 's orders , lines were secured to it at different points , so that ere long every boat was a buoy ; the sunken whale being suspended a few inches beneath them by the cords . 
By very heedful management , when the ship drew nigh , the whale was transferred to her side , and was strongly secured there by the stiffest fluke-chains , for it was plain that unless artificially upheld , the body would at once sink to the bottom . 
It so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with the spade , the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded in his flesh , on the lower part of the bunch before described . 
But as the stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the dead bodies of captured whales , with the flesh perfectly healed around them , and no prominence of any kind to denote their place ; therefore , there must needs have been some other unknown reason in the present case fully to account for the ulceration alluded to . 
But still more curious was the fact of a lance-head of stone being found in him , not far from the buried iron , the flesh perfectly firm about it . 
Who had darted that stone lance ? 
And when ? 
It might have been darted by some Nor ' West Indian long before America was discovered . 
What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrous cabinet there is no telling . 
But a sudden stop was put to further discoveries , by the ship 's being unprecedentedly dragged over sideways to the sea , owing to the body 's immensely increasing tendency to sink . 
However , Starbuck , who had the ordering of affairs , hung on to it to the last ; hung on to it so resolutely , indeed , that when at length the ship would have been capsized , if still persisting in locking arms with the body ; then , when the command was given to break clear from it , such was the immovable strain upon the timber-heads to which the fluke-chains and cables were fastened , that it was impossible to cast them off . 
Meantime everything in the Pequod was aslant . 
To cross to the other side of the deck was like walking up the steep gabled roof of a house . 
The ship groaned and gasped . 
Many of the ivory inlayings of her bulwarks and cabins were started from their places , by the unnatural dislocation . 
In vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear upon the immovable fluke-chains , to pry them adrift from the timberheads ; and so low had the whale now settled that the submerged ends could not be at all approached , while every moment whole tons of ponderosity seemed added to the sinking bulk , and the ship seemed on the point of going over . 
`` Hold on , hold on , wo n't ye ? '' 
cried Stubb to the body , `` do n't be in such a devil of a hurry to sink ! 
By thunder , men , we must do something or go for it . 
No use prying there ; avast , I say with your handspikes , and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife , and cut the big chains . '' 
`` Knife ? 
Aye , aye , '' cried Queequeg , and seizing the carpenter 's heavy hatchet , he leaned out of a porthole , and steel to iron , began slashing at the largest fluke-chains . 
But a few strokes , full of sparks , were given , when the exceeding strain effected the rest . 
With a terrific snap , every fastening went adrift ; the ship righted , the carcase sank . 
Now , this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed Sperm Whale is a very curious thing ; nor has any fisherman yet adequately accounted for it . 
Usually the dead Sperm Whale floats with great buoyancy , with its side or belly considerably elevated above the surface . 
If the only whales that thus sank were old , meagre , and broken-hearted creatures , their pads of lard diminished and all their bones heavy and rheumatic ; then you might with some reason assert that this sinking is caused by an uncommon specific gravity in the fish so sinking , consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter in him . 
But it is not so . 
For young whales , in the highest health , and swelling with noble aspirations , prematurely cut off in the warm flush and May of life , with all their panting lard about them ! 
even these brawny , buoyant heroes do sometimes sink . 
Be it said , however , that the Sperm Whale is far less liable to this accident than any other species . 
Where one of that sort go down , twenty Right Whales do . 
This difference in the species is no doubt imputable in no small degree to the greater quantity of bone in the Right Whale ; his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than a ton ; from this incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free . 
But there are instances where , after the lapse of many hours or several days , the sunken whale again rises , more buoyant than in life . 
But the reason of this is obvious . 
Gases are generated in him ; he swells to a prodigious magnitude ; becomes a sort of animal balloon . 
A line-of-battle ship could hardly keep him under then . 
In the Shore Whaling , on soundings , among the Bays of New Zealand , when a Right Whale gives token of sinking , they fasten buoys to him , with plenty of rope ; so that when the body has gone down , they know where to look for it when it shall have ascended again . 
It was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry was heard from the Pequod 's mast-heads , announcing that the Jungfrau was again lowering her boats ; though the only spout in sight was that of a Fin-Back , belonging to the species of uncapturable whales , because of its incredible power of swimming . 
Nevertheless , the Fin-Back 's spout is so similar to the Sperm Whale 's , that by unskilful fishermen it is often mistaken for it . 
And consequently Derick and all his host were now in valiant chase of this unnearable brute . 
The Virgin crowding all sail , made after her four young keels , and thus they all disappeared far to leeward , still in bold , hopeful chase . 
Oh ! 
many are the Fin-Backs , and many are the Dericks , my friend . 
The Honor and Glory of Whaling There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the true method . 
The more I dive into this matter of whaling , and push my researches up to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I impressed with its great honorableness and antiquity ; and especially when I find so many great demi-gods and heroes , prophets of all sorts , who one way or other have shed distinction upon it , I am transported with the reflection that I myself belong , though but subordinately , to so emblazoned a fraternity . 
The gallant Perseus , a son of Jupiter , was the first whaleman ; and to the eternal honor of our calling be it said , that the first whale attacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any sordid intent . 
Those were the knightly days of our profession , when we only bore arms to succor the distressed , and not to fill men 's lamp-feeders . 
Every one knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda ; how the lovely Andromeda , the daughter of a king , was tied to a rock on the sea-coast , and as Leviathan was in the very act of carrying her off , Perseus , the prince of whalemen , intrepidly advancing , harpooned the monster , and delivered and married the maid . 
It was an admirable artistic exploit , rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of the present day ; inasmuch as this Leviathan was slain at the very first dart . 
And let no man doubt this Arkite story ; for in the ancient Joppa , now Jaffa , on the Syrian coast , in one of the Pagan temples , there stood for many ages the vast skeleton of a whale , which the city 's legends and all the inhabitants asserted to be the identical bones of the monster that Perseus slew . 
When the Romans took Joppa , the same skeleton was carried to Italy in triumph . 
What seems most singular and suggestively important in this story , is this : it was from Joppa that Jonah set sail . 
Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda -- indeed , by some supposed to be indirectly derived from it -- is that famous story of St. George and the Dragon ; which dragon I maintain to have been a whale ; for in many old chronicles whales and dragons are strangely jumbled together , and often stand for each other . 
`` Thou art as a lion of the waters , and as a dragon of the sea , '' said Ezekiel ; hereby , plainly meaning a whale ; in truth , some versions of the Bible use that word itself . 
Besides , it would much subtract from the glory of the exploit had St. George but encountered a crawling reptile of the land , instead of doing battle with the great monster of the deep . 
Any man may kill a snake , but only a Perseus , a St. George , a Coffin , have the heart in them to march boldly up to a whale . 
Let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us ; for though the creature encountered by that valiant whaleman of old is vaguely represented of a griffin-like shape , and though the battle is depicted on land and the saint on horseback , yet considering the great ignorance of those times , when the true form of the whale was unknown to artists ; and considering that as in Perseus ' case , St. George 's whale might have crawled up out of the sea on the beach ; and considering that the animal ridden by St. George might have been only a large seal , or sea-horse ; bearing all this in mind , it will not appear altogether incompatible with the sacred legend and the ancientest draughts of the scene , to hold this so-called dragon no other than the great Leviathan himself . 
In fact , placed before the strict and piercing truth , this whole story will fare like that fish , flesh , and fowl idol of the Philistines , Dagon by name ; who being planted before the ark of Israel , his horse 's head and both the palms of his hands fell off from him , and only the stump or fishy part of him remained . 
Thus , then , one of our own noble stamp , even a whaleman , is the tutelary guardian of England ; and by good rights , we harpooneers of Nantucket should be enrolled in the most noble order of St. George . 
And therefore , let not the knights of that honorable company -LRB- none of whom , I venture to say , have ever had to do with a whale like their great patron -RRB- , let them never eye a Nantucketer with disdain , since even in our woollen frocks and tarred trowsers we are much better entitled to St. George 's decoration than they . 
Whether to admit Hercules among us or not , concerning this I long remained dubious : for though according to the Greek mythologies , that antique Crockett and Kit Carson -- that brawny doer of rejoicing good deeds , was swallowed down and thrown up by a whale ; still , whether that strictly makes a whaleman of him , that might be mooted . 
It nowhere appears that he ever actually harpooned his fish , unless , indeed , from the inside . 
Nevertheless , he may be deemed a sort of involuntary whaleman ; at any rate the whale caught him , if he did not the whale . 
I claim him for one of our clan . 
But , by the best contradictory authorities , this Grecian story of Hercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the still more ancient Hebrew story of Jonah and the whale ; and vice versa ; certainly they are very similar . 
If I claim the demigod then , why not the prophet ? 
Nor do heroes , saints , demigods , and prophets alone comprise the whole roll of our order . 
Our grand master is still to be named ; for like royal kings of old times , we find the head-waters of our fraternity in nothing short of the great gods themselves . 
That wondrous oriental story is now to be rehearsed from the Shaster , which gives us the dread Vishnoo , one of the three persons in the godhead of the Hindoos ; gives us this divine Vishnoo himself for our Lord ; -- Vishnoo , who , by the first of his ten earthly incarnations , has for ever set apart and sanctified the whale . 
When Brahma , or the God of Gods , saith the Shaster , resolved to recreate the world after one of its periodical dissolutions , he gave birth to Vishnoo , to preside over the work ; but the Vedas , or mystical books , whose perusal would seem to have been indispensable to Vishnoo before beginning the creation , and which therefore must have contained something in the shape of practical hints to young architects , these Vedas were lying at the bottom of the waters ; so Vishnoo became incarnate in a whale , and sounding down in him to the uttermost depths , rescued the sacred volumes . 
Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman , then ? 
even as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman ? 
Perseus , St. George , Hercules , Jonah , and Vishnoo ! 
there 's a member-roll for you ! 
What club but the whaleman 's can head off like that ? 
Jonah Historically Regarded Reference was made to the historical story of Jonah and the whale in the preceding chapter . 
Now some Nantucketers rather distrust this historical story of Jonah and the whale . 
But then there were some sceptical Greeks and Romans , who , standing out from the orthodox pagans of their times , equally doubted the story of Hercules and the whale , and Arion and the dolphin ; and yet their doubting those traditions did not make those traditions one whit the less facts , for all that . 
One old Sag-Harbor whaleman 's chief reason for questioning the Hebrew story was this : -- He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles , embellished with curious , unscientific plates ; one of which represented Jonah 's whale with two spouts in his head -- a peculiarity only true with respect to a species of the Leviathan -LRB- the Right Whale , and the varieties of that order -RRB- , concerning which the fishermen have this saying , `` A penny roll would choke him '' ; his swallow is so very small . 
But , to this , Bishop Jebb 's anticipative answer is ready . 
It is not necessary , hints the Bishop , that we consider Jonah as tombed in the whale 's belly , but as temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth . 
And this seems reasonable enough in the good Bishop . 
For truly , the Right Whale 's mouth would accommodate a couple of whist-tables , and comfortably seat all the players . 
Possibly , too , Jonah might have ensconced himself in a hollow tooth ; but , on second thoughts , the Right Whale is toothless . 
Another reason which Sag-Harbor -LRB- he went by that name -RRB- urged for his want of faith in this matter of the prophet , was something obscurely in reference to his incarcerated body and the whale 's gastric juices . 
But this objection likewise falls to the ground , because a German exegetist supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge in the floating body of a dead whale -- even as the French soldiers in the Russian campaign turned their dead horses into tents , and crawled into them . 
Besides , it has been divined by other continental commentators , that when Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship , he straightway effected his escape to another vessel near by , some vessel with a whale for a figure-head ; and , I would add , possibly called `` The Whale , '' as some craft are nowadays christened the `` Shark , '' the `` Gull , '' the `` Eagle . '' 
Nor have there been wanting learned exegetists who have opined that the whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merely meant a life-preserver -- an inflated bag of wind -- which the endangered prophet swam to , and so was saved from a watery doom . 
Poor Sag-Harbor , therefore , seems worsted all round . 
But he had still another reason for his want of faith . 
It was this , if I remember right : Jonah was swallowed by the whale in the Mediterranean Sea , and after three days ' he was vomited up somewhere within three days ' journey of Nineveh , a city on the Tigris , very much more than three days ' journey across from the nearest point of the Mediterranean coast . 
How is that ? 
But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within that short distance of Nineveh ? 
Yes . 
He might have carried him round by the way of the Cape of Good Hope . 
But not to speak of the passage through the whole length of the Mediterranean , and another passage up the Persian Gulf and Red Sea , such a supposition would involve the complete circumnavigation of all Africa in three days , not to speak of the Tigris waters , near the site of Nineveh , being too shallow for any whale to swim in . 
Besides , this idea of Jonah 's weathering the Cape of Good Hope at so early a day would wrest the honor of the discovery of that great headland from Bartholomew Diaz , its reputed discoverer , and so make modern history a liar . 
But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only evinced his foolish pride of reason -- a thing still more reprehensible in him , seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked up from the sun and the sea . 
I say it only shows his foolish , impious pride , and abominable , devilish rebellion against the reverend clergy . 
For by a Portuguese Catholic priest , this very idea of Jonah 's going to Nineveh via the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as a signal magnification of the general miracle . 
And so it was . 
Besides , to this day , the highly enlightened Turks devoutly believe in the historical story of Jonah . 
And some three centuries ago , an English traveller in old Harris 's Voyages , speaks of a Turkish Mosque built in honor of Jonah , in which Mosque was a miraculous lamp that burnt without any oil . 
Pitchpoling To make them run easily and swiftly , the axles of carriages are anointed ; and for much the same purpose , some whalers perform an analogous operation upon their boat ; they grease the bottom . 
Nor is it to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm , it may possibly be of no contemptible advantage ; considering that oil and water are hostile ; that oil is a sliding thing , and that the object in view is to make the boat slide bravely . 
Queequeg believed strongly in anointing his boat , and one morning not long after the German ship Jungfrau disappeared , took more than customary pains in that occupation ; crawling under its bottom , where it hung over the side , and rubbing in the unctuousness as though diligently seeking to insure a crop of hair from the craft 's bald keel . 
He seemed to be working in obedience to some particular presentiment . 
Nor did it remain unwarranted by the event . 
Towards noon whales were raised ; but so soon as the ship sailed down to them , they turned and fled with swift precipitancy ; a disordered flight , as of Cleopatra 's barges from Actium . 
Nevertheless , the boats pursued , and Stubb 's was foremost . 
By great exertion , Tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron ; but the stricken whale , without at all sounding , still continued his horizontal flight , with added fleetness . 
Such unintermitted strainings upon the planted iron must sooner or later inevitably extract it . 
It became imperative to lance the flying whale , or be content to lose him . 
But to haul the boat up to his flank was impossible , he swam so fast and furious . 
What then remained ? 
Of all the wondrous devices and dexterities , the sleights of hand and countless subtleties , to which the veteran whaleman is so often forced , none exceed that fine manoeuvre with the lance called pitchpoling . 
Small sword , or broad sword , in all its exercises boasts nothing like it . 
It is only indispensable with an inveterate running whale ; its grand fact and feature is the wonderful distance to which the long lance is accurately darted from a violently rocking , jerking boat , under extreme headway . 
Steel and wood included , the entire spear is some ten or twelve feet in length ; the staff is much slighter than that of the harpoon , and also of a lighter material -- pine . 
It is furnished with a small rope called a warp , of considerable length , by which it can be hauled back to the hand after darting . 
But before going further , it is important to mention here , that though the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance , yet it is seldom done ; and when done , is still less frequently successful , on account of the greater weight and inferior length of the harpoon as compared with the lance , which in effect become serious drawbacks . 
As a general thing , therefore , you must first get fast to a whale , before any pitchpoling comes into play . 
Look now at Stubb ; a man who from his humorous , deliberate coolness and equanimity in the direst emergencies , was specially qualified to excel in pitchpoling . 
Look at him ; he stands upright in the tossed bow of the flying boat ; wrapt in fleecy foam , the towing whale is forty feet ahead . 
Handling the long lance lightly , glancing twice or thrice along its length to see if it be exactly straight , Stubb whistlingly gathers up the coil of the warp in one hand , so as to secure its free end in his grasp , leaving the rest unobstructed . 
Then holding the lance full before his waistband 's middle , he levels it at the whale ; when , covering him with it , he steadily depresses the butt-end in his hand , thereby elevating the point till the weapon stands fairly balanced upon his palm , fifteen feet in the air . 
He minds you somewhat of a juggler , balancing a long staff on his chin . 
Next moment with a rapid , nameless impulse , in a superb lofty arch the bright steel spans the foaming distance , and quivers in the life spot of the whale . 
Instead of sparkling water , he now spouts red blood . 
`` That drove the spigot out of him ! '' 
cried Stubb . '' 
'T is July 's immortal Fourth ; all fountains must run wine today ! 
Would now , it were old Orleans whiskey , or old Ohio , or unspeakable old Monongahela ! 
Then , Tashtego , lad , I 'd have ye hold a canakin to the jet , and we 'd drink round it ! 
Yea , verily , hearts alive , we 'd brew choice punch in the spread of his spout-hole there , and from that live punch-bowl quaff the living stuff . '' 
Again and again to such gamesome talk , the dexterous dart is repeated , the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in skilful leash . 
The agonized whale goes into his flurry ; the tow-line is slackened , and the pitchpoler dropping astern , folds his hands , and mutely watches the monster die . 
The Fountain That for six thousand years -- and no one knows how many millions of ages before -- the great whales should have been spouting all over the sea , and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep , as with so many sprinkling or mistifying pots ; and that for some centuries back , thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain of the whale , watching these sprinklings and spoutings -- that all this should be , and yet , that down to this blessed minute -LRB- fifteen and a quarter minutes past one o'clock P.M. of this sixteenth day of December , A.D. 1851 -RRB- , it should still remain a problem , whether these spoutings are , after all , really water , or nothing but vapor -- this is surely a noteworthy thing . 
Let us , then , look at this matter , along with some interesting items contingent . 
Every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of their gills , the finny tribes in general breathe the air which at all times is combined with the element in which they swim ; hence , a herring or a cod might live a century , and never once raise its head above the surface . 
But owing to his marked internal structure which gives him regular lungs , like a human being 's , the whale can only live by inhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere . 
Wherefore the necessity for his periodical visits to the upper world . 
But he can not in any degree breathe through his mouth , for , in his ordinary attitude , the Sperm Whale 's mouth is buried at least eight feet beneath the surface ; and what is still more , his windpipe has no connexion with his mouth . 
No , he breathes through his spiracle alone ; and this is on the top of his head . 
If I say , that in any creature breathing is only a function indispensable to vitality , inasmuch as it withdraws from the air a certain element , which being subsequently brought into contact with the blood imparts to the blood its vivifying principle , I do not think I shall err ; though I may possibly use some superfluous scientific words . 
Assume it , and it follows that if all the blood in a man could be aerated with one breath , he might then seal up his nostrils and not fetch another for a considerable time . 
That is to say , he would then live without breathing . 
Anomalous as it may seem , this is precisely the case with the whale , who systematically lives , by intervals , his full hour and more -LRB- when at the bottom -RRB- without drawing a single breath , or so much as in any way inhaling a particle of air ; for , remember , he has no gills . 
How is this ? 
Between his ribs and on each side of his spine he is supplied with a remarkable involved Cretan labyrinth of vermicelli-like vessels , which vessels , when he quits the surface , are completely distended with oxygenated blood . 
So that for an hour or more , a thousand fathoms in the sea , he carries a surplus stock of vitality in him , just as the camel crossing the waterless desert carries a surplus supply of drink for future use in its four supplementary stomachs . 
The anatomical fact of this labyrinth is indisputable ; and that the supposition founded upon it is reasonable and true , seems the more cogent to me , when I consider the otherwise inexplicable obstinacy of that leviathan in having his spoutings out , as the fishermen phrase it . 
This is what I mean . 
If unmolested , upon rising to the surface , the Sperm Whale will continue there for a period of time exactly uniform with all his other unmolested risings . 
Say he stays eleven minutes , and jets seventy times , that is , respires seventy breaths ; then whenever he rises again , he will be sure to have his seventy breaths over again , to a minute . 
Now , if after he fetches a few breaths you alarm him , so that he sounds , he will be always dodging up again to make good his regular allowance of air . 
And not till those seventy breaths are told , will he finally go down to stay out his full term below . 
Remark , however , that in different individuals these rates are different ; but in any one they are alike . 
Now , why should the whale thus insist upon having his spoutings out , unless it be to replenish his reservoir of air , ere descending for good ? 
How obvious it is it , too , that this necessity for the whale 's rising exposes him to all the fatal hazards of the chase . 
For not by hook or by net could this vast leviathan be caught , when sailing a thousand fathoms beneath the sunlight . 
Not so much thy skill , then , O hunter , as the great necessities that strike the victory to thee ! 
In man , breathing is incessantly going on -- one breath only serving for two or three pulsations ; so that whatever other business he has to attend to , waking or sleeping , breathe he must , or die he will . 
But the Sperm Whale only breathes about one seventh or Sunday of his time . 
It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole ; if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water , then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense of smell seems obliterated in him ; for the only thing about him that at all answers to his nose is that identical spout-hole ; and being so clogged with two elements , it could not be expected to have the power of smelling . 
But owing to the mystery of the spout -- whether it be water or whether it be vapor -- no absolute certainty can as yet be arrived at on this head . 
Sure it is , nevertheless , that the Sperm Whale has no proper olfactories . 
But what does he want of them ? 
No roses , no violets , no Cologne-water in the sea . 
Furthermore , as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his spouting canal , and as that long canal -- like the grand Erie Canal -- is furnished with a sort of locks -LRB- that open and shut -RRB- for the downward retention of air or the upward exclusion of water , therefore the whale has no voice ; unless you insult him by saying , that when he so strangely rumbles , he talks through his nose . 
But then again , what has the whale to say ? 
Seldom have I known any profound being that had anything to say to this world , unless forced to stammer out something by way of getting a living . 
Oh ! 
happy that the world is such an excellent listener ! 
Now , the spouting canal of the Sperm Whale , chiefly intended as it is for the conveyance of air , and for several feet laid along , horizontally , just beneath the upper surface of his head , and a little to one side ; this curious canal is very much like a gas-pipe laid down in a city on one side of a street . 
But the question returns whether this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe ; in other words , whether the spout of the Sperm Whale is the mere vapor of the exhaled breath , or whether that exhaled breath is mixed with water taken in at the mouth , and discharged through the spiracle . 
It is certain that the mouth indirectly communicates with the spouting canal ; but it can not be proved that this is for the purpose of discharging water through the spiracle . 
Because the greatest necessity for so doing would seem to be , when in feeding he accidentally takes in water . 
But the Sperm Whale 's food is far beneath the surface , and there he can not spout even if he would . 
Besides , if you regard him very closely , and time him with your watch , you will find that when unmolested , there is an undeviating rhyme between the periods of his jets and the ordinary periods of respiration . 
But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject ? 
Speak out ! 
You have seen him spout ; then declare what the spout is ; can you not tell water from air ? 
My dear sir , in this world it is not so easy to settle these plain things . 
I have ever found your plain things the knottiest of all . 
And as for this whale spout , you might almost stand in it , and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely . 
The central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist enveloping it ; and how can you certainly tell whether any water falls from it , when , always , when you are close enough to a whale to get a close view of his spout , he is in a prodigious commotion , the water cascading all around him . 
And if at such times you should think that you really perceived drops of moisture in the spout , how do you know that they are not merely condensed from its vapor ; or how do you know that they are not those identical drops superficially lodged in the spout-hole fissure , which is countersunk into the summit of the whale 's head ? 
For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day sea in a calm , with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary 's in the desert ; even then , the whale always carries a small basin of water on his head , as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity in a rock filled up with rain . 
Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching the precise nature of the whale spout . 
It will not do for him to be peering into it , and putting his face in it . 
You can not go with your pitcher to this fountain and fill it , and bring it away . 
For even when coming into slight contact with the outer , vapory shreds of the jet , which will often happen , your skin will feverishly smart , from the acridness of the thing so touching it . 
And I know one , who coming into still closer contact with the spout , whether with some scientific object in view , or otherwise , I can not say , the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm . 
Wherefore , among whalemen , the spout is deemed poisonous ; they try to evade it . 
Another thing ; I have heard it said , and I do not much doubt it , that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes , it will blind you . 
The wisest thing the investigator can do then , it seems to me , is to let this deadly spout alone . 
Still , we can hypothesize , even if we can not prove and establish . 
My hypothesis is this : that the spout is nothing but mist . 
And besides other reasons , to this conclusion I am impelled , by considerations touching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale ; I account him no common , shallow being , inasmuch as it is an undisputed fact that he is never found on soundings , or near shores ; all other whales sometimes are . 
He is both ponderous and profound . 
And I am convinced that from the heads of all ponderous profound beings , such as Plato , Pyrrho , the Devil , Jupiter , Dante , and so on , there always goes up a certain semi-visible steam , while in the act of thinking deep thoughts . 
While composing a little treatise on Eternity , I had the curiosity to place a mirror before me ; and ere long saw reflected there , a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over my head . 
The invariable moisture of my hair , while plunged in deep thought , after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic , of an August noon ; this seems an additional argument for the above supposition . 
And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty , misty monster , to behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea ; his vast , mild head overhung by a canopy of vapor , engendered by his incommunicable contemplations , and that vapor -- as you will sometimes see it -- glorified by a rainbow , as if Heaven itself had put its seal upon his thoughts . 
For d'ye see , rainbows do not visit the clear air ; they only irradiate vapor . 
And so , through all the thick mists of the dim doubts in my mind , divine intuitions now and then shoot , enkindling my fog with a heavenly ray . 
And for this I thank God ; for all have doubts ; many deny ; but doubts or denials , few along with them , have intuitions . 
Doubts of all things earthly , and intuitions of some things heavenly ; this combination makes neither believer nor infidel , but makes a man who regards them both with equal eye . 
The Tail Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope , and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights ; less celestial , I celebrate a tail . 
Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale 's tail to begin at that point of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man , it comprises upon its upper surface alone , an area of at least fifty square feet . 
The compact round body of its root expands into two broad , firm , flat palms or flukes , gradually shoaling away to less than an inch in thickness . 
At the crotch or junction , these flukes slightly overlap , then sideways recede from each other like wings , leaving a wide vacancy between . 
In no living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely defined than in the crescentic borders of these flukes . 
At its utmost expansion in the full grown whale , the tail will considerably exceed twenty feet across . 
The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews ; but cut into it , and you find that three distinct strata compose it : -- upper , middle , and lower . 
The fibres in the upper and lower layers , are long and horizontal ; those of the middle one , very short , and running crosswise between the outside layers . 
This triune structure , as much as anything else , imparts power to the tail . 
To the student of old Roman walls , the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to the thin course of tiles always alternating with the stone in those wonderful relics of the antique , and which undoubtedly contribute so much to the great strength of the masonry . 
But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough , the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof of muscular fibres and filaments , which passing on either side the loins and running down into the flukes , insensibly blend with them , and largely contribute to their might ; so that in the tail the confluent measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to a point . 
Could annihilation occur to matter , this were the thing to do it . 
Nor does this -- its amazing strength , at all tend to cripple the graceful flexion of its motions ; where infantileness of ease undulates through a Titanism of power . 
On the contrary , those motions derive their most appalling beauty from it . 
Real strength never impairs beauty or harmony , but it often bestows it ; and in everything imposingly beautiful , strength has much to do with the magic . 
Take away the tied tendons that all over seem bursting from the marble in the carved Hercules , and its charm would be gone . 
As devout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked corpse of Goethe , he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man , that seemed as a Roman triumphal arch . 
When Angelo paints even God the Father in human form , mark what robustness is there . 
And whatever they may reveal of the divine love in the Son , the soft , curled , hermaphroditical Italian pictures , in which his idea has been most successfully embodied ; these pictures , so destitute as they are of all brawniness , hint nothing of any power , but the mere negative , feminine one of submission and endurance , which on all hands it is conceded , form the peculiar practical virtues of his teachings . 
Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of , that whether wielded in sport , or in earnest , or in anger , whatever be the mood it be in , its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace . 
Therein no fairy 's arm can transcend it . 
Five great motions are peculiar to it . 
First , when used as a fin for progression ; Second , when used as a mace in battle ; Third , in sweeping ; Fourth , in lobtailing ; Fifth , in peaking flukes . 
First : Being horizontal in its position , the Leviathan 's tail acts in a different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures . 
It never wriggles . 
In man or fish , wriggling is a sign of inferiority . 
To the whale his tail is the sole means of propulsion . 
Scroll-wise coiled forwards beneath the body , and then rapidly sprung backwards , it is this which gives that singular darting , leaping motion to the monster when furiously swimming . 
His side-fins only serve to steer by . 
Second : It is a little significant , that while one sperm whale only fights another sperm whale with his head and jaw , nevertheless , in his conflicts with man , he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail . 
In striking at a boat , he swiftly curves away his flukes from it , and the blow is only inflicted by the recoil . 
If it be made in the unobstructed air , especially if it descend to its mark , the stroke is then simply irresistible . 
No ribs of man or boat can withstand it . 
Your only salvation lies in eluding it ; but if it comes sideways through the opposing water , then partly owing to the light buoyancy of the whale-boat , and the elasticity of its materials , a cracked rib or a dashed plank or two , a sort of stitch in the side , is generally the most serious result . 
These submerged side blows are so often received in the fishery , that they are accounted mere child 's play . 
Some one strips off a frock , and the hole is stopped . 
Third : I can not demonstrate it , but it seems to me , that in the whale the sense of touch is concentrated in the tail ; for in this respect there is a delicacy in it only equalled by the daintiness of the elephant 's trunk . 
This delicacy is chiefly evinced in the action of sweeping , when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain soft slowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface of the sea ; and if he feel but a sailor 's whisker , woe to that sailor , whiskers and all . 
What tenderness there is in that preliminary touch ! 
Had this tail any prehensile power , I should straightway bethink me of Darmonodes ' elephant that so frequented the flower-market , and with low salutations presented nosegays to damsels , and then caressed their zones . 
On more accounts than one , a pity it is that the whale does not possess this prehensile virtue in his tail ; for I have heard of yet another elephant , that when wounded in the fight , curved round his trunk and extracted the dart . 
Fourth : Stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security of the middle of solitary seas , you find him unbent from the vast corpulence of his dignity , and kitten-like , he plays on the ocean as if it were a hearth . 
But still you see his power in his play . 
The broad palms of his tail are flirted high into the air ! 
then smiting the surface , the thunderous concussion resounds for miles . 
You would almost think a great gun had been discharged ; and if you noticed the light wreath of vapor from the spiracle at his other extremity , you would think that that was the smoke from the touch-hole . 
Fifth : As in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan the flukes lies considerably below the level of his back , they are then completely out of sight beneath the surface ; but when he is about to plunge into the deeps , his entire flukes with at least thirty feet of his body are tossed erect in the air , and so remain vibrating a moment , till they downwards shoot out of view . 
Excepting the sublime breach -- somewhere else to be described -- this peaking of the whale 's flukes is perhaps the grandest sight to be seen in all animated nature . 
Out of the bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically snatching at the highest heaven . 
So in dreams , have I seen majestic Satan thrusting forth his tormented colossal claw from the flame Baltic of Hell . 
But in gazing at such scenes , it is all in all what mood you are in ; if in the Dantean , the devils will occur to you ; if in that of Isaiah , the archangels . 
Standing at the mast-head of my ship during a sunrise that crimsoned sky and sea , I once saw a large herd of whales in the east , all heading towards the sun , and for a moment vibrating in concert with peaked flukes . 
As it seemed to me at the time , such a grand embodiment of adoration of the gods was never beheld , even in Persia , the home of the fire worshippers . 
As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African elephant , I then testified of the whale , pronouncing him the most devout of all beings . 
For according to King Juba , the military elephants of antiquity often hailed the morning with their trunks uplifted in the profoundest silence . 
The chance comparison in this chapter , between the whale and the elephant , so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunk of the other are concerned , should not tend to place those two opposite organs on an equality , much less the creatures to which they respectively belong . 
For as the mightiest elephant is but a terrier to Leviathan , so , compared with Leviathan 's tail , his trunk is but the stalk of a lily . 
The most direful blow from the elephant 's trunk were as the playful tap of a fan , compared with the measureless crush and crash of the sperm whale 's ponderous flukes , which in repeated instances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all their oars and crews into the air , very much as an Indian juggler tosses his balls . 
* * Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whale and the elephant is preposterous , inasmuch as in that particular the elephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog does to the elephant ; nevertheless , there are not wanting some points of curious similitude ; among these is the spout . 
It is well known that the elephant will often draw up water or dust in his trunk , and then elevating it , jet it forth in a stream . 
The more I consider this mighty tail , the more do I deplore my inability to express it . 
At times there are gestures in it , which , though they would well grace the hand of man , remain wholly inexplicable . 
In an extensive herd , so remarkable , occasionally , are these mystic gestures , that I have heard hunters who have declared them akin to Free-Mason signs and symbols ; that the whale , indeed , by these methods intelligently conversed with the world . 
Nor are there wanting other motions of the whale in his general body , full of strangeness , and unaccountable to his most experienced assailant . 
Dissect him how I may , then , I but go skin deep . 
I know him not , and never will . 
But if I know not even the tail of this whale , how understand his head ? 
much more , how comprehend his face , when face he has none ? 
Thou shalt see my back parts , my tail , he seems to say , but my face shall not be seen . 
But I can not completely make out his back parts ; and hint what he will about his face , I say again he has no face . 
The Grand Armada The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca , extending south-eastward from the territories of Birmah , forms the most southerly point of all Asia . 
In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long islands of Sumatra , Java , Bally , and Timor ; which , with many others , form a vast mole , or rampart , lengthwise connecting Asia with Australia , and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the thickly studded oriental archipelagoes . 
This rampart is pierced by several sally-ports for the convenience of ships and whales ; conspicuous among which are the straits of Sunda and Malacca . 
By the straits of Sunda , chiefly , vessels bound to China from the west , emerge into the China seas . 
Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java ; and standing midway in that vast rampart of islands , buttressed by that bold green promontory , known to seamen as Java Head ; they not a little correspond to the central gateway opening into some vast walled empire : and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices , and silks , and jewels , and gold , and ivory , with which the thousand islands of that oriental sea are enriched , it seems a significant provision of nature , that such treasures , by the very formation of the land , should at least bear the appearance , however ineffectual , of being guarded from the all-grasping western world . 
The shores of the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those domineering fortresses which guard the entrances to the Mediterranean , the Baltic , and the Propontis . 
Unlike the Danes , these Orientals do not demand the obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless procession of ships before the wind , which for centuries past , by night and by day , have passed between the islands of Sumatra and Java , freighted with the costliest cargoes of the east . 
But while they freely waive a ceremonial like this , they do by no means renounce their claim to more solid tribute . 
Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays , lurking among the low shaded coves and islets of Sumatra , have sallied out upon the vessels sailing through the straits , fiercely demanding tribute at the point of their spears . 
