I see I was up a stump . 
I had to let on to get choked with a chicken bone , so as to get time to think how to get down again . 
Then I says : `` I mean he goes to our church regular when he 's in Sheffield . 
That 's only in the summer time , when he comes there to take the sea baths . '' 
`` Why , how you talk -- Sheffield ai n't on the sea . '' 
`` Well , who said it was ? '' 
`` Why , you did . '' 
`` I did n't nuther . '' 
`` You did ! '' 
`` I did n't . '' 
`` You did . '' 
`` I never said nothing of the kind . '' 
`` Well , what did you say , then ? '' 
`` Said he come to take the sea baths -- that 's what I said . '' 
`` Well , then , how 's he going to take the sea baths if it ai n't on the sea ? '' 
`` Looky here , '' I says ; `` did you ever see any Congress-water ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , did you have to go to Congress to get it ? '' 
`` Why , no . '' 
`` Well , neither does William Fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea bath . '' 
`` How does he get it , then ? '' 
`` Gets it the way people down here gets Congress-water -- in barrels . 
There in the palace at Sheffield they 've got furnaces , and he wants his water hot . 
They ca n't bile that amount of water away off there at the sea . 
They have n't got no conveniences for it . '' 
`` Oh , I see , now . 
You might a said that in the first place and saved time . '' 
When she said that I see I was out of the woods again , and so I was comfortable and glad . 
Next , she says : `` Do you go to church , too ? '' 
`` Yes -- regular . '' 
`` Where do you set ? '' 
`` Why , in our pew . '' '' 
Whose pew ? '' 
`` Why , ourn -- your Uncle Harvey 's . '' 
`` His ` n ? 
What does he want with a pew ? '' 
`` Wants it to set in . 
What did you reckon he wanted with it ? '' 
`` Why , I thought he 'd be in the pulpit . '' 
Rot him , I forgot he was a preacher . 
I see I was up a stump again , so I played another chicken bone and got another think . 
Then I says : `` Blame it , do you suppose there ai n't but one preacher to a church ? '' 
`` Why , what do they want with more ? '' 
`` What ! 
-- to preach before a king ? 
I never did see such a girl as you . 
They do n't have no less than seventeen . '' 
`` Seventeen ! 
My land ! 
Why , I would n't set out such a string as that , not if I never got to glory . 
It must take 'em a week . '' 
`` Shucks , they do n't all of 'em preach the same day -- only one of 'em . '' 
`` Well , then , what does the rest of 'em do ? '' 
`` Oh , nothing much . 
Loll around , pass the plate -- and one thing or another . 
But mainly they do n't do nothing . '' 
`` Well , then , what are they for ? '' 
`` Why , they 're for style . 
Do n't you know nothing ? '' 
`` Well , I do n't want to know no such foolishness as that . 
How is servants treated in England ? 
Do they treat 'em better 'n we treat our niggers ? '' '' 
No ! 
A servant ai n't nobody there . 
They treat them worse than dogs . '' 
`` Do n't they give 'em holidays , the way we do , Christmas and New Year 's week , and Fourth of July ? '' 
`` Oh , just listen ! 
A body could tell you hai n't ever been to England by that . 
Why , Hare-l -- why , Joanna , they never see a holiday from year 's end to year 's end ; never go to the circus , nor theater , nor nigger shows , nor nowheres . '' 
`` Nor church ? '' 
`` Nor church . '' 
`` But you always went to church . '' 
Well , I was gone up again . 
I forgot I was the old man 's servant . 
But next minute I whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was different from a common servant and had to go to church whether he wanted to or not , and set with the family , on account of its being the law . 
But I did n't do it pretty good , and when I got done I see she war n't satisfied . 
She says : `` Honest injun , now , hai n't you been telling me a lot of lies ? '' 
`` Honest injun , '' says I. `` None of it at all ? '' 
`` None of it at all . 
Not a lie in it , '' says I. `` Lay your hand on this book and say it . '' 
I see it war n't nothing but a dictionary , so I laid my hand on it and said it . 
So then she looked a little better satisfied , and says : `` Well , then , I 'll believe some of it ; but I hope to gracious if I 'll believe the rest . '' 
`` What is it you wo n't believe , Joe ? '' 
says Mary Jane , stepping in with Susan behind her . 
`` It ai n't right nor kind for you to talk so to him , and him a stranger and so far from his people . 
How would you like to be treated so ? '' 
`` That 's always your way , Maim -- always sailing in to help somebody before they 're hurt . 
I hai n't done nothing to him . 
He 's told some stretchers , I reckon , and I said I would n't swallow it all ; and that 's every bit and grain I did say . 
I reckon he can stand a little thing like that , ca n't he ? '' 
`` I do n't care whether 't was little or whether 't was big ; he 's here in our house and a stranger , and it was n't good of you to say it . 
If you was in his place it would make you feel ashamed ; and so you ought n't to say a thing to another person that will make them feel ashamed . '' 
`` Why , Mam , he said -- '' `` It do n't make no difference what he said -- that ai n't the thing . 
The thing is for you to treat him kind , and not be saying things to make him remember he ai n't in his own country and amongst his own folks . '' 
I says to myself , this is a girl that I 'm letting that old reptile rob her of her money ! 
Then Susan she waltzed in ; and if you 'll believe me , she did give Hare-lip hark from the tomb ! 
Says I to myself , and this is another one that I 'm letting him rob her of her money ! 
Then Mary Jane she took another inning , and went in sweet and lovely again -- which was her way ; but when she got done there war n't hardly anything left o ' poor Hare-lip . 
So she hollered . 
`` All right , then , '' says the other girls ; `` you just ask his pardon . '' 
She done it , too ; and she done it beautiful . 
She done it so beautiful it was good to hear ; and I wished I could tell her a thousand lies , so she could do it again . 
I says to myself , this is another one that I 'm letting him rob her of her money . 
And when she got through they all jest laid theirselves out to make me feel at home and know I was amongst friends . 
I felt so ornery and low down and mean that I says to myself , my mind 's made up ; I 'll hive that money for them or bust . 
So then I lit out -- for bed , I said , meaning some time or another . 
When I got by myself I went to thinking the thing over . 
I says to myself , shall I go to that doctor , private , and blow on these frauds ? 
No -- that wo n't do . 
He might tell who told him ; then the king and the duke would make it warm for me . 
Shall I go , private , and tell Mary Jane ? 
No -- I das n't do it . 
Her face would give them a hint , sure ; they 've got the money , and they 'd slide right out and get away with it . 
If she was to fetch in help I 'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with , I judge . 
No ; there ai n't no good way but one . 
I got to steal that money , somehow ; and I got to steal it some way that they wo n't suspicion that I done it . 
They 've got a good thing here , and they ai n't a-going to leave till they 've played this family and this town for all they 're worth , so I 'll find a chance time enough . 
I 'll steal it and hide it ; and by and by , when I 'm away down the river , I 'll write a letter and tell Mary Jane where it 's hid . 
But I better hive it tonight if I can , because the doctor maybe has n't let up as much as he lets on he has ; he might scare them out of here yet . 
So , thinks I , I 'll go and search them rooms . 
Upstairs the hall was dark , but I found the duke 's room , and started to paw around it with my hands ; but I recollected it would n't be much like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but his own self ; so then I went to his room and begun to paw around there . 
But I see I could n't do nothing without a candle , and I das n't light one , of course . 
So I judged I 'd got to do the other thing -- lay for them and eavesdrop . 
About that time I hears their footsteps coming , and was going to skip under the bed ; I reached for it , but it was n't where I thought it would be ; but I touched the curtain that hid Mary Jane 's frocks , so I jumped in behind that and snuggled in amongst the gowns , and stood there perfectly still . 
They come in and shut the door ; and the first thing the duke done was to get down and look under the bed . 
Then I was glad I had n't found the bed when I wanted it . 
And yet , you know , it 's kind of natural to hide under the bed when you are up to anything private . 
They sets down then , and the king says : `` Well , what is it ? 
And cut it middlin ' short , because it 's better for us to be down there a-whoopin ' up the mournin ' than up here givin ' 'em a chance to talk us over . '' 
`` Well , this is it , Capet . 
I ai n't easy ; I ai n't comfortable . 
That doctor lays on my mind . 
I wanted to know your plans . 
I 've got a notion , and I think it 's a sound one . '' 
`` What is it , duke ? '' 
`` That we better glide out of this before three in the morning , and clip it down the river with what we 've got . 
Specially , seeing we got it so easy -- given back to us , flung at our heads , as you may say , when of course we allowed to have to steal it back . 
I 'm for knocking off and lighting out . '' 
That made me feel pretty bad . 
About an hour or two ago it would a been a little different , but now it made me feel bad and disappointed , The king rips out and says : `` What ! 
And not sell out the rest o ' the property ? 
March off like a passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous 'n' dollars ' worth o ' property layin ' around jest sufferin ' to be scooped in ? 
-- and all good , salable stuff , too . '' 
The duke he grumbled ; said the bag of gold was enough , and he did n't want to go no deeper -- did n't want to rob a lot of orphans of everything they had . 
`` Why , how you talk ! '' 
says the king . 
`` We sha 'n' t rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money . 
The people that buys the property is the suff ` rers ; because as soon 's it 's found out ` at we did n't own it -- which wo n't be long after we 've slid -- the sale wo n't be valid , and it 'll all go back to the estate . 
These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin , and that 's enough for them ; they 're young and spry , and k 'n easy earn a livin ' . 
they ai n't a-goin to suffer . 
Why , jest think -- there 's thous 'n' s and thous 'n' s that ai n't nigh so well off . 
Bless you , they ai n't got noth 'n' to complain of . '' 
Well , the king he talked him blind ; so at last he give in , and said all right , but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay , and that doctor hanging over them . 
But the king says : `` Cuss the doctor ! 
What do we k ` yer for him ? 
Hai n't we got all the fools in town on our side ? 
And ai n't that a big enough majority in any town ? '' 
So they got ready to go down stairs again . 
The duke says : `` I do n't think we put that money in a good place . '' 
That cheered me up . 
I 'd begun to think I war n't going to get a hint of no kind to help me . 
The king says : `` Why ? '' 
`` Because Mary Jane 'll be in mourning from this out ; and first you know the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up and put 'em away ; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of it ? '' 
`` Your head 's level agin , duke , '' says the king ; and he comes a-fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where I was . 
I stuck tight to the wall and kept mighty still , though quivery ; and I wondered what them fellows would say to me if they catched me ; and I tried to think what I 'd better do if they did catch me . 
But the king he got the bag before I could think more than about a half a thought , and he never suspicioned I was around . 
They took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather-bed , and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it was all right now , because a nigger only makes up the feather-bed , and do n't turn over the straw tick only about twice a year , and so it war n't in no danger of getting stole now . 
But I knowed better . 
I had it out of there before they was half-way down stairs . 
I groped along up to my cubby , and hid it there till I could get a chance to do better . 
I judged I better hide it outside of the house somewheres , because if they missed it they would give the house a good ransacking : I knowed that very well . 
Then I turned in , with my clothes all on ; but I could n't a gone to sleep if I 'd a wanted to , I was in such a sweat to get through with the business . 
By and by I heard the king and the duke come up ; so I rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder , and waited to see if anything was going to happen . 
But nothing did . 
So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones had n't begun yet ; and then I slipped down the ladder . 
I crept to their doors and listened ; they was snoring . 
So I tiptoed along , and got down stairs all right . 
There war n't a sound anywheres . 
I peeped through a crack of the dining-room door , and see the men that was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs . 
The door was open into the parlor , where the corpse was laying , and there was a candle in both rooms . 
I passed along , and the parlor door was open ; but I see there war n't nobody in there but the remainders of Peter ; so I shoved on by ; but the front door was locked , and the key was n't there . 
Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs , back behind me . 
I run in the parlor and took a swift look around , and the only place I see to hide the bag was in the coffin . 
The lid was shoved along about a foot , showing the dead man 's face down in there , with a wet cloth over it , and his shroud on . 
I tucked the money-bag in under the lid , just down beyond where his hands was crossed , which made me creep , they was so cold , and then I run back across the room and in behind the door . 
The person coming was Mary Jane . 
She went to the coffin , very soft , and kneeled down and looked in ; then she put up her handkerchief , and I see she begun to cry , though I could n't hear her , and her back was to me . 
I slid out , and as I passed the dining-room I thought I 'd make sure them watchers had n't seen me ; so I looked through the crack , and everything was all right . 
They had n't stirred . 
I slipped up to bed , feeling ruther blue , on accounts of the thing playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much resk about it . 
Says I , if it could stay where it is , all right ; because when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to Mary Jane , and she could dig him up again and get it ; but that ai n't the thing that 's going to happen ; the thing that 's going to happen is , the money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid . 
Then the king 'll get it again , and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody another chance to smouch it from him . 
Of course I wanted to slide down and get it out of there , but I das n't try it . 
Every minute it was getting earlier now , and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin to stir , and I might get catched -- catched with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody had n't hired me to take care of . 
I do n't wish to be mixed up in no such business as that , I says to myself . 
When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up , and the watchers was gone . 
There war n't nobody around but the family and the widow Bartley and our tribe . 
I watched their faces to see if anything had been happening , but I could n't tell . 
Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man , and they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs , and then set all our chairs in rows , and borrowed more from the neighbors till the hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full . 
I see the coffin lid was the way it was before , but I das n't go to look in under it , with folks around . 
Then the people begun to flock in , and the beats and the girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin , and for a half an hour the people filed around slow , in single rank , and looked down at the dead man 's face a minute , and some dropped in a tear , and it was all very still and solemn , only the girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to their eyes and keeping their heads bent , and sobbing a little . 
There war n't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor and blowing noses -- because people always blows them more at a funeral than they do at other places except church . 
When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways , putting on the last touches , and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable , and making no more sound than a cat . 
He never spoke ; he moved people around , he squeezed in late ones , he opened up passageways , and done it with nods , and signs with his hands . 
Then he took his place over against the wall . 
He was the softest , glidingest , stealthiest man I ever see ; and there war n't no more smile to him than there is to a ham . 
They had borrowed a melodeum -- a sick one ; and when everything was ready a young woman set down and worked it , and it was pretty skreeky and colicky , and everybody joined in and sung , and Peter was the only one that had a good thing , according to my notion . 
Then the Reverend Hobson opened up , slow and solemn , and begun to talk ; and straight off the most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard ; it was only one dog , but he made a most powerful racket , and he kept it up right along ; the parson he had to stand there , over the coffin , and wait -- you could n't hear yourself think . 
It was right down awkward , and nobody did n't seem to know what to do . 
But pretty soon they see that long-legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say , `` Do n't you worry -- just depend on me . '' 
Then he stooped down and begun to glide along the wall , just his shoulders showing over the people 's heads . 
So he glided along , and the powwow and racket getting more and more outrageous all the time ; and at last , when he had gone around two sides of the room , he disappears down cellar . 
Then in about two seconds we heard a whack , and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or two , and then everything was dead still , and the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off . 
In a minute or two here comes this undertaker 's back and shoulders gliding along the wall again ; and so he glided and glided around three sides of the room , and then rose up , and shaded his mouth with his hands , and stretched his neck out towards the preacher , over the people 's heads , and says , in a kind of a coarse whisper , '' He had a rat ! '' 
Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his place . 
You could see it was a great satisfaction to the people , because naturally they wanted to know . 
A little thing like that do n't cost nothing , and it 's just the little things that makes a man to be looked up to and liked . 
There war n't no more popular man in town than what that undertaker was . 
Well , the funeral sermon was very good , but pison long and tiresome ; and then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rubbage , and at last the job was through , and the undertaker begun to sneak up on the coffin with his screw-driver . 
I was in a sweat then , and watched him pretty keen . 
But he never meddled at all ; just slid the lid along as soft as mush , and screwed it down tight and fast . 
So there I was ! 
I did n't know whether the money was in there or not . 
So , says I , s ` pose somebody has hogged that bag on the sly ? 
-- now how do I know whether to write to Mary Jane or not ? 
S'pose she dug him up and did n't find nothing , what would she think of me ? 
Blame it , I says , I might get hunted up and jailed ; I 'd better lay low and keep dark , and not write at all ; the thing 's awful mixed now ; trying to better it , I 've worsened it a hundred times , and I wish to goodness I 'd just let it alone , dad fetch the whole business ! 
They buried him , and we come back home , and I went to watching faces again -- I could n't help it , and I could n't rest easy . 
But nothing come of it ; the faces did n't tell me nothing . 
The king he visited around in the evening , and sweetened everybody up , and made himself ever so friendly ; and he give out the idea that his congregation over in England would be in a sweat about him , so he must hurry and settle up the estate right away and leave for home . 
He was very sorry he was so pushed , and so was everybody ; they wished he could stay longer , but they said they could see it could n't be done . 
And he said of course him and William would take the girls home with them ; and that pleased everybody too , because then the girls would be well fixed and amongst their own relations ; and it pleased the girls , too -- tickled them so they clean forgot they ever had a trouble in the world ; and told him to sell out as quick as he wanted to , they would be ready . 
Them poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them getting fooled and lied to so , but I did n't see no safe way for me to chip in and change the general tune . 
Well , blamed if the king did n't bill the house and the niggers and all the property for auction straight off -- sale two days after the funeral ; but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to . 
So the next day after the funeral , along about noon-time , the girls ' joy got the first jolt . 
A couple of nigger traders come along , and the king sold them the niggers reasonable , for three-day drafts as they called it , and away they went , the two sons up the river to Memphis , and their mother down the river to Orleans . 
I thought them poor girls and them niggers would break their hearts for grief ; they cried around each other , and took on so it most made me down sick to see it . 
The girls said they had n't ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold away from the town . 
I ca n't ever get it out of my memory , the sight of them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging around each other 's necks and crying ; and I reckon I could n't a stood it all , but would a had to bust out and tell on our gang if I had n't knowed the sale war n't no account and the niggers would be back home in a week or two . 
The thing made a big stir in the town , too , and a good many come out flatfooted and said it was scandalous to separate the mother and the children that way . 
It injured the frauds some ; but the old fool he bulled right along , spite of all the duke could say or do , and I tell you the duke was powerful uneasy . 
Next day was auction day . 
About broad day in the morning the king and the duke come up in the garret and woke me up , and I see by their look that there was trouble . 
The king says : `` Was you in my room night before last ? '' 
`` No , your majesty '' -- which was the way I always called him when nobody but our gang war n't around . 
`` Was you in there yisterday er last night ? '' 
`` No , your majesty . '' 
`` Honor bright , now -- no lies . '' 
`` Honor bright , your majesty , I 'm telling you the truth . 
I hai n't been a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed it to you . '' 
The duke says : `` Have you seen anybody else go in there ? '' 
`` No , your grace , not as I remember , I believe . '' 
`` Stop and think . '' 
I studied awhile and see my chance ; then I says : `` Well , I see the niggers go in there several times . '' 
Both of them gave a little jump , and looked like they had n't ever expected it , and then like they had . 
Then the duke says : `` What , all of them ? '' 
`` No -- leastways , not all at once -- that is , I do n't think I ever see them all come out at once but just one time . '' 
`` Hello ! 
When was that ? '' 
`` It was the day we had the funeral . 
In the morning . 
It war n't early , because I overslept . 
I was just starting down the ladder , and I see them . '' 
`` Well , go on , go on ! 
What did they do ? 
How 'd they act ? '' 
`` They did n't do nothing . 
And they did n't act anyway much , as fur as I see . 
They tiptoed away ; so I seen , easy enough , that they 'd shoved in there to do up your majesty 's room , or something , s ` posing you was up ; and found you war n't up , and so they was hoping to slide out of the way of trouble without waking you up , if they had n't already waked you up . '' 
`` Great guns , this is a go ! '' 
says the king ; and both of them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly . 
They stood there a-thinking and scratching their heads a minute , and the duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle , and says : `` It does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand . 
They let on to be sorry they was going out of this region ! 
And I believed they was sorry , and so did you , and so did everybody . 
Do n't ever tell me any more that a nigger ai n't got any histrionic talent . 
Why , the way they played that thing it would fool anybody . 
In my opinion , there 's a fortune in 'em . 
If I had capital and a theater , I would n't want a better lay-out than that -- and here we 've gone and sold 'em for a song . 
Yes , and ai n't privileged to sing the song yet . 
Say , where is that song -- that draft ? '' 
`` In the bank for to be collected . 
Where would it be ? '' 
`` Well , that 's all right then , thank goodness . '' 
Says I , kind of timid-like : `` Is something gone wrong ? '' 
The king whirls on me and rips out : `` None o ' your business ! 
You keep your head shet , and mind y' r own affairs -- if you got any . 
Long as you 're in this town do n't you forgit that -- you hear ? '' 
Then he says to the duke , `` We got to jest swaller it and say noth 'n' : mum 's the word for us . '' 
As they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again , and says : `` Quick sales and small profits ! 
It 's a good business -- yes . '' 
The king snarls around on him and says : `` I was trying to do for the best in sellin ' 'em out so quick . 
If the profits has turned out to be none , lackin ' considable , and none to carry , is it my fault any more 'n it 's yourn ? '' 
`` Well , they 'd be in this house yet and we would n't if I could a got my advice listened to . '' 
The king sassed back as much as was safe for him , and then swapped around and lit into me again . 
He give me down the banks for not coming and telling him I see the niggers come out of his room acting that way -- said any fool would a knowed something was up . 
And then waltzed in and cussed himself awhile , and said it all come of him not laying late and taking his natural rest that morning , and he 'd be blamed if he 'd ever do it again . 
So they went off a-jawing ; and I felt dreadful glad I 'd worked it all off on to the niggers , and yet had n't done the niggers no harm by it . 
BY and by it was getting-up time . 
So I come down the ladder and started for down-stairs ; but as I come to the girls ' room the door was open , and I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk , which was open and she 'd been packing things in it -- getting ready to go to England . 
But she had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap , and had her face in her hands , crying . 
I felt awful bad to see it ; of course anybody would . 
I went in there and says : `` Miss Mary Jane , you ca n't a-bear to see people in trouble , and I ca n't -- most always . 
Tell me about it . '' 
So she done it . 
And it was the niggers -- I just expected it . 
She said the beautiful trip to England was most about spoiled for her ; she did n't know how she was ever going to be happy there , knowing the mother and the children war n't ever going to see each other no more -- and then busted out bitterer than ever , and flung up her hands , and says : `` Oh , dear , dear , to think they ai n't ever going to see each other any more ! '' 
`` But they will -- and inside of two weeks -- and I know it ! '' 
says I. Laws , it was out before I could think ! 
And before I could budge she throws her arms around my neck and told me to say it again , say it again , say it again ! 
I see I had spoke too sudden and said too much , and was in a close place . 
I asked her to let me think a minute ; and she set there , very impatient and excited and handsome , but looking kind of happy and eased-up , like a person that 's had a tooth pulled out . 
So I went to studying it out . 
I says to myself , I reckon a body that ups and tells the truth when he is in a tight place is taking considerable many resks , though I ai n't had no experience , and ca n't say for certain ; but it looks so to me , anyway ; and yet here 's a case where I 'm blest if it do n't look to me like the truth is better and actuly safer than a lie . 
I must lay it by in my mind , and think it over some time or other , it 's so kind of strange and unregular . 
I never see nothing like it . 
Well , I says to myself at last , I 'm a-going to chance it ; I 'll up and tell the truth this time , though it does seem most like setting down on a kag of powder and touching it off just to see where you 'll go to . 
Then I says : `` Miss Mary Jane , is there any place out of town a little ways where you could go and stay three or four days ? '' 
`` Yes ; Mr. Lothrop 's . 
Why ? '' 
`` Never mind why yet . 
If I 'll tell you how I know the niggers will see each other again inside of two weeks -- here in this house -- and prove how I know it -- will you go to Mr. Lothrop 's and stay four days ? '' 
`` Four days ! '' 
she says ; `` I 'll stay a year ! '' 
`` All right , '' I says , `` I do n't want nothing more out of you than just your word -- I druther have it than another man 's kiss-the-Bible . '' 
She smiled and reddened up very sweet , and I says , `` If you do n't mind it , I 'll shut the door -- and bolt it . '' 
Then I come back and set down again , and says : `` Do n't you holler . 
Just set still and take it like a man . 
I got to tell the truth , and you want to brace up , Miss Mary , because it 's a bad kind , and going to be hard to take , but there ai n't no help for it . 
These uncles of yourn ai n't no uncles at all ; they 're a couple of frauds -- regular dead-beats . 
There , now we 're over the worst of it , you can stand the rest middling easy . '' 
It jolted her up like everything , of course ; but I was over the shoal water now , so I went right along , her eyes a-blazing higher and higher all the time , and told her every blame thing , from where we first struck that young fool going up to the steamboat , clear through to where she flung herself on to the king 's breast at the front door and he kissed her sixteen or seventeen times -- and then up she jumps , with her face afire like sunset , and says : `` The brute ! 
Come , do n't waste a minute -- not a second -- we 'll have them tarred and feathered , and flung in the river ! '' 
Says I : `` Cert ` nly . 
But do you mean before you go to Mr. Lothrop 's , or -- '' `` Oh , '' she says , `` what am I thinking about ! '' 
she says , and set right down again . 
`` Do n't mind what I said -- please do n't -- you wo n't , now , will you ? '' 
Laying her silky hand on mine in that kind of a way that I said I would die first . 
`` I never thought , I was so stirred up , '' she says ; `` now go on , and I wo n't do so any more . 
You tell me what to do , and whatever you say I 'll do it . '' 
`` Well , '' I says , `` it 's a rough gang , them two frauds , and I 'm fixed so I got to travel with them a while longer , whether I want to or not -- I druther not tell you why ; and if you was to blow on them this town would get me out of their claws , and I 'd be all right ; but there 'd be another person that you do n't know about who 'd be in big trouble . 
Well , we got to save him , hai n't we ? 
Of course . 
Well , then , we wo n't blow on them . '' 
Saying them words put a good idea in my head . 
I see how maybe I could get me and Jim rid of the frauds ; get them jailed here , and then leave . 
But I did n't want to run the raft in the daytime without anybody aboard to answer questions but me ; so I did n't want the plan to begin working till pretty late to-night . 
I says : `` Miss Mary Jane , I 'll tell you what we 'll do , and you wo n't have to stay at Mr. Lothrop 's so long , nuther . 
How fur is it ? '' 
`` A little short of four miles -- right out in the country , back here . '' 
`` Well , that 'll answer . 
Now you go along out there , and lay low till nine or half-past to-night , and then get them to fetch you home again -- tell them you 've thought of something . 
If you get here before eleven put a candle in this window , and if I do n't turn up wait till eleven , and then if I do n't turn up it means I 'm gone , and out of the way , and safe . 
Then you come out and spread the news around , and get these beats jailed . '' 
`` Good , '' she says , `` I 'll do it . '' 
`` And if it just happens so that I do n't get away , but get took up along with them , you must up and say I told you the whole thing beforehand , and you must stand by me all you can . '' 
`` Stand by you ! 
indeed I will . 
They sha 'n' t touch a hair of your head ! '' 
she says , and I see her nostrils spread and her eyes snap when she said it , too . 
`` If I get away I sha 'n' t be here , '' I says , `` to prove these rapscallions ai n't your uncles , and I could n't do it if I was here . 
I could swear they was beats and bummers , that 's all , though that 's worth something . 
Well , there 's others can do that better than what I can , and they 're people that ai n't going to be doubted as quick as I 'd be . 
I 'll tell you how to find them . 
Gim me a pencil and a piece of paper . 
There -- ` Royal Nonesuch , Bricksville . ' 
Put it away , and do n't lose it . 
When the court wants to find out something about these two , let them send up to Bricksville and say they 've got the men that played the Royal Nonesuch , and ask for some witnesses -- why , you 'll have that entire town down here before you can hardly wink , Miss Mary . 
And they 'll come a-biling , too . '' 
I judged we had got everything fixed about right now . 
So I says : `` Just let the auction go right along , and do n't worry . 
Nobody do n't have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day after the auction on accounts of the short notice , and they ai n't going out of this till they get that money ; and the way we 've fixed it the sale ai n't going to count , and they ai n't going to get no money . 
It 's just like the way it was with the niggers -- it war n't no sale , and the niggers will be back before long . 
Why , they ca n't collect the money for the niggers yet -- they 're in the worst kind of a fix , Miss Mary . '' 
`` Well , '' she says , `` I 'll run down to breakfast now , and then I 'll start straight for Mr. Lothrop 's . '' '' 
` Deed , that ai n't the ticket , Miss Mary Jane , '' I says , `` by no manner of means ; go before breakfast . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for , Miss Mary ? '' 
`` Well , I never thought -- and come to think , I do n't know . 
What was it ? '' 
`` Why , it 's because you ai n't one of these leather-face people . 
I do n't want no better book than what your face is . 
A body can set down and read it off like coarse print . 
Do you reckon you can go and face your uncles when they come to kiss you good-morning , and never -- '' `` There , there , do n't ! 
Yes , I 'll go before breakfast -- I 'll be glad to . 
And leave my sisters with them ? '' 
`` Yes ; never mind about them . 
They 've got to stand it yet a while . 
They might suspicion something if all of you was to go . 
I do n't want you to see them , nor your sisters , nor nobody in this town ; if a neighbor was to ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something . 
No , you go right along , Miss Mary Jane , and I 'll fix it with all of them . 
I 'll tell Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say you 've went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change , or to see a friend , and you 'll be back to-night or early in the morning . '' 
`` Gone to see a friend is all right , but I wo n't have my love given to them . '' 
`` Well , then , it sha 'n' t be . '' 
It was well enough to tell her so -- no harm in it . 
It was only a little thing to do , and no trouble ; and it 's the little things that smooths people 's roads the most , down here below ; it would make Mary Jane comfortable , and it would n't cost nothing . 
Then I says : `` There 's one more thing -- that bag of money . '' 
`` Well , they 've got that ; and it makes me feel pretty silly to think how they got it . '' 
`` No , you 're out , there . 
They hai n't got it . '' 
`` Why , who 's got it ? '' 
`` I wish I knowed , but I do n't . 
I had it , because I stole it from them ; and I stole it to give to you ; and I know where I hid it , but I 'm afraid it ai n't there no more . 
I 'm awful sorry , Miss Mary Jane , I 'm just as sorry as I can be ; but I done the best I could ; I did honest . 
I come nigh getting caught , and I had to shove it into the first place I come to , and run -- and it war n't a good place . '' 
`` Oh , stop blaming yourself -- it 's too bad to do it , and I wo n't allow it -- you could n't help it ; it was n't your fault . 
Where did you hide it ? '' 
I did n't want to set her to thinking about her troubles again ; and I could n't seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that corpse laying in the coffin with that bag of money on his stomach . 
So for a minute I did n't say nothing ; then I says : `` I 'd ruther not tell you where I put it , Miss Mary Jane , if you do n't mind letting me off ; but I 'll write it for you on a piece of paper , and you can read it along the road to Mr. Lothrop 's , if you want to . 
Do you reckon that 'll do ? '' 
`` Oh , yes . '' 
So I wrote : `` I put it in the coffin . 
It was in there when you was crying there , away in the night . 
I was behind the door , and I was mighty sorry for you , Miss Mary Jane . '' 
It made my eyes water a little to remember her crying there all by herself in the night , and them devils laying there right under her own roof , shaming her and robbing her ; and when I folded it up and give it to her I see the water come into her eyes , too ; and she shook me by the hand , hard , and says : '' Good - bye . 
I 'm going to do everything just as you 've told me ; and if I do n't ever see you again , I sha 'n' t ever forget you and I 'll think of you a many and a many a time , and I 'll pray for you , too ! '' 
-- and she was gone . 
Pray for me ! 
I reckoned if she knowed me she 'd take a job that was more nearer her size . 
But I bet she done it , just the same -- she was just that kind . 
She had the grit to pray for Judus if she took the notion -- there war n't no back-down to her , I judge . 
You may say what you want to , but in my opinion she had more sand in her than any girl I ever see ; in my opinion she was just full of sand . 
It sounds like flattery , but it ai n't no flattery . 
And when it comes to beauty -- and goodness , too -- she lays over them all . 
I hai n't ever seen her since that time that I see her go out of that door ; no , I hai n't ever seen her since , but I reckon I 've thought of her a many and a many a million times , and of her saying she would pray for me ; and if ever I 'd a thought it would do any good for me to pray for her , blamed if I would n't a done it or bust . 
Well , Mary Jane she lit out the back way , I reckon ; because nobody see her go . 
When I struck Susan and the hare-lip , I says : `` What 's the name of them people over on t ` other side of the river that you all goes to see sometimes ? '' 
They says : `` There 's several ; but it 's the Proctors , mainly . '' 
`` That 's the name , '' I says ; `` I most forgot it . 
Well , Miss Mary Jane she told me to tell you she 's gone over there in a dreadful hurry -- one of them 's sick . '' 
`` Which one ? '' 
`` I do n't know ; leastways , I kinder forget ; but I thinks it 's -- '' `` Sakes alive , I hope it ai n't Hanner ? '' 
`` I 'm sorry to say it , '' I says , `` but Hanner 's the very one . '' 
`` My goodness , and she so well only last week ! 
Is she took bad ? '' 
`` It ai n't no name for it . 
They set up with her all night , Miss Mary Jane said , and they do n't think she 'll last many hours . '' 
`` Only think of that , now ! 
What 's the matter with her ? '' 
I could n't think of anything reasonable , right off that way , so I says : `` Mumps . '' 
`` Mumps your granny ! 
They do n't set up with people that 's got the mumps . '' 
`` They do n't , do n't they ? 
You better bet they do with these mumps . 
These mumps is different . 
It 's a new kind , Miss Mary Jane said . '' 
`` How 's it a new kind ? '' 
`` Because it 's mixed up with other things . '' 
`` What other things ? '' 
`` Well , measles , and whooping-cough , and erysiplas , and consumption , and yaller janders , and brain-fever , and I do n't know what all . '' 
`` My land ! 
And they call it the mumps ? '' 
`` That 's what Miss Mary Jane said . '' 
`` Well , what in the nation do they call it the mumps for ? '' 
`` Why , because it is the mumps . 
That 's what it starts with . '' 
`` Well , ther ' ai n't no sense in it . 
A body might stump his toe , and take pison , and fall down the well , and break his neck , and bust his brains out , and somebody come along and ask what killed him , and some numskull up and say , ` Why , he stumped his toe . ' 
Would ther ' be any sense in that ? 
No . 
And ther ' ai n't no sense in this , nuther . 
Is it ketching ? '' 
`` Is it ketching ? 
Why , how you talk . 
Is a harrow catching -- in the dark ? 
If you do n't hitch on to one tooth , you 're bound to on another , ai n't you ? 
And you ca n't get away with that tooth without fetching the whole harrow along , can you ? 
Well , these kind of mumps is a kind of a harrow , as you may say -- and it ai n't no slouch of a harrow , nuther , you come to get it hitched on good . '' 
`` Well , it 's awful , I think , '' says the hare-lip . 
`` I 'll go to Uncle Harvey and -- '' `` Oh , yes , '' I says , `` I would . 
Of course I would . 
I would n't lose no time . '' 
`` Well , why would n't you ? '' 
`` Just look at it a minute , and maybe you can see . 
Hai n't your uncles obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can ? 
And do you reckon they 'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that journey by yourselves ? 
you know they 'll wait for you . 
So fur , so good . 
Your uncle Harvey 's a preacher , ai n't he ? 
Very well , then ; is a preacher going to deceive a steamboat clerk ? 
is he going to deceive a ship clerk ? 
-- so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard ? 
Now you know he ai n't . 
What will he do , then ? 
Why , he 'll say , ` It 's a great pity , but my church matters has got to get along the best way they can ; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps , and so it 's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months it takes to show on her if she 's got it . ' 
But never mind , if you think it 's best to tell your uncle Harvey -- '' `` Shucks , and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane 's got it or not ? 
Why , you talk like a muggins . '' 
`` Well , anyway , maybe you 'd better tell some of the neighbors . '' 
`` Listen at that , now . 
You do beat all for natural stupidness . 
Ca n't you see that they 'd go and tell ? 
Ther ' ai n't no way but just to not tell anybody at all . '' 
`` Well , maybe you 're right -- yes , I judge you are right . '' 
`` But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she 's gone out a while , anyway , so he wo n't be uneasy about her ? '' 
`` Yes , Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that . 
She says , ` Tell them to give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss , and say I 've run over the river to see Mr. ' -- Mr. -- what is the name of that rich family your uncle Peter used to think so much of ? 
-- I mean the one that -- '' `` Why , you must mean the Apthorps , ai n't it ? '' 
`` Of course ; bother them kind of names , a body ca n't ever seem to remember them , half the time , somehow . 
Yes , she said , say she has run over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy this house , because she allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had it than anybody else ; and she 's going to stick to them till they say they 'll come , and then , if she ai n't too tired , she 's coming home ; and if she is , she 'll be home in the morning anyway . 
She said , do n't say nothing about the Proctors , but only about the Apthorps -- which 'll be perfectly true , because she is going there to speak about their buying the house ; I know it , because she told me so herself . '' 
`` All right , '' they said , and cleared out to lay for their uncles , and give them the love and the kisses , and tell them the message . 
