Her Pearl -- for so had Hester called her ; not as a name expressive of her aspect , which had nothing of the calm , white , unimpassioned lustre that would be indicated by the comparison . 
But she named the infant `` Pearl , '' as being of great price -- purchased with all she had -- her mother 's only treasure ! 
How strange , indeed ! 
Man had marked this woman 's sin by a scarlet letter , which had such potent and disastrous efficacy that no human sympathy could reach her , save it were sinful like herself . 
God , as a direct consequence of the sin which man thus punished , had given her a lovely child , whose place was on that same dishonoured bosom , to connect her parent for ever with the race and descent of mortals , and to be finally a blessed soul in heaven ! 
Yet these thoughts affected Hester Prynne less with hope than apprehension . 
She knew that her deed had been evil ; she could have no faith , therefore , that its result would be good . 
Day after day she looked fearfully into the child 's expanding nature , ever dreading to detect some dark and wild peculiarity that should correspond with the guiltiness to which she owed her being . 
Certainly there was no physical defect . 
By its perfect shape , its vigour , and its natural dexterity in the use of all its untried limbs , the infant was worthy to have been brought forth in Eden : worthy to have been left there to be the plaything of the angels after the world 's first parents were driven out . 
The child had a native grace which does not invariably co-exist with faultless beauty ; its attire , however simple , always impressed the beholder as if it were the very garb that precisely became it best . 
But little Pearl was not clad in rustic weeds . 
Her mother , with a morbid purpose that may be better understood hereafter , had bought the richest tissues that could be procured , and allowed her imaginative faculty its full play in the arrangement and decoration of the dresses which the child wore before the public eye . 
So magnificent was the small figure when thus arrayed , and such was the splendour of Pearl 's own proper beauty , shining through the gorgeous robes which might have extinguished a paler loveliness , that there was an absolute circle of radiance around her on the darksome cottage floor . 
And yet a russet gown , torn and soiled with the child 's rude play , made a picture of her just as perfect . 
Pearl 's aspect was imbued with a spell of infinite variety ; in this one child there were many children , comprehending the full scope between the wild-flower prettiness of a peasant-baby , and the pomp , in little , of an infant princess . 
Throughout all , however , there was a trait of passion , a certain depth of hue , which she never lost ; and if in any of her changes , she had grown fainter or paler , she would have ceased to be herself -- it would have been no longer Pearl ! 
This outward mutability indicated , and did not more than fairly express , the various properties of her inner life . 
Her nature appeared to possess depth , too , as well as variety ; but -- or else Hester 's fears deceived her -- it lacked reference and adaptation to the world into which she was born . 
The child could not be made amenable to rules . 
In giving her existence a great law had been broken ; and the result was a being whose elements were perhaps beautiful and brilliant , but all in disorder , or with an order peculiar to themselves , amidst which the point of variety and arrangement was difficult or impossible to be discovered . 
Hester could only account for the child 's character -- and even then most vaguely and imperfectly -- by recalling what she herself had been during that momentous period while Pearl was imbibing her soul from the spiritual world , and her bodily frame from its material of earth . 
The mother 's impassioned state had been the medium through which were transmitted to the unborn infant the rays of its moral life ; and , however white and clear originally , they had taken the deep stains of crimson and gold , the fiery lustre , the black shadow , and the untempered light of the intervening substance . 
Above all , the warfare of Hester 's spirit at that epoch was perpetuated in Pearl . 
She could recognize her wild , desperate , defiant mood , the flightiness of her temper , and even some of the very cloud-shapes of gloom and despondency that had brooded in her heart . 
They were now illuminated by the morning radiance of a young child 's disposition , but , later in the day of earthly existence , might be prolific of the storm and whirlwind . 
The discipline of the family in those days was of a far more rigid kind than now . 
The frown , the harsh rebuke , the frequent application of the rod , enjoined by Scriptural authority , were used , not merely in the way of punishment for actual offences , but as a wholesome regimen for the growth and promotion of all childish virtues . 
Hester Prynne , nevertheless , the loving mother of this one child , ran little risk of erring on the side of undue severity . 
Mindful , however , of her own errors and misfortunes , she early sought to impose a tender but strict control over the infant immortality that was committed to her charge . 
But the task was beyond her skill . 
After testing both smiles and frowns , and proving that neither mode of treatment possessed any calculable influence , Hester was ultimately compelled to stand aside and permit the child to be swayed by her own impulses . 
Physical compulsion or restraint was effectual , of course , while it lasted . 
As to any other kind of discipline , whether addressed to her mind or heart , little Pearl might or might not be within its reach , in accordance with the caprice that ruled the moment . 
Her mother , while Pearl was yet an infant , grew acquainted with a certain peculiar look , that warned her when it would be labour thrown away to insist , persuade or plead . 
It was a look so intelligent , yet inexplicable , perverse , sometimes so malicious , but generally accompanied by a wild flow of spirits , that Hester could not help questioning at such moments whether Pearl was a human child . 
She seemed rather an airy sprite , which , after playing its fantastic sports for a little while upon the cottage floor , would flit away with a mocking smile . 
Whenever that look appeared in her wild , bright , deeply black eyes , it invested her with a strange remoteness and intangibility : it was as if she were hovering in the air , and might vanish , like a glimmering light that comes we know not whence and goes we know not whither . 
Beholding it , Hester was constrained to rush towards the child -- to pursue the little elf in the flight which she invariably began -- to snatch her to her bosom with a close pressure and earnest kisses -- not so much from overflowing love as to assure herself that Pearl was flesh and blood , and not utterly delusive . 
But Pearl 's laugh , when she was caught , though full of merriment and music , made her mother more doubtful than before . 
Heart-smitten at this bewildering and baffling spell , that so often came between herself and her sole treasure , whom she had bought so dear , and who was all her world , Hester sometimes burst into passionate tears . 
Then , perhaps -- for there was no foreseeing how it might affect her -- Pearl would frown , and clench her little fist , and harden her small features into a stern , unsympathising look of discontent . 
Not seldom she would laugh anew , and louder than before , like a thing incapable and unintelligent of human sorrow . 
Or -- but this more rarely happened -- she would be convulsed with rage of grief and sob out her love for her mother in broken words , and seem intent on proving that she had a heart by breaking it . 
Yet Hester was hardly safe in confiding herself to that gusty tenderness : it passed as suddenly as it came . 
Brooding over all these matters , the mother felt like one who has evoked a spirit , but , by some irregularity in the process of conjuration , has failed to win the master-word that should control this new and incomprehensible intelligence . 
Her only real comfort was when the child lay in the placidity of sleep . 
Then she was sure of her , and tasted hours of quiet , sad , delicious happiness ; until -- perhaps with that perverse expression glimmering from beneath her opening lids -- little Pearl awoke ! 
How soon -- with what strange rapidity , indeed did Pearl arrive at an age that was capable of social intercourse beyond the mother 's ever-ready smile and nonsense-words ! 
And then what a happiness would it have been could Hester Prynne have heard her clear , bird-like voice mingling with the uproar of other childish voices , and have distinguished and unravelled her own darling 's tones , amid all the entangled outcry of a group of sportive children . 
But this could never be . 
Pearl was a born outcast of the infantile world . 
An imp of evil , emblem and product of sin , she had no right among christened infants . 
Nothing was more remarkable than the instinct , as it seemed , with which the child comprehended her loneliness : the destiny that had drawn an inviolable circle round about her : the whole peculiarity , in short , of her position in respect to other children . 
Never since her release from prison had Hester met the public gaze without her . 
In all her walks about the town , Pearl , too , was there : first as the babe in arms , and afterwards as the little girl , small companion of her mother , holding a forefinger with her whole grasp , and tripping along at the rate of three or four footsteps to one of Hester 's . 
She saw the children of the settlement on the grassy margin of the street , or at the domestic thresholds , disporting themselves in such grim fashions as the Puritanic nurture would permit ; playing at going to church , perchance , or at scourging Quakers ; or taking scalps in a sham fight with the Indians , or scaring one another with freaks of imitative witchcraft . 
Pearl saw , and gazed intently , but never sought to make acquaintance . 
If spoken to , she would not speak again . 
If the children gathered about her , as they sometimes did , Pearl would grow positively terrible in her puny wrath , snatching up stones to fling at them , with shrill , incoherent exclamations , that made her mother tremble , because they had so much the sound of a witch 's anathemas in some unknown tongue . 
The truth was , that the little Puritans , being of the most intolerant brood that ever lived , had got a vague idea of something outlandish , unearthly , or at variance with ordinary fashions , in the mother and child , and therefore scorned them in their hearts , and not unfrequently reviled them with their tongues . 
Pearl felt the sentiment , and requited it with the bitterest hatred that can be supposed to rankle in a childish bosom . 
These outbreaks of a fierce temper had a kind of value , and even comfort for the mother ; because there was at least an intelligible earnestness in the mood , instead of the fitful caprice that so often thwarted her in the child 's manifestations . 
It appalled her , nevertheless , to discern here , again , a shadowy reflection of the evil that had existed in herself . 
All this enmity and passion had Pearl inherited , by inalienable right , out of Hester 's heart . 
Mother and daughter stood together in the same circle of seclusion from human society ; and in the nature of the child seemed to be perpetuated those unquiet elements that had distracted Hester Prynne before Pearl 's birth , but had since begun to be soothed away by the softening influences of maternity . 
At home , within and around her mother 's cottage , Pearl wanted not a wide and various circle of acquaintance . 
The spell of life went forth from her ever-creative spirit , and communicated itself to a thousand objects , as a torch kindles a flame wherever it may be applied . 
The unlikeliest materials -- a stick , a bunch of rags , a flower -- were the puppets of Pearl 's witchcraft , and , without undergoing any outward change , became spiritually adapted to whatever drama occupied the stage of her inner world . 
Her one baby-voice served a multitude of imaginary personages , old and young , to talk withal . 
The pine-trees , aged , black , and solemn , and flinging groans and other melancholy utterances on the breeze , needed little transformation to figure as Puritan elders ; the ugliest weeds of the garden were their children , whom Pearl smote down and uprooted most unmercifully . 
It was wonderful , the vast variety of forms into which she threw her intellect , with no continuity , indeed , but darting up and dancing , always in a state of preternatural activity -- soon sinking down , as if exhausted by so rapid and feverish a tide of life -- and succeeded by other shapes of a similar wild energy . 
It was like nothing so much as the phantasmagoric play of the northern lights . 
In the mere exercise of the fancy , however , and the sportiveness of a growing mind , there might be a little more than was observable in other children of bright faculties ; except as Pearl , in the dearth of human playmates , was thrown more upon the visionary throng which she created . 
The singularity lay in the hostile feelings with which the child regarded all these offsprings of her own heart and mind . 
She never created a friend , but seemed always to be sowing broadcast the dragon 's teeth , whence sprung a harvest of armed enemies , against whom she rushed to battle . 
It was inexpressibly sad -- then what depth of sorrow to a mother , who felt in her own heart the cause -- to observe , in one so young , this constant recognition of an adverse world , and so fierce a training of the energies that were to make good her cause in the contest that must ensue . 
Gazing at Pearl , Hester Prynne often dropped her work upon her knees , and cried out with an agony which she would fain have hidden , but which made utterance for itself betwixt speech and a groan -- `` O Father in Heaven -- if Thou art still my Father -- what is this being which I have brought into the world ? '' 
And Pearl , overhearing the ejaculation , or aware through some more subtile channel , of those throbs of anguish , would turn her vivid and beautiful little face upon her mother , smile with sprite-like intelligence , and resume her play . 
One peculiarity of the child 's deportment remains yet to be told . 
The very first thing which she had noticed in her life , was -- what ? 
-- not the mother 's smile , responding to it , as other babies do , by that faint , embryo smile of the little mouth , remembered so doubtfully afterwards , and with such fond discussion whether it were indeed a smile . 
By no means ! 
But that first object of which Pearl seemed to become aware was -- shall we say it ? 
-- the scarlet letter on Hester 's bosom ! 
One day , as her mother stooped over the cradle , the infant 's eyes had been caught by the glimmering of the gold embroidery about the letter ; and putting up her little hand she grasped at it , smiling , not doubtfully , but with a decided gleam , that gave her face the look of a much older child . 
Then , gasping for breath , did Hester Prynne clutch the fatal token , instinctively endeavouring to tear it away , so infinite was the torture inflicted by the intelligent touch of Pearl 's baby-hand . 
Again , as if her mother 's agonised gesture were meant only to make sport for her , did little Pearl look into her eyes , and smile . 
From that epoch , except when the child was asleep , Hester had never felt a moment 's safety : not a moment 's calm enjoyment of her . 
Weeks , it is true , would sometimes elapse , during which Pearl 's gaze might never once be fixed upon the scarlet letter ; but then , again , it would come at unawares , like the stroke of sudden death , and always with that peculiar smile and odd expression of the eyes . 
Once this freakish , elvish cast came into the child 's eyes while Hester was looking at her own image in them , as mothers are fond of doing ; and suddenly for women in solitude , and with troubled hearts , are pestered with unaccountable delusions she fancied that she beheld , not her own miniature portrait , but another face in the small black mirror of Pearl 's eye . 
It was a face , fiend-like , full of smiling malice , yet bearing the semblance of features that she had known full well , though seldom with a smile , and never with malice in them . 
It was as if an evil spirit possessed the child , and had just then peeped forth in mockery . 
Many a time afterwards had Hester been tortured , though less vividly , by the same illusion . 
In the afternoon of a certain summer 's day , after Pearl grew big enough to run about , she amused herself with gathering handfuls of wild flowers , and flinging them , one by one , at her mother 's bosom ; dancing up and down like a little elf whenever she hit the scarlet letter . 
Hester 's first motion had been to cover her bosom with her clasped hands . 
But whether from pride or resignation , or a feeling that her penance might best be wrought out by this unutterable pain , she resisted the impulse , and sat erect , pale as death , looking sadly into little Pearl 's wild eyes . 
Still came the battery of flowers , almost invariably hitting the mark , and covering the mother 's breast with hurts for which she could find no balm in this world , nor knew how to seek it in another . 
At last , her shot being all expended , the child stood still and gazed at Hester , with that little laughing image of a fiend peeping out -- or , whether it peeped or no , her mother so imagined it -- from the unsearchable abyss of her black eyes . 
`` Child , what art thou ? '' 
cried the mother . 
`` Oh , I am your little Pearl ! '' 
answered the child . 
But while she said it , Pearl laughed , and began to dance up and down with the humoursome gesticulation of a little imp , whose next freak might be to fly up the chimney . 
`` Art thou my child , in very truth ? '' 
asked Hester . 
Nor did she put the question altogether idly , but , for the moment , with a portion of genuine earnestness ; for , such was Pearl 's wonderful intelligence , that her mother half doubted whether she were not acquainted with the secret spell of her existence , and might not now reveal herself . 
`` Yes ; I am little Pearl ! '' 
repeated the child , continuing her antics . 
`` Thou art not my child ! 
Thou art no Pearl of mine ! '' 
said the mother half playfully ; for it was often the case that a sportive impulse came over her in the midst of her deepest suffering . 
`` Tell me , then , what thou art , and who sent thee hither ? '' 
`` Tell me , mother ! '' 
said the child , seriously , coming up to Hester , and pressing herself close to her knees . 
`` Do thou tell me ! '' 
`` Thy Heavenly Father sent thee ! '' 
answered Hester Prynne . 
But she said it with a hesitation that did not escape the acuteness of the child . 
Whether moved only by her ordinary freakishness , or because an evil spirit prompted her , she put up her small forefinger and touched the scarlet letter . 
`` He did not send me ! '' 
cried she , positively . 
`` I have no Heavenly Father ! '' 
`` Hush , Pearl , hush ! 
Thou must not talk so ! '' 
answered the mother , suppressing a groan . 
`` He sent us all into the world . 
He sent even me , thy mother . 
Then , much more thee ! 
Or , if not , thou strange and elfish child , whence didst thou come ? '' 
`` Tell me ! 
Tell me ! '' 
repeated Pearl , no longer seriously , but laughing and capering about the floor . 
`` It is thou that must tell me ! '' 
But Hester could not resolve the query , being herself in a dismal labyrinth of doubt . 
She remembered -- betwixt a smile and a shudder -- the talk of the neighbouring townspeople , who , seeking vainly elsewhere for the child 's paternity , and observing some of her odd attributes , had given out that poor little Pearl was a demon offspring : such as , ever since old Catholic times , had occasionally been seen on earth , through the agency of their mother 's sin , and to promote some foul and wicked purpose . 
Luther , according to the scandal of his monkish enemies , was a brat of that hellish breed ; nor was Pearl the only child to whom this inauspicious origin was assigned among the New England Puritans . 
Hester Prynne went one day to the mansion of Governor Bellingham , with a pair of gloves which she had fringed and embroidered to his order , and which were to be worn on some great occasion of state ; for , though the chances of a popular election had caused this former ruler to descend a step or two from the highest rank , he still held an honourable and influential place among the colonial magistracy . 
Another and far more important reason than the delivery of a pair of embroidered gloves , impelled Hester , at this time , to seek an interview with a personage of so much power and activity in the affairs of the settlement . 
It had reached her ears that there was a design on the part of some of the leading inhabitants , cherishing the more rigid order of principles in religion and government , to deprive her of her child . 
On the supposition that Pearl , as already hinted , was of demon origin , these good people not unreasonably argued that a Christian interest in the mother 's soul required them to remove such a stumbling-block from her path . 
If the child , on the other hand , were really capable of moral and religious growth , and possessed the elements of ultimate salvation , then , surely , it would enjoy all the fairer prospect of these advantages by being transferred to wiser and better guardianship than Hester Prynne 's . 
Among those who promoted the design , Governor Bellingham was said to be one of the most busy . 
It may appear singular , and , indeed , not a little ludicrous , that an affair of this kind , which in later days would have been referred to no higher jurisdiction than that of the select men of the town , should then have been a question publicly discussed , and on which statesmen of eminence took sides . 
At that epoch of pristine simplicity , however , matters of even slighter public interest , and of far less intrinsic weight than the welfare of Hester and her child , were strangely mixed up with the deliberations of legislators and acts of state . 
The period was hardly , if at all , earlier than that of our story , when a dispute concerning the right of property in a pig not only caused a fierce and bitter contest in the legislative body of the colony , but resulted in an important modification of the framework itself of the legislature . 
Full of concern , therefore -- but so conscious of her own right that it seemed scarcely an unequal match between the public on the one side , and a lonely woman , backed by the sympathies of nature , on the other -- Hester Prynne set forth from her solitary cottage . 
Little Pearl , of course , was her companion . 
She was now of an age to run lightly along by her mother 's side , and , constantly in motion from morn till sunset , could have accomplished a much longer journey than that before her . 
Often , nevertheless , more from caprice than necessity , she demanded to be taken up in arms ; but was soon as imperious to be let down again , and frisked onward before Hester on the grassy pathway , with many a harmless trip and tumble . 
We have spoken of Pearl 's rich and luxuriant beauty -- a beauty that shone with deep and vivid tints , a bright complexion , eyes possessing intensity both of depth and glow , and hair already of a deep , glossy brown , and which , in after years , would be nearly akin to black . 
There was fire in her and throughout her : she seemed the unpremeditated offshoot of a passionate moment . 
Her mother , in contriving the child 's garb , had allowed the gorgeous tendencies of her imagination their full play , arraying her in a crimson velvet tunic of a peculiar cut , abundantly embroidered in fantasies and flourishes of gold thread . 
So much strength of colouring , which must have given a wan and pallid aspect to cheeks of a fainter bloom , was admirably adapted to Pearl 's beauty , and made her the very brightest little jet of flame that ever danced upon the earth . 
But it was a remarkable attribute of this garb , and indeed , of the child 's whole appearance , that it irresistibly and inevitably reminded the beholder of the token which Hester Prynne was doomed to wear upon her bosom . 
It was the scarlet letter in another form : the scarlet letter endowed with life ! 
The mother herself -- as if the red ignominy were so deeply scorched into her brain that all her conceptions assumed its form -- had carefully wrought out the similitude , lavishing many hours of morbid ingenuity to create an analogy between the object of her affection and the emblem of her guilt and torture . 
But , in truth , Pearl was the one as well as the other ; and only in consequence of that identity had Hester contrived so perfectly to represent the scarlet letter in her appearance . 
As the two wayfarers came within the precincts of the town , the children of the Puritans looked up from their play , -- or what passed for play with those sombre little urchins -- and spoke gravely one to another . 
`` Behold , verily , there is the woman of the scarlet letter : and of a truth , moreover , there is the likeness of the scarlet letter running along by her side ! 
Come , therefore , and let us fling mud at them ! '' 
But Pearl , who was a dauntless child , after frowning , stamping her foot , and shaking her little hand with a variety of threatening gestures , suddenly made a rush at the knot of her enemies , and put them all to flight . 
She resembled , in her fierce pursuit of them , an infant pestilence -- the scarlet fever , or some such half-fledged angel of judgment -- whose mission was to punish the sins of the rising generation . 
She screamed and shouted , too , with a terrific volume of sound , which , doubtless , caused the hearts of the fugitives to quake within them . 
The victory accomplished , Pearl returned quietly to her mother , and looked up , smiling , into her face . 
Without further adventure , they reached the dwelling of Governor Bellingham . 
This was a large wooden house , built in a fashion of which there are specimens still extant in the streets of our older towns now moss-grown , crumbling to decay , and melancholy at heart with the many sorrowful or joyful occurrences , remembered or forgotten , that have happened and passed away within their dusky chambers . 
Then , however , there was the freshness of the passing year on its exterior , and the cheerfulness , gleaming forth from the sunny windows , of a human habitation , into which death had never entered . 
It had , indeed , a very cheery aspect , the walls being overspread with a kind of stucco , in which fragments of broken glass were plentifully intermixed ; so that , when the sunshine fell aslant-wise over the front of the edifice , it glittered and sparkled as if diamonds had been flung against it by the double handful . 
The brilliancy might have be fitted Aladdin 's palace rather than the mansion of a grave old Puritan ruler . 
It was further decorated with strange and seemingly cabalistic figures and diagrams , suitable to the quaint taste of the age which had been drawn in the stucco , when newly laid on , and had now grown hard and durable , for the admiration of after times . 
Pearl , looking at this bright wonder of a house began to caper and dance , and imperatively required that the whole breadth of sunshine should be stripped off its front , and given her to play with . 
`` No , my little Pearl ! '' 
said her mother ; `` thou must gather thine own sunshine . 
I have none to give thee ! '' 
They approached the door , which was of an arched form , and flanked on each side by a narrow tower or projection of the edifice , in both of which were lattice-windows , the wooden shutters to close over them at need . 
Lifting the iron hammer that hung at the portal , Hester Prynne gave a summons , which was answered by one of the Governor 's bond servant -- a free-born Englishman , but now a seven years ' slave . 
During that term he was to be the property of his master , and as much a commodity of bargain and sale as an ox , or a joint-stool . 
The serf wore the customary garb of serving-men at that period , and long before , in the old hereditary halls of England . 
`` Is the worshipful Governor Bellingham within ? '' 
inquired Hester . 
`` Yea , forsooth , '' replied the bond-servant , staring with wide-open eyes at the scarlet letter , which , being a new-comer in the country , he had never before seen . 
`` Yea , his honourable worship is within . 
But he hath a godly minister or two with him , and likewise a leech . 
Ye may not see his worship now . '' 
`` Nevertheless , I will enter , '' answered Hester Prynne ; and the bond-servant , perhaps judging from the decision of her air , and the glittering symbol in her bosom , that she was a great lady in the land , offered no opposition . 
So the mother and little Pearl were admitted into the hall of entrance . 
With many variations , suggested by the nature of his building materials , diversity of climate , and a different mode of social life , Governor Bellingham had planned his new habitation after the residences of gentlemen of fair estate in his native land . 
Here , then , was a wide and reasonably lofty hall , extending through the whole depth of the house , and forming a medium of general communication , more or less directly , with all the other apartments . 
At one extremity , this spacious room was lighted by the windows of the two towers , which formed a small recess on either side of the portal . 
At the other end , though partly muffled by a curtain , it was more powerfully illuminated by one of those embowed hall windows which we read of in old books , and which was provided with a deep and cushioned seat . 
Here , on the cushion , lay a folio tome , probably of the Chronicles of England , or other such substantial literature ; even as , in our own days , we scatter gilded volumes on the centre table , to be turned over by the casual guest . 
The furniture of the hall consisted of some ponderous chairs , the backs of which were elaborately carved with wreaths of oaken flowers ; and likewise a table in the same taste , the whole being of the Elizabethan age , or perhaps earlier , and heirlooms , transferred hither from the Governor 's paternal home . 
On the table -- in token that the sentiment of old English hospitality had not been left behind -- stood a large pewter tankard , at the bottom of which , had Hester or Pearl peeped into it , they might have seen the frothy remnant of a recent draught of ale . 
On the wall hung a row of portraits , representing the forefathers of the Bellingham lineage , some with armour on their breasts , and others with stately ruffs and robes of peace . 
All were characterised by the sternness and severity which old portraits so invariably put on , as if they were the ghosts , rather than the pictures , of departed worthies , and were gazing with harsh and intolerant criticism at the pursuits and enjoyments of living men . 
At about the centre of the oaken panels that lined the hall was suspended a suit of mail , not , like the pictures , an ancestral relic , but of the most modern date ; for it had been manufactured by a skilful armourer in London , the same year in which Governor Bellingham came over to New England . 
There was a steel head-piece , a cuirass , a gorget and greaves , with a pair of gauntlets and a sword hanging beneath ; all , and especially the helmet and breastplate , so highly burnished as to glow with white radiance , and scatter an illumination everywhere about upon the floor . 
This bright panoply was not meant for mere idle show , but had been worn by the Governor on many a solemn muster and training field , and had glittered , moreover , at the head of a regiment in the Pequod war . 
For , though bred a lawyer , and accustomed to speak of Bacon , Coke , Noye , and Finch , as his professional associates , the exigencies of this new country had transformed Governor Bellingham into a soldier , as well as a statesman and ruler . 
Little Pearl , who was as greatly pleased with the gleaming armour as she had been with the glittering frontispiece of the house , spent some time looking into the polished mirror of the breastplate . 
`` Mother , '' cried she , `` I see you here . 
Look ! 
Look ! '' 
Hester looked by way of humouring the child ; and she saw that , owing to the peculiar effect of this convex mirror , the scarlet letter was represented in exaggerated and gigantic proportions , so as to be greatly the most prominent feature of her appearance . 
In truth , she seemed absolutely hidden behind it . 
Pearl pointed upwards also , at a similar picture in the head-piece ; smiling at her mother , with the elfish intelligence that was so familiar an expression on her small physiognomy . 
That look of naughty merriment was likewise reflected in the mirror , with so much breadth and intensity of effect , that it made Hester Prynne feel as if it could not be the image of her own child , but of an imp who was seeking to mould itself into Pearl 's shape . 
`` Come along , Pearl , '' said she , drawing her away , `` Come and look into this fair garden . 
It may be we shall see flowers there ; more beautiful ones than we find in the woods . '' 
Pearl accordingly ran to the bow-window , at the further end of the hall , and looked along the vista of a garden walk , carpeted with closely-shaven grass , and bordered with some rude and immature attempt at shrubbery . 
But the proprietor appeared already to have relinquished as hopeless , the effort to perpetuate on this side of the Atlantic , in a hard soil , and amid the close struggle for subsistence , the native English taste for ornamental gardening . 
Cabbages grew in plain sight ; and a pumpkin-vine , rooted at some distance , had run across the intervening space , and deposited one of its gigantic products directly beneath the hall window , as if to warn the Governor that this great lump of vegetable gold was as rich an ornament as New England earth would offer him . 
There were a few rose-bushes , however , and a number of apple-trees , probably the descendants of those planted by the Reverend Mr. Blackstone , the first settler of the peninsula ; that half mythological personage who rides through our early annals , seated on the back of a bull . 
Pearl , seeing the rose-bushes , began to cry for a red rose , and would not be pacified . 
`` Hush , child -- hush ! '' 
said her mother , earnestly . 
`` Do not cry , dear little Pearl ! 
I hear voices in the garden . 
The Governor is coming , and gentlemen along with him . '' 
In fact , adown the vista of the garden avenue , a number of persons were seen approaching towards the house . 
Pearl , in utter scorn of her mother 's attempt to quiet her , gave an eldritch scream , and then became silent , not from any notion of obedience , but because the quick and mobile curiosity of her disposition was excited by the appearance of those new personages . 
Governor Bellingham , in a loose gown and easy cap -- such as elderly gentlemen loved to endue themselves with , in their domestic privacy -- walked foremost , and appeared to be showing off his estate , and expatiating on his projected improvements . 
The wide circumference of an elaborate ruff , beneath his grey beard , in the antiquated fashion of King James 's reign , caused his head to look not a little like that of John the Baptist in a charger . 
The impression made by his aspect , so rigid and severe , and frost-bitten with more than autumnal age , was hardly in keeping with the appliances of worldly enjoyment wherewith he had evidently done his utmost to surround himself . 
But it is an error to suppose that our great forefathers -- though accustomed to speak and think of human existence as a state merely of trial and warfare , and though unfeignedly prepared to sacrifice goods and life at the behest of duty -- made it a matter of conscience to reject such means of comfort , or even luxury , as lay fairly within their grasp . 
This creed was never taught , for instance , by the venerable pastor , John Wilson , whose beard , white as a snow-drift , was seen over Governor Bellingham 's shoulders , while its wearer suggested that pears and peaches might yet be naturalised in the New England climate , and that purple grapes might possibly be compelled to flourish against the sunny garden-wall . 
The old clergyman , nurtured at the rich bosom of the English Church , had a long established and legitimate taste for all good and comfortable things , and however stern he might show himself in the pulpit , or in his public reproof of such transgressions as that of Hester Prynne , still , the genial benevolence of his private life had won him warmer affection than was accorded to any of his professional contemporaries . 
Behind the Governor and Mr. Wilson came two other guests -- one , the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale , whom the reader may remember as having taken a brief and reluctant part in the scene of Hester Prynne 's disgrace ; and , in close companionship with him , old Roger Chillingworth , a person of great skill in physic , who for two or three years past had been settled in the town . 
It was understood that this learned man was the physician as well as friend of the young minister , whose health had severely suffered of late by his too unreserved self-sacrifice to the labours and duties of the pastoral relation . 
The Governor , in advance of his visitors , ascended one or two steps , and , throwing open the leaves of the great hall window , found himself close to little Pearl . 
The shadow of the curtain fell on Hester Prynne , and partially concealed her . 
`` What have we here ? '' 
said Governor Bellingham , looking with surprise at the scarlet little figure before him . 
`` I profess , I have never seen the like since my days of vanity , in old King James 's time , when I was wont to esteem it a high favour to be admitted to a court mask ! 
There used to be a swarm of these small apparitions in holiday time , and we called them children of the Lord of Misrule . 
But how gat such a guest into my hall ? '' 
`` Ay , indeed ! '' 
cried good old Mr. Wilson . 
`` What little bird of scarlet plumage may this be ? 
Methinks I have seen just such figures when the sun has been shining through a richly painted window , and tracing out the golden and crimson images across the floor . 
But that was in the old land . 
Prithee , young one , who art thou , and what has ailed thy mother to bedizen thee in this strange fashion ? 
Art thou a Christian child -- ha ? 
Dost know thy catechism ? 
Or art thou one of those naughty elfs or fairies whom we thought to have left behind us , with other relics of Papistry , in merry old England ? '' 
`` I am mother 's child , '' answered the scarlet vision , `` and my name is Pearl ! '' 
`` Pearl ? 
-- Ruby , rather -- or Coral ! 
-- or Red Rose , at the very least , judging from thy hue ! '' 
responded the old minister , putting forth his hand in a vain attempt to pat little Pearl on the cheek . 
`` But where is this mother of thine ? 
Ah ! 
I see , '' he added ; and , turning to Governor Bellingham , whispered , `` This is the selfsame child of whom we have held speech together ; and behold here the unhappy woman , Hester Prynne , her mother ! '' 
`` Sayest thou so ? '' 
cried the Governor . 
`` Nay , we might have judged that such a child 's mother must needs be a scarlet woman , and a worthy type of her of Babylon ! 
But she comes at a good time , and we will look into this matter forthwith . '' 
Governor Bellingham stepped through the window into the hall , followed by his three guests . 
`` Hester Prynne , '' said he , fixing his naturally stern regard on the wearer of the scarlet letter , `` there hath been much question concerning thee of late . 
The point hath been weightily discussed , whether we , that are of authority and influence , do well discharge our consciences by trusting an immortal soul , such as there is in yonder child , to the guidance of one who hath stumbled and fallen amid the pitfalls of this world . 
Speak thou , the child 's own mother ! 
Were it not , thinkest thou , for thy little one 's temporal and eternal welfare that she be taken out of thy charge , and clad soberly , and disciplined strictly , and instructed in the truths of heaven and earth ? 
What canst thou do for the child in this kind ? '' 
`` I can teach my little Pearl what I have learned from this ! '' 
answered Hester Prynne , laying her finger on the red token . 
`` Woman , it is thy badge of shame ! '' 
replied the stern magistrate . 
`` It is because of the stain which that letter indicates that we would transfer thy child to other hands . '' 
`` Nevertheless , '' said the mother , calmly , though growing more pale , `` this badge hath taught me -- it daily teaches me -- it is teaching me at this moment -- lessons whereof my child may be the wiser and better , albeit they can profit nothing to myself . '' 
`` We will judge warily , '' said Bellingham , `` and look well what we are about to do . 
Good Master Wilson , I pray you , examine this Pearl -- since that is her name -- and see whether she hath had such Christian nurture as befits a child of her age . '' 
The old minister seated himself in an arm-chair and made an effort to draw Pearl betwixt his knees . 
But the child , unaccustomed to the touch or familiarity of any but her mother , escaped through the open window , and stood on the upper step , looking like a wild tropical bird of rich plumage , ready to take flight into the upper air . 
Mr. Wilson , not a little astonished at this outbreak -- for he was a grandfatherly sort of personage , and usually a vast favourite with children -- essayed , however , to proceed with the examination . 
`` Pearl , '' said he , with great solemnity , `` thou must take heed to instruction , that so , in due season , thou mayest wear in thy bosom the pearl of great price . 
Canst thou tell me , my child , who made thee ? '' 
Now Pearl knew well enough who made her , for Hester Prynne , the daughter of a pious home , very soon after her talk with the child about her Heavenly Father , had begun to inform her of those truths which the human spirit , at whatever stage of immaturity , imbibes with such eager interest . 
Pearl , therefore -- so large were the attainments of her three years ' lifetime -- could have borne a fair examination in the New England Primer , or the first column of the Westminster Catechisms , although unacquainted with the outward form of either of those celebrated works . 
But that perversity , which all children have more or less of , and of which little Pearl had a tenfold portion , now , at the most inopportune moment , took thorough possession of her , and closed her lips , or impelled her to speak words amiss . 
After putting her finger in her mouth , with many ungracious refusals to answer good Mr. Wilson 's question , the child finally announced that she had not been made at all , but had been plucked by her mother off the bush of wild roses that grew by the prison-door . 
This phantasy was probably suggested by the near proximity of the Governor 's red roses , as Pearl stood outside of the window , together with her recollection of the prison rose-bush , which she had passed in coming hither . 
Old Roger Chillingworth , with a smile on his face , whispered something in the young clergyman 's ear . 
Hester Prynne looked at the man of skill , and even then , with her fate hanging in the balance , was startled to perceive what a change had come over his features -- how much uglier they were , how his dark complexion seemed to have grown duskier , and his figure more misshapen -- since the days when she had familiarly known him . 
She met his eyes for an instant , but was immediately constrained to give all her attention to the scene now going forward . 
`` This is awful ! '' 
cried the Governor , slowly recovering from the astonishment into which Pearl 's response had thrown him . 
`` Here is a child of three years old , and she can not tell who made her ! 
Without question , she is equally in the dark as to her soul , its present depravity , and future destiny ! 
Methinks , gentlemen , we need inquire no further . '' 
Hester caught hold of Pearl , and drew her forcibly into her arms , confronting the old Puritan magistrate with almost a fierce expression . 
Alone in the world , cast off by it , and with this sole treasure to keep her heart alive , she felt that she possessed indefeasible rights against the world , and was ready to defend them to the death . 
`` God gave me the child ! '' 
cried she . 
`` He gave her in requital of all things else which ye had taken from me . 
She is my happiness -- she is my torture , none the less ! 
Pearl keeps me here in life ! 
Pearl punishes me , too ! 
See ye not , she is the scarlet letter , only capable of being loved , and so endowed with a millionfold the power of retribution for my sin ? 
Ye shall not take her ! 
I will die first ! '' 
`` My poor woman , '' said the not unkind old minister , `` the child shall be well cared for -- far better than thou canst do for it . '' 
`` God gave her into my keeping ! '' 
repeated Hester Prynne , raising her voice almost to a shriek . 
`` I will not give her up ! '' 
And here by a sudden impulse , she turned to the young clergyman , Mr. Dimmesdale , at whom , up to this moment , she had seemed hardly so much as once to direct her eyes . 
`` Speak thou for me ! '' 
cried she . 
`` Thou wast my pastor , and hadst charge of my soul , and knowest me better than these men can . 
I will not lose the child ! 
Speak for me ! 
Thou knowest -- for thou hast sympathies which these men lack -- thou knowest what is in my heart , and what are a mother 's rights , and how much the stronger they are when that mother has but her child and the scarlet letter ! 
Look thou to it ! 
I will not lose the child ! 
Look to it ! '' 
At this wild and singular appeal , which indicated that Hester Prynne 's situation had provoked her to little less than madness , the young minister at once came forward , pale , and holding his hand over his heart , as was his custom whenever his peculiarly nervous temperament was thrown into agitation . 
He looked now more careworn and emaciated than as we described him at the scene of Hester 's public ignominy ; and whether it were his failing health , or whatever the cause might be , his large dark eyes had a world of pain in their troubled and melancholy depth . 
`` There is truth in what she says , '' began the minister , with a voice sweet , tremulous , but powerful , insomuch that the hall re-echoed and the hollow armour rang with it -- `` truth in what Hester says , and in the feeling which inspires her ! 
God gave her the child , and gave her , too , an instinctive knowledge of its nature and requirements -- both seemingly so peculiar -- which no other mortal being can possess . 
And , moreover , is there not a quality of awful sacredness in the relation between this mother and this child ? '' 
`` Ay -- how is that , good Master Dimmesdale ? '' 
interrupted the Governor . 
`` Make that plain , I pray you ! '' 
`` It must be even so , '' resumed the minister . 
`` For , if we deem it otherwise , do we not thereby say that the Heavenly Father , the creator of all flesh , hath lightly recognised a deed of sin , and made of no account the distinction between unhallowed lust and holy love ? 
This child of its father 's guilt and its mother 's shame has come from the hand of God , to work in many ways upon her heart , who pleads so earnestly and with such bitterness of spirit the right to keep her . 
It was meant for a blessing -- for the one blessing of her life ! 
It was meant , doubtless , the mother herself hath told us , for a retribution , too ; a torture to be felt at many an unthought-of moment ; a pang , a sting , an ever-recurring agony , in the midst of a troubled joy ! 
Hath she not expressed this thought in the garb of the poor child , so forcibly reminding us of that red symbol which sears her bosom ? '' 
`` Well said again ! '' 
cried good Mr. Wilson . 
`` I feared the woman had no better thought than to make a mountebank of her child ! '' 
`` Oh , not so ! 
-- not so ! '' 
continued Mr. Dimmesdale . 
`` She recognises , believe me , the solemn miracle which God hath wrought in the existence of that child . 
And may she feel , too -- what , methinks , is the very truth -- that this boon was meant , above all things else , to keep the mother 's soul alive , and to preserve her from blacker depths of sin into which Satan might else have sought to plunge her ! 
Therefore it is good for this poor , sinful woman , that she hath an infant immortality , a being capable of eternal joy or sorrow , confided to her care -- to be trained up by her to righteousness , to remind her , at every moment , of her fall , but yet to teach her , as if it were by the Creator 's sacred pledge , that , if she bring the child to heaven , the child also will bring its parents thither ! 
Herein is the sinful mother happier than the sinful father . 
For Hester Prynne 's sake , then , and no less for the poor child 's sake , let us leave them as Providence hath seen fit to place them ! '' 
`` You speak , my friend , with a strange earnestness , '' said old Roger Chillingworth , smiling at him . 
`` And there is a weighty import in what my young brother hath spoken , '' added the Rev. Mr. Wilson . 
`` What say you , worshipful Master Bellingham ? 
Hath he not pleaded well for the poor woman ? '' 
`` Indeed hath he , '' answered the magistrate ; `` and hath adduced such arguments , that we will even leave the matter as it now stands ; so long , at least , as there shall be no further scandal in the woman . 
Care must be had nevertheless , to put the child to due and stated examination in the catechism , at thy hands or Master Dimmesdale 's . 
Moreover , at a proper season , the tithing-men must take heed that she go both to school and to meeting . '' 
The young minister , on ceasing to speak had withdrawn a few steps from the group , and stood with his face partially concealed in the heavy folds of the window-curtain ; while the shadow of his figure , which the sunlight cast upon the floor , was tremulous with the vehemence of his appeal . 
Pearl , that wild and flighty little elf stole softly towards him , and taking his hand in the grasp of both her own , laid her cheek against it ; a caress so tender , and withal so unobtrusive , that her mother , who was looking on , asked herself -- `` Is that my Pearl ? '' 
Yet she knew that there was love in the child 's heart , although it mostly revealed itself in passion , and hardly twice in her lifetime had been softened by such gentleness as now . 
The minister -- for , save the long-sought regards of woman , nothing is sweeter than these marks of childish preference , accorded spontaneously by a spiritual instinct , and therefore seeming to imply in us something truly worthy to be loved -- the minister looked round , laid his hand on the child 's head , hesitated an instant , and then kissed her brow . 
Little Pearl 's unwonted mood of sentiment lasted no longer ; she laughed , and went capering down the hall so airily , that old Mr. Wilson raised a question whether even her tiptoes touched the floor . 
`` The little baggage hath witchcraft in her , I profess , '' said he to Mr. Dimmesdale . 
`` She needs no old woman 's broomstick to fly withal ! '' 
`` A strange child ! '' 
remarked old Roger Chillingworth . 
`` It is easy to see the mother 's part in her . 
Would it be beyond a philosopher 's research , think ye , gentlemen , to analyse that child 's nature , and , from it make a mould , to give a shrewd guess at the father ? '' 
`` Nay ; it would be sinful , in such a question , to follow the clue of profane philosophy , '' said Mr. Wilson . 
`` Better to fast and pray upon it ; and still better , it may be , to leave the mystery as we find it , unless Providence reveal it of its own accord . 
Thereby , every good Christian man hath a title to show a father 's kindness towards the poor , deserted babe . '' 
The affair being so satisfactorily concluded , Hester Prynne , with Pearl , departed from the house . 
As they descended the steps , it is averred that the lattice of a chamber-window was thrown open , and forth into the sunny day was thrust the face of Mistress Hibbins , Governor Bellingham 's bitter-tempered sister , and the same who , a few years later , was executed as a witch . 
`` Hist , hist ! '' 
said she , while her ill-omened physiognomy seemed to cast a shadow over the cheerful newness of the house . 
`` Wilt thou go with us to-night ? 
There will be a merry company in the forest ; and I well-nigh promised the Black Man that comely Hester Prynne should make one . '' 
`` Make my excuse to him , so please you ! '' 
answered Hester , with a triumphant smile . 
`` I must tarry at home , and keep watch over my little Pearl . 
Had they taken her from me , I would willingly have gone with thee into the forest , and signed my name in the Black Man 's book too , and that with mine own blood ! '' 
`` We shall have thee there anon ! '' 
said the witch-lady , frowning , as she drew back her head . 
But here -- if we suppose this interview betwixt Mistress Hibbins and Hester Prynne to be authentic , and not a parable -- was already an illustration of the young minister 's argument against sundering the relation of a fallen mother to the offspring of her frailty . 
Even thus early had the child saved her from Satan 's snare . 
Under the appellation of Roger Chillingworth , the reader will remember , was hidden another name , which its former wearer had resolved should never more be spoken . 
It has been related , how , in the crowd that witnessed Hester Prynne 's ignominious exposure , stood a man , elderly , travel-worn , who , just emerging from the perilous wilderness , beheld the woman , in whom he hoped to find embodied the warmth and cheerfulness of home , set up as a type of sin before the people . 
Her matronly fame was trodden under all men 's feet . 
Infamy was babbling around her in the public market-place . 
For her kindred , should the tidings ever reach them , and for the companions of her unspotted life , there remained nothing but the contagion of her dishonour ; which would not fail to be distributed in strict accordance and proportion with the intimacy and sacredness of their previous relationship . 
Then why -- since the choice was with himself -- should the individual , whose connexion with the fallen woman had been the most intimate and sacred of them all , come forward to vindicate his claim to an inheritance so little desirable ? 
He resolved not to be pilloried beside her on her pedestal of shame . 
Unknown to all but Hester Prynne , and possessing the lock and key of her silence , he chose to withdraw his name from the roll of mankind , and , as regarded his former ties and interest , to vanish out of life as completely as if he indeed lay at the bottom of the ocean , whither rumour had long ago consigned him . 
This purpose once effected , new interests would immediately spring up , and likewise a new purpose ; dark , it is true , if not guilty , but of force enough to engage the full strength of his faculties . 
In pursuance of this resolve , he took up his residence in the Puritan town as Roger Chillingworth , without other introduction than the learning and intelligence of which he possessed more than a common measure . 
As his studies , at a previous period of his life , had made him extensively acquainted with the medical science of the day , it was as a physician that he presented himself and as such was cordially received . 
Skilful men , of the medical and chirurgical profession , were of rare occurrence in the colony . 
They seldom , it would appear , partook of the religious zeal that brought other emigrants across the Atlantic . 
In their researches into the human frame , it may be that the higher and more subtle faculties of such men were materialised , and that they lost the spiritual view of existence amid the intricacies of that wondrous mechanism , which seemed to involve art enough to comprise all of life within itself . 
At all events , the health of the good town of Boston , so far as medicine had aught to do with it , had hitherto lain in the guardianship of an aged deacon and apothecary , whose piety and godly deportment were stronger testimonials in his favour than any that he could have produced in the shape of a diploma . 
The only surgeon was one who combined the occasional exercise of that noble art with the daily and habitual flourish of a razor . 
To such a professional body Roger Chillingworth was a brilliant acquisition . 
He soon manifested his familiarity with the ponderous and imposing machinery of antique physic ; in which every remedy contained a multitude of far-fetched and heterogeneous ingredients , as elaborately compounded as if the proposed result had been the Elixir of Life . 
In his Indian captivity , moreover , he had gained much knowledge of the properties of native herbs and roots ; nor did he conceal from his patients that these simple medicines , Nature 's boon to the untutored savage , had quite as large a share of his own confidence as the European Pharmacopoeia , which so many learned doctors had spent centuries in elaborating . 
This learned stranger was exemplary as regarded at least the outward forms of a religious life ; and early after his arrival , had chosen for his spiritual guide the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale . 
The young divine , whose scholar-like renown still lived in Oxford , was considered by his more fervent admirers as little less than a heavenly ordained apostle , destined , should he live and labour for the ordinary term of life , to do as great deeds , for the now feeble New England Church , as the early Fathers had achieved for the infancy of the Christian faith . 
About this period , however , the health of Mr. Dimmesdale had evidently begun to fail . 
By those best acquainted with his habits , the paleness of the young minister 's cheek was accounted for by his too earnest devotion to study , his scrupulous fulfilment of parochial duty , and more than all , to the fasts and vigils of which he made a frequent practice , in order to keep the grossness of this earthly state from clogging and obscuring his spiritual lamp . 
Some declared , that if Mr. Dimmesdale were really going to die , it was cause enough that the world was not worthy to be any longer trodden by his feet . 
He himself , on the other hand , with characteristic humility , avowed his belief that if Providence should see fit to remove him , it would be because of his own unworthiness to perform its humblest mission here on earth . 
With all this difference of opinion as to the cause of his decline , there could be no question of the fact . 
His form grew emaciated ; his voice , though still rich and sweet , had a certain melancholy prophecy of decay in it ; he was often observed , on any slight alarm or other sudden accident , to put his hand over his heart with first a flush and then a paleness , indicative of pain . 
Such was the young clergyman 's condition , and so imminent the prospect that his dawning light would be extinguished , all untimely , when Roger Chillingworth made his advent to the town . 
His first entry on the scene , few people could tell whence , dropping down as it were out of the sky or starting from the nether earth , had an aspect of mystery , which was easily heightened to the miraculous . 
He was now known to be a man of skill ; it was observed that he gathered herbs and the blossoms of wild-flowers , and dug up roots and plucked off twigs from the forest-trees like one acquainted with hidden virtues in what was valueless to common eyes . 
He was heard to speak of Sir Kenelm Digby and other famous men -- whose scientific attainments were esteemed hardly less than supernatural -- as having been his correspondents or associates . 
Why , with such rank in the learned world , had he come hither ? 
What , could he , whose sphere was in great cities , be seeking in the wilderness ? 
In answer to this query , a rumour gained ground -- and however absurd , was entertained by some very sensible people -- that Heaven had wrought an absolute miracle , by transporting an eminent Doctor of Physic from a German university bodily through the air and setting him down at the door of Mr. Dimmesdale 's study ! 
Individuals of wiser faith , indeed , who knew that Heaven promotes its purposes without aiming at the stage-effect of what is called miraculous interposition , were inclined to see a providential hand in Roger Chillingworth 's so opportune arrival . 
This idea was countenanced by the strong interest which the physician ever manifested in the young clergyman ; he attached himself to him as a parishioner , and sought to win a friendly regard and confidence from his naturally reserved sensibility . 
He expressed great alarm at his pastor 's state of health , but was anxious to attempt the cure , and , if early undertaken , seemed not despondent of a favourable result . 
The elders , the deacons , the motherly dames , and the young and fair maidens of Mr. Dimmesdale 's flock , were alike importunate that he should make trial of the physician 's frankly offered skill . 
Mr. Dimmesdale gently repelled their entreaties . 
`` I need no medicine , '' said he . 
But how could the young minister say so , when , with every successive Sabbath , his cheek was paler and thinner , and his voice more tremulous than before -- when it had now become a constant habit , rather than a casual gesture , to press his hand over his heart ? 
Was he weary of his labours ? 
Did he wish to die ? 
These questions were solemnly propounded to Mr. Dimmesdale by the elder ministers of Boston , and the deacons of his church , who , to use their own phrase , `` dealt with him , '' on the sin of rejecting the aid which Providence so manifestly held out . 
He listened in silence , and finally promised to confer with the physician . 
`` Were it God 's will , '' said the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale , when , in fulfilment of this pledge , he requested old Roger Chillingworth 's professional advice , `` I could be well content that my labours , and my sorrows , and my sins , and my pains , should shortly end with me , and what is earthly of them be buried in my grave , and the spiritual go with me to my eternal state , rather than that you should put your skill to the proof in my behalf . '' 
`` Ah , '' replied Roger Chillingworth , with that quietness , which , whether imposed or natural , marked all his deportment , `` it is thus that a young clergyman is apt to speak . 
Youthful men , not having taken a deep root , give up their hold of life so easily ! 
And saintly men , who walk with God on earth , would fain be away , to walk with him on the golden pavements of the New Jerusalem . '' 
`` Nay , '' rejoined the young minister , putting his hand to his heart , with a flush of pain flitting over his brow , `` were I worthier to walk there , I could be better content to toil here . '' 
`` Good men ever interpret themselves too meanly , '' said the physician . 
In this manner , the mysterious old Roger Chillingworth became the medical adviser of the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale . 
As not only the disease interested the physician , but he was strongly moved to look into the character and qualities of the patient , these two men , so different in age , came gradually to spend much time together . 
For the sake of the minister 's health , and to enable the leech to gather plants with healing balm in them , they took long walks on the sea-shore , or in the forest ; mingling various walks with the splash and murmur of the waves , and the solemn wind-anthem among the tree-tops . 
Often , likewise , one was the guest of the other in his place of study and retirement . 
There was a fascination for the minister in the company of the man of science , in whom he recognised an intellectual cultivation of no moderate depth or scope ; together with a range and freedom of ideas , that he would have vainly looked for among the members of his own profession . 
In truth , he was startled , if not shocked , to find this attribute in the physician . 
Mr. Dimmesdale was a true priest , a true religionist , with the reverential sentiment largely developed , and an order of mind that impelled itself powerfully along the track of a creed , and wore its passage continually deeper with the lapse of time . 
In no state of society would he have been what is called a man of liberal views ; it would always be essential to his peace to feel the pressure of a faith about him , supporting , while it confined him within its iron framework . 
Not the less , however , though with a tremulous enjoyment , did he feel the occasional relief of looking at the universe through the medium of another kind of intellect than those with which he habitually held converse . 
It was as if a window were thrown open , admitting a freer atmosphere into the close and stifled study , where his life was wasting itself away , amid lamp-light , or obstructed day-beams , and the musty fragrance , be it sensual or moral , that exhales from books . 
But the air was too fresh and chill to be long breathed with comfort . 
So the minister , and the physician with him , withdrew again within the limits of what their Church defined as orthodox . 
Thus Roger Chillingworth scrutinised his patient carefully , both as he saw him in his ordinary life , keeping an accustomed pathway in the range of thoughts familiar to him , and as he appeared when thrown amidst other moral scenery , the novelty of which might call out something new to the surface of his character . 
He deemed it essential , it would seem , to know the man , before attempting to do him good . 
Wherever there is a heart and an intellect , the diseases of the physical frame are tinged with the peculiarities of these . 
In Arthur Dimmesdale , thought and imagination were so active , and sensibility so intense , that the bodily infirmity would be likely to have its groundwork there . 
So Roger Chillingworth -- the man of skill , the kind and friendly physician -- strove to go deep into his patient 's bosom , delving among his principles , prying into his recollections , and probing everything with a cautious touch , like a treasure-seeker in a dark cavern . 
Few secrets can escape an investigator , who has opportunity and licence to undertake such a quest , and skill to follow it up . 
A man burdened with a secret should especially avoid the intimacy of his physician . 
If the latter possess native sagacity , and a nameless something more , -- let us call it intuition ; if he show no intrusive egotism , nor disagreeable prominent characteristics of his own ; if he have the power , which must be born with him , to bring his mind into such affinity with his patient 's , that this last shall unawares have spoken what he imagines himself only to have thought ; if such revelations be received without tumult , and acknowledged not so often by an uttered sympathy as by silence , an inarticulate breath , and here and there a word to indicate that all is understood ; if to these qualifications of a confidant be joined the advantages afforded by his recognised character as a physician ; -- then , at some inevitable moment , will the soul of the sufferer be dissolved , and flow forth in a dark but transparent stream , bringing all its mysteries into the daylight . 
Roger Chillingworth possessed all , or most , of the attributes above enumerated . 
Nevertheless , time went on ; a kind of intimacy , as we have said , grew up between these two cultivated minds , which had as wide a field as the whole sphere of human thought and study to meet upon ; they discussed every topic of ethics and religion , of public affairs , and private character ; they talked much , on both sides , of matters that seemed personal to themselves ; and yet no secret , such as the physician fancied must exist there , ever stole out of the minister 's consciousness into his companion 's ear . 
The latter had his suspicions , indeed , that even the nature of Mr. Dimmesdale 's bodily disease had never fairly been revealed to him . 
It was a strange reserve ! 
After a time , at a hint from Roger Chillingworth , the friends of Mr. Dimmesdale effected an arrangement by which the two were lodged in the same house ; so that every ebb and flow of the minister 's life-tide might pass under the eye of his anxious and attached physician . 
There was much joy throughout the town when this greatly desirable object was attained . 
It was held to be the best possible measure for the young clergyman 's welfare ; unless , indeed , as often urged by such as felt authorised to do so , he had selected some one of the many blooming damsels , spiritually devoted to him , to become his devoted wife . 
This latter step , however , there was no present prospect that Arthur Dimmesdale would be prevailed upon to take ; he rejected all suggestions of the kind , as if priestly celibacy were one of his articles of Church discipline . 
Doomed by his own choice , therefore , as Mr. Dimmesdale so evidently was , to eat his unsavoury morsel always at another 's board , and endure the life-long chill which must be his lot who seeks to warm himself only at another 's fireside , it truly seemed that this sagacious , experienced , benevolent old physician , with his concord of paternal and reverential love for the young pastor , was the very man , of all mankind , to be constantly within reach of his voice . 
The new abode of the two friends was with a pious widow , of good social rank , who dwelt in a house covering pretty nearly the site on which the venerable structure of King 's Chapel has since been built . 
It had the graveyard , originally Isaac Johnson 's home-field , on one side , and so was well adapted to call up serious reflections , suited to their respective employments , in both minister and man of physic . 
The motherly care of the good widow assigned to Mr. Dimmesdale a front apartment , with a sunny exposure , and heavy window-curtains , to create a noontide shadow when desirable . 
The walls were hung round with tapestry , said to be from the Gobelin looms , and , at all events , representing the Scriptural story of David and Bathsheba , and Nathan the Prophet , in colours still unfaded , but which made the fair woman of the scene almost as grimly picturesque as the woe-denouncing seer . 
Here the pale clergyman piled up his library , rich with parchment-bound folios of the Fathers , and the lore of Rabbis , and monkish erudition , of which the Protestant divines , even while they vilified and decried that class of writers , were yet constrained often to avail themselves . 
On the other side of the house , old Roger Chillingworth arranged his study and laboratory : not such as a modern man of science would reckon even tolerably complete , but provided with a distilling apparatus and the means of compounding drugs and chemicals , which the practised alchemist knew well how to turn to purpose . 
With such commodiousness of situation , these two learned persons sat themselves down , each in his own domain , yet familiarly passing from one apartment to the other , and bestowing a mutual and not incurious inspection into one another 's business . 
And the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale 's best discerning friends , as we have intimated , very reasonably imagined that the hand of Providence had done all this for the purpose -- besought in so many public and domestic and secret prayers -- of restoring the young minister to health . 
But , it must now be said , another portion of the community had latterly begun to take its own view of the relation betwixt Mr. Dimmesdale and the mysterious old physician . 
When an uninstructed multitude attempts to see with its eyes , it is exceedingly apt to be deceived . 
When , however , it forms its judgment , as it usually does , on the intuitions of its great and warm heart , the conclusions thus attained are often so profound and so unerring as to possess the character of truth supernaturally revealed . 
The people , in the case of which we speak , could justify its prejudice against Roger Chillingworth by no fact or argument worthy of serious refutation . 
There was an aged handicraftsman , it is true , who had been a citizen of London at the period of Sir Thomas Overbury 's murder , now some thirty years agone ; he testified to having seen the physician , under some other name , which the narrator of the story had now forgotten , in company with Dr. Forman , the famous old conjurer , who was implicated in the affair of Overbury . 
Two or three individuals hinted that the man of skill , during his Indian captivity , had enlarged his medical attainments by joining in the incantations of the savage priests , who were universally acknowledged to be powerful enchanters , often performing seemingly miraculous cures by their skill in the black art . 
A large number -- and many of these were persons of such sober sense and practical observation that their opinions would have been valuable in other matters -- affirmed that Roger Chillingworth 's aspect had undergone a remarkable change while he had dwelt in town , and especially since his abode with Mr. Dimmesdale . 
At first , his expression had been calm , meditative , scholar-like . 
Now there was something ugly and evil in his face , which they had not previously noticed , and which grew still the more obvious to sight the oftener they looked upon him . 
According to the vulgar idea , the fire in his laboratory had been brought from the lower regions , and was fed with infernal fuel ; and so , as might be expected , his visage was getting sooty with the smoke . 
To sum up the matter , it grew to be a widely diffused opinion that the Rev. Arthur Dimmesdale , like many other personages of special sanctity , in all ages of the Christian world , was haunted either by Satan himself or Satan 's emissary , in the guise of old Roger Chillingworth . 
This diabolical agent had the Divine permission , for a season , to burrow into the clergyman 's intimacy , and plot against his soul . 
No sensible man , it was confessed , could doubt on which side the victory would turn . 
The people looked , with an unshaken hope , to see the minister come forth out of the conflict transfigured with the glory which he would unquestionably win . 
Meanwhile , nevertheless , it was sad to think of the perchance mortal agony through which he must struggle towards his triumph . 
Alas ! 
to judge from the gloom and terror in the depth of the poor minister 's eyes , the battle was a sore one , and the victory anything but secure . 
Old Roger Chillingworth , throughout life , had been calm in temperament , kindly , though not of warm affections , but ever , and in all his relations with the world , a pure and upright man . 
He had begun an investigation , as he imagined , with the severe and equal integrity of a judge , desirous only of truth , even as if the question involved no more than the air-drawn lines and figures of a geometrical problem , instead of human passions , and wrongs inflicted on himself . 
But , as he proceeded , a terrible fascination , a kind of fierce , though still calm , necessity , seized the old man within its gripe , and never set him free again until he had done all its bidding . 
He now dug into the poor clergyman 's heart , like a miner searching for gold ; or , rather , like a sexton delving into a grave , possibly in quest of a jewel that had been buried on the dead man 's bosom , but likely to find nothing save mortality and corruption . 
Alas , for his own soul , if these were what he sought ! 
Sometimes a light glimmered out of the physician 's eyes , burning blue and ominous , like the reflection of a furnace , or , let us say , like one of those gleams of ghastly fire that darted from Bunyan 's awful doorway in the hillside , and quivered on the pilgrim 's face . 
The soil where this dark miner was working had perchance shown indications that encouraged him . 
`` This man , '' said he , at one such moment , to himself , `` pure as they deem him -- all spiritual as he seems -- hath inherited a strong animal nature from his father or his mother . 
Let us dig a little further in the direction of this vein ! '' 
Then after long search into the minister 's dim interior , and turning over many precious materials , in the shape of high aspirations for the welfare of his race , warm love of souls , pure sentiments , natural piety , strengthened by thought and study , and illuminated by revelation -- all of which invaluable gold was perhaps no better than rubbish to the seeker -- he would turn back , discouraged , and begin his quest towards another point . 
He groped along as stealthily , with as cautious a tread , and as wary an outlook , as a thief entering a chamber where a man lies only half asleep -- or , it may be , broad awake -- with purpose to steal the very treasure which this man guards as the apple of his eye . 
In spite of his premeditated carefulness , the floor would now and then creak ; his garments would rustle ; the shadow of his presence , in a forbidden proximity , would be thrown across his victim . 
In other words , Mr. Dimmesdale , whose sensibility of nerve often produced the effect of spiritual intuition , would become vaguely aware that something inimical to his peace had thrust itself into relation with him . 
But Old Roger Chillingworth , too , had perceptions that were almost intuitive ; and when the minister threw his startled eyes towards him , there the physician sat ; his kind , watchful , sympathising , but never intrusive friend . 
Yet Mr. Dimmesdale would perhaps have seen this individual 's character more perfectly , if a certain morbidness , to which sick hearts are liable , had not rendered him suspicious of all mankind . 
Trusting no man as his friend , he could not recognize his enemy when the latter actually appeared . 
He therefore still kept up a familiar intercourse with him , daily receiving the old physician in his study , or visiting the laboratory , and , for recreation 's sake , watching the processes by which weeds were converted into drugs of potency . 
One day , leaning his forehead on his hand , and his elbow on the sill of the open window , that looked towards the grave-yard , he talked with Roger Chillingworth , while the old man was examining a bundle of unsightly plants . 
`` Where , '' asked he , with a look askance at them -- for it was the clergyman 's peculiarity that he seldom , now-a-days , looked straight forth at any object , whether human or inanimate , `` where , my kind doctor , did you gather those herbs , with such a dark , flabby leaf ? '' 
`` Even in the graveyard here at hand , '' answered the physician , continuing his employment . 
