`` They are new to me . 
I found them growing on a grave , which bore no tombstone , no other memorial of the dead man , save these ugly weeds , that have taken upon themselves to keep him in remembrance . 
They grew out of his heart , and typify , it may be , some hideous secret that was buried with him , and which he had done better to confess during his lifetime . '' 
`` Perchance , '' said Mr. Dimmesdale , `` he earnestly desired it , but could not . '' 
`` And wherefore ? '' 
rejoined the physician . 
`` Wherefore not ; since all the powers of nature call so earnestly for the confession of sin , that these black weeds have sprung up out of a buried heart , to make manifest , an outspoken crime ? '' 
`` That , good sir , is but a phantasy of yours , '' replied the minister . 
`` There can be , if I forbode aright , no power , short of the Divine mercy , to disclose , whether by uttered words , or by type or emblem , the secrets that may be buried in the human heart . 
The heart , making itself guilty of such secrets , must perforce hold them , until the day when all hidden things shall be revealed . 
Nor have I so read or interpreted Holy Writ , as to understand that the disclosure of human thoughts and deeds , then to be made , is intended as a part of the retribution . 
That , surely , were a shallow view of it . 
No ; these revelations , unless I greatly err , are meant merely to promote the intellectual satisfaction of all intelligent beings , who will stand waiting , on that day , to see the dark problem of this life made plain . 
A knowledge of men 's hearts will be needful to the completest solution of that problem . 
And , I conceive moreover , that the hearts holding such miserable secrets as you speak of , will yield them up , at that last day , not with reluctance , but with a joy unutterable . '' 
`` Then why not reveal it here ? '' 
asked Roger Chillingworth , glancing quietly aside at the minister . 
`` Why should not the guilty ones sooner avail themselves of this unutterable solace ? '' 
`` They mostly do , '' said the clergyman , griping hard at his breast , as if afflicted with an importunate throb of pain . 
`` Many , many a poor soul hath given its confidence to me , not only on the death-bed , but while strong in life , and fair in reputation . 
And ever , after such an outpouring , oh , what a relief have I witnessed in those sinful brethren ! 
even as in one who at last draws free air , after a long stifling with his own polluted breath . 
How can it be otherwise ? 
Why should a wretched man -- guilty , we will say , of murder -- prefer to keep the dead corpse buried in his own heart , rather than fling it forth at once , and let the universe take care of it ! '' 
`` Yet some men bury their secrets thus , '' observed the calm physician . 
`` True ; there are such men , '' answered Mr. Dimmesdale . 
`` But not to suggest more obvious reasons , it may be that they are kept silent by the very constitution of their nature . 
Or -- can we not suppose it ? 
-- guilty as they may be , retaining , nevertheless , a zeal for God 's glory and man 's welfare , they shrink from displaying themselves black and filthy in the view of men ; because , thenceforward , no good can be achieved by them ; no evil of the past be redeemed by better service . 
So , to their own unutterable torment , they go about among their fellow-creatures , looking pure as new-fallen snow , while their hearts are all speckled and spotted with iniquity of which they can not rid themselves . '' 
`` These men deceive themselves , '' said Roger Chillingworth , with somewhat more emphasis than usual , and making a slight gesture with his forefinger . 
`` They fear to take up the shame that rightfully belongs to them . 
Their love for man , their zeal for God 's service -- these holy impulses may or may not coexist in their hearts with the evil inmates to which their guilt has unbarred the door , and which must needs propagate a hellish breed within them . 
But , if they seek to glorify God , let them not lift heavenward their unclean hands ! 
If they would serve their fellowmen , let them do it by making manifest the power and reality of conscience , in constraining them to penitential self-abasement ! 
Would thou have me to believe , O wise and pious friend , that a false show can be better -- can be more for God 's glory , or man ' welfare -- than God 's own truth ? 
Trust me , such men deceive themselves ! '' 
`` It may be so , '' said the young clergyman , indifferently , as waiving a discussion that he considered irrelevant or unseasonable . 
He had a ready faculty , indeed , of escaping from any topic that agitated his too sensitive and nervous temperament . 
-- `` But , now , I would ask of my well-skilled physician , whether , in good sooth , he deems me to have profited by his kindly care of this weak frame of mine ? '' 
Before Roger Chillingworth could answer , they heard the clear , wild laughter of a young child 's voice , proceeding from the adjacent burial-ground . 
Looking instinctively from the open window -- for it was summer-time -- the minister beheld Hester Prynne and little Pearl passing along the footpath that traversed the enclosure . 
Pearl looked as beautiful as the day , but was in one of those moods of perverse merriment which , whenever they occurred , seemed to remove her entirely out of the sphere of sympathy or human contact . 
She now skipped irreverently from one grave to another ; until coming to the broad , flat , armorial tombstone of a departed worthy -- perhaps of Isaac Johnson himself -- she began to dance upon it . 
In reply to her mother 's command and entreaty that she would behave more decorously , little Pearl paused to gather the prickly burrs from a tall burdock which grew beside the tomb . 
Taking a handful of these , she arranged them along the lines of the scarlet letter that decorated the maternal bosom , to which the burrs , as their nature was , tenaciously adhered . 
Hester did not pluck them off . 
Roger Chillingworth had by this time approached the window and smiled grimly down . 
`` There is no law , nor reverence for authority , no regard for human ordinances or opinions , right or wrong , mixed up with that child 's composition , '' remarked he , as much to himself as to his companion . 
`` I saw her , the other day , bespatter the Governor himself with water at the cattle-trough in Spring Lane . 
What , in heaven 's name , is she ? 
Is the imp altogether evil ? 
Hath she affections ? 
Hath she any discoverable principle of being ? '' 
`` None , save the freedom of a broken law , '' answered Mr. Dimmesdale , in a quiet way , as if he had been discussing the point within himself , `` Whether capable of good , I know not . '' 
The child probably overheard their voices , for , looking up to the window with a bright , but naughty smile of mirth and intelligence , she threw one of the prickly burrs at the Rev. Mr. Dimmesdale . 
The sensitive clergyman shrank , with nervous dread , from the light missile . 
Detecting his emotion , Pearl clapped her little hands in the most extravagant ecstacy . 
Hester Prynne , likewise , had involuntarily looked up , and all these four persons , old and young , regarded one another in silence , till the child laughed aloud , and shouted -- `` Come away , mother ! 
Come away , or yonder old black man will catch you ! 
He hath got hold of the minister already . 
Come away , mother or he will catch you ! 
But he can not catch little Pearl ! '' 
So she drew her mother away , skipping , dancing , and frisking fantastically among the hillocks of the dead people , like a creature that had nothing in common with a bygone and buried generation , nor owned herself akin to it . 
It was as if she had been made afresh out of new elements , and must perforce be permitted to live her own life , and be a law unto herself without her eccentricities being reckoned to her for a crime . 
`` There goes a woman , '' resumed Roger Chillingworth , after a pause , `` who , be her demerits what they may , hath none of that mystery of hidden sinfulness which you deem so grievous to be borne . 
Is Hester Prynne the less miserable , think you , for that scarlet letter on her breast ? '' 
`` I do verily believe it , '' answered the clergyman . 
`` Nevertheless , I can not answer for her . 
There was a look of pain in her face which I would gladly have been spared the sight of . 
But still , methinks , it must needs be better for the sufferer to be free to show his pain , as this poor woman Hester is , than to cover it up in his heart . '' 
There was another pause , and the physician began anew to examine and arrange the plants which he had gathered . 
`` You inquired of me , a little time agone , '' said he , at length , `` my judgment as touching your health . '' 
`` I did , '' answered the clergyman , `` and would gladly learn it . 
Speak frankly , I pray you , be it for life or death . '' 
`` Freely then , and plainly , '' said the physician , still busy with his plants , but keeping a wary eye on Mr. Dimmesdale , `` the disorder is a strange one ; not so much in itself nor as outwardly manifested , -- in so far , at least as the symptoms have been laid open to my observation . 
Looking daily at you , my good sir , and watching the tokens of your aspect now for months gone by , I should deem you a man sore sick , it may be , yet not so sick but that an instructed and watchful physician might well hope to cure you . 
But I know not what to say , the disease is what I seem to know , yet know it not . '' 
`` You speak in riddles , learned sir , '' said the pale minister , glancing aside out of the window . 
`` Then , to speak more plainly , '' continued the physician , `` and I crave pardon , sir , should it seem to require pardon , for this needful plainness of my speech . 
Let me ask as your friend , as one having charge , under Providence , of your life and physical well being , hath all the operations of this disorder been fairly laid open and recounted to me ? '' 
`` How can you question it ? '' 
asked the minister . 
`` Surely it were child 's play to call in a physician and then hide the sore ! '' 
`` You would tell me , then , that I know all ? '' 
said Roger Chillingworth , deliberately , and fixing an eye , bright with intense and concentrated intelligence , on the minister 's face . 
`` Be it so ! 
But again ! 
He to whom only the outward and physical evil is laid open , knoweth , oftentimes , but half the evil which he is called upon to cure . 
A bodily disease , which we look upon as whole and entire within itself , may , after all , be but a symptom of some ailment in the spiritual part . 
Your pardon once again , good sir , if my speech give the shadow of offence . 
You , sir , of all men whom I have known , are he whose body is the closest conjoined , and imbued , and identified , so to speak , with the spirit whereof it is the instrument . '' 
`` Then I need ask no further , '' said the clergyman , somewhat hastily rising from his chair . 
`` You deal not , I take it , in medicine for the soul ! '' 
`` Thus , a sickness , '' continued Roger Chillingworth , going on , in an unaltered tone , without heeding the interruption , but standing up and confronting the emaciated and white-cheeked minister , with his low , dark , and misshapen figure , -- `` a sickness , a sore place , if we may so call it , in your spirit hath immediately its appropriate manifestation in your bodily frame . 
Would you , therefore , that your physician heal the bodily evil ? 
How may this be unless you first lay open to him the wound or trouble in your soul ? '' 
`` No , not to thee ! 
not to an earthly physician ! '' 
cried Mr. Dimmesdale , passionately , and turning his eyes , full and bright , and with a kind of fierceness , on old Roger Chillingworth . 
`` Not to thee ! 
But , if it be the soul 's disease , then do I commit myself to the one Physician of the soul ! 
He , if it stand with His good pleasure , can cure , or he can kill . 
Let Him do with me as , in His justice and wisdom , He shall see good . 
But who art thou , that meddlest in this matter ? 
that dares thrust himself between the sufferer and his God ? '' 
With a frantic gesture he rushed out of the room . 
`` It is as well to have made this step , '' said Roger Chillingworth to himself , looking after the minister , with a grave smile . 
`` There is nothing lost . 
We shall be friends again anon . 
But see , now , how passion takes hold upon this man , and hurrieth him out of himself ! 
As with one passion so with another . 
He hath done a wild thing ere now , this pious Master Dimmesdale , in the hot passion of his heart . '' 
It proved not difficult to re-establish the intimacy of the two companions , on the same footing and in the same degree as heretofore . 
The young clergyman , after a few hours of privacy , was sensible that the disorder of his nerves had hurried him into an unseemly outbreak of temper , which there had been nothing in the physician 's words to excuse or palliate . 
He marvelled , indeed , at the violence with which he had thrust back the kind old man , when merely proffering the advice which it was his duty to bestow , and which the minister himself had expressly sought . 
With these remorseful feelings , he lost no time in making the amplest apologies , and besought his friend still to continue the care which , if not successful in restoring him to health , had , in all probability , been the means of prolonging his feeble existence to that hour . 
Roger Chillingworth readily assented , and went on with his medical supervision of the minister ; doing his best for him , in all good faith , but always quitting the patient 's apartment , at the close of the professional interview , with a mysterious and puzzled smile upon his lips . 
This expression was invisible in Mr. Dimmesdale 's presence , but grew strongly evident as the physician crossed the threshold . 
`` A rare case , '' he muttered . 
`` I must needs look deeper into it . 
A strange sympathy betwixt soul and body ! 
Were it only for the art 's sake , I must search this matter to the bottom . '' 
It came to pass , not long after the scene above recorded , that the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale , noon-day , and entirely unawares , fell into a deep , deep slumber , sitting in his chair , with a large black-letter volume open before him on the table . 
It must have been a work of vast ability in the somniferous school of literature . 
The profound depth of the minister 's repose was the more remarkable , inasmuch as he was one of those persons whose sleep ordinarily is as light as fitful , and as easily scared away , as a small bird hopping on a twig . 
To such an unwonted remoteness , however , had his spirit now withdrawn into itself that he stirred not in his chair when old Roger Chillingworth , without any extraordinary precaution , came into the room . 
The physician advanced directly in front of his patient , laid his hand upon his bosom , and thrust aside the vestment , that hitherto had always covered it even from the professional eye . 
Then , indeed , Mr. Dimmesdale shuddered , and slightly stirred . 
After a brief pause , the physician turned away . 
But with what a wild look of wonder , joy , and horror ! 
With what a ghastly rapture , as it were , too mighty to be expressed only by the eye and features , and therefore bursting forth through the whole ugliness of his figure , and making itself even riotously manifest by the extravagant gestures with which he threw up his arms towards the ceiling , and stamped his foot upon the floor ! 
Had a man seen old Roger Chillingworth , at that moment of his ecstasy , he would have had no need to ask how Satan comports himself when a precious human soul is lost to heaven , and won into his kingdom . 
But what distinguished the physician 's ecstasy from Satan 's was the trait of wonder in it ! 
After the incident last described , the intercourse between the clergyman and the physician , though externally the same , was really of another character than it had previously been . 
The intellect of Roger Chillingworth had now a sufficiently plain path before it . 
It was not , indeed , precisely that which he had laid out for himself to tread . 
Calm , gentle , passionless , as he appeared , there was yet , we fear , a quiet depth of malice , hitherto latent , but active now , in this unfortunate old man , which led him to imagine a more intimate revenge than any mortal had ever wreaked upon an enemy . 
To make himself the one trusted friend , to whom should be confided all the fear , the remorse , the agony , the ineffectual repentance , the backward rush of sinful thoughts , expelled in vain ! 
All that guilty sorrow , hidden from the world , whose great heart would have pitied and forgiven , to be revealed to him , the Pitiless -- to him , the Unforgiving ! 
All that dark treasure to be lavished on the very man , to whom nothing else could so adequately pay the debt of vengeance ! 
The clergyman 's shy and sensitive reserve had balked this scheme . 
Roger Chillingworth , however , was inclined to be hardly , if at all , less satisfied with the aspect of affairs , which Providence -- using the avenger and his victim for its own purposes , and , perchance , pardoning , where it seemed most to punish -- had substituted for his black devices . 
A revelation , he could almost say , had been granted to him . 
It mattered little for his object , whether celestial or from what other region . 
By its aid , in all the subsequent relations betwixt him and Mr. Dimmesdale , not merely the external presence , but the very inmost soul of the latter , seemed to be brought out before his eyes , so that he could see and comprehend its every movement . 
He became , thenceforth , not a spectator only , but a chief actor in the poor minister 's interior world . 
He could play upon him as he chose . 
Would he arouse him with a throb of agony ? 
The victim was for ever on the rack ; it needed only to know the spring that controlled the engine : and the physician knew it well . 
Would he startle him with sudden fear ? 
As at the waving of a magician 's wand , up rose a grisly phantom -- up rose a thousand phantoms -- in many shapes , of death , or more awful shame , all flocking round about the clergyman , and pointing with their fingers at his breast ! 
All this was accomplished with a subtlety so perfect , that the minister , though he had constantly a dim perception of some evil influence watching over him , could never gain a knowledge of its actual nature . 
True , he looked doubtfully , fearfully -- even , at times , with horror and the bitterness of hatred -- at the deformed figure of the old physician . 
His gestures , his gait , his grizzled beard , his slightest and most indifferent acts , the very fashion of his garments , were odious in the clergyman 's sight ; a token implicitly to be relied on of a deeper antipathy in the breast of the latter than he was willing to acknowledge to himself . 
For , as it was impossible to assign a reason for such distrust and abhorrence , so Mr. Dimmesdale , conscious that the poison of one morbid spot was infecting his heart 's entire substance , attributed all his presentiments to no other cause . 
He took himself to task for his bad sympathies in reference to Roger Chillingworth , disregarded the lesson that he should have drawn from them , and did his best to root them out . 
Unable to accomplish this , he nevertheless , as a matter of principle , continued his habits of social familiarity with the old man , and thus gave him constant opportunities for perfecting the purpose to which -- poor forlorn creature that he was , and more wretched than his victim -- the avenger had devoted himself . 
While thus suffering under bodily disease , and gnawed and tortured by some black trouble of the soul , and given over to the machinations of his deadliest enemy , the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale had achieved a brilliant popularity in his sacred office . 
He won it indeed , in great part , by his sorrows . 
His intellectual gifts , his moral perceptions , his power of experiencing and communicating emotion , were kept in a state of preternatural activity by the prick and anguish of his daily life . 
His fame , though still on its upward slope , already overshadowed the soberer reputations of his fellow-clergymen , eminent as several of them were . 
There are scholars among them , who had spent more years in acquiring abstruse lore , connected with the divine profession , than Mr. Dimmesdale had lived ; and who might well , therefore , be more profoundly versed in such solid and valuable attainments than their youthful brother . 
There were men , too , of a sturdier texture of mind than his , and endowed with a far greater share of shrewd , hard iron , or granite understanding ; which , duly mingled with a fair proportion of doctrinal ingredient , constitutes a highly respectable , efficacious , and unamiable variety of the clerical species . 
There were others again , true saintly fathers , whose faculties had been elaborated by weary toil among their books , and by patient thought , and etherealised , moreover , by spiritual communications with the better world , into which their purity of life had almost introduced these holy personages , with their garments of mortality still clinging to them . 
All that they lacked was , the gift that descended upon the chosen disciples at Pentecost , in tongues of flame ; symbolising , it would seem , not the power of speech in foreign and unknown languages , but that of addressing the whole human brotherhood in the heart 's native language . 
These fathers , otherwise so apostolic , lacked Heaven 's last and rarest attestation of their office , the Tongue of Flame . 
They would have vainly sought -- had they ever dreamed of seeking -- to express the highest truths through the humblest medium of familiar words and images . 
Their voices came down , afar and indistinctly , from the upper heights where they habitually dwelt . 
Not improbably , it was to this latter class of men that Mr. Dimmesdale , by many of his traits of character , naturally belonged . 
To the high mountain peaks of faith and sanctity he would have climbed , had not the tendency been thwarted by the burden , whatever it might be , of crime or anguish , beneath which it was his doom to totter . 
It kept him down on a level with the lowest ; him , the man of ethereal attributes , whose voice the angels might else have listened to and answered ! 
But this very burden it was that gave him sympathies so intimate with the sinful brotherhood of mankind ; so that his heart vibrated in unison with theirs , and received their pain into itself and sent its own throb of pain through a thousand other hearts , in gushes of sad , persuasive eloquence . 
Oftenest persuasive , but sometimes terrible ! 
The people knew not the power that moved them thus . 
They deemed the young clergyman a miracle of holiness . 
They fancied him the mouth-piece of Heaven 's messages of wisdom , and rebuke , and love . 
In their eyes , the very ground on which he trod was sanctified . 
The virgins of his church grew pale around him , victims of a passion so imbued with religious sentiment , that they imagined it to be all religion , and brought it openly , in their white bosoms , as their most acceptable sacrifice before the altar . 
The aged members of his flock , beholding Mr. Dimmesdale 's frame so feeble , while they were themselves so rugged in their infirmity , believed that he would go heavenward before them , and enjoined it upon their children that their old bones should be buried close to their young pastor 's holy grave . 
And all this time , perchance , when poor Mr. Dimmesdale was thinking of his grave , he questioned with himself whether the grass would ever grow on it , because an accursed thing must there be buried ! 
It is inconceivable , the agony with which this public veneration tortured him . 
It was his genuine impulse to adore the truth , and to reckon all things shadow-like , and utterly devoid of weight or value , that had not its divine essence as the life within their life . 
Then what was he ? 
-- a substance ? 
-- or the dimmest of all shadows ? 
He longed to speak out from his own pulpit at the full height of his voice , and tell the people what he was . 
`` I , whom you behold in these black garments of the priesthood -- I , who ascend the sacred desk , and turn my pale face heavenward , taking upon myself to hold communion in your behalf with the Most High Omniscience -- I , in whose daily life you discern the sanctity of Enoch -- I , whose footsteps , as you suppose , leave a gleam along my earthly track , whereby the Pilgrims that shall come after me may be guided to the regions of the blest -- I , who have laid the hand of baptism upon your children -- I , who have breathed the parting prayer over your dying friends , to whom the Amen sounded faintly from a world which they had quitted -- I , your pastor , whom you so reverence and trust , am utterly a pollution and a lie ! '' 
More than once , Mr. Dimmesdale had gone into the pulpit , with a purpose never to come down its steps until he should have spoken words like the above . 
More than once he had cleared his throat , and drawn in the long , deep , and tremulous breath , which , when sent forth again , would come burdened with the black secret of his soul . 
More than once -- nay , more than a hundred times -- he had actually spoken ! 
Spoken ! 
But how ? 
He had told his hearers that he was altogether vile , a viler companion of the vilest , the worst of sinners , an abomination , a thing of unimaginable iniquity , and that the only wonder was that they did not see his wretched body shrivelled up before their eyes by the burning wrath of the Almighty ! 
Could there be plainer speech than this ? 
Would not the people start up in their seats , by a simultaneous impulse , and tear him down out of the pulpit which he defiled ? 
Not so , indeed ! 
They heard it all , and did but reverence him the more . 
They little guessed what deadly purport lurked in those self-condemning words . 
`` The godly youth ! '' 
said they among themselves . 
`` The saint on earth ! 
Alas ! 
if he discern such sinfulness in his own white soul , what horrid spectacle would he behold in thine or mine ! '' 
The minister well knew -- subtle , but remorseful hypocrite that he was ! 
-- the light in which his vague confession would be viewed . 
He had striven to put a cheat upon himself by making the avowal of a guilty conscience , but had gained only one other sin , and a self-acknowledged shame , without the momentary relief of being self-deceived . 
He had spoken the very truth , and transformed it into the veriest falsehood . 
And yet , by the constitution of his nature , he loved the truth , and loathed the lie , as few men ever did . 
Therefore , above all things else , he loathed his miserable self ! 
His inward trouble drove him to practices more in accordance with the old , corrupted faith of Rome than with the better light of the church in which he had been born and bred . 
In Mr. Dimmesdale 's secret closet , under lock and key , there was a bloody scourge . 
Oftentimes , this Protestant and Puritan divine had plied it on his own shoulders , laughing bitterly at himself the while , and smiting so much the more pitilessly because of that bitter laugh . 
It was his custom , too , as it has been that of many other pious Puritans , to fast -- not however , like them , in order to purify the body , and render it the fitter medium of celestial illumination -- but rigorously , and until his knees trembled beneath him , as an act of penance . 
He kept vigils , likewise , night after night , sometimes in utter darkness , sometimes with a glimmering lamp , and sometimes , viewing his own face in a looking-glass , by the most powerful light which he could throw upon it . 
He thus typified the constant introspection wherewith he tortured , but could not purify himself . 
In these lengthened vigils , his brain often reeled , and visions seemed to flit before him ; perhaps seen doubtfully , and by a faint light of their own , in the remote dimness of the chamber , or more vividly and close beside him , within the looking-glass . 
Now it was a herd of diabolic shapes , that grinned and mocked at the pale minister , and beckoned him away with them ; now a group of shining angels , who flew upward heavily , as sorrow-laden , but grew more ethereal as they rose . 
Now came the dead friends of his youth , and his white-bearded father , with a saint-like frown , and his mother turning her face away as she passed by . 
Ghost of a mother -- thinnest fantasy of a mother -- methinks she might yet have thrown a pitying glance towards her son ! 
And now , through the chamber which these spectral thoughts had made so ghastly , glided Hester Prynne leading along little Pearl , in her scarlet garb , and pointing her forefinger , first at the scarlet letter on her bosom , and then at the clergyman 's own breast . 
None of these visions ever quite deluded him . 
At any moment , by an effort of his will , he could discern substances through their misty lack of substance , and convince himself that they were not solid in their nature , like yonder table of carved oak , or that big , square , leather-bound and brazen-clasped volume of divinity . 
But , for all that , they were , in one sense , the truest and most substantial things which the poor minister now dealt with . 
It is the unspeakable misery of a life so false as his , that it steals the pith and substance out of whatever realities there are around us , and which were meant by Heaven to be the spirit 's joy and nutriment . 
To the untrue man , the whole universe is false -- it is impalpable -- it shrinks to nothing within his grasp . 
And he himself in so far as he shows himself in a false light , becomes a shadow , or , indeed , ceases to exist . 
The only truth that continued to give Mr. Dimmesdale a real existence on this earth was the anguish in his inmost soul , and the undissembled expression of it in his aspect . 
Had he once found power to smile , and wear a face of gaiety , there would have been no such man ! 
On one of those ugly nights , which we have faintly hinted at , but forborne to picture forth , the minister started from his chair . 
A new thought had struck him . 
There might be a moment 's peace in it . 
Attiring himself with as much care as if it had been for public worship , and precisely in the same manner , he stole softly down the staircase , undid the door , and issued forth . 
Walking in the shadow of a dream , as it were , and perhaps actually under the influence of a species of somnambulism , Mr. Dimmesdale reached the spot where , now so long since , Hester Prynne had lived through her first hours of public ignominy . 
The same platform or scaffold , black and weather-stained with the storm or sunshine of seven long years , and foot-worn , too , with the tread of many culprits who had since ascended it , remained standing beneath the balcony of the meeting-house . 
The minister went up the steps . 
It was an obscure night in early May . 
An unvaried pall of cloud muffled the whole expanse of sky from zenith to horizon . 
If the same multitude which had stood as eye-witnesses while Hester Prynne sustained her punishment could now have been summoned forth , they would have discerned no face above the platform nor hardly the outline of a human shape , in the dark grey of the midnight . 
But the town was all asleep . 
There was no peril of discovery . 
The minister might stand there , if it so pleased him , until morning should redden in the east , without other risk than that the dank and chill night air would creep into his frame , and stiffen his joints with rheumatism , and clog his throat with catarrh and cough ; thereby defrauding the expectant audience of to-morrow 's prayer and sermon . 
No eye could see him , save that ever-wakeful one which had seen him in his closet , wielding the bloody scourge . 
Why , then , had he come hither ? 
Was it but the mockery of penitence ? 
A mockery , indeed , but in which his soul trifled with itself ! 
A mockery at which angels blushed and wept , while fiends rejoiced with jeering laughter ! 
He had been driven hither by the impulse of that Remorse which dogged him everywhere , and whose own sister and closely linked companion was that Cowardice which invariably drew him back , with her tremulous gripe , just when the other impulse had hurried him to the verge of a disclosure . 
Poor , miserable man ! 
what right had infirmity like his to burden itself with crime ? 
Crime is for the iron-nerved , who have their choice either to endure it , or , if it press too hard , to exert their fierce and savage strength for a good purpose , and fling it off at once ! 
This feeble and most sensitive of spirits could do neither , yet continually did one thing or another , which intertwined , in the same inextricable knot , the agony of heaven-defying guilt and vain repentance . 
And thus , while standing on the scaffold , in this vain show of expiation , Mr. Dimmesdale was overcome with a great horror of mind , as if the universe were gazing at a scarlet token on his naked breast , right over his heart . 
On that spot , in very truth , there was , and there had long been , the gnawing and poisonous tooth of bodily pain . 
Without any effort of his will , or power to restrain himself , he shrieked aloud : an outcry that went pealing through the night , and was beaten back from one house to another , and reverberated from the hills in the background ; as if a company of devils , detecting so much misery and terror in it , had made a plaything of the sound , and were bandying it to and fro . 
`` It is done ! '' 
muttered the minister , covering his face with his hands . 
`` The whole town will awake and hurry forth , and find me here ! '' 
But it was not so . 
The shriek had perhaps sounded with a far greater power , to his own startled ears , than it actually possessed . 
The town did not awake ; or , if it did , the drowsy slumberers mistook the cry either for something frightful in a dream , or for the noise of witches , whose voices , at that period , were often heard to pass over the settlements or lonely cottages , as they rode with Satan through the air . 
The clergyman , therefore , hearing no symptoms of disturbance , uncovered his eyes and looked about him . 
At one of the chamber-windows of Governor Bellingham 's mansion , which stood at some distance , on the line of another street , he beheld the appearance of the old magistrate himself with a lamp in his hand a white night-cap on his head , and a long white gown enveloping his figure . 
He looked like a ghost evoked unseasonably from the grave . 
The cry had evidently startled him . 
At another window of the same house , moreover appeared old Mistress Hibbins , the Governor 's sister , also with a lamp , which even thus far off revealed the expression of her sour and discontented face . 
She thrust forth her head from the lattice , and looked anxiously upward . 
Beyond the shadow of a doubt , this venerable witch-lady had heard Mr. Dimmesdale 's outcry , and interpreted it , with its multitudinous echoes and reverberations , as the clamour of the fiends and night-hags , with whom she was well known to make excursions in the forest . 
Detecting the gleam of Governor Bellingham 's lamp , the old lady quickly extinguished her own , and vanished . 
Possibly , she went up among the clouds . 
The minister saw nothing further of her motions . 
The magistrate , after a wary observation of the darkness -- into which , nevertheless , he could see but little further than he might into a mill-stone -- retired from the window . 
The minister grew comparatively calm . 
His eyes , however , were soon greeted by a little glimmering light , which , at first a long way off was approaching up the street . 
It threw a gleam of recognition , on here a post , and there a garden fence , and here a latticed window-pane , and there a pump , with its full trough of water , and here again an arched door of oak , with an iron knocker , and a rough log for the door-step . 
The Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale noted all these minute particulars , even while firmly convinced that the doom of his existence was stealing onward , in the footsteps which he now heard ; and that the gleam of the lantern would fall upon him in a few moments more , and reveal his long-hidden secret . 
As the light drew nearer , he beheld , within its illuminated circle , his brother clergyman -- or , to speak more accurately , his professional father , as well as highly valued friend -- the Reverend Mr. Wilson , who , as Mr. Dimmesdale now conjectured , had been praying at the bedside of some dying man . 
And so he had . 
The good old minister came freshly from the death-chamber of Governor Winthrop , who had passed from earth to heaven within that very hour . 
And now surrounded , like the saint-like personage of olden times , with a radiant halo , that glorified him amid this gloomy night of sin -- as if the departed Governor had left him an inheritance of his glory , or as if he had caught upon himself the distant shine of the celestial city , while looking thitherward to see the triumphant pilgrim pass within its gates -- now , in short , good Father Wilson was moving homeward , aiding his footsteps with a lighted lantern ! 
The glimmer of this luminary suggested the above conceits to Mr. Dimmesdale , who smiled -- nay , almost laughed at them -- and then wondered if he was going mad . 
As the Reverend Mr. Wilson passed beside the scaffold , closely muffling his Geneva cloak about him with one arm , and holding the lantern before his breast with the other , the minister could hardly restrain himself from speaking -- `` A good evening to you , venerable Father Wilson . 
Come up hither , I pray you , and pass a pleasant hour with me ! '' 
Good Heavens ! 
Had Mr. Dimmesdale actually spoken ? 
For one instant he believed that these words had passed his lips . 
But they were uttered only within his imagination . 
The venerable Father Wilson continued to step slowly onward , looking carefully at the muddy pathway before his feet , and never once turning his head towards the guilty platform . 
When the light of the glimmering lantern had faded quite away , the minister discovered , by the faintness which came over him , that the last few moments had been a crisis of terrible anxiety , although his mind had made an involuntary effort to relieve itself by a kind of lurid playfulness . 
Shortly afterwards , the like grisly sense of the humorous again stole in among the solemn phantoms of his thought . 
He felt his limbs growing stiff with the unaccustomed chilliness of the night , and doubted whether he should be able to descend the steps of the scaffold . 
Morning would break and find him there . 
The neighbourhood would begin to rouse itself . 
The earliest riser , coming forth in the dim twilight , would perceive a vaguely-defined figure aloft on the place of shame ; and half-crazed betwixt alarm and curiosity , would go knocking from door to door , summoning all the people to behold the ghost -- as he needs must think it -- of some defunct transgressor . 
A dusky tumult would flap its wings from one house to another . 
Then -- the morning light still waxing stronger -- old patriarchs would rise up in great haste , each in his flannel gown , and matronly dames , without pausing to put off their night-gear . 
The whole tribe of decorous personages , who had never heretofore been seen with a single hair of their heads awry , would start into public view with the disorder of a nightmare in their aspects . 
Old Governor Bellingham would come grimly forth , with his King James ' ruff fastened askew , and Mistress Hibbins , with some twigs of the forest clinging to her skirts , and looking sourer than ever , as having hardly got a wink of sleep after her night ride ; and good Father Wilson too , after spending half the night at a death-bed , and liking ill to be disturbed , thus early , out of his dreams about the glorified saints . 
Hither , likewise , would come the elders and deacons of Mr. Dimmesdale 's church , and the young virgins who so idolized their minister , and had made a shrine for him in their white bosoms , which now , by-the-bye , in their hurry and confusion , they would scantly have given themselves time to cover with their kerchiefs . 
All people , in a word , would come stumbling over their thresholds , and turning up their amazed and horror-stricken visages around the scaffold . 
Whom would they discern there , with the red eastern light upon his brow ? 
Whom , but the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale , half-frozen to death , overwhelmed with shame , and standing where Hester Prynne had stood ! 
Carried away by the grotesque horror of this picture , the minister , unawares , and to his own infinite alarm , burst into a great peal of laughter . 
It was immediately responded to by a light , airy , childish laugh , in which , with a thrill of the heart -- but he knew not whether of exquisite pain , or pleasure as acute -- he recognised the tones of little Pearl . 
`` Pearl ! 
Little Pearl ! '' 
cried he , after a moment 's pause ; then , suppressing his voice -- `` Hester ! 
Hester Prynne ! 
Are you there ? '' 
`` Yes ; it is Hester Prynne ! '' 
she replied , in a tone of surprise ; and the minister heard her footsteps approaching from the side-walk , along which she had been passing . 
`` It is I , and my little Pearl . '' 
`` Whence come you , Hester ? '' 
asked the minister . 
`` What sent you hither ? '' 
`` I have been watching at a death-bed , '' answered Hester Prynne `` at Governor Winthrop 's death-bed , and have taken his measure for a robe , and am now going homeward to my dwelling . '' 
`` Come up hither , Hester , thou and little Pearl , '' said the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale . 
`` Ye have both been here before , but I was not with you . 
Come up hither once again , and we will stand all three together . '' 
She silently ascended the steps , and stood on the platform , holding little Pearl by the hand . 
The minister felt for the child 's other hand , and took it . 
The moment that he did so , there came what seemed a tumultuous rush of new life , other life than his own pouring like a torrent into his heart , and hurrying through all his veins , as if the mother and the child were communicating their vital warmth to his half-torpid system . 
The three formed an electric chain . 
`` Minister ! '' 
whispered little Pearl . 
`` What wouldst thou say , child ? '' 
asked Mr. Dimmesdale . 
`` Wilt thou stand here with mother and me , to-morrow noontide ? '' 
inquired Pearl . 
`` Nay ; not so , my little Pearl , '' answered the minister ; for , with the new energy of the moment , all the dread of public exposure , that had so long been the anguish of his life , had returned upon him ; and he was already trembling at the conjunction in which -- with a strange joy , nevertheless -- he now found himself -- `` not so , my child . 
I shall , indeed , stand with thy mother and thee one other day , but not to-morrow . '' 
Pearl laughed , and attempted to pull away her hand . 
But the minister held it fast . 
`` A moment longer , my child ! '' 
said he . 
`` But wilt thou promise , '' asked Pearl , `` to take my hand , and mother 's hand , to-morrow noontide ? '' 
`` Not then , Pearl , '' said the minister ; `` but another time . '' 
`` And what other time ? '' 
persisted the child . 
`` At the great judgment day , '' whispered the minister ; and , strangely enough , the sense that he was a professional teacher of the truth impelled him to answer the child so . 
`` Then , and there , before the judgment-seat , thy mother , and thou , and I must stand together . 
But the daylight of this world shall not see our meeting ! '' 
Pearl laughed again . 
But before Mr. Dimmesdale had done speaking , a light gleamed far and wide over all the muffled sky . 
It was doubtless caused by one of those meteors , which the night-watcher may so often observe burning out to waste , in the vacant regions of the atmosphere . 
So powerful was its radiance , that it thoroughly illuminated the dense medium of cloud betwixt the sky and earth . 
The great vault brightened , like the dome of an immense lamp . 
It showed the familiar scene of the street with the distinctness of mid-day , but also with the awfulness that is always imparted to familiar objects by an unaccustomed light . 
The wooden houses , with their jutting storeys and quaint gable-peaks ; the doorsteps and thresholds with the early grass springing up about them ; the garden-plots , black with freshly-turned earth ; the wheel-track , little worn , and even in the market-place margined with green on either side -- all were visible , but with a singularity of aspect that seemed to give another moral interpretation to the things of this world than they had ever borne before . 
And there stood the minister , with his hand over his heart ; and Hester Prynne , with the embroidered letter glimmering on her bosom ; and little Pearl , herself a symbol , and the connecting link between those two . 
They stood in the noon of that strange and solemn splendour , as if it were the light that is to reveal all secrets , and the daybreak that shall unite all who belong to one another . 
There was witchcraft in little Pearl 's eyes ; and her face , as she glanced upward at the minister , wore that naughty smile which made its expression frequently so elvish . 
She withdrew her hand from Mr. Dimmesdale 's , and pointed across the street . 
But he clasped both his hands over his breast , and cast his eyes towards the zenith . 
Nothing was more common , in those days , than to interpret all meteoric appearances , and other natural phenomena that occurred with less regularity than the rise and set of sun and moon , as so many revelations from a supernatural source . 
Thus , a blazing spear , a sword of flame , a bow , or a sheaf of arrows seen in the midnight sky , prefigured Indian warfare . 
Pestilence was known to have been foreboded by a shower of crimson light . 
We doubt whether any marked event , for good or evil , ever befell New England , from its settlement down to revolutionary times , of which the inhabitants had not been previously warned by some spectacle of its nature . 
Not seldom , it had been seen by multitudes . 
Oftener , however , its credibility rested on the faith of some lonely eye-witness , who beheld the wonder through the coloured , magnifying , and distorted medium of his imagination , and shaped it more distinctly in his after-thought . 
It was , indeed , a majestic idea that the destiny of nations should be revealed , in these awful hieroglyphics , on the cope of heaven . 
A scroll so wide might not be deemed too expensive for Providence to write a people 's doom upon . 
The belief was a favourite one with our forefathers , as betokening that their infant commonwealth was under a celestial guardianship of peculiar intimacy and strictness . 
But what shall we say , when an individual discovers a revelation addressed to himself alone , on the same vast sheet of record . 
In such a case , it could only be the symptom of a highly disordered mental state , when a man , rendered morbidly self-contemplative by long , intense , and secret pain , had extended his egotism over the whole expanse of nature , until the firmament itself should appear no more than a fitting page for his soul 's history and fate . 
We impute it , therefore , solely to the disease in his own eye and heart that the minister , looking upward to the zenith , beheld there the appearance of an immense letter -- the letter A -- marked out in lines of dull red light . 
Not but the meteor may have shown itself at that point , burning duskily through a veil of cloud , but with no such shape as his guilty imagination gave it , or , at least , with so little definiteness , that another 's guilt might have seen another symbol in it . 
There was a singular circumstance that characterised Mr. Dimmesdale 's psychological state at this moment . 
All the time that he gazed upward to the zenith , he was , nevertheless , perfectly aware that little Pearl was pointing her finger towards old Roger Chillingworth , who stood at no great distance from the scaffold . 
The minister appeared to see him , with the same glance that discerned the miraculous letter . 
To his feature as to all other objects , the meteoric light imparted a new expression ; or it might well be that the physician was not careful then , as at all other times , to hide the malevolence with which he looked upon his victim . 
Certainly , if the meteor kindled up the sky , and disclosed the earth , with an awfulness that admonished Hester Prynne and the clergyman of the day of judgment , then might Roger Chillingworth have passed with them for the arch-fiend , standing there with a smile and scowl , to claim his own . 
So vivid was the expression , or so intense the minister 's perception of it , that it seemed still to remain painted on the darkness after the meteor had vanished , with an effect as if the street and all things else were at once annihilated . 
`` Who is that man , Hester ? '' 
gasped Mr. Dimmesdale , overcome with terror . 
`` I shiver at him ! 
Dost thou know the man ? 
I hate him , Hester ! '' 
She remembered her oath , and was silent . 
`` I tell thee , my soul shivers at him ! '' 
muttered the minister again . 
`` Who is he ? 
Who is he ? 
Canst thou do nothing for me ? 
I have a nameless horror of the man ! '' 
`` Minister , '' said little Pearl , `` I can tell thee who he is ! '' 
`` Quickly , then , child ! '' 
said the minister , bending his ear close to her lips . 
`` Quickly , and as low as thou canst whisper . '' 
Pearl mumbled something into his ear that sounded , indeed , like human language , but was only such gibberish as children may be heard amusing themselves with by the hour together . 
At all events , if it involved any secret information in regard to old Roger Chillingworth , it was in a tongue unknown to the erudite clergyman , and did but increase the bewilderment of his mind . 
The elvish child then laughed aloud . 
`` Dost thou mock me now ? '' 
said the minister . 
`` Thou wast not bold ! 
-- thou wast not true ! '' 
answered the child . 
`` Thou wouldst not promise to take my hand , and mother 's hand , to-morrow noon-tide ! '' 
`` Worthy sir , '' answered the physician , who had now advanced to the foot of the platform -- `` pious Master Dimmesdale ! 
can this be you ? 
Well , well , indeed ! 
We men of study , whose heads are in our books , have need to be straitly looked after ! 
We dream in our waking moments , and walk in our sleep . 
Come , good sir , and my dear friend , I pray you let me lead you home ! '' 
`` How knewest thou that I was here ? '' 
asked the minister , fearfully . 
`` Verily , and in good faith , '' answered Roger Chillingworth , `` I knew nothing of the matter . 
I had spent the better part of the night at the bedside of the worshipful Governor Winthrop , doing what my poor skill might to give him ease . 
He , going home to a better world , I , likewise , was on my way homeward , when this light shone out . 
Come with me , I beseech you , Reverend sir , else you will be poorly able to do Sabbath duty to-morrow . 
Aha ! 
see now how they trouble the brain -- these books ! 
-- these books ! 
You should study less , good sir , and take a little pastime , or these night whimsies will grow upon you . '' 
`` I will go home with you , '' said Mr. Dimmesdale . 
With a chill despondency , like one awakening , all nerveless , from an ugly dream , he yielded himself to the physician , and was led away . 
The next day , however , being the Sabbath , he preached a discourse which was held to be the richest and most powerful , and the most replete with heavenly influences , that had ever proceeded from his lips . 
Souls , it is said , more souls than one , were brought to the truth by the efficacy of that sermon , and vowed within themselves to cherish a holy gratitude towards Mr. Dimmesdale throughout the long hereafter . 
But as he came down the pulpit steps , the grey-bearded sexton met him , holding up a black glove , which the minister recognised as his own . 
`` It was found , '' said the Sexton , `` this morning on the scaffold where evil-doers are set up to public shame . 
Satan dropped it there , I take it , intending a scurrilous jest against your reverence . 
But , indeed , he was blind and foolish , as he ever and always is . 
A pure hand needs no glove to cover it ! '' 
`` Thank you , my good friend , '' said the minister , gravely , but startled at heart ; for so confused was his remembrance , that he had almost brought himself to look at the events of the past night as visionary . 
`` Yes , it seems to be my glove , indeed ! '' 
`` And , since Satan saw fit to steal it , your reverence must needs handle him without gloves henceforward , '' remarked the old sexton , grimly smiling . 
`` But did your reverence hear of the portent that was seen last night ? 
a great red letter in the sky -- the letter A , which we interpret to stand for Angel . 
For , as our good Governor Winthrop was made an angel this past night , it was doubtless held fit that there should be some notice thereof ! '' 
`` No , '' answered the minister ; `` I had not heard of it . '' 
In her late singular interview with Mr. Dimmesdale , Hester Prynne was shocked at the condition to which she found the clergyman reduced . 
His nerve seemed absolutely destroyed . 
His moral force was abased into more than childish weakness . 
It grovelled helpless on the ground , even while his intellectual faculties retained their pristine strength , or had perhaps acquired a morbid energy , which disease only could have given them . 
With her knowledge of a train of circumstances hidden from all others , she could readily infer that , besides the legitimate action of his own conscience , a terrible machinery had been brought to bear , and was still operating , on Mr. Dimmesdale 's well-being and repose . 
Knowing what this poor fallen man had once been , her whole soul was moved by the shuddering terror with which he had appealed to her -- the outcast woman -- for support against his instinctively discovered enemy . 
She decided , moreover , that he had a right to her utmost aid . 
Little accustomed , in her long seclusion from society , to measure her ideas of right and wrong by any standard external to herself , Hester saw -- or seemed to see -- that there lay a responsibility upon her in reference to the clergyman , which she owned to no other , nor to the whole world besides . 
The links that united her to the rest of humankind -- links of flowers , or silk , or gold , or whatever the material -- had all been broken . 
Here was the iron link of mutual crime , which neither he nor she could break . 
Like all other ties , it brought along with it its obligations . 
Hester Prynne did not now occupy precisely the same position in which we beheld her during the earlier periods of her ignominy . 
Years had come and gone . 
Pearl was now seven years old . 
Her mother , with the scarlet letter on her breast , glittering in its fantastic embroidery , had long been a familiar object to the townspeople . 
As is apt to be the case when a person stands out in any prominence before the community , and , at the same time , interferes neither with public nor individual interests and convenience , a species of general regard had ultimately grown up in reference to Hester Prynne . 
It is to the credit of human nature that , except where its selfishness is brought into play , it loves more readily than it hates . 
Hatred , by a gradual and quiet process , will even be transformed to love , unless the change be impeded by a continually new irritation of the original feeling of hostility . 
In this matter of Hester Prynne there was neither irritation nor irksomeness . 
She never battled with the public , but submitted uncomplainingly to its worst usage ; she made no claim upon it in requital for what she suffered ; she did not weigh upon its sympathies . 
Then , also , the blameless purity of her life during all these years in which she had been set apart to infamy was reckoned largely in her favour . 
With nothing now to lose , in the sight of mankind , and with no hope , and seemingly no wish , of gaining anything , it could only be a genuine regard for virtue that had brought back the poor wanderer to its paths . 
It was perceived , too , that while Hester never put forward even the humblest title to share in the world 's privileges -- further than to breathe the common air and earn daily bread for little Pearl and herself by the faithful labour of her hands -- she was quick to acknowledge her sisterhood with the race of man whenever benefits were to be conferred . 
None so ready as she to give of her little substance to every demand of poverty , even though the bitter-hearted pauper threw back a gibe in requital of the food brought regularly to his door , or the garments wrought for him by the fingers that could have embroidered a monarch 's robe . 
None so self-devoted as Hester when pestilence stalked through the town . 
In all seasons of calamity , indeed , whether general or of individuals , the outcast of society at once found her place . 
She came , not as a guest , but as a rightful inmate , into the household that was darkened by trouble , as if its gloomy twilight were a medium in which she was entitled to hold intercourse with her fellow-creature . 
There glimmered the embroidered letter , with comfort in its unearthly ray . 
Elsewhere the token of sin , it was the taper of the sick chamber . 
It had even thrown its gleam , in the sufferer 's bard extremity , across the verge of time . 
It had shown him where to set his foot , while the light of earth was fast becoming dim , and ere the light of futurity could reach him . 
In such emergencies Hester 's nature showed itself warm and rich -- a well-spring of human tenderness , unfailing to every real demand , and inexhaustible by the largest . 
Her breast , with its badge of shame , was but the softer pillow for the head that needed one . 
She was self-ordained a Sister of Mercy , or , we may rather say , the world 's heavy hand had so ordained her , when neither the world nor she looked forward to this result . 
The letter was the symbol of her calling . 
Such helpfulness was found in her -- so much power to do , and power to sympathise -- that many people refused to interpret the scarlet A by its original signification . 
They said that it meant Abel , so strong was Hester Prynne , with a woman 's strength . 
It was only the darkened house that could contain her . 
When sunshine came again , she was not there . 
Her shadow had faded across the threshold . 
The helpful inmate had departed , without one backward glance to gather up the meed of gratitude , if any were in the hearts of those whom she had served so zealously . 
Meeting them in the street , she never raised her head to receive their greeting . 
If they were resolute to accost her , she laid her finger on the scarlet letter , and passed on . 
This might be pride , but was so like humility , that it produced all the softening influence of the latter quality on the public mind . 
The public is despotic in its temper ; it is capable of denying common justice when too strenuously demanded as a right ; but quite as frequently it awards more than justice , when the appeal is made , as despots love to have it made , entirely to its generosity . 
Interpreting Hester Prynne 's deportment as an appeal of this nature , society was inclined to show its former victim a more benign countenance than she cared to be favoured with , or , perchance , than she deserved . 
The rulers , and the wise and learned men of the community , were longer in acknowledging the influence of Hester 's good qualities than the people . 
The prejudices which they shared in common with the latter were fortified in themselves by an iron frame-work of reasoning , that made it a far tougher labour to expel them . 
Day by day , nevertheless , their sour and rigid wrinkles were relaxing into something which , in the due course of years , might grow to be an expression of almost benevolence . 
Thus it was with the men of rank , on whom their eminent position imposed the guardianship of the public morals . 
Individuals in private life , meanwhile , had quite forgiven Hester Prynne for her frailty ; nay , more , they had begun to look upon the scarlet letter as the token , not of that one sin for which she had borne so long and dreary a penance , but of her many good deeds since . 
`` Do you see that woman with the embroidered badge ? '' 
they would say to strangers . 
`` It is our Hester -- the town 's own Hester -- who is so kind to the poor , so helpful to the sick , so comfortable to the afflicted ! '' 
Then , it is true , the propensity of human nature to tell the very worst of itself , when embodied in the person of another , would constrain them to whisper the black scandal of bygone years . 
It was none the less a fact , however , that in the eyes of the very men who spoke thus , the scarlet letter had the effect of the cross on a nun 's bosom . 
It imparted to the wearer a kind of sacredness , which enabled her to walk securely amid all peril . 
Had she fallen among thieves , it would have kept her safe . 
It was reported , and believed by many , that an Indian had drawn his arrow against the badge , and that the missile struck it , and fell harmless to the ground . 
The effect of the symbol -- or rather , of the position in respect to society that was indicated by it -- on the mind of Hester Prynne herself was powerful and peculiar . 
All the light and graceful foliage of her character had been withered up by this red-hot brand , and had long ago fallen away , leaving a bare and harsh outline , which might have been repulsive had she possessed friends or companions to be repelled by it . 
Even the attractiveness of her person had undergone a similar change . 
It might be partly owing to the studied austerity of her dress , and partly to the lack of demonstration in her manners . 
It was a sad transformation , too , that her rich and luxuriant hair had either been cut off , or was so completely hidden by a cap , that not a shining lock of it ever once gushed into the sunshine . 
It was due in part to all these causes , but still more to something else , that there seemed to be no longer anything in Hester 's face for Love to dwell upon ; nothing in Hester 's form , though majestic and statue like , that Passion would ever dream of clasping in its embrace ; nothing in Hester 's bosom to make it ever again the pillow of Affection . 
Some attribute had departed from her , the permanence of which had been essential to keep her a woman . 
Such is frequently the fate , and such the stern development , of the feminine character and person , when the woman has encountered , and lived through , an experience of peculiar severity . 
If she be all tenderness , she will die . 
If she survive , the tenderness will either be crushed out of her , or -- and the outward semblance is the same -- crushed so deeply into her heart that it can never show itself more . 
The latter is perhaps the truest theory . 
