The reader already has some idea of it . 
The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue Polonceau , the Rue Droit-Mur , the Rue Petit-Picpus , and the unused lane , called Rue Aumarais on old plans . 
These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat . 
The convent was composed of several buildings and a garden . 
The principal building , taken in its entirety , was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which , viewed from a bird 's - eye view , outlined , with considerable exactness , a gibbet laid flat on the ground . 
The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau ; the lesser arm was a lofty , gray , severe grated facade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus ; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its extremity . 
Towards the centre of this facade was a low , arched door , whitened with dust and ashes , where the spiders wove their webs , and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays , and on rare occasions , when the coffin of a nun left the convent . 
This was the public entrance of the church . 
The elbow of the gibbet was a square hall which was used as the servants ' hall , and which the nuns called the buttery . 
In the main arm were the cells of the mothers , the sisters , and the novices . 
In the lesser arm lay the kitchens , the refectory , backed up by the cloisters and the church . 
Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed lane Aumarais , was the school , which was not visible from without . 
The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden , which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau , which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside . 
The garden , which was slightly arched , had in its centre , on the summit of a hillock , a fine pointed and conical fir-tree , whence ran , as from the peaked boss of a shield , four grand alleys , and , ranged by twos in between the branchings of these , eight small ones , so that , if the enclosure had been circular , the geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel . 
As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of the garden , they were of unequal length . 
They were bordered with currant bushes . 
At the bottom , an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent , which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house of the Little Convent , which was at the angle of the Aumarais lane . 
In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little garden . 
To this whole , let the reader add a courtyard , all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings , prison walls , the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood , and he will be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago . 
This holy house had been built on the precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century , which was called the `` tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils . '' 
All these streets , moreover , were more ancient than Paris . 
These names , Droit-Mur and Aumarais , are very ancient ; the streets which bear them are very much more ancient still . 
Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane ; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers , for God opened flowers before man cut stones . 
A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in former times , and since we have ventured to open a window on that discreet retreat , the reader will permit us one other little digression , utterly foreign to this book , but characteristic and useful , since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures . 
In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey of Fontevrault . 
She had even been in society before the Revolution . 
She talked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil , Keeper of the Seals under Louis XVI . 
and of a Presidentess Duplat , with whom she had been very intimate . 
It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these names on every pretext . 
She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault , -- that it was like a city , and that there were streets in the monastery . 
She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils . 
Every year , she solemnly renewed her vows , and at the moment of taking the oath , she said to the priest , `` Monseigneur Saint-Francois gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Julien , Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius , Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius , etc. , etc. ; and thus I give it to you , father . '' 
And the school-girls would begin to laugh , not in their sleeves , but under their veils ; charming little stifled laughs which made the vocal mothers frown . 
On another occasion , the centenarian was telling stories . 
She said that in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as the mousquetaires . 
It was a century which spoke through her , but it was the eighteenth century . 
She told about the custom of the four wines , which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne . 
When a great personage , a marshal of France , a prince , a duke , and a peer , traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne , the city fathers came out to harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which they had poured four different sorts of wine . 
On the first goblet this inscription could be read , monkey wine ; on the second , lion wine ; on the third , sheep wine ; on the fourth , hog wine . 
These four legends express the four stages descended by the drunkard ; the first , intoxication , which enlivens ; the second , that which irritates ; the third , that which dulls ; and the fourth , that which brutalizes . 
In a cupboard , under lock and key , she kept a mysterious object of which she thought a great deal . 
The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid this . 
She would not show this object to anyone . 
She shut herself up , which her rule allowed her to do , and hid herself , every time that she desired to contemplate it . 
If she heard a footstep in the corridor , she closed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her aged hands . 
As soon as it was mentioned to her , she became silent , she who was so fond of talking . 
The most curious were baffled by her silence and the most tenacious by her obstinacy . 
Thus it furnished a subject of comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent . 
What could that treasure of the centenarian be , which was so precious and so secret ? 
Some holy book , no doubt ? 
