The lodgings in the Rue de l'Homme Arme were situated on a back court , on the second floor , and were composed of two sleeping-rooms , a dining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room , with a garret where there was a folding-bed , and which fell to Toussaint 's share . 
The dining-room was an antechamber as well , and separated the two bedrooms . 
The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils . 
People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it ; human nature is so constituted . 
Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l'Homme Arme when his anxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated . 
There are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind . 
An obscure street , peaceable inhabitants . 
Jean Valjean experienced an indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris , which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transverse beam placed on two posts , which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the clamorous city , dimly lighted at mid-day , and is , so to speak , incapable of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old , which hold their peace like ancients as they are . 
There was a touch of stagnant oblivion in that street . 
Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there . 
How could he be found there ? 
His first care was to place the inseparable beside him . 
He slept well . 
Night brings wisdom ; we may add , night soothes . 
On the following morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay . 
He thought the dining-room charming , though it was hideous , furnished with an old round table , a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror , a dilapidated arm-chair , and several plain chairs which were encumbered with Toussaint 's packages . 
In one of these packages Jean Valjean 's uniform of a National Guard was visible through a rent . 
As for Cosette , she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room , and did not make her appearance until evening . 
About five o'clock , Toussaint , who was going and coming and busying herself with the tiny establishment , set on the table a cold chicken , which Cosette , out of deference to her father , consented to glance at . 
That done , Cosette , under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache , had bade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in her chamber . 
Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good appetite , and with his elbows on the table , having gradually recovered his serenity , had regained possession of his sense of security . 
While he was discussing this modest dinner , he had , twice or thrice , noticed in a confused way , Toussaint 's stammering words as she said to him : `` Monsieur , there is something going on , they are fighting in Paris . '' 
But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations , he had paid no heed to it . 
To tell the truth , he had not heard her . 
He rose and began to pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door , growing ever more serene . 
With this calm , Cosette , his sole anxiety , recurred to his thoughts . 
Not that he was troubled by this headache , a little nervous crisis , a young girl 's fit of sulks , the cloud of a moment , there would be nothing left of it in a day or two ; but he meditated on the future , and , as was his habit , he thought of it with pleasure . 
After all , he saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course . 
At certain hours , everything seems impossible , at others everything appears easy ; Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours . 
They generally succeed the bad ones , as day follows night , by virtue of that law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature , and which superficial minds call antithesis . 
In this peaceful street where he had taken refuge , Jean Valjean got rid of all that had been troubling him for some time past . 
This very fact , that he had seen many shadows , made him begin to perceive a little azure . 
To have quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one good step already accomplished . 
Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad , if only for a few months , and to set out for London . 
Well , they would go . 
What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in England , provided he had Cosette beside him ? 
Cosette was his nation . 
Cosette sufficed for his happiness ; the idea that he , perhaps , did not suffice for Cosette 's happiness , that idea which had formerly been the cause of his fever and sleeplessness , did not even present itself to his mind . 
He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings , and he was fully entered on optimism . 
Cosette was by his side , she seemed to be his ; an optical illusion which every one has experienced . 
He arranged in his own mind , with all sorts of felicitous devices , his departure for England with Cosette , and he beheld his felicity reconstituted wherever he pleased , in the perspective of his revery . 
As he paced to and fro with long strides , his glance suddenly encountered something strange . 
In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard , he saw the four lines which follow : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Jean Valjean halted , perfectly haggard . 
Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in front of the mirror , and , utterly absorbed in her agony of grief , had forgotten it and left it there , without even observing that she had left it wide open , and open at precisely the page on which she had laid to dry the four lines which she had penned , and which she had given in charge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet . 
