This created , outdoors , alternate shadow and gleams of light , eclipses , then bright openings of the clouds ; and indoors a sort of twilight . 
This twilight , sufficient to enable a person to see his way , intermittent on account of the clouds , resembled the sort of livid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar , before which the passersby come and go . 
On arriving at the window , Jean Valjean examined it . 
It had no grating ; it opened in the garden and was fastened , according to the fashion of the country , only by a small pin . 
He opened it ; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated the room abruptly , he closed it again immediately . 
He scrutinized the garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks . 
The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall , easy to climb . 
Far away , at the extremity , he perceived tops of trees , spaced at regular intervals , which indicated that the wall separated the garden from an avenue or lane planted with trees . 
Having taken this survey , he executed a movement like that of a man who has made up his mind , strode to his alcove , grasped his knapsack , opened it , fumbled in it , pulled out of it something which he placed on the bed , put his shoes into one of his pockets , shut the whole thing up again , threw the knapsack on his shoulders , put on his cap , drew the visor down over his eyes , felt for his cudgel , went and placed it in the angle of the window ; then returned to the bed , and resolutely seized the object which he had deposited there . 
It resembled a short bar of iron , pointed like a pike at one end . 
It would have been difficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bit of iron could have been designed . 
Perhaps it was a lever ; possibly it was a club . 
In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing more than a miner 's candlestick . 
Convicts were , at that period , sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which environ Toulon , and it was not rare for them to have miners ' tools at their command . 
These miners ' candlesticks are of massive iron , terminated at the lower extremity by a point , by means of which they are stuck into the rock . 
He took the candlestick in his right hand ; holding his breath and trying to deaden the sound of his tread , he directed his steps to the door of the adjoining room , occupied by the Bishop , as we already know . 
On arriving at this door , he found it ajar . 
The Bishop had not closed it . 
WHAT HE DOES Jean Valjean listened . 
Not a sound . 
He gave the door a push . 
He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger , lightly , with the furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering . 
The door yielded to this pressure , and made an imperceptible and silent movement , which enlarged the opening a little . 
He waited a moment ; then gave the door a second and a bolder push . 
It continued to yield in silence . 
The opening was now large enough to allow him to pass . 
But near the door there stood a little table , which formed an embarrassing angle with it , and barred the entrance . 
Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty . 
It was necessary , at any cost , to enlarge the aperture still further . 
He decided on his course of action , and gave the door a third push , more energetic than the two preceding . 
This time a badly oiled hinge suddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry . 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
The noise of the hinge rang in his ears with something of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Day of Judgment . 
In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined that that hinge had just become animated , and had suddenly assumed a terrible life , and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one , and warn and to wake those who were asleep . 
He halted , shuddering , bewildered , and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels . 
He heard the arteries in his temples beating like two forge hammers , and it seemed to him that his breath issued from his breast with the roar of the wind issuing from a cavern . 
It seemed impossible to him that the horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed the entire household , like the shock of an earthquake ; the door , pushed by him , had taken the alarm , and had shouted ; the old man would rise at once ; the two old women would shriek out ; people would come to their assistance ; in less than a quarter of an hour the town would be in an uproar , and the gendarmerie on hand . 
For a moment he thought himself lost . 
He remained where he was , petrified like the statue of salt , not daring to make a movement . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
The door had fallen wide open . 
He ventured to peep into the next room . 
Nothing had stirred there . 
He lent an ear . 
Nothing was moving in the house . 
The noise made by the rusty hinge had not awakened any one . 
This first danger was past ; but there still reigned a frightful tumult within him . 
Nevertheless , he did not retreat . 
Even when he had thought himself lost , he had not drawn back . 
His only thought now was to finish as soon as possible . 
