The two women looked on without uttering a word , without a gesture , without a look which could disconcert the Bishop . 
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb . 
He took the two candlesticks mechanically , and with a bewildered air . 
`` Now , '' said the Bishop , `` go in peace . 
By the way , when you return , my friend , it is not necessary to pass through the garden . 
You can always enter and depart through the street door . 
It is never fastened with anything but a latch , either by day or by night . '' 
Then , turning to the gendarmes : -- `` You may retire , gentlemen . '' 
The gendarmes retired . 
Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting . 
The Bishop drew near to him , and said in a low voice : -- `` Do not forget , never forget , that you have promised to use this money in becoming an honest man . '' 
Jean Valjean , who had no recollection of ever having promised anything , remained speechless . 
The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered them . 
He resumed with solemnity : -- `` Jean Valjean , my brother , you no longer belong to evil , but to good . 
It is your soul that I buy from you ; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the spirit of perdition , and I give it to God . '' 
LITTLE GERVAIS Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it . 
He set out at a very hasty pace through the fields , taking whatever roads and paths presented themselves to him , without perceiving that he was incessantly retracing his steps . 
He wandered thus the whole morning , without having eaten anything and without feeling hungry . 
He was the prey of a throng of novel sensations . 
He was conscious of a sort of rage ; he did not know against whom it was directed . 
He could not have told whether he was touched or humiliated . 
There came over him at moments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life . 
This state of mind fatigued him . 
He perceived with dismay that the sort of frightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred upon him was giving way within him . 
He asked himself what would replace this . 
At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison with the gendarmes , and that things should not have happened in this way ; it would have agitated him less . 
Although the season was tolerably far advanced , there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here and there , whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled to him memories of his childhood . 
These memories were almost intolerable to him , it was so long since they had recurred to him . 
Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long . 
As the sun declined to its setting , casting long shadows athwart the soil from every pebble , Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a large ruddy plain , which was absolutely deserted . 
There was nothing on the horizon except the Alps . 
Not even the spire of a distant village . 
Jean Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D -- A path which intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush . 
In the middle of this meditation , which would have contributed not a little to render his rags terrifying to any one who might have encountered him , a joyous sound became audible . 
He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard , about ten years of age , coming up the path and singing , his hurdy-gurdy on his hip , and his marmot-box on his back , One of those gay and gentle children , who go from land to land affording a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers . 
Without stopping his song , the lad halted in his march from time to time , and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his hand -- his whole fortune , probably . 
Among this money there was one forty-sou piece . 
The child halted beside the bush , without perceiving Jean Valjean , and tossed up his handful of sous , which , up to that time , he had caught with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand . 
This time the forty-sou piece escaped him , and went rolling towards the brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean set his foot upon it . 
In the meantime , the child had looked after his coin and had caught sight of him . 
He showed no astonishment , but walked straight up to the man . 
The spot was absolutely solitary . 
As far as the eye could see there was not a person on the plain or on the path . 
The only sound was the tiny , feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage , which was traversing the heavens at an immense height . 
The child was standing with his back to the sun , which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' said the little Savoyard , with that childish confidence which is composed of ignorance and innocence , `` my money . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Little Gervais , sir . '' 
