The children dead , the income was at an end . 
The Magnon sought an expedient . 
In that dark free-masonry of evil of which she formed a part , everything is known , all secrets are kept , and all lend mutual aid . 
Magnon needed two children ; the Thenardiers had two . 
The same sex , the same age . 
A good arrangement for the one , a good investment for the other . 
The little Thenardiers became little Magnons . 
Magnon quitted the Quai des Celestins and went to live in the Rue Clocheperce . 
In Paris , the identity which binds an individual to himself is broken between one street and another . 
The registry office being in no way warned , raised no objections , and the substitution was effected in the most simple manner in the world . 
Only , the Thenardier exacted for this loan of her children , ten francs a month , which Magnon promised to pay , and which she actually did pay . 
It is unnecessary to add that M. Gillenormand continued to perform his compact . 
He came to see the children every six months . 
He did not perceive the change . 
`` Monsieur , '' Magnon said to him , `` how much they resemble you ! '' 
Thenardier , to whom avatars were easy , seized this occasion to become Jondrette . 
His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time to discover that they had two little brothers . 
When a certain degree of misery is reached , one is overpowered with a sort of spectral indifference , and one regards human beings as though they were spectres . 
Your nearest relations are often no more for you than vague shadowy forms , barely outlined against a nebulous background of life and easily confounded again with the invisible . 
On the evening of the day when she had handed over her two little ones to Magnon , with express intention of renouncing them forever , the Thenardier had felt , or had appeared to feel , a scruple . 
She said to her husband : `` But this is abandoning our children ! '' 
Thenardier , masterful and phlegmatic , cauterized the scruple with this saying : `` Jean Jacques Rousseau did even better ! '' 
From scruples , the mother proceeded to uneasiness : `` But what if the police were to annoy us ? 
Tell me , Monsieur Thenardier , is what we have done permissible ? '' 
Thenardier replied : `` Everything is permissible . 
No one will see anything but true blue in it . 
Besides , no one has any interest in looking closely after children who have not a sou . '' 
Magnon was a sort of fashionable woman in the sphere of crime . 
She was careful about her toilet . 
She shared her lodgings , which were furnished in an affected and wretched style , with a clever gallicized English thief . 
This English woman , who had become a naturalized Parisienne , recommended by very wealthy relations , intimately connected with the medals in the Library and Mademoiselle Mar 's diamonds , became celebrated later on in judicial accounts . 
She was called Mamselle Miss. . 
The two little creatures who had fallen to Magnon had no reason to complain of their lot . 
Recommended by the eighty francs , they were well cared for , as is everything from which profit is derived ; they were neither badly clothed , nor badly fed ; they were treated almost like `` little gentlemen , '' -- better by their false mother than by their real one . 
Magnon played the lady , and talked no thieves ' slang in their presence . 
Thus passed several years . 
Thenardier augured well from the fact . 
One day , he chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipend of ten francs : `` The father must give them some education . '' 
All at once , these two poor children , who had up to that time been protected tolerably well , even by their evil fate , were abruptly hurled into life and forced to begin it for themselves . 
A wholesale arrest of malefactors , like that in the Jondrette garret , necessarily complicated by investigations and subsequent incarcerations , is a veritable disaster for that hideous and occult counter-society which pursues its existence beneath public society ; an adventure of this description entails all sorts of catastrophes in that sombre world . 
The Thenardier catastrophe involved the catastrophe of Magnon . 
One day , a short time after Magnon had handed to Eponine the note relating to the Rue Plumet , a sudden raid was made by the police in the Rue Clocheperce ; Magnon was seized , as was also Mamselle Miss ; and all the inhabitants of the house , which was of a suspicious character , were gathered into the net . 
While this was going on , the two little boys were playing in the back yard , and saw nothing of the raid . 
When they tried to enter the house again , they found the door fastened and the house empty . 
A cobbler opposite called them to him , and delivered to them a paper which `` their mother '' had left for them . 
On this paper there was an address : M. Barge , collector of rents , Rue du Roi-de-Sicile , No. 8 . 
The proprietor of the stall said to them : `` You can not live here any longer . 
Go there . 
It is near by . 
The first street on the left . 
