Jean Valjean remained silent , motionless , with his back towards the door , seated on the chair from which he had not stirred , and holding his breath in the dark . 
After the expiration of a rather long interval , he turned round , as he heard nothing more , and , as he raised his eyes towards the door of his chamber , he saw a light through the keyhole . 
This light formed a sort of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall . 
There was evidently some one there , who was holding a candle in his hand and listening . 
Several minutes elapsed thus , and the light retreated . 
But he heard no sound of footsteps , which seemed to indicate that the person who had been listening at the door had removed his shoes . 
Jean Valjean threw himself , all dressed as he was , on his bed , and could not close his eyes all night . 
At daybreak , just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue , he was awakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at the end of the corridor , then he heard the same masculine footstep which had ascended the stairs on the preceding evening . 
The step was approaching . 
He sprang off the bed and applied his eye to the keyhole , which was tolerably large , hoping to see the person who had made his way by night into the house and had listened at his door , as he passed . 
It was a man , in fact , who passed , this time without pausing , in front of Jean Valjean 's chamber . 
The corridor was too dark to allow of the person 's face being distinguished ; but when the man reached the staircase , a ray of light from without made it stand out like a silhouette , and Jean Valjean had a complete view of his back . 
The man was of lofty stature , clad in a long frock-coat , with a cudgel under his arm . 
The formidable neck and shoulders belonged to Javert . 
Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him through his window opening on the boulevard , but he would have been obliged to open the window : he dared not . 
It was evident that this man had entered with a key , and like himself . 
Who had given him that key ? 
What was the meaning of this ? 
When the old woman came to do the work , at seven o'clock in the morning , Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her , but he did not question her . 
The good woman appeared as usual . 
As she swept up she remarked to him : -- `` Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night ? '' 
At that age , and on that boulevard , eight o'clock in the evening was the dead of the night . 
`` That is true , by the way , '' he replied , in the most natural tone possible . 
`` Who was it ? '' 
`` It was a new lodger who has come into the house , '' said the old woman . 
`` And what is his name ? '' 
`` I do n't know exactly ; Dumont , or Daumont , or some name of that sort . '' 
`` And who is this Monsieur Dumont ? '' 
The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes , and answered : -- `` A gentleman of property , like yourself . '' 
Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning . 
Jean Valjean thought he perceived one . 
When the old woman had taken her departure , he did up a hundred francs which he had in a cupboard , into a roll , and put it in his pocket . 
In spite of all the precautions which he took in this operation so that he might not be heard rattling silver , a hundred-sou piece escaped from his hands and rolled noisily on the floor . 
When darkness came on , he descended and carefully scrutinized both sides of the boulevard . 
He saw no one . 
The boulevard appeared to be absolutely deserted . 
It is true that a person can conceal himself behind trees . 
He went up stairs again . 
`` Come . '' 
he said to Cosette . 
He took her by the hand , and they both went out . 
THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY An observation here becomes necessary , in view of the pages which the reader is about to peruse , and of others which will be met with further on . 
The author of this book , who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself , has been absent from Paris for many years . 
Paris has been transformed since he quitted it . 
A new city has arisen , which is , after a fashion , unknown to him . 
There is no need for him to say that he loves Paris : Paris is his mind 's natal city . 
In consequence of demolitions and reconstructions , the Paris of his youth , that Paris which he bore away religiously in his memory , is now a Paris of days gone by . 
He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed . 
It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a spot and says , `` In such a street there stands such and such a house , '' neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality . 
Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble . 
