Satan has two names ; he is called Satan and Lying . 
That is what she thought ; and as she thought , so she did . 
The result was the whiteness which we have mentioned -- a whiteness which covered even her lips and her eyes with radiance . 
Her smile was white , her glance was white . 
There was not a single spider 's web , not a grain of dust , on the glass window of that conscience . 
On entering the order of Saint Vincent de Paul , she had taken the name of Simplice by special choice . 
Simplice of Sicily , as we know , is the saint who preferred to allow both her breasts to be torn off rather than to say that she had been born at Segesta when she had been born at Syracuse -- a lie which would have saved her . 
This patron saint suited this soul . 
Sister Simplice , on her entrance into the order , had had two faults which she had gradually corrected : she had a taste for dainties , and she liked to receive letters . 
She never read anything but a book of prayers printed in Latin , in coarse type . 
She did not understand Latin , but she understood the book . 
This pious woman had conceived an affection for Fantine , probably feeling a latent virtue there , and she had devoted herself almost exclusively to her care . 
M. Madeleine took Sister Simplice apart and recommended Fantine to her in a singular tone , which the sister recalled later on . 
On leaving the sister , he approached Fantine . 
Fantine awaited M. Madeleine 's appearance every day as one awaits a ray of warmth and joy . 
She said to the sisters , `` I only live when Monsieur le Maire is here . '' 
She had a great deal of fever that day . 
As soon as she saw M. Madeleine she asked him : -- `` And Cosette ? '' 
He replied with a smile : -- `` Soon . '' 
M. Madeleine was the same as usual with Fantine . 
Only he remained an hour instead of half an hour , to Fantine 's great delight . 
He urged every one repeatedly not to allow the invalid to want for anything . 
It was noticed that there was a moment when his countenance became very sombre . 
But this was explained when it became known that the doctor had bent down to his ear and said to him , `` She is losing ground fast . '' 
Then he returned to the town-hall , and the clerk observed him attentively examining a road map of France which hung in his study . 
He wrote a few figures on a bit of paper with a pencil . 
THE PERSPICACITY OF MASTER SCAUFFLAIRE From the town-hall he betook himself to the extremity of the town , to a Fleming named Master Scaufflaer , French Scaufflaire , who let out `` horses and cabriolets as desired . '' 
In order to reach this Scaufflaire , the shortest way was to take the little-frequented street in which was situated the parsonage of the parish in which M. Madeleine resided . 
The cure was , it was said , a worthy , respectable , and sensible man . 
At the moment when M. Madeleine arrived in front of the parsonage there was but one passer-by in the street , and this person noticed this : After the mayor had passed the priest 's house he halted , stood motionless , then turned about , and retraced his steps to the door of the parsonage , which had an iron knocker . 
He laid his hand quickly on the knocker and lifted it ; then he paused again and stopped short , as though in thought , and after the lapse of a few seconds , instead of allowing the knocker to fall abruptly , he placed it gently , and resumed his way with a sort of haste which had not been apparent previously . 
M. Madeleine found Master Scaufflaire at home , engaged in stitching a harness over . 
`` Master Scaufflaire , '' he inquired , `` have you a good horse ? '' 
`` Mr. Mayor , '' said the Fleming , `` all my horses are good . 
What do you mean by a good horse ? '' 
`` I mean a horse which can travel twenty leagues in a day . '' 
`` The deuce ! '' 
said the Fleming . 
`` Twenty leagues ! '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Hitched to a cabriolet ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And how long can he rest at the end of his journey ? '' 
`` He must be able to set out again on the next day if necessary . '' 
`` To traverse the same road ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` The deuce ! 
the deuce ! 
And it is twenty leagues ? '' 
M. Madeleine drew from his pocket the paper on which he had pencilled some figures . 
