The situation was alarming . 
For an instant , for two or three perhaps , this bit of wall was a shelter , but how was he to escape from this massacre ? 
He recalled the anguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before , and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape ; it was difficult then , to-day it was impossible . 
He had before him that deaf and implacable house , six stories in height , which appeared to be inhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window ; he had on his right the rather low barricade , which shut off the Rue de la Petite Truanderie ; to pass this obstacle seemed easy , but beyond the crest of the barrier a line of bayonets was visible . 
The troops of the line were posted on the watch behind that barricade . 
It was evident , that to pass the barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon , and that any head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of stones would serve as a target for sixty shots . 
On his left he had the field of battle . 
Death lurked round the corner of that wall . 
What was to be done ? 
Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament . 
And it was necessary to decide on the instant , to devise some expedient , to come to some decision . 
Fighting was going on a few paces away ; fortunately , all were raging around a single point , the door of the wine-shop ; but if it should occur to one soldier , to one single soldier , to turn the corner of the house , or to attack him on the flank , all was over . 
Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him , he gazed at the barricade at one side of him , then he looked at the ground , with the violence of the last extremity , bewildered , and as though he would have liked to pierce a hole there with his eyes . 
By dint of staring , something vaguely striking in such an agony began to assume form and outline at his feet , as though it had been a power of glance which made the thing desired unfold . 
A few paces distant he perceived , at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and watched on the exterior , beneath a disordered mass of paving-stones which partly concealed it , an iron grating , placed flat and on a level with the soil . 
This grating , made of stout , transverse bars , was about two feet square . 
The frame of paving-stones which supported it had been torn up , and it was , as it were , unfastened . 
Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture , something like the flue of a chimney , or the pipe of a cistern . 
Jean Valjean darted forward . 
His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination . 
To thrust aside the stones , to raise the grating , to lift Marius , who was as inert as a dead body , upon his shoulders , to descend , with this burden on his loins , and with the aid of his elbows and knees into that sort of well , fortunately not very deep , to let the heavy trap , upon which the loosened stones rolled down afresh , fall into its place behind him , to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres below the surface , -- all this was executed like that which one does in dreams , with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle ; this took only a few minutes . 
Jean Valjean found himself with Marius , who was still unconscious , in a sort of long , subterranean corridor . 
There reigned profound peace , absolute silence , night . 
The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the wall into the convent recurred to him . 
Only , what he was carrying to-day was not Cosette ; it was Marius . 
He could barely hear the formidable tumult in the wine-shop , taken by assault , like a vague murmur overhead . 
THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water . 
And this without metaphor . 
How , and in what manner ? 
Day and night . 
With what object ? 
With no object . 
With what intention ? 
With no intention . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
By means of what organ ? 
By means of its intestine . 
What is its intestine ? 
The sewer . 
Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which the valuations of special science have set upon it . 
Science , after having long groped about , now knows that the most fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure . 
The Chinese , let us confess it to our shame , knew it before us . 
Not a Chinese peasant -- it is Eckberg who says this , -- goes to town without bringing back with him , at the two extremities of his bamboo pole , two full buckets of what we designate as filth . 
Thanks to human dung , the earth in China is still as young as in the days of Abraham . 
Chinese wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed . 
There is no guano comparable in fertility with the detritus of a capital . 
A great city is the most mighty of dung-makers . 
Certain success would attend the experiment of employing the city to manure the plain . 
If our gold is manure , our manure , on the other hand , is gold . 
