At times , amid his convict toil , he paused . 
He fell to thinking . 
His reason , at one and the same time riper and more troubled than of yore , rose in revolt . 
Everything which had happened to him seemed to him absurd ; everything that surrounded him seemed to him impossible . 
He said to himself , `` It is a dream . '' 
He gazed at the galley-sergeant standing a few paces from him ; the galley-sergeant seemed a phantom to him . 
All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel . 
Visible nature hardly existed for him . 
It would almost be true to say that there existed for Jean Valjean neither sun , nor fine summer days , nor radiant sky , nor fresh April dawns . 
I know not what vent-hole daylight habitually illumined his soul . 
To sum up , in conclusion , that which can be summed up and translated into positive results in all that we have just pointed out , we will confine ourselves to the statement that , in the course of nineteen years , Jean Valjean , the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles , the formidable convict of Toulon , had become capable , thanks to the manner in which the galleys had moulded him , of two sorts of evil action : firstly , of evil action which was rapid , unpremeditated , dashing , entirely instinctive , in the nature of reprisals for the evil which he had undergone ; secondly , of evil action which was serious , grave , consciously argued out and premeditated , with the false ideas which such a misfortune can furnish . 
His deliberate deeds passed through three successive phases , which natures of a certain stamp can alone traverse , -- reasoning , will , perseverance . 
He had for moving causes his habitual wrath , bitterness of soul , a profound sense of indignities suffered , the reaction even against the good , the innocent , and the just , if there are any such . 
The point of departure , like the point of arrival , for all his thoughts , was hatred of human law ; that hatred which , if it be not arrested in its development by some providential incident , becomes , within a given time , the hatred of society , then the hatred of the human race , then the hatred of creation , and which manifests itself by a vague , incessant , and brutal desire to do harm to some living being , no matter whom . 
It will be perceived that it was not without reason that Jean Valjean 's passport described him as a very dangerous man . 
From year to year this soul had dried away slowly , but with fatal sureness . 
When the heart is dry , the eye is dry . 
On his departure from the galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear . 
BILLOWS AND SHADOWS A man overboard ! 
What matters it ? 
The vessel does not halt . 
The wind blows . 
That sombre ship has a path which it is forced to pursue . 
It passes on . 
The man disappears , then reappears ; he plunges , he rises again to the surface ; he calls , he stretches out his arms ; he is not heard . 
The vessel , trembling under the hurricane , is wholly absorbed in its own workings ; the passengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man ; his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves . 
He gives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths . 
What a spectre is that retreating sail ! 
He gazes and gazes at it frantically . 
It retreats , it grows dim , it diminishes in size . 
He was there but just now , he was one of the crew , he went and came along the deck with the rest , he had his part of breath and of sunlight , he was a living man . 
Now , what has taken place ? 
He has slipped , he has fallen ; all is at an end . 
He is in the tremendous sea . 
Under foot he has nothing but what flees and crumbles . 
The billows , torn and lashed by the wind , encompass him hideously ; the tossings of the abyss bear him away ; all the tongues of water dash over his head ; a populace of waves spits upon him ; confused openings half devour him ; every time that he sinks , he catches glimpses of precipices filled with night ; frightful and unknown vegetations seize him , knot about his feet , draw him to them ; he is conscious that he is becoming an abyss , that he forms part of the foam ; the waves toss him from one to another ; he drinks in the bitterness ; the cowardly ocean attacks him furiously , to drown him ; the enormity plays with his agony . 
It seems as though all that water were hate . 
Nevertheless , he struggles . 
He tries to defend himself ; he tries to sustain himself ; he makes an effort ; he swims . 
He , his petty strength all exhausted instantly , combats the inexhaustible . 
Where , then , is the ship ? 
Yonder . 
Barely visible in the pale shadows of the horizon . 
The wind blows in gusts ; all the foam overwhelms him . 
He raises his eyes and beholds only the lividness of the clouds . 
He witnesses , amid his death-pangs , the immense madness of the sea . 
He is tortured by this madness ; he hears noises strange to man , which seem to come from beyond the limits of the earth , and from one knows not what frightful region beyond . 
There are birds in the clouds , just as there are angels above human distresses ; but what can they do for him ? 
They sing and fly and float , and he , he rattles in the death agony . 
He feels himself buried in those two infinities , the ocean and the sky , at one and the same time : the one is a tomb ; the other is a shroud . 
