The law has deprived him of the entire quantity of humanity of which it can deprive a man . 
Marius , on penal questions , still held to the inexorable system , though he was a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on the subject of those whom the law strikes . 
He had not yet accomplished all progress , we admit . 
He had not yet come to distinguish between that which is written by man and that which is written by God , between law and right . 
He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes to dispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable . 
He was not shocked by the word vindicte . 
He found it quite simple that certain breaches of the written law should be followed by eternal suffering , and he accepted , as the process of civilization , social damnation . 
He still stood at this point , though safe to advance infallibly later on , since his nature was good , and , at bottom , wholly formed of latent progress . 
In this stage of his ideas , Jean Valjean appeared to him hideous and repulsive . 
He was a man reproved , he was the convict . 
That word was for him like the sound of the trump on the Day of Judgment ; and , after having reflected upon Jean Valjean for a long time , his final gesture had been to turn away his head . 
Vade retro . 
Marius , if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact , while interrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said : `` You are confessing me , '' had not , nevertheless , put to him two or three decisive questions . 
It was not that they had not presented themselves to his mind , but that he had been afraid of them . 
The Jondrette attic ? 
The barricade ? 
Javert ? 
Who knows where these revelations would have stopped ? 
Jean Valjean did not seem like a man who would draw back , and who knows whether Marius , after having urged him on , would not have himself desired to hold him back ? 
Has it not happened to all of us , in certain supreme conjunctures , to stop our ears in order that we may not hear the reply , after we have asked a question ? 
It is especially when one loves that one gives way to these exhibitions of cowardice . 
It is not wise to question sinister situations to the last point , particularly when the indissoluble side of our life is fatally intermingled with them . 
What a terrible light might have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean , and who knows whether that hideous glare would not have darted forth as far as Cosette ? 
Who knows whether a sort of infernal glow would not have lingered behind it on the brow of that angel ? 
The spattering of a lightning-flash is of the thunder also . 
Fatality has points of juncture where innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of the reflections which give color . 
The purest figures may forever preserve the reflection of a horrible association . 
Rightly or wrongly , Marius had been afraid . 
He already knew too much . 
He sought to dull his senses rather than to gain further light . 
In dismay he bore off Cosette in his arms and shut his eyes to Jean Valjean . 
That man was the night , the living and horrible night . 
How should he dare to seek the bottom of it ? 
It is a terrible thing to interrogate the shadow . 
Who knows what its reply will be ? 
The dawn may be blackened forever by it . 
In this state of mind the thought that that man would , henceforth , come into any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity to Marius . 
He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidable questions , before which he had recoiled , and from which an implacable and definitive decision might have sprung . 
He felt that he was too good , too gentle , too weak , if we must say the word . 
This weakness had led him to an imprudent concession . 
He had allowed himself to be touched . 
He had been in the wrong . 
He ought to have simply and purely rejected Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean played the part of fire , and that is what he should have done , and have freed his house from that man . 
He was vexed with himself , he was angry with that whirlwind of emotions which had deafened , blinded , and carried him away . 
He was displeased with himself . 
What was he to do now ? 
Jean Valjean 's visits were profoundly repugnant to him . 
What was the use in having that man in his house ? 
What did the man want ? 
