Night descends ; he has been swimming for hours ; his strength is exhausted ; that ship , that distant thing in which there were men , has vanished ; he is alone in the formidable twilight gulf ; he sinks , he stiffens himself , he twists himself ; he feels under him the monstrous billows of the invisible ; he shouts . 
There are no more men . 
Where is God ? 
He shouts . 
Help ! 
Help ! 
He still shouts on . 
Nothing on the horizon ; nothing in heaven . 
He implores the expanse , the waves , the seaweed , the reef ; they are deaf . 
He beseeches the tempest ; the imperturbable tempest obeys only the infinite . 
Around him darkness , fog , solitude , the stormy and nonsentient tumult , the undefined curling of those wild waters . 
In him horror and fatigue . 
Beneath him the depths . 
Not a point of support . 
He thinks of the gloomy adventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow . 
The bottomless cold paralyzes him . 
His hands contract convulsively ; they close , and grasp nothingness . 
Winds , clouds , whirlwinds , gusts , useless stars ! 
What is to be done ? 
The desperate man gives up ; he is weary , he chooses the alternative of death ; he resists not ; he lets himself go ; he abandons his grip ; and then he tosses forevermore in the lugubrious dreary depths of engulfment . 
Oh , implacable march of human societies ! 
Oh , losses of men and of souls on the way ! 
Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip ! 
Disastrous absence of help ! 
Oh , moral death ! 
The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws fling their condemned . 
The sea is the immensity of wretchedness . 
The soul , going down stream in this gulf , may become a corpse . 
Who shall resuscitate it ? 
NEW TROUBLES When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys , when Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words , Thou art free ! 
the moment seemed improbable and unprecedented ; a ray of vivid light , a ray of the true light of the living , suddenly penetrated within him . 
But it was not long before this ray paled . 
Jean Valjean had been dazzled by the idea of liberty . 
He had believed in a new life . 
He very speedily perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is provided . 
And this was encompassed with much bitterness . 
He had calculated that his earnings , during his sojourn in the galleys , ought to amount to a hundred and seventy-one francs . 
It is but just to add that he had forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays and festival days during nineteen years , which entailed a diminution of about eighty francs . 
At all events , his hoard had been reduced by various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which had been counted out to him on his departure . 
He had understood nothing of this , and had thought himself wronged . 
Let us say the word -- robbed . 
On the day following his liberation , he saw , at Grasse , in front of an orange-flower distillery , some men engaged in unloading bales . 
He offered his services . 
Business was pressing ; they were accepted . 
He set to work . 
He was intelligent , robust , adroit ; he did his best ; the master seemed pleased . 
While he was at work , a gendarme passed , observed him , and demanded his papers . 
It was necessary to show him the yellow passport . 
That done , Jean Valjean resumed his labor . 
A little while before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the amount which they earned each day at this occupation ; he had been told thirty sous . 
