Marius was not there . 
On the following day , Jean Valjean asked Cosette again : -- `` Would you like to come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
She replied , sadly and gently : -- `` No . '' 
Jean Valjean was hurt by this sadness , and heart-broken at this gentleness . 
What was going on in that mind which was so young and yet already so impenetrable ? 
What was on its way there within ? 
What was taking place in Cosette 's soul ? 
Sometimes , instead of going to bed , Jean Valjean remained seated on his pallet , with his head in his hands , and he passed whole nights asking himself : `` What has Cosette in her mind ? '' 
and in thinking of the things that she might be thinking about . 
Oh ! 
at such moments , what mournful glances did he cast towards that cloister , that chaste peak , that abode of angels , that inaccessible glacier of virtue ! 
How he contemplated , with despairing ecstasy , that convent garden , full of ignored flowers and cloistered virgins , where all perfumes and all souls mount straight to heaven ! 
How he adored that Eden forever closed against him , whence he had voluntarily and madly emerged ! 
How he regretted his abnegation and his folly in having brought Cosette back into the world , poor hero of sacrifice , seized and hurled to the earth by his very self-devotion ! 
How he said to himself , `` What have I done ? '' 
However , nothing of all this was perceptible to Cosette . 
No ill-temper , no harshness . 
His face was always serene and kind . 
Jean Valjean 's manners were more tender and more paternal than ever . 
If anything could have betrayed his lack of joy , it was his increased suavity . 
On her side , Cosette languished . 
She suffered from the absence of Marius as she had rejoiced in his presence , peculiarly , without exactly being conscious of it . 
When Jean Valjean ceased to take her on their customary strolls , a feminine instinct murmured confusedly , at the bottom of her heart , that she must not seem to set store on the Luxembourg garden , and that if this proved to be a matter of indifference to her , her father would take her thither once more . 
But days , weeks , months , elapsed . 
Jean Valjean had tacitly accepted Cosette 's tacit consent . 
She regretted it . 
It was too late . 
So Marius had disappeared ; all was over . 
The day on which she returned to the Luxembourg , Marius was no longer there . 
What was to be done ? 
Should she ever find him again ? 
She felt an anguish at her heart , which nothing relieved , and which augmented every day ; she no longer knew whether it was winter or summer , whether it was raining or shining , whether the birds were singing , whether it was the season for dahlias or daisies , whether the Luxembourg was more charming than the Tuileries , whether the linen which the laundress brought home was starched too much or not enough , whether Toussaint had done `` her marketing '' well or ill ; and she remained dejected , absorbed , attentive to but a single thought , her eyes vague and staring as when one gazes by night at a black and fathomless spot where an apparition has vanished . 
However , she did not allow Jean Valjean to perceive anything of this , except her pallor . 
She still wore her sweet face for him . 
This pallor sufficed but too thoroughly to trouble Jean Valjean . 
Sometimes he asked her : -- `` What is the matter with you ? '' 
She replied : `` There is nothing the matter with me . '' 
And after a silence , when she divined that he was sad also , she would add : -- `` And you , father -- is there anything wrong with you ? '' 
`` With me ? 
Nothing , '' said he . 
These two beings who had loved each other so exclusively , and with so touching an affection , and who had lived so long for each other now suffered side by side , each on the other 's account ; without acknowledging it to each other , without anger towards each other , and with a smile . 
THE CHAIN-GANG Jean Valjean was the more unhappy of the two . 
Youth , even in its sorrows , always possesses its own peculiar radiance . 
At times , Jean Valjean suffered so greatly that he became puerile . 
It is the property of grief to cause the childish side of man to reappear . 
He had an unconquerable conviction that Cosette was escaping from him . 
He would have liked to resist , to retain her , to arouse her enthusiasm by some external and brilliant matter . 
These ideas , puerile , as we have just said , and at the same time senile , conveyed to him , by their very childishness , a tolerably just notion of the influence of gold lace on the imaginations of young girls . 
He once chanced to see a general on horseback , in full uniform , pass along the street , Comte Coutard , the commandant of Paris . 
He envied that gilded man ; what happiness it would be , he said to himself , if he could put on that suit which was an incontestable thing ; and if Cosette could behold him thus , she would be dazzled , and when he had Cosette on his arm and passed the gates of the Tuileries , the guard would present arms to him , and that would suffice for Cosette , and would dispel her idea of looking at young men . 
