Grave and obscure questions , to the last of which every physiologist would probably have responded no , and that without hesitation , had he beheld at Toulon , during the hours of repose , which were for Jean Valjean hours of revery , this gloomy galley-slave , seated with folded arms upon the bar of some capstan , with the end of his chain thrust into his pocket to prevent its dragging , serious , silent , and thoughtful , a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath , condemned by civilization , and regarding heaven with severity . 
Certainly , -- and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact , -- the observing physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery ; he would , perchance , have pitied this sick man , of the law 's making ; but he would not have even essayed any treatment ; he would have turned aside his gaze from the caverns of which he would have caught a glimpse within this soul , and , like Dante at the portals of hell , he would have effaced from this existence the word which the finger of God has , nevertheless , inscribed upon the brow of every man , -- hope . 
Was this state of his soul , which we have attempted to analyze , as perfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those who read us ? 
Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive , after their formation , and had he seen distinctly during the process of their formation , all the elements of which his moral misery was composed ? 
Had this rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception of the succession of ideas through which he had , by degrees , mounted and descended to the lugubrious aspects which had , for so many years , formed the inner horizon of his spirit ? 
Was he conscious of all that passed within him , and of all that was working there ? 
That is something which we do not presume to state ; it is something which we do not even believe . 
There was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean , even after his misfortune , to prevent much vagueness from still lingering there . 
At times he did not rightly know himself what he felt . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadows ; he suffered in the shadows ; he hated in the shadows ; one might have said that he hated in advance of himself . 
He dwelt habitually in this shadow , feeling his way like a blind man and a dreamer . 
Only , at intervals , there suddenly came to him , from without and from within , an access of wrath , a surcharge of suffering , a livid and rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul , and caused to appear abruptly all around him , in front , behind , amid the gleams of a frightful light , the hideous precipices and the sombre perspective of his destiny . 
The flash passed , the night closed in again ; and where was he ? 
He no longer knew . 
The peculiarity of pains of this nature , in which that which is pitiless -- that is to say , that which is brutalizing -- predominates , is to transform a man , little by little , by a sort of stupid transfiguration , into a wild beast ; sometimes into a ferocious beast . 
Jean Valjean 's successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alone suffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul . 
Jean Valjean would have renewed these attempts , utterly useless and foolish as they were , as often as the opportunity had presented itself , without reflecting for an instant on the result , nor on the experiences which he had already gone through . 
He escaped impetuously , like the wolf who finds his cage open . 
Instinct said to him , `` Flee ! '' 
Reason would have said , `` Remain ! '' 
But in the presence of so violent a temptation , reason vanished ; nothing remained but instinct . 
The beast alone acted . 
When he was recaptured , the fresh severities inflicted on him only served to render him still more wild . 
One detail , which we must not omit , is that he possessed a physical strength which was not approached by a single one of the denizens of the galleys . 
At work , at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan , Jean Valjean was worth four men . 
He sometimes lifted and sustained enormous weights on his back ; and when the occasion demanded it , he replaced that implement which is called a jack-screw , and was formerly called orgueil -LSB- pride -RSB- , whence , we may remark in passing , is derived the name of the Rue Montorgueil , near the Halles -LSB- Fishmarket -RSB- in Paris . 
His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw . 
Once , when they were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon , one of those admirable caryatids of Puget , which support the balcony , became loosened , and was on the point of falling . 
Jean Valjean , who was present , supported the caryatid with his shoulder , and gave the workmen time to arrive . 
His suppleness even exceeded his strength . 
Certain convicts who were forever dreaming of escape , ended by making a veritable science of force and skill combined . 
It is the science of muscles . 
An entire system of mysterious statics is daily practised by prisoners , men who are forever envious of the flies and birds . 
To climb a vertical surface , and to find points of support where hardly a projection was visible , was play to Jean Valjean . 
An angle of the wall being given , with the tension of his back and legs , with his elbows and his heels fitted into the unevenness of the stone , he raised himself as if by magic to the third story . 
He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of the galley prison . 
He spoke but little . 
He laughed not at all . 
An excessive emotion was required to wring from him , once or twice a year , that lugubrious laugh of the convict , which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon . 
To all appearance , he seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of something terrible . 
He was absorbed , in fact . 
Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed intelligence , he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was resting on him . 
In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled , each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance , he perceived with terror , mingled with rage , a sort of frightful accumulation of things , collecting and mounting above him , beyond the range of his vision , -- laws , prejudices , men , and deeds , -- whose outlines escaped him , whose mass terrified him , and which was nothing else than that prodigious pyramid which we call civilization . 
He distinguished , here and there in that swarming and formless mass , now near him , now afar off and on inaccessible table-lands , some group , some detail , vividly illuminated ; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel ; there the gendarme and his sword ; yonder the mitred archbishop ; away at the top , like a sort of sun , the Emperor , crowned and dazzling . 
It seemed to him that these distant splendors , far from dissipating his night , rendered it more funereal and more black . 
All this -- laws , prejudices , deeds , men , things -- went and came above him , over his head , in accordance with the complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization , walking over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness in its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference . 
Souls which have fallen to the bottom of all possible misfortune , unhappy men lost in the lowest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks , the reproved of the law , feel the whole weight of this human society , so formidable for him who is without , so frightful for him who is beneath , resting upon their heads . 
In this situation Jean Valjean meditated ; and what could be the nature of his meditation ? 
If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts , it would , doubtless , think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought . 
All these things , realities full of spectres , phantasmagories full of realities , had eventually created for him a sort of interior state which is almost indescribable . 
