He is the son of one of those brigands of the Loire , but children are innocent of their fathers ' crimes . 
I remember when he was no higher than that . 
He could not manage to pronounce his Ds . 
He had a way of talking that was so sweet and indistinct that you would have thought it was a bird chirping . 
I remember that once , in front of the Hercules Farnese , people formed a circle to admire him and marvel at him , he was so handsome , was that child ! 
He had a head such as you see in pictures . 
I talked in a deep voice , and I frightened him with my cane , but he knew very well that it was only to make him laugh . 
In the morning , when he entered my room , I grumbled , but he was like the sunlight to me , all the same . 
One can not defend oneself against those brats . 
They take hold of you , they hold you fast , they never let you go again . 
The truth is , that there never was a cupid like that child . 
Now , what can you say for your Lafayettes , your Benjamin Constants , and your Tirecuir de Corcelles who have killed him ? 
This can not be allowed to pass in this fashion . '' 
He approached Marius , who still lay livid and motionless , and to whom the physician had returned , and began once more to wring his hands . 
The old man 's pallid lips moved as though mechanically , and permitted the passage of words that were barely audible , like breaths in the death agony : `` Ah ! 
heartless lad ! 
Ah ! 
clubbist ! 
Ah ! 
wretch ! 
Ah ! 
Septembrist ! '' 
Reproaches in the low voice of an agonizing man , addressed to a corpse . 
Little by little , as it is always indispensable that internal eruptions should come to the light , the sequence of words returned , but the grandfather appeared no longer to have the strength to utter them , his voice was so weak , and extinct , that it seemed to come from the other side of an abyss : `` It is all the same to me , I am going to die too , that I am . 
And to think that there is not a hussy in Paris who would not have been delighted to make this wretch happy ! 
A scamp who , instead of amusing himself and enjoying life , went off to fight and get himself shot down like a brute ! 
And for whom ? 
Why ? 
For the Republic ! 
Instead of going to dance at the Chaumiere , as it is the duty of young folks to do ! 
What 's the use of being twenty years old ? 
The Republic , a cursed pretty folly ! 
Poor mothers , beget fine boys , do ! 
Come , he is dead . 
That will make two funerals under the same carriage gate . 
So you have got yourself arranged like this for the sake of General Lamarque 's handsome eyes ! 
What had that General Lamarque done to you ? 
A slasher ! 
A chatter-box ! 
To get oneself killed for a dead man ! 
If that is n't enough to drive any one mad ! 
Just think of it ! 
At twenty ! 
And without so much as turning his head to see whether he was not leaving something behind him ! 
That 's the way poor , good old fellows are forced to die alone , now-adays . 
Perish in your corner , owl ! 
Well , after all , so much the better , that is what I was hoping for , this will kill me on the spot . 
I am too old , I am a hundred years old , I am a hundred thousand years old , I ought , by rights , to have been dead long ago . 
This blow puts an end to it . 
So all is over , what happiness ! 
