Barrecarrosse -LRB- Stop-carriage -RRB- , called Monsieur Dupont . 
L'Esplanade-du-Sud . 
Poussagrive . 
Carmagnolet . 
Kruideniers , called Bizarro . 
Mangedentelle . 
-LRB- Lace-eater . -RRB- 
Les-pieds-en-l'Air . 
-LRB- Feet in the air . -RRB- 
Demi-Liard , called Deux-Milliards . 
Etc. , etc. . 
We pass over some , and not the worst of them . 
These names have faces attached . 
They do not express merely beings , but species . 
Each one of these names corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from the under side of civilization . 
Those beings , who were not very lavish with their countenances , were not among the men whom one sees passing along the streets . 
Fatigued by the wild nights which they passed , they went off by day to sleep , sometimes in the lime-kilns , sometimes in the abandoned quarries of Montmatre or Montrouge , sometimes in the sewers . 
They ran to earth . 
What became of these men ? 
They still exist . 
They have always existed . 
Horace speaks of them : Ambubaiarum collegia , pharmacopolae , mendici , mimae ; and so long as society remains what it is , they will remain what they are . 
Beneath the obscure roof of their cavern , they are continually born again from the social ooze . 
They return , spectres , but always identical ; only , they no longer bear the same names and they are no longer in the same skins . 
The individuals extirpated , the tribe subsists . 
They always have the same faculties . 
From the vagrant to the tramp , the race is maintained in its purity . 
They divine purses in pockets , they scent out watches in fobs . 
Gold and silver possess an odor for them . 
There exist ingenuous bourgeois , of whom it might be said , that they have a `` stealable '' air . 
These men patiently pursue these bourgeois . 
They experience the quivers of a spider at the passage of a stranger or of a man from the country . 
These men are terrible , when one encounters them , or catches a glimpse of them , towards midnight , on a deserted boulevard . 
They do not seem to be men but forms composed of living mists ; one would say that they habitually constitute one mass with the shadows , that they are in no wise distinct from them , that they possess no other soul than the darkness , and that it is only momentarily and for the purpose of living for a few minutes a monstrous life , that they have separated from the night . 
What is necessary to cause these spectres to vanish ? 
Light . 
Light in floods . 
Not a single bat can resist the dawn . 
Light up society from below . 
MARIUS , WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET , ENCOUNTERS A MAN IN A CAP Summer passed , then the autumn ; winter came . 
Neither M. Leblanc nor the young girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden . 
Thenceforth , Marius had but one thought , -- to gaze once more on that sweet and adorable face . 
He sought constantly , he sought everywhere ; he found nothing . 
He was no longer Marius , the enthusiastic dreamer , the firm , resolute , ardent man , the bold defier of fate , the brain which erected future on future , the young spirit encumbered with plans , with projects , with pride , with ideas and wishes ; he was a lost dog . 
He fell into a black melancholy . 
All was over . 
Work disgusted him , walking tired him . 
Vast nature , formerly so filled with forms , lights , voices , counsels , perspectives , horizons , teachings , now lay empty before him . 
It seemed to him that everything had disappeared . 
He thought incessantly , for he could not do otherwise ; but he no longer took pleasure in his thoughts . 
