God delivers over to men his visible will in events , an obscure text written in a mysterious tongue . 
Men immediately make translations of it ; translations hasty , incorrect , full of errors , of gaps , and of nonsense . 
Very few minds comprehend the divine language . 
The most sagacious , the calmest , the most profound , decipher slowly , and when they arrive with their text , the task has long been completed ; there are already twenty translations on the public place . 
From each remaining springs a party , and from each misinterpretation a faction ; and each party thinks that it alone has the true text , and each faction thinks that it possesses the light . 
Power itself is often a faction . 
There are , in revolutions , swimmers who go against the current ; they are the old parties . 
For the old parties who clung to heredity by the grace of God , think that revolutions , having sprung from the right to revolt , one has the right to revolt against them . 
Error . 
For in these revolutions , the one who revolts is not the people ; it is the king . 
Revolution is precisely the contrary of revolt . 
Every revolution , being a normal outcome , contains within itself its legitimacy , which false revolutionists sometimes dishonor , but which remains even when soiled , which survives even when stained with blood . 
Revolutions spring not from an accident , but from necessity . 
A revolution is a return from the fictitious to the real . 
It is because it must be that it is . 
None the less did the old legitimist parties assail the Revolution of 1830 with all the vehemence which arises from false reasoning . 
Errors make excellent projectiles . 
They strike it cleverly in its vulnerable spot , in default of a cuirass , in its lack of logic ; they attacked this revolution in its royalty . 
They shouted to it : `` Revolution , why this king ? '' 
Factions are blind men who aim correctly . 
This cry was uttered equally by the republicans . 
But coming from them , this cry was logical . 
What was blindness in the legitimists was clearness of vision in the democrats . 
1830 had bankrupted the people . 
The enraged democracy reproached it with this . 
Between the attack of the past and the attack of the future , the establishment of July struggled . 
It represented the minute at loggerheads on the one hand with the monarchical centuries , on the other hand with eternal right . 
In addition , and beside all this , as it was no longer revolution and had become a monarchy , 1830 was obliged to take precedence of all Europe . 
To keep the peace , was an increase of complication . 
A harmony established contrary to sense is often more onerous than a war . 
From this secret conflict , always muzzled , but always growling , was born armed peace , that ruinous expedient of civilization which in the harness of the European cabinets is suspicious in itself . 
The Royalty of July reared up , in spite of the fact that it caught it in the harness of European cabinets . 
Metternich would gladly have put it in kicking-straps . 
Pushed on in France by progress , it pushed on the monarchies , those loiterers in Europe . 
After having been towed , it undertook to tow . 
Meanwhile , within her , pauperism , the proletariat , salary , education , penal servitude , prostitution , the fate of the woman , wealth , misery , production , consumption , division , exchange , coin , credit , the rights of capital , the rights of labor , -- all these questions were multiplied above society , a terrible slope . 
Outside of political parties properly so called , another movement became manifest . 
Philosophical fermentation replied to democratic fermentation . 
The elect felt troubled as well as the masses ; in another manner , but quite as much . 
Thinkers meditated , while the soil , that is to say , the people , traversed by revolutionary currents , trembled under them with indescribably vague epileptic shocks . 
These dreamers , some isolated , others united in families and almost in communion , turned over social questions in a pacific but profound manner ; impassive miners , who tranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths of a volcano , hardly disturbed by the dull commotion and the furnaces of which they caught glimpses . 
This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of this agitated epoch . 
These men left to political parties the question of rights , they occupied themselves with the question of happiness . 
The well-being of man , that was what they wanted to extract from society . 
They raised material questions , questions of agriculture , of industry , of commerce , almost to the dignity of a religion . 
In civilization , such as it has formed itself , a little by the command of God , a great deal by the agency of man , interests combine , unite , and amalgamate in a manner to form a veritable hard rock , in accordance with a dynamic law , patiently studied by economists , those geologists of politics . 
These men who grouped themselves under different appellations , but who may all be designated by the generic title of socialists , endeavored to pierce that rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters of human felicity . 
From the question of the scaffold to the question of war , their works embraced everything . 
To the rights of man , as proclaimed by the French Revolution , they added the rights of woman and the rights of the child . 
The reader will not be surprised if , for various reasons , we do not here treat in a thorough manner , from the theoretical point of view , the questions raised by socialism . 
