he asked . 
`` What young ` un ? '' 
`` The one who climbed the wall and carried you the rope . '' 
`` Not particularly . '' 
`` Well , I do n't know , but it strikes me that it was your son . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
said Thenardier , `` do you think so ? '' 
BOOK SEVENTH . 
-- SLANG ORIGIN Pigritia is a terrible word . 
It engenders a whole world , la pegre , for which read theft , and a hell , la pegrenne , for which read hunger . 
Thus , idleness is the mother . 
She has a son , theft , and a daughter , hunger . 
Where are we at this moment ? 
In the land of slang . 
What is slang ? 
It is at one and the same time , a nation and a dialect ; it is theft in its two kinds ; people and language . 
When , four and thirty years ago , the narrator of this grave and sombre history introduced into a work written with the same aim as this -LSB- 39 -RSB- a thief who talked argot , there arose amazement and clamor . 
-- `` What ! 
How ! 
Argot ! 
Why , argot is horrible ! 
It is the language of prisons , galleys , convicts , of everything that is most abominable in society ! '' 
etc. , etc. -LSB- 39 -RSB- The Last Day of a Condemned Man . 
We have never understood this sort of objections . 
Since that time , two powerful romancers , one of whom is a profound observer of the human heart , the other an intrepid friend of the people , Balzac and Eugene Sue , having represented their ruffians as talking their natural language , as the author of The Last Day of a Condemned Man did in 1828 , the same objections have been raised . 
People repeated : `` What do authors mean by that revolting dialect ? 
Slang is odious ! 
Slang makes one shudder ! '' 
Who denies that ? 
Of course it does . 
When it is a question of probing a wound , a gulf , a society , since when has it been considered wrong to go too far ? 
to go to the bottom ? 
We have always thought that it was sometimes a courageous act , and , at least , a simple and useful deed , worthy of the sympathetic attention which duty accepted and fulfilled merits . 
Why should one not explore everything , and study everything ? 
Why should one halt on the way ? 
The halt is a matter depending on the sounding-line , and not on the leadsman . 
Certainly , too , it is neither an attractive nor an easy task to undertake an investigation into the lowest depths of the social order , where terra firma comes to an end and where mud begins , to rummage in those vague , murky waves , to follow up , to seize and to fling , still quivering , upon the pavement that abject dialect which is dripping with filth when thus brought to the light , that pustulous vocabulary each word of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of the mire and the shadows . 
Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus in its nudity , in the broad light of thought , of the horrible swarming of slang . 
It seems , in fact , to be a sort of horrible beast made for the night which has just been torn from its cesspool . 
One thinks one beholds a frightful , living , and bristling thicket which quivers , rustles , wavers , returns to shadow , threatens and glares . 
One word resembles a claw , another an extinguished and bleeding eye , such and such a phrase seems to move like the claw of a crab . 
All this is alive with the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out of disorganization . 
Now , when has horror ever excluded study ? 
Since when has malady banished medicine ? 
Can one imagine a naturalist refusing to study the viper , the bat , the scorpion , the centipede , the tarantula , and one who would cast them back into their darkness , saying : `` Oh ! 
how ugly that is ! '' 
The thinker who should turn aside from slang would resemble a surgeon who should avert his face from an ulcer or a wart . 
He would be like a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language , a philosopher hesitating to scrutinize a fact in humanity . 
For , it must be stated to those who are ignorant of the case , that argot is both a literary phenomenon and a social result . 
What is slang , properly speaking ? 
