`` Even if you were to take possession of me , Monsieur Pontmercy , would that make me other than I am ? 
No , God has thought like you and myself , and he does not change his mind ; it is useful for me to go . 
Death is a good arrangement . 
God knows better than we what we need . 
May you be happy , may Monsieur Pontmercy have Cosette , may youth wed the morning , may there be around you , my children , lilacs and nightingales ; may your life be a beautiful , sunny lawn , may all the enchantments of heaven fill your souls , and now let me , who am good for nothing , die ; it is certain that all this is right . 
Come , be reasonable , nothing is possible now , I am fully conscious that all is over . 
And then , last night , I drank that whole jug of water . 
How good thy husband is , Cosette ! 
Thou art much better off with him than with me . '' 
A noise became audible at the door . 
It was the doctor entering . 
`` Good-day , and farewell , doctor , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Here are my poor children . '' 
Marius stepped up to the doctor . 
He addressed to him only this single word : `` Monsieur ? 
... '' But his manner of pronouncing it contained a complete question . 
The doctor replied to the question by an expressive glance . 
`` Because things are not agreeable , '' said Jean Valjean , `` that is no reason for being unjust towards God . '' 
A silence ensued . 
All breasts were oppressed . 
Jean Valjean turned to Cosette . 
He began to gaze at her as though he wished to retain her features for eternity . 
In the depths of the shadow into which he had already descended , ecstasy was still possible to him when gazing at Cosette . 
The reflection of that sweet face lighted up his pale visage . 
The doctor felt of his pulse . 
`` Ah ! 
it was you that he wanted ! '' 
he murmured , looking at Cosette and Marius . 
And bending down to Marius ' ear , he added in a very low voice : `` Too late . '' 
Jean Valjean surveyed the doctor and Marius serenely , almost without ceasing to gaze at Cosette . 
These barely articulate words were heard to issue from his mouth : `` It is nothing to die ; it is dreadful not to live . '' 
All at once he rose to his feet . 
These accesses of strength are sometimes the sign of the death agony . 
He walked with a firm step to the wall , thrusting aside Marius and the doctor who tried to help him , detached from the wall a little copper crucifix which was suspended there , and returned to his seat with all the freedom of movement of perfect health , and said in a loud voice , as he laid the crucifix on the table : `` Behold the great martyr . '' 
Then his chest sank in , his head wavered , as though the intoxication of the tomb were seizing hold upon him . 
His hands , which rested on his knees , began to press their nails into the stuff of his trousers . 
Cosette supported his shoulders , and sobbed , and tried to speak to him , but could not . 
Among the words mingled with that mournful saliva which accompanies tears , they distinguished words like the following : `` Father , do not leave us . 
Is it possible that we have found you only to lose you again ? '' 
It might be said that agony writhes . 
It goes , comes , advances towards the sepulchre , and returns towards life . 
There is groping in the action of dying . 
Jean Valjean rallied after this semi-swoon , shook his brow as though to make the shadows fall away from it and became almost perfectly lucid once more . 
He took a fold of Cosette 's sleeve and kissed it . 
`` He is coming back ! 
doctor , he is coming back , '' cried Marius . 
`` You are good , both of you , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` I am going to tell you what has caused me pain . 
What has pained me , Monsieur Pontmercy , is that you have not been willing to touch that money . 
That money really belongs to your wife . 
