`` You will take the road on the left , leading to Carency ; you will cross the river ; when you reach Camblin , you will turn to the right ; that is the road to Mont-Saint-Eloy which leads to Arras . '' 
`` But it is night , and I shall lose my way . '' 
`` You do not belong in these parts ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` And , besides , it is all cross-roads ; stop ! 
sir , '' resumed the road-mender ; `` shall I give you a piece of advice ? 
your horse is tired ; return to Tinques ; there is a good inn there ; sleep there ; you can reach Arras to-morrow . '' 
`` I must be there this evening . '' 
`` That is different ; but go to the inn all the same , and get an extra horse ; the stable-boy will guide you through the cross-roads . '' 
He followed the road-mender 's advice , retraced his steps , and , half an hour later , he passed the same spot again , but this time at full speed , with a good horse to aid ; a stable-boy , who called himself a postilion , was seated on the shaft of the cariole . 
Still , he felt that he had lost time . 
Night had fully come . 
They turned into the cross-road ; the way became frightfully bad ; the cart lurched from one rut to the other ; he said to the postilion : -- `` Keep at a trot , and you shall have a double fee . '' 
In one of the jolts , the whiffle-tree broke . 
`` There 's the whiffle-tree broken , sir , '' said the postilion ; `` I do n't know how to harness my horse now ; this road is very bad at night ; if you wish to return and sleep at Tinques , we could be in Arras early to-morrow morning . '' 
He replied , `` Have you a bit of rope and a knife ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it . 
This caused another loss of twenty minutes ; but they set out again at a gallop . 
The plain was gloomy ; low-hanging , black , crisp fogs crept over the hills and wrenched themselves away like smoke : there were whitish gleams in the clouds ; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea produced a sound in all quarters of the horizon , as of some one moving furniture ; everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror . 
How many things shiver beneath these vast breaths of the night ! 
He was stiff with cold ; he had eaten nothing since the night before ; he vaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in the neighborhood of D -- , eight years previously , and it seemed but yesterday . 
The hour struck from a distant tower ; he asked the boy : -- `` What time is it ? '' 
`` Seven o'clock , sir ; we shall reach Arras at eight ; we have but three leagues still to go . '' 
At that moment , he for the first time indulged in this reflection , thinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner : that all this trouble which he was taking was , perhaps , useless ; that he did not know so much as the hour of the trial ; that he should , at least , have informed himself of that ; that he was foolish to go thus straight ahead without knowing whether he would be of any service or not ; then he sketched out some calculations in his mind : that , ordinarily , the sittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine o'clock in the morning ; that it could not be a long affair ; that the theft of the apples would be very brief ; that there would then remain only a question of identity , four or five depositions , and very little for the lawyers to say ; that he should arrive after all was over . 
The postilion whipped up the horses ; they had crossed the river and left Mont-Saint-Eloy behind them . 
The night grew more profound . 
SISTER SIMPLICE PUT TO THE PROOF But at that moment Fantine was joyous . 
She had passed a very bad night ; her cough was frightful ; her fever had doubled in intensity ; she had had dreams : in the morning , when the doctor paid his visit , she was delirious ; he assumed an alarmed look , and ordered that he should be informed as soon as M. Madeleine arrived . 
All the morning she was melancholy , said but little , and laid plaits in her sheets , murmuring the while , in a low voice , calculations which seemed to be calculations of distances . 
Her eyes were hollow and staring . 
They seemed almost extinguished at intervals , then lighted up again and shone like stars . 
It seems as though , at the approach of a certain dark hour , the light of heaven fills those who are quitting the light of earth . 
Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt , she replied invariably , `` Well . 
I should like to see M. Madeleine . '' 
Some months before this , at the moment when Fantine had just lost her last modesty , her last shame , and her last joy , she was the shadow of herself ; now she was the spectre of herself . 
Physical suffering had completed the work of moral suffering . 
This creature of five and twenty had a wrinkled brow , flabby cheeks , pinched nostrils , teeth from which the gums had receded , a leaden complexion , a bony neck , prominent shoulder-blades , frail limbs , a clayey skin , and her golden hair was growing out sprinkled with gray . 
Alas ! 
how illness improvises old-age ! 
At mid-day the physician returned , gave some directions , inquired whether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary , and shook his head . 
M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o'clock . 
As exactness is kindness , he was exact . 
About half-past two , Fantine began to be restless . 
In the course of twenty minutes , she asked the nun more than ten times , `` What time is it , sister ? '' 
Three o'clock struck . 
At the third stroke , Fantine sat up in bed ; she who could , in general , hardly turn over , joined her yellow , fleshless hands in a sort of convulsive clasp , and the nun heard her utter one of those profound sighs which seem to throw off dejection . 
Then Fantine turned and looked at the door . 
No one entered ; the door did not open . 
She remained thus for a quarter of an hour , her eyes riveted on the door , motionless and apparently holding her breath . 
