Cosette had permission to pass an hour with him every day . 
As the sisters were melancholy and he was kind , the child made comparisons and adored him . 
At the appointed hour she flew to the hut . 
When she entered the lowly cabin , she filled it with paradise . 
Jean Valjean blossomed out and felt his happiness increase with the happiness which he afforded Cosette . 
The joy which we inspire has this charming property , that , far from growing meagre , like all reflections , it returns to us more radiant than ever . 
At recreation hours , Jean Valjean watched her running and playing in the distance , and he distinguished her laugh from that of the rest . 
For Cosette laughed now . 
Cosette 's face had even undergone a change , to a certain extent . 
The gloom had disappeared from it . 
A smile is the same as sunshine ; it banishes winter from the human countenance . 
Recreation over , when Cosette went into the house again , Jean Valjean gazed at the windows of her class-room , and at night he rose to look at the windows of her dormitory . 
God has his own ways , moreover ; the convent contributed , like Cosette , to uphold and complete the Bishop 's work in Jean Valjean . 
It is certain that virtue adjoins pride on one side . 
A bridge built by the devil exists there . 
Jean Valjean had been , unconsciously , perhaps , tolerably near that side and that bridge , when Providence cast his lot in the convent of the Petit-Picpus ; so long as he had compared himself only to the Bishop , he had regarded himself as unworthy and had remained humble ; but for some time past he had been comparing himself to men in general , and pride was beginning to spring up . 
Who knows ? 
He might have ended by returning very gradually to hatred . 
The convent stopped him on that downward path . 
This was the second place of captivity which he had seen . 
In his youth , in what had been for him the beginning of his life , and later on , quite recently again , he had beheld another , -- a frightful place , a terrible place , whose severities had always appeared to him the iniquity of justice , and the crime of the law . 
Now , after the galleys , he saw the cloister ; and when he meditated how he had formed a part of the galleys , and that he now , so to speak , was a spectator of the cloister , he confronted the two in his own mind with anxiety . 
Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe , and slowly descended the endless spirals of revery . 
He recalled his former companions : how wretched they were ; they rose at dawn , and toiled until night ; hardly were they permitted to sleep ; they lay on camp beds , where nothing was tolerated but mattresses two inches thick , in rooms which were heated only in the very harshest months of the year ; they were clothed in frightful red blouses ; they were allowed , as a great favor , linen trousers in the hottest weather , and a woollen carter 's blouse on their backs when it was very cold ; they drank no wine , and ate no meat , except when they went on `` fatigue duty . '' 
They lived nameless , designated only by numbers , and converted , after a manner , into ciphers themselves , with downcast eyes , with lowered voices , with shorn heads , beneath the cudgel and in disgrace . 
Then his mind reverted to the beings whom he had under his eyes . 
These beings also lived with shorn heads , with downcast eyes , with lowered voices , not in disgrace , but amid the scoffs of the world , not with their backs bruised with the cudgel , but with their shoulders lacerated with their discipline . 
Their names , also , had vanished from among men ; they no longer existed except under austere appellations . 
They never ate meat and they never drank wine ; they often remained until evening without food ; they were attired , not in a red blouse , but in a black shroud , of woollen , which was heavy in summer and thin in winter , without the power to add or subtract anything from it ; without having even , according to the season , the resource of the linen garment or the woollen cloak ; and for six months in the year they wore serge chemises which gave them fever . 
They dwelt , not in rooms warmed only during rigorous cold , but in cells where no fire was ever lighted ; they slept , not on mattresses two inches thick , but on straw . 
And finally , they were not even allowed their sleep ; every night , after a day of toil , they were obliged , in the weariness of their first slumber , at the moment when they were falling sound asleep and beginning to get warm , to rouse themselves , to rise and to go and pray in an ice-cold and gloomy chapel , with their knees on the stones . 
On certain days each of these beings in turn had to remain for twelve successive hours in a kneeling posture , or prostrate , with face upon the pavement , and arms outstretched in the form of a cross . 
The others were men ; these were women . 
What had those men done ? 
They had stolen , violated , pillaged , murdered , assassinated . 
They were bandits , counterfeiters , poisoners , incendiaries , murderers , parricides . 
What had these women done ? 
They had done nothing whatever . 
On the one hand , highway robbery , fraud , deceit , violence , sensuality , homicide , all sorts of sacrilege , every variety of crime ; on the other , one thing only , innocence . 
Perfect innocence , almost caught up into heaven in a mysterious assumption , attached to the earth by virtue , already possessing something of heaven through holiness . 
On the one hand , confidences over crimes , which are exchanged in whispers ; on the other , the confession of faults made aloud . 
And what crimes ! 
And what faults ! 
On the one hand , miasms ; on the other , an ineffable perfume . 
On the one hand , a moral pest , guarded from sight , penned up under the range of cannon , and literally devouring its plague-stricken victims ; on the other , the chaste flame of all souls on the same hearth . 
There , darkness ; here , the shadow ; but a shadow filled with gleams of light , and of gleams full of radiance . 
Two strongholds of slavery ; but in the first , deliverance possible , a legal limit always in sight , and then , escape . 
In the second , perpetuity ; the sole hope , at the distant extremity of the future , that faint light of liberty which men call death . 
In the first , men are bound only with chains ; in the other , chained by faith . 
What flowed from the first ? 
