It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Chatelet of Paris that comes the melancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley : `` Timaloumisaine , timaloumison . '' 
The majority of these Icicaille est la theatre Here is the theatre Du petit dardant . 
Of the little archer -LRB- Cupid -RRB- . 
Do what you will , you can not annihilate that eternal relic in the heart of man , love . 
In this world of dismal deeds , people keep their secrets . 
The secret is the thing above all others . 
The secret , in the eyes of these wretches , is unity which serves as a base of union . 
To betray a secret is to tear from each member of this fierce community something of his own personality . 
To inform against , in the energetic slang dialect , is called : `` to eat the bit . '' 
As though the informer drew to himself a little of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit of each one 's flesh . 
What does it signify to receive a box on the ear ? 
Commonplace metaphor replies : `` It is to see thirty-six candles . '' 
Here slang intervenes and takes it up : Candle , camoufle . 
Thereupon , the ordinary tongue gives camouflet -LSB- 42 -RSB- as the synonym for soufflet . 
Thus , by a sort of infiltration from below upwards , with the aid of metaphor , that incalculable , trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the Academy ; and Poulailler saying : `` I light my camoufle , '' causes Voltaire to write : `` Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred camouflets . '' 
-LSB- 42 -RSB- Smoke puffed in the face of a person asleep . 
Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step . 
Study and investigation of this strange idiom lead to the mysterious point of intersection of regular society with society which is accursed . 
The thief also has his food for cannon , stealable matter , you , I , whoever passes by ; le pantre . 
-LRB- Pan , everybody . -RRB- 
Slang is language turned convict . 
That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low , that it can be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality , that it can be bound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss , is sufficient to create consternation . 
Oh , poor thought of miserable wretches ! 
Alas ! 
will no one come to the succor of the human soul in that darkness ? 
Is it her destiny there to await forever the mind , the liberator , the immense rider of Pegasi and hippo-griffs , the combatant of heroes of the dawn who shall descend from the azure between two wings , the radiant knight of the future ? 
Will she forever summon in vain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal ? 
Is she condemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density of the gulf , and to catch glimpses , nearer and nearer at hand , beneath the hideous water of that dragon 's head , that maw streaked with foam , and that writhing undulation of claws , swellings , and rings ? 
Must it remain there , without a gleam of light , without hope , given over to that terrible approach , vaguely scented out by the monster , shuddering , dishevelled , wringing its arms , forever chained to the rock of night , a sombre Andromeda white and naked amid the shadows ! 
SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS As the reader perceives , slang in its entirety , slang of four hundred years ago , like the slang of to-day , is permeated with that sombre , symbolical spirit which gives to all words a mien which is now mournful , now menacing . 
One feels in it the wild and ancient sadness of those vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packs of their own , some of which have come down to us . 
The eight of clubs , for instance , represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous trefoil leaves , a sort of fantastic personification of the forest . 
At the foot of this tree a fire was burning , over which three hares were roasting a huntsman on a spit , and behind him , on another fire , hung a steaming pot , whence emerged the head of a dog . 
Nothing can be more melancholy than these reprisals in painting , by a pack of cards , in the presence of stakes for the roasting of smugglers and of the cauldron for the boiling of counterfeiters . 
The diverse forms assumed by thought in the realm of slang , even song , even raillery , even menace , all partook of this powerless and dejected character . 
All the songs , the melodies of some of which have been collected , were humble and lamentable to the point of evoking tears . 
The pegre is always the poor pegre , and he is always the hare in hiding , the fugitive mouse , the flying bird . 
He hardly complains , he contents himself with sighing ; one of his moans has come down to us : `` I do not understand how God , the father of men , can torture his children and his grandchildren and hear them cry , without himself suffering torture . '' 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- The wretch , whenever he has time to think , makes himself small before the low , and frail in the presence of society ; he lies down flat on his face , he entreats , he appeals to the side of compassion ; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt . 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- Je n'entrave que le dail comment meck , le daron des orgues , peut atiger ses momes et ses momignards et les locher criblant sans etre agite lui-meme . 
Towards the middle of the last century a change took place , prison songs and thieves ' ritournelles assumed , so to speak , an insolent and jovial mien . 
The plaintive malure was replaced by the larifla . 
We find in the eighteenth century , in nearly all the songs of the galleys and prisons , a diabolical and enigmatical gayety . 
We hear this strident and lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a phosphorescent gleam , and which seems to have been flung into the forest by a will-o ' - the-wisp playing the fife : -- Miralabi suslababo Mirliton ribonribette Surlababi mirlababo Mirliton ribonribo . 
This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a man 's throat . 
A serious symptom . 
In the eighteenth century , the ancient melancholy of the dejected classes vanishes . 
They began to laugh . 
They rally the grand meg and the grand dab . 
Given Louis XV . 
