Their great stature and their vast fists rendered them no less alarming than did their sinister stride through the darkness . 
One would have pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois . 
They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group , like men in consultation . 
They had an air of indecision . 
The one who appeared to be their leader turned round and pointed hastily with his right hand in the direction which Jean Valjean had taken ; another seemed to indicate the contrary direction with considerable obstinacy . 
At the moment when the first man wheeled round , the moon fell full in his face . 
Jean Valjean recognized Javert perfectly . 
IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D'AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean : fortunately it still lasted for the men . 
He took advantage of their hesitation . 
It was time lost for them , but gained for him . 
He slipped from under the gate where he had concealed himself , and went down the Rue des Postes , towards the region of the Jardin des Plantes . 
Cosette was beginning to be tired . 
He took her in his arms and carried her . 
There were no passers-by , and the street lanterns had not been lighted on account of there being a moon . 
He redoubled his pace . 
In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries , on the front of which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient inscription : -- De Goblet fils c'est ici la fabrique ; -LSB- 14 -RSB- Venez choisir des cruches et des broos , Des pots a fleurs , des tuyaux , de la brique . 
A tout venant le Coeur vend des Carreaux . 
-LSB- 14 -RSB- This is the factory of Goblet Junior : Come choose your jugs and crocks , Flower-pots , pipes , bricks . 
The Heart sells Diamonds to every comer . 
He left behind him the Rue de la Clef , then the Fountain Saint-Victor , skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets , and reached the quay . 
There he turned round . 
The quay was deserted . 
The streets were deserted . 
There was no one behind him . 
He drew a long breath . 
He gained the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Tolls were still collected there at that epoch . 
He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou . 
`` It is two sous , '' said the old soldier in charge of the bridge . 
`` You are carrying a child who can walk . 
Pay for two . '' 
He paid , vexed that his passage should have aroused remark . 
Every flight should be an imperceptible slipping away . 
A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself , and on its way , like him , to the right bank . 
This was of use to him . 
He could traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart . 
Towards the middle of the Bridge , Cosette , whose feet were benumbed , wanted to walk . 
He set her on the ground and took her hand again . 
The bridge once crossed , he perceived some timber-yards on his right . 
He directed his course thither . 
In order to reach them , it was necessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered and illuminated space . 
He did not hesitate . 
Those who were on his track had evidently lost the scent , and Jean Valjean believed himself to be out of danger . 
Hunted , yes ; followed , no . 
A little street , the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , opened out between two timber-yards enclosed in walls . 
This street was dark and narrow and seemed made expressly for him . 
Before entering it he cast a glance behind him , From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Four shadows were just entering on the bridge . 
These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and were on their way to the right bank . 
These four shadows were the four men . 
