This Boulatruelle was a man who was viewed with disfavor by the inhabitants of the district as too respectful , too humble , too prompt in removing his cap to every one , and trembling and smiling in the presence of the gendarmes , -- probably affiliated to robber bands , they said ; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of copses at nightfall . 
The only thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard . 
This is what people thought they had noticed : -- Of late , Boulatruelle had taken to quitting his task of stone-breaking and care of the road at a very early hour , and to betaking himself to the forest with his pickaxe . 
He was encountered towards evening in the most deserted clearings , in the wildest thickets ; and he had the appearance of being in search of something , and sometimes he was digging holes . 
The goodwives who passed took him at first for Beelzebub ; then they recognized Boulatruelle , and were not in the least reassured thereby . 
These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a lively displeasure . 
It was evident that he sought to hide , and that there was some mystery in what he was doing . 
It was said in the village : `` It is clear that the devil has appeared . 
Boulatruelle has seen him , and is on the search . 
In sooth , he is cunning enough to pocket Lucifer 's hoard . '' 
The Voltairians added , `` Will Boulatruelle catch the devil , or will the devil catch Boulatruelle ? '' 
The old women made a great many signs of the cross . 
In the meantime , Boulatruelle 's manoeuvres in the forest ceased ; and he resumed his regular occupation of roadmending ; and people gossiped of something else . 
Some persons , however , were still curious , surmising that in all this there was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends , but some fine windfall of a more serious and palpable sort than the devil 's bank-bills , and that the road-mender had half discovered the secret . 
The most `` puzzled '' were the school-master and Thenardier , the proprietor of the tavern , who was everybody 's friend , and had not disdained to ally himself with Boulatruelle . 
`` He has been in the galleys , '' said Thenardier . 
`` Eh ! 
Good God ! 
no one knows who has been there or will be there . '' 
One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the law would have instituted an inquiry as to what Boulatruelle did in the forest , and that the latter would have been forced to speak , and that he would have been put to the torture in case of need , and that Boulatruelle would not have resisted the water test , for example . 
`` Let us put him to the wine test , '' said Thenardier . 
They made an effort , and got the old road-mender to drinking . 
Boulatruelle drank an enormous amount , but said very little . 
He combined with admirable art , and in masterly proportions , the thirst of a gormandizer with the discretion of a judge . 
Nevertheless , by dint of returning to the charge and of comparing and putting together the few obscure words which he did allow to escape him , this is what Thenardier and the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out : -- One morning , when Boulatruelle was on his way to his work , at daybreak , he had been surprised to see , at a nook of the forest in the underbrush , a shovel and a pickaxe , concealed , as one might say . 
However , he might have supposed that they were probably the shovel and pick of Father Six-Fours , the water-carrier , and would have thought no more about it . 
But , on the evening of that day , he saw , without being seen himself , as he was hidden by a large tree , `` a person who did not belong in those parts , and whom he , Boulatruelle , knew well , '' directing his steps towards the densest part of the wood . 
Translation by Thenardier : A comrade of the galleys . 
Boulatruelle obstinately refused to reveal his name . 
This person carried a package -- something square , like a large box or a small trunk . 
Surprise on the part of Boulatruelle . 
However , it was only after the expiration of seven or eight minutes that the idea of following that `` person '' had occurred to him . 
But it was too late ; the person was already in the thicket , night had descended , and Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him . 
Then he had adopted the course of watching for him at the edge of the woods . 
`` It was moonlight . '' 
Two or three hours later , Boulatruelle had seen this person emerge from the brushwood , carrying no longer the coffer , but a shovel and pick . 
Boulatruelle had allowed the person to pass , and had not dreamed of accosting him , because he said to himself that the other man was three times as strong as he was , and armed with a pickaxe , and that he would probably knock him over the head on recognizing him , and on perceiving that he was recognized . 
Touching effusion of two old comrades on meeting again . 
But the shovel and pick had served as a ray of light to Boulatruelle ; he had hastened to the thicket in the morning , and had found neither shovel nor pick . 
From this he had drawn the inference that this person , once in the forest , had dug a hole with his pick , buried the coffer , and reclosed the hole with his shovel . 
Now , the coffer was too small to contain a body ; therefore it contained money . 
Hence his researches . 
Boulatruelle had explored , sounded , searched the entire forest and the thicket , and had dug wherever the earth appeared to him to have been recently turned up . 
In vain . 
He had `` ferreted out '' nothing . 
No one in Montfermeil thought any more about it . 
There were only a few brave gossips , who said , `` You may be certain that the mender on the Gagny road did not take all that trouble for nothing ; he was sure that the devil had come . '' 
THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORY MANIPULATION TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER Towards the end of October , in that same year , 1823 , the inhabitants of Toulon beheld the entry into their port , after heavy weather , and for the purpose of repairing some damages , of the ship Orion , which was employed later at Brest as a school-ship , and which then formed a part of the Mediterranean squadron . 
This vessel , battered as it was , -- for the sea had handled it roughly , -- produced a fine effect as it entered the roads . 
It flew some colors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns , which it returned , shot for shot ; total , twenty-two . 
