He resumed haughtily : `` Let those who are afraid of not numbering more than thirty say so . '' 
The murmurs redoubled . 
`` Besides , '' observed a voice in one group , `` it is easy enough to talk about leaving . 
The barricade is hemmed in . '' 
`` Not on the side of the Halles , '' said Enjolras . 
`` The Rue Mondetour is free , and through the Rue des Precheurs one can reach the Marche des Innocents . '' 
`` And there , '' went on another voice , `` you would be captured . 
You would fall in with some grand guard of the line or the suburbs ; they will spy a man passing in blouse and cap . 
` Whence come you ? ' 
` Do n't you belong to the barricade ? ' 
And they will look at your hands . 
You smell of powder . 
Shot . '' 
Enjolras , without making any reply , touched Combeferre 's shoulder , and the two entered the tap-room . 
They emerged thence a moment later . 
Enjolras held in his outstretched hands the four uniforms which he had laid aside . 
Combeferre followed , carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos . 
`` With this uniform , '' said Enjolras , `` you can mingle with the ranks and escape ; here is enough for four . '' 
And he flung on the ground , deprived of its pavement , the four uniforms . 
No wavering took place in his stoical audience . 
Combeferre took the word . 
`` Come , said he , `` you must have a little pity . 
Do you know what the question is here ? 
It is a question of women . 
See here . 
Are there women or are there not ? 
Are there children or are there not ? 
Are there mothers , yes or no , who rock cradles with their foot and who have a lot of little ones around them ? 
Let that man of you who has never beheld a nurse 's breast raise his hand . 
Ah ! 
you want to get yourselves killed , so do I -- I , who am speaking to you ; but I do not want to feel the phantoms of women wreathing their arms around me . 
Die , if you will , but do n't make others die . 
Suicides like that which is on the brink of accomplishment here are sublime ; but suicide is narrow , and does not admit of extension ; and as soon as it touches your neighbors , suicide is murder . 
Think of the little blond heads ; think of the white locks . 
Listen , Enjolras has just told me that he saw at the corner of the Rue du Cygne a lighted casement , a candle in a poor window , on the fifth floor , and on the pane the quivering shadow of the head of an old woman , who had the air of having spent the night in watching . 
Perhaps she is the mother of some one of you . 
Well , let that man go , and make haste , to say to his mother : ` Here I am , mother ! ' 
Let him feel at ease , the task here will be performed all the same . 
When one supports one 's relatives by one 's toil , one has not the right to sacrifice one 's self . 
That is deserting one 's family . 
And those who have daughters ! 
what are you thinking of ? 
You get yourselves killed , you are dead , that is well . 
And tomorrow ? 
Young girls without bread -- that is a terrible thing . 
Man begs , woman sells . 
Ah ! 
those charming and gracious beings , so gracious and so sweet , who have bonnets of flowers , who fill the house with purity , who sing and prattle , who are like a living perfume , who prove the existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth , that Jeanne , that Lise , that Mimi , those adorable and honest creatures who are your blessings and your pride , ah ! 
good God , they will suffer hunger ! 
What do you want me to say to you ? 
