The glance has been so much abused in love romances that it has finally fallen into disrepute . 
One hardly dares to say , nowadays , that two beings fell in love because they looked at each other . 
That is the way people do fall in love , nevertheless , and the only way . 
The rest is nothing , but the rest comes afterwards . 
Nothing is more real than these great shocks which two souls convey to each other by the exchange of that spark . 
At that particular hour when Cosette unconsciously darted that glance which troubled Marius , Marius had no suspicion that he had also launched a look which disturbed Cosette . 
He caused her the same good and the same evil . 
She had been in the habit of seeing him for a long time , and she had scrutinized him as girls scrutinize and see , while looking elsewhere . 
Marius still considered Cosette ugly , when she had already begun to think Marius handsome . 
But as he paid no attention to her , the young man was nothing to her . 
Still , she could not refrain from saying to herself that he had beautiful hair , beautiful eyes , handsome teeth , a charming tone of voice when she heard him conversing with his comrades , that he held himself badly when he walked , if you like , but with a grace that was all his own , that he did not appear to be at all stupid , that his whole person was noble , gentle , simple , proud , and that , in short , though he seemed to be poor , yet his air was fine . 
On the day when their eyes met at last , and said to each other those first , obscure , and ineffable things which the glance lisps , Cosette did not immediately understand . 
She returned thoughtfully to the house in the Rue de l'Ouest , where Jean Valjean , according to his custom , had come to spend six weeks . 
The next morning , on waking , she thought of that strange young man , so long indifferent and icy , who now seemed to pay attention to her , and it did not appear to her that this attention was the least in the world agreeable to her . 
She was , on the contrary , somewhat incensed at this handsome and disdainful individual . 
A substratum of war stirred within her . 
It struck her , and the idea caused her a wholly childish joy , that she was going to take her revenge at last . 
Knowing that she was beautiful , she was thoroughly conscious , though in an indistinct fashion , that she possessed a weapon . 
Women play with their beauty as children do with a knife . 
They wound themselves . 
The reader will recall Marius ' hesitations , his palpitations , his terrors . 
He remained on his bench and did not approach . 
This vexed Cosette . 
One day , she said to Jean Valjean : `` Father , let us stroll about a little in that direction . '' 
Seeing that Marius did not come to her , she went to him . 
In such cases , all women resemble Mahomet . 
And then , strange to say , the first symptom of true love in a young man is timidity ; in a young girl it is boldness . 
This is surprising , and yet nothing is more simple . 
It is the two sexes tending to approach each other and assuming , each the other 's qualities . 
That day , Cosette 's glance drove Marius beside himself , and Marius ' glance set Cosette to trembling . 
Marius went away confident , and Cosette uneasy . 
From that day forth , they adored each other . 
The first thing that Cosette felt was a confused and profound melancholy . 
It seemed to her that her soul had become black since the day before . 
She no longer recognized it . 
The whiteness of soul in young girls , which is composed of coldness and gayety , resembles snow . 
It melts in love , which is its sun . 
Cosette did not know what love was . 
She had never heard the word uttered in its terrestrial sense . 
On the books of profane music which entered the convent , amour -LRB- love -RRB- was replaced by tambour -LRB- drum -RRB- or pandour . 
This created enigmas which exercised the imaginations of the big girls , such as : Ah , how delightful is the drum ! 
or , Pity is not a pandour . 
But Cosette had left the convent too early to have occupied herself much with the `` drum . '' 
Therefore , she did not know what name to give to what she now felt . 
Is any one the less ill because one does not know the name of one 's malady ? 
She loved with all the more passion because she loved ignorantly . 
She did not know whether it was a good thing or a bad thing , useful or dangerous , eternal or temporary , allowable or prohibited ; she loved . 
She would have been greatly astonished , had any one said to her : `` You do not sleep ? 
But that is forbidden ! 
You do not eat ? 
