When I say to you that I beg you to accept the dedication of my drama which I desire to make to you and of all those that I shall make , is to prove to you how great is my ambition to have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection , and of adorning my writings with your name . 
If you deign to honor me with the most modest offering , I shall immediately occupy myself in making a piesse of verse to pay you my tribute of gratitude . 
Which I shall endeavor to render this piesse as perfect as possible , will be sent to you before it is inserted at the beginning of the drama and delivered on the stage . 
To Monsieur and Madame Pabourgeot , My most respectful complements , Genflot , man of letters . 
P. S. Even if it is only forty sous . 
Excuse me for sending my daughter and not presenting myself , but sad motives connected with the toilet do not permit me , alas ! 
to go out . 
Finally , Marius opened the fourth letter . 
The address ran : To the benevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-haut-Pas . 
It contained the following lines : -- Benevolent Man : If you deign to accompany my daughter , you will behold a misserable calamity , and I will show you my certificates . 
At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be moved with a sentiment of obvious benevolence , for true philosophers always feel lively emotions . 
Admit , compassionate man , that it is necessary to suffer the most cruel need , and that it is very painful , for the sake of obtaining a little relief , to get oneself attested by the authorities as though one were not free to suffer and to die of inanition while waiting to have our misery relieved . 
Destinies are very fatal for several and too prodigal or too protecting for others . 
I await your presence or your offering , if you deign to make one , and I beseech you to accept the respectful sentiments with which I have the honor to be , truly magnanimous man , your very humble and very obedient servant , P. Fabantou , dramatic artist . 
After perusing these four letters , Marius did not find himself much further advanced than before . 
In the first place , not one of the signers gave his address . 
Then , they seemed to come from four different individuals , Don Alveras , Mistress Balizard , the poet Genflot , and dramatic artist Fabantou ; but the singular thing about these letters was , that all four were written by the same hand . 
What conclusion was to be drawn from this , except that they all come from the same person ? 
Moreover , and this rendered the conjecture all the more probable , the coarse and yellow paper was the same in all four , the odor of tobacco was the same , and , although an attempt had been made to vary the style , the same orthographical faults were reproduced with the greatest tranquillity , and the man of letters Genflot was no more exempt from them than the Spanish captain . 
It was waste of trouble to try to solve this petty mystery . 
Had it not been a chance find , it would have borne the air of a mystification . 
Marius was too melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well , and to lend himself to a game which the pavement of the street seemed desirous of playing with him . 
It seemed to him that he was playing the part of the blind man in blind man 's buff between the four letters , and that they were making sport of him . 
Nothing , however , indicated that these letters belonged to the two young girls whom Marius had met on the boulevard . 
After all , they were evidently papers of no value . 
Marius replaced them in their envelope , flung the whole into a corner and went to bed . 
About seven o'clock in the morning , he had just risen and breakfasted , and was trying to settle down to work , when there came a soft knock at his door . 
As he owned nothing , he never locked his door , unless occasionally , though very rarely , when he was engaged in some pressing work . 
Even when absent he left his key in the lock . 
`` You will be robbed , '' said Ma'am Bougon . 
`` Of what ? '' 
said Marius . 
The truth is , however , that he had , one day , been robbed of an old pair of boots , to the great triumph of Ma'am Bougon . 
There came a second knock , as gentle as the first . 
`` Come in , '' said Marius . 
The door opened . 
`` What do you want , Ma'am Bougon ? '' 
asked Marius , without raising his eyes from the books and manuscripts on his table . 
A voice which did not belong to Ma'am Bougon replied : -- `` Excuse me , sir -- '' It was a dull , broken , hoarse , strangled voice , the voice of an old man , roughened with brandy and liquor . 
Marius turned round hastily , and beheld a young girl . 
A ROSE IN MISERY A very young girl was standing in the half-open door . 
The dormer window of the garret , through which the light fell , was precisely opposite the door , and illuminated the figure with a wan light . 
She was a frail , emaciated , slender creature ; there was nothing but a chemise and a petticoat upon that chilled and shivering nakedness . 
Her girdle was a string , her head ribbon a string , her pointed shoulders emerged from her chemise , a blond and lymphatic pallor , earth-colored collar-bones , red hands , a half-open and degraded mouth , missing teeth , dull , bold , base eyes ; she had the form of a young girl who has missed her youth , and the look of a corrupt old woman ; fifty years mingled with fifteen ; one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible , and which cause those to shudder whom they do not cause to weep . 
Marius had risen , and was staring in a sort of stupor at this being , who was almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams . 
The most heart-breaking thing of all was , that this young girl had not come into the world to be homely . 
In her early childhood she must even have been pretty . 
The grace of her age was still struggling against the hideous , premature decrepitude of debauchery and poverty . 
The remains of beauty were dying away in that face of sixteen , like the pale sunlight which is extinguished under hideous clouds at dawn on a winter 's day . 
That face was not wholly unknown to Marius . 
