my poor children , you will not have a sou ! 
Your beautiful white hands , Madame la Baronne , will do the devil the honor of pulling him by the tail . '' 
-LSB- 64 -RSB- -LSB- 64 -RSB- Tirer le diable par la queue , `` to live from hand to mouth . '' 
At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say : `` Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousand francs . '' 
It was the voice of Jean Valjean . 
So far he had not uttered a single word , no one seemed to be aware that he was there , and he had remained standing erect and motionless , behind all these happy people . 
`` What has Mademoiselle Euphrasie to do with the question ? '' 
inquired the startled grandfather . 
`` I am she , '' replied Cosette . 
`` Six hundred thousand francs ? '' 
resumed M. Gillenormand . 
`` Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs , possibly , '' said Jean Valjean . 
And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormand had mistaken for a book . 
Jean Valjean himself opened the package ; it was a bundle of bank-notes . 
They were turned over and counted . 
There were five hundred notes for a thousand francs each , and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred . 
In all , five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs . 
`` This is a fine book , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
murmured the aunt . 
`` This arranges things well , does it not , Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior ? '' 
said the grandfather . 
`` That devil of a Marius has ferreted out the nest of a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams ! 
Just trust to the love affairs of young folks now , will you ! 
Students find studentesses with six hundred thousand francs . 
Cherubino works better than Rothschild . '' 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
repeated Mademoiselle Gillenormand , in a low tone . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four ! 
one might as well say six hundred thousand ! '' 
As for Marius and Cosette , they were gazing at each other while this was going on ; they hardly heeded this detail . 
DEPOSIT YOUR MONEY IN A FOREST RATHER THAN WITH A NOTARY The reader has , no doubt , understood , without necessitating a lengthy explanation , that Jean Valjean , after the Champmathieu affair , had been able , thanks to his first escape of a few days ' duration , to come to Paris and to withdraw in season , from the hands of Laffitte , the sum earned by him , under the name of Monsieur Madeleine , at Montreuil-sur-Mer ; and that fearing that he might be recaptured , -- which eventually happened -- he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest of Montfermeil , in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom . 
The sum , six hundred and thirty thousand francs , all in bank-bills , was not very bulky , and was contained in a box ; only , in order to preserve the box from dampness , he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut shavings . 
In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures , the Bishop 's candlesticks . 
It will be remembered that he had carried off the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer . 
The man seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle , was Jean Valjean . 
Later on , every time that Jean Valjean needed money , he went to get it in the Blaru-bottom . 
Hence the absences which we have mentioned . 
He had a pickaxe somewhere in the heather , in a hiding-place known to himself alone . 
When he beheld Marius convalescent , feeling that the hour was at hand , when that money might prove of service , he had gone to get it ; it was he again , whom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods , but on this occasion , in the morning instead of in the evening . 
Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe . 
The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand , five hundred francs . 
Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself . 
-- `` We shall see hereafter , '' he thought . 
The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand francs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten years , from 1823 to 1833 . 
The five years of his stay in the convent had cost only five thousand francs . 
Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece , where they glittered to the great admiration of Toussaint . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert . 
The story had been told in his presence , and he had verified the fact in the Moniteur , how a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned under a boat belonging to some laundresses , between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf , and that a writing left by this man , otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors , pointed to a fit of mental aberration and a suicide . 
-- `` In fact , '' thought Jean Valjean , `` since he left me at liberty , once having got me in his power , he must have been already mad . '' 
