this broken brazier ! 
this cracked pot ! 
Give all ! 
cast away all ! 
Push this roll , dig , dismantle , overturn , ruin everything ! 
It was the collaboration of the pavement , the block of stone , the beam , the bar of iron , the rag , the scrap , the broken pane , the unseated chair , the cabbage-stalk , the tatter , the rag , and the malediction . 
It was grand and it was petty . 
It was the abyss parodied on the public place by hubbub . 
The mass beside the atom ; the strip of ruined wall and the broken bowl , -- threatening fraternization of every sort of rubbish . 
Sisyphus had thrown his rock there and Job his potsherd . 
Terrible , in short . 
It was the acropolis of the barefooted . 
Overturned carts broke the uniformity of the slope ; an immense dray was spread out there crossways , its axle pointing heavenward , and seemed a scar on that tumultuous facade ; an omnibus hoisted gayly , by main force , to the very summit of the heap , as though the architects of this bit of savagery had wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror , presented its horseless , unharnessed pole to no one knows what horses of the air . 
This gigantic heap , the alluvium of the revolt , figured to the mind an Ossa on Pelion of all revolutions ; '93 on ' 89 , the 9th of Thermidor on the 10th of August , the 18th of Brumaire on the 11th of January , Vendemiaire on Prairial , 1848 on 1830 . 
The situation deserved the trouble and this barricade was worthy to figure on the very spot whence the Bastille had disappeared . 
If the ocean made dikes , it is thus that it would build . 
The fury of the flood was stamped upon this shapeless mass . 
What flood ? 
The crowd . 
One thought one beheld hubbub petrified . 
One thought one heard humming above this barricade as though there had been over their hive , enormous , dark bees of violent progress . 
Was it a thicket ? 
Was it a bacchanalia ? 
Was it a fortress ? 
Vertigo seemed to have constructed it with blows of its wings . 
There was something of the cess-pool in that redoubt and something Olympian in that confusion . 
One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair , the rafters of roofs , bits of garret windows with their figured paper , window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins awaiting the cannon , wrecks of chimneys , cupboards , tables , benches , howling topsyturveydom , and those thousand poverty-stricken things , the very refuse of the mendicant , which contain at the same time fury and nothingness . 
One would have said that it was the tatters of a people , rags of wood , of iron , of bronze , of stone , and that the Faubourg Saint Antoine had thrust it there at its door , with a colossal flourish of the broom making of its misery its barricade . 
Blocks resembling headsman 's blocks , dislocated chains , pieces of woodwork with brackets having the form of gibbets , horizontal wheels projecting from the rubbish , amalgamated with this edifice of anarchy the sombre figure of the old tortures endured by the people . 
The barricade Saint Antoine converted everything into a weapon ; everything that civil war could throw at the head of society proceeded thence ; it was not combat , it was a paroxysm ; the carbines which defended this redoubt , among which there were some blunderbusses , sent bits of earthenware bones , coat-buttons , even the casters from night-stands , dangerous projectiles on account of the brass . 
This barricade was furious ; it hurled to the clouds an inexpressible clamor ; at certain moments , when provoking the army , it was covered with throngs and tempest ; a tumultuous crowd of flaming heads crowned it ; a swarm filled it ; it had a thorny crest of guns , of sabres , of cudgels , of axes , of pikes and of bayonets ; a vast red flag flapped in the wind ; shouts of command , songs of attack , the roll of drums , the sobs of women and bursts of gloomy laughter from the starving were to be heard there . 
It was huge and living , and , like the back of an electric beast , there proceeded from it little flashes of lightning . 
The spirit of revolution covered with its cloud this summit where rumbled that voice of the people which resembles the voice of God ; a strange majesty was emitted by this titanic basket of rubbish . 
It was a heap of filth and it was Sinai . 
As we have said previously , it attacked in the name of the revolution -- what ? 
The revolution . 
It -- that barricade , chance , hazard , disorder , terror , misunderstanding , the unknown -- had facing it the Constituent Assembly , the sovereignty of the people , universal suffrage , the nation , the republic ; and it was the Carmagnole bidding defiance to the Marseillaise . 
Immense but heroic defiance , for the old faubourg is a hero . 
The faubourg and its redoubt lent each other assistance . 
The faubourg shouldered the redoubt , the redoubt took its stand under cover of the faubourg . 
The vast barricade spread out like a cliff against which the strategy of the African generals dashed itself . 
Its caverns , its excrescences , its warts , its gibbosities , grimaced , so to speak , and grinned beneath the smoke . 
The mitraille vanished in shapelessness ; the bombs plunged into it ; bullets only succeeded in making holes in it ; what was the use of cannonading chaos ? 
and the regiments , accustomed to the fiercest visions of war , gazed with uneasy eyes on that species of redoubt , a wild beast in its boar-like bristling and a mountain by its enormous size . 
A quarter of a league away , from the corner of the Rue du Temple which debouches on the boulevard near the Chateaud ` Eau , if one thrust one 's head bodily beyond the point formed by the front of the Dallemagne shop , one perceived in the distance , beyond the canal , in the street which mounts the slopes of Belleville at the culminating point of the rise , a strange wall reaching to the second story of the house fronts , a sort of hyphen between the houses on the right and the houses on the left , as though the street had folded back on itself its loftiest wall in order to close itself abruptly . 
This wall was built of paving-stones . 
It was straight , correct , cold , perpendicular , levelled with the square , laid out by rule and line . 
Cement was lacking , of course , but , as in the case of certain Roman walls , without interfering with its rigid architecture . 
The entablature was mathematically parallel with the base . 
From distance to distance , one could distinguish on the gray surface , almost invisible loopholes which resembled black threads . 
