They are giving themselves a sad malady ; they are inoculating themselves with the past . 
There is but one way of rejecting To-morrow , and that is to die . 
Now , no death , that of the body as late as possible , that of the soul never , -- this is what we desire . 
Yes , the enigma will utter its word , the sphinx will speak , the problem will be solved . 
Yes , the people , sketched out by the eighteenth century , will be finished by the nineteenth . 
He who doubts this is an idiot ! 
The future blossoming , the near blossoming forth of universal well-being , is a divinely fatal phenomenon . 
Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct them within a given time to a logical state , that is to say , to a state of equilibrium ; that is to say , to equity . 
A force composed of earth and heaven results from humanity and governs it ; this force is a worker of miracles ; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it than extraordinary vicissitudes . 
Aided by science , which comes from one man , and by the event , which comes from another , it is not greatly alarmed by these contradictions in the attitude of problems , which seem impossibilities to the vulgar herd . 
It is no less skilful at causing a solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas , than a lesson from the reconciliation of facts , and we may expect anything from that mysterious power of progress , which brought the Orient and the Occident face to face one fine day , in the depths of a sepulchre , and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte in the interior of the Great Pyramid . 
In the meantime , let there be no halt , no hesitation , no pause in the grandiose onward march of minds . 
Social philosophy consists essentially in science and peace . 
Its object is , and its result must be , to dissolve wrath by the study of antagonisms . 
It examines , it scrutinizes , it analyzes ; then it puts together once more , it proceeds by means of reduction , discarding all hatred . 
More than once , a society has been seen to give way before the wind which is let loose upon mankind ; history is full of the shipwrecks of nations and empires ; manners , customs , laws , religions , -- and some fine day that unknown force , the hurricane , passes by and bears them all away . 
The civilizations of India , of Chaldea , of Persia , of Syria , of Egypt , have disappeared one after the other . 
Why ? 
We know not . 
What are the causes of these disasters ? 
We do not know . 
Could these societies have been saved ? 
Was it their fault ? 
Did they persist in the fatal vice which destroyed them ? 
What is the amount of suicide in these terrible deaths of a nation and a race ? 
Questions to which there exists no reply . 
Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations . 
They sprung a leak , then they sank . 
We have nothing more to say ; and it is with a sort of terror that we look on , at the bottom of that sea which is called the past , behind those colossal waves , at the shipwreck of those immense vessels , Babylon , Nineveh , Tarsus , Thebes , Rome , beneath the fearful gusts which emerge from all the mouths of the shadows . 
But shadows are there , and light is here . 
We are not acquainted with the maladies of these ancient civilizations , we do not know the infirmities of our own . 
Everywhere upon it we have the right of light , we contemplate its beauties , we lay bare its defects . 
Where it is ill , we probe ; and the sickness once diagnosed , the study of the cause leads to the discovery of the remedy . 
Our civilization , the work of twenty centuries , is its law and its prodigy ; it is worth the trouble of saving . 
It will be saved . 
It is already much to have solaced it ; its enlightenment is yet another point . 
All the labors of modern social philosophies must converge towards this point . 
The thinker of to-day has a great duty -- to auscultate civilization . 
We repeat , that this auscultation brings encouragement ; it is by this persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages , an austere interlude in a mournful drama . 
Beneath the social mortality , we feel human imperishableness . 
The globe does not perish , because it has these wounds , craters , eruptions , sulphur pits , here and there , nor because of a volcano which ejects its pus . 
The maladies of the people do not kill man . 
And yet , any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes his head at times . 
The strongest , the tenderest , the most logical have their hours of weakness . 
Will the future arrive ? 
It seems as though we might almost put this question , when we behold so much terrible darkness . 
Melancholy face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched . 
On the part of the selfish , the prejudices , shadows of costly education , appetite increasing through intoxication , a giddiness of prosperity which dulls , a fear of suffering which , in some , goes as far as an aversion for the suffering , an implacable satisfaction , the I so swollen that it bars the soul ; on the side of the wretched covetousness , envy , hatred of seeing others enjoy , the profound impulses of the human beast towards assuaging its desires , hearts full of mist , sadness , need , fatality , impure and simple ignorance . 
Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven ? 
is the luminous point which we distinguish there one of those which vanish ? 
