Then M. Madeleine folded his arms , and said in a severe voice which no one in the town had heard hitherto : -- `` The matter to which you refer is one connected with the municipal police . 
According to the terms of articles nine , eleven , fifteen , and sixty-six of the code of criminal examination , I am the judge . 
I order that this woman shall be set at liberty . '' 
Javert ventured to make a final effort . 
`` But , Mr. Mayor -- '' `` I refer you to article eighty-one of the law of the 13th of December , 1799 , in regard to arbitrary detention . '' 
`` Monsieur le Maire , permit me -- '' `` Not another word . '' 
`` But -- '' `` Leave the room , '' said M. Madeleine . 
Javert received the blow erect , full in the face , in his breast , like a Russian soldier . 
He bowed to the very earth before the mayor and left the room . 
Fantine stood aside from the door and stared at him in amazement as he passed . 
Nevertheless , she also was the prey to a strange confusion . 
She had just seen herself a subject of dispute between two opposing powers . 
She had seen two men who held in their hands her liberty , her life , her soul , her child , in combat before her very eyes ; one of these men was drawing her towards darkness , the other was leading her back towards the light . 
In this conflict , viewed through the exaggerations of terror , these two men had appeared to her like two giants ; the one spoke like her demon , the other like her good angel . 
The angel had conquered the demon , and , strange to say , that which made her shudder from head to foot was the fact that this angel , this liberator , was the very man whom she abhorred , that mayor whom she had so long regarded as the author of all her woes , that Madeleine ! 
And at the very moment when she had insulted him in so hideous a fashion , he had saved her ! 
Had she , then , been mistaken ? 
Must she change her whole soul ? 
She did not know ; she trembled . 
She listened in bewilderment , she looked on in affright , and at every word uttered by M. Madeleine she felt the frightful shades of hatred crumble and melt within her , and something warm and ineffable , indescribable , which was both joy , confidence and love , dawn in her heart . 
When Javert had taken his departure , M. Madeleine turned to her and said to her in a deliberate voice , like a serious man who does not wish to weep and who finds some difficulty in speaking : -- `` I have heard you . 
I knew nothing about what you have mentioned . 
I believe that it is true , and I feel that it is true . 
I was even ignorant of the fact that you had left my shop . 
Why did you not apply to me ? 
But here ; I will pay your debts , I will send for your child , or you shall go to her . 
You shall live here , in Paris , or where you please . 
I undertake the care of your child and yourself . 
You shall not work any longer if you do not like . 
I will give all the money you require . 
You shall be honest and happy once more . 
And listen ! 
I declare to you that if all is as you say , -- and I do not doubt it , -- you have never ceased to be virtuous and holy in the sight of God . 
Oh ! 
poor woman . '' 
This was more than Fantine could bear . 
To have Cosette ! 
To leave this life of infamy . 
To live free , rich , happy , respectable with Cosette ; to see all these realities of paradise blossom of a sudden in the midst of her misery . 
She stared stupidly at this man who was talking to her , and could only give vent to two or three sobs , `` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
Her limbs gave way beneath her , she knelt in front of M. Madeleine , and before he could prevent her he felt her grasp his hand and press her lips to it . 
Then she fainted . 
THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he had established in his own house . 
He confided her to the sisters , who put her to bed . 
A burning fever had come on . 
She passed a part of the night in delirium and raving . 
At length , however , she fell asleep . 
On the morrow , towards midday , Fantine awoke . 
