Courfeyrac dragged a mattress off his bed , which was furnished with two , spread it out on the floor , and said : `` There . '' 
At seven o'clock on the following morning , Marius returned to the hovel , paid the quarter 's rent which he owed to Ma'am Bougon , had his books , his bed , his table , his commode , and his two chairs loaded on a hand-cart and went off without leaving his address , so that when Javert returned in the course of the morning , for the purpose of questioning Marius as to the events of the preceding evening , he found only Ma'am Bougon , who answered : `` Moved away ! '' 
Ma'am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accomplice of the robbers who had been seized the night before . 
`` Who would ever have said it ? '' 
she exclaimed to the portresses of the quarter , `` a young man like that , who had the air of a girl ! '' 
Marius had two reasons for this prompt change of residence . 
The first was , that he now had a horror of that house , where he had beheld , so close at hand , and in its most repulsive and most ferocious development , a social deformity which is , perhaps , even more terrible than the wicked rich man , the wicked poor man . 
The second was , that he did not wish to figure in the lawsuit which would insue in all probability , and be brought in to testify against Thenardier . 
Javert thought that the young man , whose name he had forgotten , was afraid , and had fled , or perhaps , had not even returned home at the time of the ambush ; he made some efforts to find him , however , but without success . 
A month passed , then another . 
Marius was still with Courfeyrac . 
He had learned from a young licentiate in law , an habitual frequenter of the courts , that Thenardier was in close confinement . 
Every Monday , Marius had five francs handed in to the clerk 's office of La Force for Thenardier . 
As Marius had no longer any money , he borrowed the five francs from Courfeyrac . 
It was the first time in his life that he had ever borrowed money . 
These periodical five francs were a double riddle to Courfeyrac who lent and to Thenardier who received them . 
`` To whom can they go ? '' 
thought Courfeyrac . 
`` Whence can this come to me ? '' 
Thenardier asked himself . 
Moreover , Marius was heart-broken . 
Everything had plunged through a trap-door once more . 
He no longer saw anything before him ; his life was again buried in mystery where he wandered fumblingly . 
He had for a moment beheld very close at hand , in that obscurity , the young girl whom he loved , the old man who seemed to be her father , those unknown beings , who were his only interest and his only hope in this world ; and , at the very moment when he thought himself on the point of grasping them , a gust had swept all these shadows away . 
Not a spark of certainty and truth had been emitted even in the most terrible of collisions . 
No conjecture was possible . 
He no longer knew even the name that he thought he knew . 
It certainly was not Ursule . 
And the Lark was a nickname . 
And what was he to think of the old man ? 
Was he actually in hiding from the police ? 
The white-haired workman whom Marius had encountered in the vicinity of the Invalides recurred to his mind . 
It now seemed probable that that workingman and M. Leblanc were one and the same person . 
So he disguised himself ? 
That man had his heroic and his equivocal sides . 
Why had he not called for help ? 
Why had he fled ? 
Was he , or was he not , the father of the young girl ? 
Was he , in short , the man whom Thenardier thought that he recognized ? 
Thenardier might have been mistaken . 
These formed so many insoluble problems . 
All this , it is true , detracted nothing from the angelic charms of the young girl of the Luxembourg . 
Heart-rending distress ; Marius bore a passion in his heart , and night over his eyes . 
He was thrust onward , he was drawn , and he could not stir . 
All had vanished , save love . 
Of love itself he had lost the instincts and the sudden illuminations . 
Ordinarily , this flame which burns us lights us also a little , and casts some useful gleams without . 
But Marius no longer even heard these mute counsels of passion . 
He never said to himself : `` What if I were to go to such a place ? 
What if I were to try such and such a thing ? '' 
