It was no small matter to reach that glade . 
By the beaten paths , which indulge in a thousand teasing zigzags , it required a good quarter of an hour . 
In a bee-line , through the underbrush , which is peculiarly dense , very thorny , and very aggressive in that locality , a full half hour was necessary . 
Boulatruelle committed the error of not comprehending this . 
He believed in the straight line ; a respectable optical illusion which ruins many a man . 
The thicket , bristling as it was , struck him as the best road . 
`` Let 's take to the wolves ' Rue de Rivoli , '' said he . 
Boulatruelle , accustomed to taking crooked courses , was on this occasion guilty of the fault of going straight . 
He flung himself resolutely into the tangle of undergrowth . 
He had to deal with holly bushes , nettles , hawthorns , eglantines , thistles , and very irascible brambles . 
He was much lacerated . 
At the bottom of the ravine he found water which he was obliged to traverse . 
At last he reached the Blaru-bottom , after the lapse of forty minutes , sweating , soaked , breathless , scratched , and ferocious . 
There was no one in the glade . 
Boulatruelle rushed to the heap of stones . 
It was in its place . 
It had not been carried off . 
As for the man , he had vanished in the forest . 
He had made his escape . 
Where ? 
in what direction ? 
into what thicket ? 
Impossible to guess . 
And , heartrending to say , there , behind the pile of stones , in front of the tree with the sheet of zinc , was freshly turned earth , a pick-axe , abandoned or forgotten , and a hole . 
The hole was empty . 
`` Thief ! '' 
shrieked Boulatruelle , shaking his fist at the horizon . 
MARIUS , EMERGING FROM CIVIL WAR , MAKES READY FOR DOMESTIC WAR For a long time , Marius was neither dead nor alive . 
For many weeks he lay in a fever accompanied by delirium , and by tolerably grave cerebral symptoms , caused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than by the wounds themselves . 
He repeated Cosette 's name for whole nights in the melancholy loquacity of fever , and with the sombre obstinacy of agony . 
The extent of some of the lesions presented a serious danger , the suppuration of large wounds being always liable to become re-absorbed , and consequently , to kill the sick man , under certain atmospheric conditions ; at every change of weather , at the slightest storm , the physician was uneasy . 
`` Above all things , '' he repeated , `` let the wounded man be subjected to no emotion . '' 
The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult , the fixation of apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having been invented as yet , at that epoch . 
Nicolette used up a sheet `` as big as the ceiling , '' as she put it , for lint . 
It was not without difficulty that the chloruretted lotions and the nitrate of silver overcame the gangrene . 
As long as there was any danger , M. Gillenormand , seated in despair at his grandson 's pillow , was , like Marius , neither alive nor dead . 
Every day , sometimes twice a day , a very well dressed gentleman with white hair , -- such was the description given by the porter , -- came to inquire about the wounded man , and left a large package of lint for the dressings . 
Finally , on the 7th of September , four months to a day , after the sorrowful night when he had been brought back to his grandfather in a dying condition , the doctor declared that he would answer for Marius . 
Convalescence began . 
But Marius was forced to remain for two months more stretched out on a long chair , on account of the results called up by the fracture of his collar-bone . 
There always is a last wound like that which will not close , and which prolongs the dressings indefinitely , to the great annoyance of the sick person . 
However , this long illness and this long convalescence saved him from all pursuit . 
In France , there is no wrath , not even of a public character , which six months will not extinguish . 
Revolts , in the present state of society , are so much the fault of every one , that they are followed by a certain necessity of shutting the eyes . 
Let us add , that the inexcusable Gisquet order , which enjoined doctors to lodge information against the wounded , having outraged public opinion , and not opinion alone , but the King first of all , the wounded were covered and protected by this indignation ; and , with the exception of those who had been made prisoners in the very act of combat , the councils of war did not dare to trouble any one . 
So Marius was left in peace . 
M. Gillenormand first passed through all manner of anguish , and then through every form of ecstasy . 
It was found difficult to prevent his passing every night beside the wounded man ; he had his big arm-chair carried to Marius ' bedside ; he required his daughter to take the finest linen in the house for compresses and bandages . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , like a sage and elderly person , contrived to spare the fine linen , while allowing the grandfather to think that he was obeyed . 
M. Gillenormand would not permit any one to explain to him , that for the preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse linen , nor new linen as old linen . 
