In the morning everything was dripping , in the afternoon everything is powdered over . 
Nothing is so worthy of admiration as foliage washed by the rain and wiped by the rays of sunlight ; it is warm freshness . 
The gardens and meadows , having water at their roots , and sun in their flowers , become perfuming-pans of incense , and smoke with all their odors at once . 
Everything smiles , sings and offers itself . 
One feels gently intoxicated . 
The springtime is a provisional paradise , the sun helps man to have patience . 
There are beings who demand nothing further ; mortals , who , having the azure of heaven , say : `` It is enough ! '' 
dreamers absorbed in the wonderful , dipping into the idolatry of nature , indifferent to good and evil , contemplators of cosmos and radiantly forgetful of man , who do not understand how people can occupy themselves with the hunger of these , and the thirst of those , with the nudity of the poor in winter , with the lymphatic curvature of the little spinal column , with the pallet , the attic , the dungeon , and the rags of shivering young girls , when they can dream beneath the trees ; peaceful and terrible spirits they , and pitilessly satisfied . 
Strange to say , the infinite suffices them . 
That great need of man , the finite , which admits of embrace , they ignore . 
The finite which admits of progress and sublime toil , they do not think about . 
The indefinite , which is born from the human and divine combination of the infinite and the finite , escapes them . 
Provided that they are face to face with immensity , they smile . 
Joy never , ecstasy forever . 
Their life lies in surrendering their personality in contemplation . 
The history of humanity is for them only a detailed plan . 
All is not there ; the true All remains without ; what is the use of busying oneself over that detail , man ? 
Man suffers , that is quite possible ; but look at Aldebaran rising ! 
The mother has no more milk , the new-born babe is dying . 
I know nothing about that , but just look at this wonderful rosette which a slice of wood-cells of the pine presents under the microscope ! 
Compare the most beautiful Mechlin lace to that if you can ! 
These thinkers forget to love . 
The zodiac thrives with them to such a point that it prevents their seeing the weeping child . 
God eclipses their souls . 
This is a family of minds which are , at once , great and petty . 
Horace was one of them ; so was Goethe . 
La Fontaine perhaps ; magnificent egoists of the infinite , tranquil spectators of sorrow , who do not behold Nero if the weather be fair , for whom the sun conceals the funeral pile , who would look on at an execution by the guillotine in the search for an effect of light , who hear neither the cry nor the sob , nor the death rattle , nor the alarm peal , for whom everything is well , since there is a month of May , who , so long as there are clouds of purple and gold above their heads , declare themselves content , and who are determined to be happy until the radiance of the stars and the songs of the birds are exhausted . 
These are dark radiances . 
They have no suspicion that they are to be pitied . 
Certainly they are so . 
He who does not weep does not see . 
They are to be admired and pitied , as one would both pity and admire a being at once night and day , without eyes beneath his lashes but with a star on his brow . 
The indifference of these thinkers , is , according to some , a superior philosophy . 
That may be ; but in this superiority there is some infirmity . 
One may be immortal and yet limp : witness Vulcan . 
One may be more than man and less than man . 
There is incomplete immensity in nature . 
Who knows whether the sun is not a blind man ? 
But then , what ? 
In whom can we trust ? 
Solem quis dicere falsum audeat ? 
Who shall dare to say that the sun is false ? 
Thus certain geniuses , themselves , certain Very-Lofty mortals , man-stars , may be mistaken ? 
That which is on high at the summit , at the crest , at the zenith , that which sends down so much light on the earth , sees but little , sees badly , sees not at all ? 
Is not this a desperate state of things ? 
No . 
But what is there , then , above the sun ? 
The god . 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , about eleven o'clock in the morning , the Luxembourg , solitary and depopulated , was charming . 
The quincunxes and flower-beds shed forth balm and dazzling beauty into the sunlight . 
