They set to knocking at that door with the butts of their guns , and with kicks , shouting , calling , entreating , wringing their hands . 
No one opened . 
From the little window on the third floor , the head of the dead man gazed down upon them . 
But Enjolras and Marius , and the seven or eight rallied about them , sprang forward and protected them . 
Enjolras had shouted to the soldiers : `` Do n't advance ! '' 
and as an officer had not obeyed , Enjolras had killed the officer . 
He was now in the little inner court of the redoubt , with his back planted against the Corinthe building , a sword in one hand , a rifle in the other , holding open the door of the wine-shop which he barred against assailants . 
He shouted to the desperate men : -- `` There is but one door open ; this one . '' 
-- And shielding them with his body , and facing an entire battalion alone , he made them pass in behind him . 
All precipitated themselves thither . 
Enjolras , executing with his rifle , which he now used like a cane , what single-stick players call a `` covered rose '' round his head , levelled the bayonets around and in front of him , and was the last to enter ; and then ensued a horrible moment , when the soldiers tried to make their way in , and the insurgents strove to bar them out . 
The door was slammed with such violence , that , as it fell back into its frame , it showed the five fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it , cut off and glued to the post . 
Marius remained outside . 
A shot had just broken his collar bone , he felt that he was fainting and falling . 
At that moment , with eyes already shut , he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him , and the swoon in which his senses vanished , hardly allowed him time for the thought , mingled with a last memory of Cosette : -- `` I am taken prisoner . 
I shall be shot . '' 
Enjolras , not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in the wine-shop , had the same idea . 
But they had reached a moment when each man has not the time to meditate on his own death . 
Enjolras fixed the bar across the door , and bolted it , and double-locked it with key and chain , while those outside were battering furiously at it , the soldiers with the butts of their muskets , the sappers with their axes . 
The assailants were grouped about that door . 
The siege of the wine-shop was now beginning . 
The soldiers , we will observe , were full of wrath . 
The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them , and then , a still more melancholy circumstance . 
during the few hours which had preceded the attack , it had been reported among them that the insurgents were mutilating their prisoners , and that there was the headless body of a soldier in the wine-shop . 
This sort of fatal rumor is the usual accompaniment of civil wars , and it was a false report of this kind which , later on , produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain . 
When the door was barricaded , Enjolras said to the others : `` Let us sell our lives dearly . '' 
Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche . 
Beneath the black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible , one large , the other small , and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the cold folds of the shroud . 
A hand projected from beneath the winding sheet and hung near the floor . 
It was that of the old man . 
Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand , just as he had kissed his brow on the preceding evening . 
These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of his life . 
Let us abridge the tale . 
The barricade had fought like a gate of Thebes ; the wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa . 
These resistances are dogged . 
No quarter . 
No flag of truce possible . 
Men are willing to die , provided their opponent will kill them . 
When Suchet says : -- `` Capitulate , '' -- Palafox replies : `` After the war with cannon , the war with knives . '' 
Nothing was lacking in the capture by assault of the Hucheloup wine-shop ; neither paving-stones raining from the windows and the roof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiers by crushing them horribly , nor shots fired from the attic-windows and the cellar , nor the fury of attack , nor , finally , when the door yielded , the frenzied madness of extermination . 
The assailants , rushing into the wine-shop , their feet entangled in the panels of the door which had been beaten in and flung on the ground , found not a single combatant there . 
The spiral staircase , hewn asunder with the axe , lay in the middle of the tap-room , a few wounded men were just breathing their last , every one who was not killed was on the first floor , and from there , through the hole in the ceiling , which had formed the entrance of the stairs , a terrific fire burst forth . 
It was the last of their cartridges . 
When they were exhausted , when these formidable men on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball , each grasped in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved , and of which we have spoken , and held the scaling party in check with these frightfully fragile clubs . 
They were bottles of aquafortis . 
We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred . 
The besieged man , alas ! 
converts everything into a weapon . 
Greek fire did not disgrace Archimedes , boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard . 
All war is a thing of terror , and there is no choice in it . 
