Barthelemy , thin , feeble , pale , taciturn , was a sort of tragic street urchin , who , having had his ears boxed by a policeman , lay in wait for him , and killed him , and at seventeen was sent to the galleys . 
He came out and made this barricade . 
Later on , fatal circumstance , in London , proscribed by all , Barthelemy slew Cournet . 
It was a funereal duel . 
Some time afterwards , caught in the gearing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passion plays a part , a catastrophe in which French justice sees extenuating circumstances , and in which English justice sees only death , Barthelemy was hanged . 
The sombre social construction is so made that , thanks to material destitution , thanks to moral obscurity , that unhappy being who possessed an intelligence , certainly firm , possibly great , began in France with the galleys , and ended in England with the gallows . 
Barthelemy , on occasion , flew but one flag , the black flag . 
WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE ABYSS IF ONE DOES NOT CONVERSE Sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection , and June , 1848 , knew a great deal more about it than June , 1832 . 
So the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline , and an embryo compared to the two colossal barricades which we have just sketched ; but it was formidable for that epoch . 
The insurgents under the eye of Enjolras , for Marius no longer looked after anything , had made good use of the night . 
The barricade had been not only repaired , but augmented . 
They had raised it two feet . 
Bars of iron planted in the pavement resembled lances in rest . 
All sorts of rubbish brought and added from all directions complicated the external confusion . 
The redoubt had been cleverly made over , into a wall on the inside and a thicket on the outside . 
The staircase of paving-stones which permitted one to mount it like the wall of a citadel had been reconstructed . 
The barricade had been put in order , the tap-room disencumbered , the kitchen appropriated for the ambulance , the dressing of the wounded completed , the powder scattered on the ground and on the tables had been gathered up , bullets run , cartridges manufactured , lint scraped , the fallen weapons re-distributed , the interior of the redoubt cleaned , the rubbish swept up , corpses removed . 
They laid the dead in a heap in the Mondetour lane , of which they were still the masters . 
The pavement was red for a long time at that spot . 
Among the dead there were four National Guardsmen of the suburbs . 
Enjolras had their uniforms laid aside . 
Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep . 
Advice from Enjolras was a command . 
Still , only three or four took advantage of it . 
Feuilly employed these two hours in engraving this inscription on the wall which faced the tavern : -- LONG LIVE THE PEOPLES ! 
These four words , hollowed out in the rough stone with a nail , could be still read on the wall in 1848 . 
The three women had profited by the respite of the night to vanish definitely ; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely . 
They had found means of taking refuge in some neighboring house . 
The greater part of the wounded were able , and wished , to fight still . 
On a litter of mattresses and trusses of straw in the kitchen , which had been converted into an ambulance , there were five men gravely wounded , two of whom were municipal guardsmen . 
The municipal guardsmen were attended to first . 
In the tap-room there remained only Mabeuf under his black cloth and Javert bound to his post . 
`` This is the hall of the dead , '' said Enjolras . 
In the interior of this hall , barely lighted by a candle at one end , the mortuary table being behind the post like a horizontal bar , a sort of vast , vague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone . 
The pole of the omnibus , although snapped off by the fusillade , was still sufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it . 
Enjolras , who possessed that quality of a leader , of always doing what he said , attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat of the old man 's . 
No repast had been possible . 
There was neither bread nor meat . 
The fifty men in the barricade had speedily exhausted the scanty provisions of the wine-shop during the sixteen hours which they had passed there . 
At a given moment , every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of la Meduse . 
They were obliged to resign themselves to hunger . 
They had then reached the first hours of that Spartan day of the 6th of June when , in the barricade Saint-Merry , Jeanne , surrounded by the insurgents who demanded bread , replied to all combatants crying : `` Something to eat ! '' 
with : `` Why ? 
It is three o'clock ; at four we shall be dead . '' 
As they could no longer eat , Enjolras forbade them to drink . 
He interdicted wine , and portioned out the brandy . 
They had found in the cellar fifteen full bottles hermetically sealed . 
Enjolras and Combeferre examined them . 
Combeferre when he came up again said : -- `` It 's the old stock of Father Hucheloup , who began business as a grocer . '' 
-- `` It must be real wine , '' observed Bossuet . 
