Javert , after his unlooked-for escape from the barricade , had betaken himself to the prefecture of police , had rendered a verbal account to the Prefect in person in a brief audience , had then immediately gone on duty again , which implied -- the note , the reader will recollect , which had been captured on his person -- a certain surveillance of the shore on the right bank of the Seine near the Champs-Elysees , which had , for some time past , aroused the attention of the police . 
There he had caught sight of Thenardier and had followed him . 
The reader knows the rest . 
Thus it will be easily understood that that grating , so obligingly opened to Jean Valjean , was a bit of cleverness on Thenardier 's part . 
Thenardier intuitively felt that Javert was still there ; the man spied upon has a scent which never deceives him ; it was necessary to fling a bone to that sleuth-hound . 
An assassin , what a godsend ! 
Such an opportunity must never be allowed to slip . 
Thenardier , by putting Jean Valjean outside in his stead , provided a prey for the police , forced them to relinquish his scent , made them forget him in a bigger adventure , repaid Javert for his waiting , which always flatters a spy , earned thirty francs , and counted with certainty , so far as he himself was concerned , on escaping with the aid of this diversion . 
Jean Valjean had fallen from one danger upon another . 
These two encounters , this falling one after the other , from Thenardier upon Javert , was a rude shock . 
Javert did not recognize Jean Valjean , who , as we have stated , no longer looked like himself . 
He did not unfold his arms , he made sure of his bludgeon in his fist , by an imperceptible movement , and said in a curt , calm voice : `` Who are you ? '' 
`` I. '' `` Who is ` I ' ? '' 
`` Jean Valjean . '' 
Javert thrust his bludgeon between his teeth , bent his knees , inclined his body , laid his two powerful hands on the shoulders of Jean Valjean , which were clamped within them as in a couple of vices , scrutinized him , and recognized him . 
Their faces almost touched . 
Javert 's look was terrible . 
Jean Valjean remained inert beneath Javert 's grasp , like a lion submitting to the claws of a lynx . 
`` Inspector Javert , '' said he , `` you have me in your power . 
Moreover , I have regarded myself as your prisoner ever since this morning . 
I did not give you my address with any intention of escaping from you . 
Take me . 
Only grant me one favor . '' 
Javert did not appear to hear him . 
He kept his eyes riveted on Jean Valjean . 
His chin being contracted , thrust his lips upwards towards his nose , a sign of savage revery . 
At length he released Jean Valjean , straightened himself stiffly up without bending , grasped his bludgeon again firmly , and , as though in a dream , he murmured rather than uttered this question : `` What are you doing here ? 
And who is this man ? '' 
He still abstained from addressing Jean Valjean as thou . 
Jean Valjean replied , and the sound of his voice appeared to rouse Javert : `` It is with regard to him that I desire to speak to you . 
Dispose of me as you see fit ; but first help me to carry him home . 
That is all that I ask of you . '' 
Javert 's face contracted as was always the case when any one seemed to think him capable of making a concession . 
Nevertheless , he did not say `` no . '' 
Again he bent over , drew from his pocket a handkerchief which he moistened in the water and with which he then wiped Marius ' blood-stained brow . 
`` This man was at the barricade , '' said he in a low voice and as though speaking to himself . 
`` He is the one they called Marius . '' 
A spy of the first quality , who had observed everything , listened to everything , and taken in everything , even when he thought that he was to die ; who had played the spy even in his agony , and who , with his elbows leaning on the first step of the sepulchre , had taken notes . 
He seized Marius ' hand and felt his pulse . 
`` He is wounded , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` He is a dead man , '' said Javert . 
Jean Valjean replied : `` No . 
Not yet . '' 
`` So you have brought him thither from the barricade ? '' 
remarked Javert . 
His preoccupation must indeed have been very profound for him not to insist on this alarming rescue through the sewer , and for him not to even notice Jean Valjean 's silence after his question . 
Jean Valjean , on his side , seemed to have but one thought . 
He resumed : `` He lives in the Marais , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , with his grandfather . 
I do not recollect his name . '' 
Jean Valjean fumbled in Marius ' coat , pulled out his pocket-book , opened it at the page which Marius had pencilled , and held it out to Javert . 
