Your grass is young and very hard to cut still . 
It 's terribly tender . 
It yields before the iron . '' 
Etc. . 
Cosette was in her usual place , seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen table near the chimney . 
She was in rags ; her bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes , and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting woollen stockings destined for the young Thenardiers . 
A very young kitten was playing about among the chairs . 
Laughter and chatter were audible in the adjoining room , from two fresh children 's voices : it was Eponine and Azelma . 
In the chimney-corner a cat-o ' - nine-tails was hanging on a nail . 
At intervals the cry of a very young child , which was somewhere in the house , rang through the noise of the dram-shop . 
It was a little boy who had been born to the Thenardiers during one of the preceding winters , -- `` she did not know why , '' she said , `` the result of the cold , '' -- and who was a little more than three years old . 
The mother had nursed him , but she did not love him . 
When the persistent clamor of the brat became too annoying , `` Your son is squalling , '' Thenardier would say ; `` do go and see what he wants . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
the mother would reply , `` he bothers me . '' 
And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark . 
TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS So far in this book the Thenardiers have been viewed only in profile ; the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple , and considering it under all its aspects . 
Thenardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday ; Madame Thenardier was approaching her forties , which is equivalent to fifty in a woman ; so that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife . 
Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this Thenardier woman , ever since her first appearance , -- tall , blond , red , fat , angular , square , enormous , and agile ; she belonged , as we have said , to the race of those colossal wild women , who contort themselves at fairs with paving-stones hanging from their hair . 
She did everything about the house , -- made the beds , did the washing , the cooking , and everything else . 
Cosette was her only servant ; a mouse in the service of an elephant . 
Everything trembled at the sound of her voice , -- window panes , furniture , and people . 
Her big face , dotted with red blotches , presented the appearance of a skimmer . 
She had a beard . 
She was an ideal market-porter dressed in woman 's clothes . 
She swore splendidly ; she boasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist . 
Except for the romances which she had read , and which made the affected lady peep through the ogress at times , in a very queer way , the idea would never have occurred to any one to say of her , `` That is a woman . '' 
This Thenardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on a fishwife . 
When one heard her speak , one said , `` That is a gendarme '' ; when one saw her drink , one said , `` That is a carter '' ; when one saw her handle Cosette , one said , `` That is the hangman . '' 
One of her teeth projected when her face was in repose . 
Thenardier was a small , thin , pale , angular , bony , feeble man , who had a sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy . 
His cunning began here ; he smiled habitually , by way of precaution , and was almost polite to everybody , even to the beggar to whom he refused half a farthing . 
He had the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters . 
He greatly resembled the portraits of the Abbe Delille . 
His coquetry consisted in drinking with the carters . 
No one had ever succeeded in rendering him drunk . 
He smoked a big pipe . 
He wore a blouse , and under his blouse an old black coat . 
He made pretensions to literature and to materialism . 
There were certain names which he often pronounced to support whatever things he might be saying , -- Voltaire , Raynal , Parny , and , singularly enough , Saint Augustine . 
He declared that he had `` a system . '' 
In addition , he was a great swindler . 
A filousophe -LSB- philosophe -RSB- , a scientific thief . 
The species does exist . 
It will be remembered that he pretended to have served in the army ; he was in the habit of relating with exuberance , how , being a sergeant in the 6th or the 9th light something or other , at Waterloo , he had alone , and in the presence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars , covered with his body and saved from death , in the midst of the grape-shot , `` a general , who had been dangerously wounded . '' 
Thence arose for his wall the flaring sign , and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood , of `` the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo . '' 
He was a liberal , a classic , and a Bonapartist . 
He had subscribed for the Champ d'Asile . 
It was said in the village that he had studied for the priesthood . 
We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper . 
