-LSB- 30 -RSB- A democrat . 
While Jondrette thus talked , with an apparent incoherence which detracted nothing from the thoughtful and sagacious expression of his physiognomy , Marius raised his eyes , and perceived at the other end of the room a person whom he had not seen before . 
A man had just entered , so softly that the door had not been heard to turn on its hinges . 
This man wore a violet knitted vest , which was old , worn , spotted , cut and gaping at every fold , wide trousers of cotton velvet , wooden shoes on his feet , no shirt , had his neck bare , his bare arms tattooed , and his face smeared with black . 
He had seated himself in silence on the nearest bed , and , as he was behind Jondrette , he could only be indistinctly seen . 
That sort of magnetic instinct which turns aside the gaze , caused M. Leblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius . 
He could not refrain from a gesture of surprise which did not escape Jondrette . 
`` Ah ! 
I see ! '' 
exclaimed Jondrette , buttoning up his coat with an air of complaisance , `` you are looking at your overcoat ? 
It fits me ! 
My faith , but it fits me ! '' 
`` Who is that man ? '' 
said M. Leblanc . 
`` Him ? '' 
ejaculated Jondrette , `` he 's a neighbor of mine . 
Do n't pay any attention to him . '' 
The neighbor was a singular-looking individual . 
However , manufactories of chemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Many of the workmen might have black faces . 
Besides this , M. Leblanc 's whole person was expressive of candid and intrepid confidence . 
He went on : -- `` Excuse me ; what were you saying , M. Fabantou ? '' 
`` I was telling you , sir , and dear protector , '' replied Jondrette placing his elbows on the table and contemplating M. Leblanc with steady and tender eyes , not unlike the eyes of the boa-constrictor , `` I was telling you , that I have a picture to sell . '' 
A slight sound came from the door . 
A second man had just entered and seated himself on the bed , behind Jondrette . 
Like the first , his arms were bare , and he had a mask of ink or lampblack . 
Although this man had , literally , glided into the room , he had not been able to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him . 
`` Do n't mind them , '' said Jondrette , `` they are people who belong in the house . 
So I was saying , that there remains in my possession a valuable picture . 
But stop , sir , take a look at it . '' 
He rose , went to the wall at the foot of which stood the panel which we have already mentioned , and turned it round , still leaving it supported against the wall . 
It really was something which resembled a picture , and which the candle illuminated , somewhat . 
Marius could make nothing out of it , as Jondrette stood between the picture and him ; he only saw a coarse daub , and a sort of principal personage colored with the harsh crudity of foreign canvasses and screen paintings . 
`` What is that ? '' 
asked M. Leblanc . 
Jondrette exclaimed : -- `` A painting by a master , a picture of great value , my benefactor ! 
I am as much attached to it as I am to my two daughters ; it recalls souvenirs to me ! 
But I have told you , and I will not take it back , that I am so wretched that I will part with it . '' 
Either by chance , or because he had begun to feel a dawning uneasiness , M. Leblanc 's glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examined the picture . 
There were now four men , three seated on the bed , one standing near the door-post , all four with bare arms and motionless , with faces smeared with black . 
One of those on the bed was leaning against the wall , with closed eyes , and it might have been supposed that he was asleep . 
He was old ; his white hair contrasting with his blackened face produced a horrible effect . 
The other two seemed to be young ; one wore a beard , the other wore his hair long . 
None of them had on shoes ; those who did not wear socks were barefooted . 
Jondrette noticed that M. Leblanc 's eye was fixed on these men . 
`` They are friends . 
They are neighbors , '' said he . 
`` Their faces are black because they work in charcoal . 
They are chimney-builders . 
Do n't trouble yourself about them , my benefactor , but buy my picture . 
