On the right , down stream , the bridge of Jena was discernible , on the left , upstream , the bridge of the Invalides ; the place would have been a propitious one in which to await the night and to escape . 
It was one of the most solitary points in Paris ; the shore which faces the Grand-Caillou . 
Flies were entering and emerging through the bars of the grating . 
It might have been half-past eight o'clock in the evening . 
The day was declining . 
Jean Valjean laid Marius down along the wall , on the dry portion of the vaulting , then he went to the grating and clenched both fists round the bars ; the shock which he gave it was frenzied , but it did not move . 
The grating did not stir . 
Jean Valjean seized the bars one after the other , in the hope that he might be able to tear away the least solid , and to make of it a lever wherewith to raise the door or to break the lock . 
Not a bar stirred . 
The teeth of a tiger are not more firmly fixed in their sockets . 
No lever ; no prying possible . 
The obstacle was invincible . 
There was no means of opening the gate . 
Must he then stop there ? 
What was he to do ? 
What was to become of him ? 
He had not the strength to retrace his steps , to recommence the journey which he had already taken . 
Besides , how was he to again traverse that quagmire whence he had only extricated himself as by a miracle ? 
And after the quagmire , was there not the police patrol , which assuredly could not be twice avoided ? 
And then , whither was he to go ? 
What direction should he pursue ? 
To follow the incline would not conduct him to his goal . 
If he were to reach another outlet , he would find it obstructed by a plug or a grating . 
Every outlet was , undoubtedly , closed in that manner . 
Chance had unsealed the grating through which he had entered , but it was evident that all the other sewer mouths were barred . 
He had only succeeded in escaping into a prison . 
All was over . 
Everything that Jean Valjean had done was useless . 
Exhaustion had ended in failure . 
They were both caught in the immense and gloomy web of death , and Jean Valjean felt the terrible spider running along those black strands and quivering in the shadows . 
He turned his back to the grating , and fell upon the pavement , hurled to earth rather than seated , close to Marius , who still made no movement , and with his head bent between his knees . 
This was the last drop of anguish . 
Of what was he thinking during this profound depression ? 
Neither of himself nor of Marius . 
He was thinking of Cosette . 
THE TORN COAT-TAIL In the midst of this prostration , a hand was laid on his shoulder , and a low voice said to him : `` Half shares . '' 
Some person in that gloom ? 
Nothing so closely resembles a dream as despair . 
Jean Valjean thought that he was dreaming . 
He had heard no footsteps . 
Was it possible ? 
He raised his eyes . 
A man stood before him . 
This man was clad in a blouse ; his feet were bare ; he held his shoes in his left hand ; he had evidently removed them in order to reach Jean Valjean , without allowing his steps to be heard . 
Jean Valjean did not hesitate for an instant . 
Unexpected as was this encounter , this man was known to him . 
The man was Thenardier . 
Although awakened , so to speak , with a start , Jean Valjean , accustomed to alarms , and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptly parried , instantly regained possession of his presence of mind . 
Moreover , the situation could not be made worse , a certain degree of distress is no longer capable of a crescendo , and Thenardier himself could add nothing to this blackness of this night . 
A momentary pause ensued . 
