Forget the Bishop ! 
Forget everything ! 
Destroy this Champmathieu , do ! 
That is right ! 
Applaud yourself ! 
So it is settled , resolved , fixed , agreed : here is an old man who does not know what is wanted of him , who has , perhaps , done nothing , an innocent man , whose whole misfortune lies in your name , upon whom your name weighs like a crime , who is about to be taken for you , who will be condemned , who will finish his days in abjectness and horror . 
That is good ! 
Be an honest man yourself ; remain Monsieur le Maire ; remain honorable and honored ; enrich the town ; nourish the indigent ; rear the orphan ; live happy , virtuous , and admired ; and , during this time , while you are here in the midst of joy and light , there will be a man who will wear your red blouse , who will bear your name in ignominy , and who will drag your chain in the galleys . 
Yes , it is well arranged thus . 
Ah , wretch ! '' 
The perspiration streamed from his brow . 
He fixed a haggard eye on the candlesticks . 
But that within him which had spoken had not finished . 
The voice continued : -- `` Jean Valjean , there will be around you many voices , which will make a great noise , which will talk very loud , and which will bless you , and only one which no one will hear , and which will curse you in the dark . 
Well ! 
listen , infamous man ! 
All those benedictions will fall back before they reach heaven , and only the malediction will ascend to God . '' 
This voice , feeble at first , and which had proceeded from the most obscure depths of his conscience , had gradually become startling and formidable , and he now heard it in his very ear . 
It seemed to him that it had detached itself from him , and that it was now speaking outside of him . 
He thought that he heard the last words so distinctly , that he glanced around the room in a sort of terror . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
he demanded aloud , in utter bewilderment . 
Then he resumed , with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot : -- `` How stupid I am ! 
There can be no one ! '' 
There was some one ; but the person who was there was of those whom the human eye can not see . 
He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece . 
Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp , which troubled the dreams of the sleeping man beneath him , and awoke him with a start . 
This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him . 
It sometimes seems , on supreme occasions , as though people moved about for the purpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounter by change of place . 
After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knew his position . 
He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which he had arrived in turn . 
The two ideas which counselled him appeared to him equally fatal . 
What a fatality ! 
What conjunction that that Champmathieu should have been taken for him ; to be overwhelmed by precisely the means which Providence seemed to have employed , at first , to strengthen his position ! 
There was a moment when he reflected on the future . 
Denounce himself , great God ! 
Deliver himself up ! 
With immense despair he faced all that he should be obliged to leave , all that he should be obliged to take up once more . 
He should have to bid farewell to that existence which was so good , so pure , so radiant , to the respect of all , to honor , to liberty . 
He should never more stroll in the fields ; he should never more hear the birds sing in the month of May ; he should never more bestow alms on the little children ; he should never more experience the sweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon him ; he should quit that house which he had built , that little chamber ! 
Everything seemed charming to him at that moment . 
Never again should he read those books ; never more should he write on that little table of white wood ; his old portress , the only servant whom he kept , would never more bring him his coffee in the morning . 
Great God ! 
instead of that , the convict gang , the iron necklet , the red waistcoat , the chain on his ankle , fatigue , the cell , the camp bed all those horrors which he knew so well ! 
At his age , after having been what he was ! 
If he were only young again ! 
but to be addressed in his old age as `` thou '' by any one who pleased ; to be searched by the convict-guard ; to receive the galley-sergeant 's cudgellings ; to wear iron-bound shoes on his bare feet ; to have to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of the roundsman who visits the gang ; to submit to the curiosity of strangers , who would be told : `` That man yonder is the famous Jean Valjean , who was mayor of M. sur M. '' ; and at night , dripping with perspiration , overwhelmed with lassitude , their green caps drawn over their eyes , to remount , two by two , the ladder staircase of the galleys beneath the sergeant 's whip . 
Oh , what misery ! 
Can destiny , then , be as malicious as an intelligent being , and become as monstrous as the human heart ? 
And do what he would , he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma which lay at the foundation of his revery : `` Should he remain in paradise and become a demon ? 
