He thought he was putting Marius on the right road , and that `` the child '' would yield . 
Marius shivered ; it was the denial of his father that was required of him ; he dropped his eyes and replied : -- `` No , sir . '' 
`` Then , '' exclaimed the old man impetuously , with a grief that was poignant and full of wrath , `` what do you want of me ? '' 
Marius clasped his hands , advanced a step , and said in a feeble and trembling voice : -- `` Sir , have pity on me . '' 
These words touched M. Gillenormand ; uttered a little sooner , they would have rendered him tender , but they came too late . 
The grandfather rose ; he supported himself with both hands on his cane ; his lips were white , his brow wavered , but his lofty form towered above Marius as he bowed . 
`` Pity on you , sir ! 
It is youth demanding pity of the old man of ninety-one ! 
You are entering into life , I am leaving it ; you go to the play , to balls , to the cafe , to the billiard-hall ; you have wit , you please the women , you are a handsome fellow ; as for me , I spit on my brands in the heart of summer ; you are rich with the only riches that are really such , I possess all the poverty of age ; infirmity , isolation ! 
You have your thirty-two teeth , a good digestion , bright eyes , strength , appetite , health , gayety , a forest of black hair ; I have no longer even white hair , I have lost my teeth , I am losing my legs , I am losing my memory ; there are three names of streets that I confound incessantly , the Rue Charlot , the Rue du Chaume , and the Rue Saint-Claude , that is what I have come to ; you have before you the whole future , full of sunshine , and I am beginning to lose my sight , so far am I advancing into the night ; you are in love , that is a matter of course , I am beloved by no one in all the world ; and you ask pity of me ! 
Parbleu ! 
Moliere forgot that . 
If that is the way you jest at the courthouse , Messieurs the lawyers , I sincerely compliment you . 
You are droll . '' 
And the octogenarian went on in a grave and angry voice : -- `` Come , now , what do you want of me ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , `` I know that my presence is displeasing to you , but I have come merely to ask one thing of you , and then I shall go away immediately . '' 
`` You are a fool ! '' 
said the old man . 
`` Who said that you were to go away ? '' 
This was the translation of the tender words which lay at the bottom of his heart : -- `` Ask my pardon ! 
Throw yourself on my neck ! '' 
M. Gillenormand felt that Marius would leave him in a few moments , that his harsh reception had repelled the lad , that his hardness was driving him away ; he said all this to himself , and it augmented his grief ; and as his grief was straightway converted into wrath , it increased his harshness . 
He would have liked to have Marius understand , and Marius did not understand , which made the goodman furious . 
He began again : -- `` What ! 
you deserted me , your grandfather , you left my house to go no one knows whither , you drove your aunt to despair , you went off , it is easily guessed , to lead a bachelor life ; it 's more convenient , to play the dandy , to come in at all hours , to amuse yourself ; you have given me no signs of life , you have contracted debts without even telling me to pay them , you have become a smasher of windows and a blusterer , and , at the end of four years , you come to me , and that is all you have to say to me ! '' 
This violent fashion of driving a grandson to tenderness was productive only of silence on the part of Marius . 
M. Gillenormand folded his arms ; a gesture which with him was peculiarly imperious , and apostrophized Marius bitterly : -- `` Let us make an end of this . 
You have come to ask something of me , you say ? 
Well , what ? 
What is it ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , with the look of a man who feels that he is falling over a precipice , `` I have come to ask your permission to marry . '' 
M. Gillenormand rang the bell . 
Basque opened the door half-way . 
`` Call my daughter . '' 
A second later , the door was opened once more , Mademoiselle Gillenormand did not enter , but showed herself ; Marius was standing , mute , with pendant arms and the face of a criminal ; M. Gillenormand was pacing back and forth in the room . 
He turned to his daughter and said to her : -- `` Nothing . 
It is Monsieur Marius . 
Say good day to him . 
Monsieur wishes to marry . 
That 's all . 
Go away . '' 
The curt , hoarse sound of the old man 's voice announced a strange degree of excitement . 
The aunt gazed at Marius with a frightened air , hardly appeared to recognize him , did not allow a gesture or a syllable to escape her , and disappeared at her father 's breath more swiftly than a straw before the hurricane . 
In the meantime , Father Gillenormand had returned and placed his back against the chimney-piece once more . 
`` You marry ! 
At one and twenty ! 
You have arranged that ! 
You have only a permission to ask ! 
a formality . 
