You 've broken up that gentleman a bit ; now you want to tuck him away somewhere . 
The river , that great hider of folly , is what you want . 
I 'll get you out of your scrape . 
Helping a good fellow in a pinch is what suits me to a hair . '' 
While expressing his approval of Jean Valjean 's silence , he endeavored to force him to talk . 
He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch a sight of his profile , and he exclaimed , without , however , raising his tone : `` Apropos of that quagmire , you 're a hearty animal . 
Why did n't you toss the man in there ? '' 
Jean Valjean preserved silence . 
Thenardier resumed , pushing the rag which served him as a cravat to the level of his Adam 's apple , a gesture which completes the capable air of a serious man : `` After all , you acted wisely . 
The workmen , when they come to-morrow to stop up that hole , would certainly have found the stiff abandoned there , and it might have been possible , thread by thread , straw by straw , to pick up the scent and reach you . 
Some one has passed through the sewer . 
Who ? 
Where did he get out ? 
Was he seen to come out ? 
The police are full of cleverness . 
The sewer is treacherous and tells tales of you . 
Such a find is a rarity , it attracts attention , very few people make use of the sewers for their affairs , while the river belongs to everybody . 
The river is the true grave . 
At the end of a month they fish up your man in the nets at Saint-Cloud . 
Well , what does one care for that ? 
It 's carrion ! 
Who killed that man ? 
Paris . 
And justice makes no inquiries . 
You have done well . '' 
The more loquacious Thenardier became , the more mute was Jean Valjean . 
Again Thenardier shook him by the shoulder . 
`` Now let 's settle this business . 
Let 's go shares . 
You have seen my key , show me your money . '' 
Thenardier was haggard , fierce , suspicious , rather menacing , yet amicable . 
There was one singular circumstance ; Thenardier 's manners were not simple ; he had not the air of being wholly at his ease ; while affecting an air of mystery , he spoke low ; from time to time he laid his finger on his mouth , and muttered , `` hush ! '' 
It was difficult to divine why . 
There was no one there except themselves . 
Jean Valjean thought that other ruffians might possibly be concealed in some nook , not very far off , and that Thenardier did not care to share with them . 
Thenardier resumed : `` Let 's settle up . 
How much did the stiff have in his bags ? '' 
Jean Valjean searched his pockets . 
It was his habit , as the reader will remember , to always have some money about him . 
The mournful life of expedients to which he had been condemned imposed this as a law upon him . 
On this occasion , however , he had been caught unprepared . 
When donning his uniform of a National Guardsman on the preceding evening , he had forgotten , dolefully absorbed as he was , to take his pocket-book . 
He had only some small change in his fob . 
He turned out his pocket , all soaked with ooze , and spread out on the banquette of the vault one louis d'or , two five-franc pieces , and five or six large sous . 
Thenardier thrust out his lower lip with a significant twist of the neck . 
`` You knocked him over cheap , '' said he . 
He set to feeling the pockets of Jean Valjean and Marius , with the greatest familiarity . 
Jean Valjean , who was chiefly concerned in keeping his back to the light , let him have his way . 
While handling Marius ' coat , Thenardier , with the skill of a pickpocket , and without being noticed by Jean Valjean , tore off a strip which he concealed under his blouse , probably thinking that this morsel of stuff might serve , later on , to identify the assassinated man and the assassin . 
However , he found no more than the thirty francs . 
