Indigestion is charged by the good God with preaching morality to stomachs . 
And remember this : each one of our passions , even love , has a stomach which must not be filled too full . 
In all things the word finis must be written in good season ; self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent ; the bolt must be drawn on appetite ; one must set one 's own fantasy to the violin , and carry one 's self to the post . 
The sage is the man who knows how , at a given moment , to effect his own arrest . 
Have some confidence in me , for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law , according to the verdict of my examinations , for I know the difference between the question put and the question pending , for I have sustained a thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quaestor of the Parricide ; because I am going to be a doctor , apparently it does not follow that it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile . 
I recommend you to moderation in your desires . 
It is true that my name is Felix Tholomyes ; I speak well . 
Happy is he who , when the hour strikes , takes a heroic resolve , and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes . '' 
Favourite listened with profound attention . 
`` Felix , '' said she , `` what a pretty word ! 
I love that name . 
It is Latin ; it means prosper . '' 
Tholomyes went on : -- `` Quirites , gentlemen , caballeros , my friends . 
Do you wish never to feel the prick , to do without the nuptial bed , and to brave love ? 
Nothing more simple . 
Here is the receipt : lemonade , excessive exercise , hard labor ; work yourself to death , drag blocks , sleep not , hold vigil , gorge yourself with nitrous beverages , and potions of nymphaeas ; drink emulsions of poppies and agnus castus ; season this with a strict diet , starve yourself , and add thereto cold baths , girdles of herbs , the application of a plate of lead , lotions made with the subacetate of lead , and fomentations of oxycrat . '' 
`` I prefer a woman , '' said Listolier . 
`` Woman , '' resumed Tholomyes ; `` distrust her . 
Woe to him who yields himself to the unstable heart of woman ! 
Woman is perfidious and disingenuous . 
She detests the serpent from professional jealousy . 
The serpent is the shop over the way . '' 
`` Tholomyes ! '' 
cried Blachevelle , `` you are drunk ! '' 
`` Pardieu , '' said Tholomyes . 
`` Then be gay , '' resumed Blachevelle . 
`` I agree to that , '' responded Tholomyes . 
And , refilling his glass , he rose . 
`` Glory to wine ! 
Nunc te , Bacche , canam ! 
Pardon me ladies ; that is Spanish . 
And the proof of it , senoras , is this : like people , like cask . 
The arrobe of Castile contains sixteen litres ; the cantaro of Alicante , twelve ; the almude of the Canaries , twenty-five ; the cuartin of the Balearic Isles , twenty-six ; the boot of Tzar Peter , thirty . 
Long live that Tzar who was great , and long live his boot , which was still greater ! 
Ladies , take the advice of a friend ; make a mistake in your neighbor if you see fit . 
The property of love is to err . 
A love affair is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an English serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing . 
It is not made for that ; it errs gayly , our gentle love . 
It has been said , error is human ; I say , error is love . 
Ladies , I idolize you all . 
O Zephine , O Josephine , face more than irregular , you would be charming were you not all askew . 
You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has sat down by mistake . 
As for Favourite , O nymphs and muses ! 
one day when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guerin-Boisseau , he espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up , which displayed her legs . 
This prologue pleased him , and Blachevelle fell in love . 
The one he loved was Favourite . 
O Favourite , thou hast Ionian lips . 
There was a Greek painter named Euphorion , who was surnamed the painter of the lips . 
That Greek alone would have been worthy to paint thy mouth . 
Listen ! 
