She seized the coin . 
`` Good ! '' 
said she , `` the sun is shining ! '' 
And , as though the sun had possessed the property of melting the avalanches of slang in her brain , she went on : -- `` Five francs ! 
the shiner ! 
a monarch ! 
in this hole ! 
Ai n't this fine ! 
You 're a jolly thief ! 
I 'm your humble servant ! 
Bravo for the good fellows ! 
Two days ' wine ! 
and meat ! 
and stew ! 
we 'll have a royal feast ! 
and a good fill ! '' 
She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders , made a low bow to Marius , then a familiar sign with her hand , and went towards the door , saying : -- `` Good morning , sir . 
It 's all right . 
I 'll go and find my old man . '' 
As she passed , she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode , which was moulding there amid the dust ; she flung herself upon it and bit into it , muttering : -- `` That 's good ! 
it 's hard ! 
it breaks my teeth ! '' 
Then she departed . 
A PROVIDENTIAL PEEP-HOLE Marius had lived for five years in poverty , in destitution , even in distress , but he now perceived that he had not known real misery . 
True misery he had but just had a view of . 
It was its spectre which had just passed before his eyes . 
In fact , he who has only beheld the misery of man has seen nothing ; the misery of woman is what he must see ; he who has seen only the misery of woman has seen nothing ; he must see the misery of the child . 
When a man has reached his last extremity , he has reached his last resources at the same time . 
Woe to the defenceless beings who surround him ! 
Work , wages , bread , fire , courage , good will , all fail him simultaneously . 
The light of day seems extinguished without , the moral light within ; in these shadows man encounters the feebleness of the woman and the child , and bends them violently to ignominy . 
Then all horrors become possible . 
Despair is surrounded with fragile partitions which all open on either vice or crime . 
Health , youth , honor , all the shy delicacies of the young body , the heart , virginity , modesty , that epidermis of the soul , are manipulated in sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources , which encounters opprobrium , and which accomodates itself to it . 
Fathers , mothers , children , brothers , sisters , men , women , daughters , adhere and become incorporated , almost like a mineral formation , in that dusky promiscuousness of sexes , relationships , ages , infamies , and innocences . 
They crouch , back to back , in a sort of hut of fate . 
They exchange woe-begone glances . 
Oh , the unfortunate wretches ! 
How pale they are ! 
How cold they are ! 
It seems as though they dwelt in a planet much further from the sun than ours . 
This young girl was to Marius a sort of messenger from the realm of sad shadows . 
She revealed to him a hideous side of the night . 
Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of revery and passion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors up to that day . 
The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement , which any one would have yielded to ; but he , Marius , should have done better than that . 
What ! 
only a wall separated him from those abandoned beings who lived gropingly in the dark outside the pale of the rest of the world , he was elbow to elbow with them , he was , in some sort , the last link of the human race which they touched , he heard them live , or rather , rattle in the death agony beside him , and he paid no heed to them ! 
Every day , every instant , he heard them walking on the other side of the wall , he heard them go , and come , and speak , and he did not even lend an ear ! 
And groans lay in those words , and he did not even listen to them , his thoughts were elsewhere , given up to dreams , to impossible radiances , to loves in the air , to follies ; and all the while , human creatures , his brothers in Jesus Christ , his brothers in the people , were agonizing in vain beside him ! 
He even formed a part of their misfortune , and he aggravated it . 
