The end of the world is come ! 
This is plainly the end of this miserable terraqueous globe ! 
A final hiccough was required , and France has emitted it . 
Deliberate , my rascals ! 
Such things will happen so long as they go and read the newspapers under the arcades of the Odeon . 
That costs them a sou , and their good sense , and their intelligence , and their heart and their soul , and their wits . 
They emerge thence , and decamp from their families . 
All newspapers are pests ; all , even the Drapeau Blanc ! 
At bottom , Martainville was a Jacobin . 
Ah ! 
just Heaven ! 
you may boast of having driven your grandfather to despair , that you may ! '' 
`` That is evident , '' said Theodule . 
And profiting by the fact that M. Gillenormand was taking breath , the lancer added in a magisterial manner : -- `` There should be no other newspaper than the Moniteur , and no other book than the Annuaire Militaire . '' 
M. Gillenormand continued : -- `` It is like their Sieyes ! 
A regicide ending in a senator ; for that is the way they always end . 
They give themselves a scar with the address of thou as citizens , in order to get themselves called , eventually , Monsieur le Comte . 
Monsieur le Comte as big as my arm , assassins of September . 
The philosopher Sieyes ! 
I will do myself the justice to say , that I have never had any better opinion of the philosophies of all those philosophers , than of the spectacles of the grimacer of Tivoli ! 
One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in mantles of violet velvet sown with bees , with hats a la Henri IV . 
They were hideous . 
One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger 's court . 
Citizens , I declare to you , that your progress is madness , that your humanity is a dream , that your revolution is a crime , that your republic is a monster , that your young and virgin France comes from the brothel , and I maintain it against all , whoever you may be , whether journalists , economists , legists , or even were you better judges of liberty , of equality , and fraternity than the knife of the guillotine ! 
And that I announce to you , my flne fellows ! '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
cried the lieutenant , `` that is wonderfully true . '' 
M. Gillenormand paused in a gesture which he had begun , wheeled round , stared Lancer Theodule intently in the eyes , and said to him : -- `` You are a fool . '' 
THE SOBRIQUET : MODE OF FORMATION OF FAMILY NAMES Marius was , at this epoch , a handsome young man , of medium stature , with thick and intensely black hair , a lofty and intelligent brow , well-opened and passionate nostrils , an air of calmness and sincerity , and with something indescribably proud , thoughtful , and innocent over his whole countenance . 
His profile , all of whose lines were rounded , without thereby losing their firmness , had a certain Germanic sweetness , which has made its way into the French physiognomy by way of Alsace and Lorraine , and that complete absence of angles which rendered the Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans , and which distinguishes the leonine from the aquiline race . 
He was at that period of life when the mind of men who think is composed , in nearly equal parts , of depth and ingenuousness . 
A grave situation being given , he had all that is required to be stupid : one more turn of the key , and he might be sublime . 
His manners were reserved , cold , polished , not very genial . 
As his mouth was charming , his lips the reddest , and his teeth the whitest in the world , his smile corrected the severity of his face , as a whole . 
At certain moments , that pure brow and that voluptuous smile presented a singular contrast . 
His eyes were small , but his glance was large . 
At the period of his most abject misery , he had observed that young girls turned round when he passed by , and he fled or hid , with death in his soul . 
He thought that they were staring at him because of his old clothes , and that they were laughing at them ; the fact is , that they stared at him because of his grace , and that they dreamed of him . 
This mute misunderstanding between him and the pretty passers-by had made him shy . 
He chose none of them for the excellent reason that he fled from all of them . 
He lived thus indefinitely , -- stupidly , as Courfeyrac said . 
Courfeyrac also said to him : `` Do not aspire to be venerable '' -LSB- they called each other thou ; it is the tendency of youthful friendships to slip into this mode of address -RSB- . 
`` Let me give you a piece of advice , my dear fellow . 
Do n't read so many books , and look a little more at the lasses . 
The jades have some good points about them , O Marius ! 
By dint of fleeing and blushing , you will become brutalized . '' 
On other occasions , Courfeyrac encountered him and said : -- `` Good morning , Monsieur l'Abbe ! '' 
When Courfeyrac had addressed to him some remark of this nature , Marius avoided women , both young and old , more than ever for a week to come , and he avoided Courfeyrac to boot . 
Nevertheless , there existed in all the immensity of creation , two women whom Marius did not flee , and to whom he paid no attention whatever . 
In truth , he would have been very much amazed if he had been informed that they were women . 
