The prisoner uttered not a syllable . 
After a pause , Thenardier continued : -- `` It 's very simple , as you see . 
There 'll be no harm done unless you wish that there should be harm done . 
I 'm telling you how things stand . 
I warn you so that you may be prepared . '' 
He paused : the prisoner did not break the silence , and Thenardier resumed : -- `` As soon as my wife returns and says to me : ` The Lark is on the way , ' we will release you , and you will be free to go and sleep at home . 
You see that our intentions are not evil . '' 
Terrible images passed through Marius ' mind . 
What ! 
That young girl whom they were abducting was not to be brought back ? 
One of those monsters was to bear her off into the darkness ? 
Whither ? 
And what if it were she ! 
It was clear that it was she . 
Marius felt his heart stop beating . 
What was he to do ? 
Discharge the pistol ? 
Place all those scoundrels in the hands of justice ? 
But the horrible man with the meat-axe would , none the less , be out of reach with the young girl , and Marius reflected on Thenardier 's words , of which he perceived the bloody significance : `` If you have me arrested , my comrade will give a turn of his thumb to the Lark . '' 
Now , it was not alone by the colonel 's testament , it was by his own love , it was by the peril of the one he loved , that he felt himself restrained . 
This frightful situation , which had already lasted above half an hour , was changing its aspect every moment . 
Marius had sufficient strength of mind to review in succession all the most heart-breaking conjectures , seeking hope and finding none . 
The tumult of his thoughts contrasted with the funereal silence of the den . 
In the midst of this silence , the door at the bottom of the staircase was heard to open and shut again . 
The prisoner made a movement in his bonds . 
`` Here 's the bourgeoise , '' said Thenardier . 
He had hardly uttered the words , when the Thenardier woman did in fact rush hastily into the room , red , panting , breathless , with flaming eyes , and cried , as she smote her huge hands on her thighs simultaneously : -- `` False address ! '' 
The ruffian who had gone with her made his appearance behind her and picked up his axe again . 
She resumed : -- `` Nobody there ! 
Rue Saint-Dominique , No. 17 , no Monsieur Urbain Fabre ! 
They know not what it means ! '' 
She paused , choking , then went on : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier ! 
That old fellow has duped you ! 
You are too good , you see ! 
If it had been me , I 'd have chopped the beast in four quarters to begin with ! 
And if he had acted ugly , I 'd have boiled him alive ! 
He would have been obliged to speak , and say where the girl is , and where he keeps his shiners ! 
That 's the way I should have managed matters ! 
People are perfectly right when they say that men are a deal stupider than women ! 
Nobody at No. 17 . 
It 's nothing but a big carriage gate ! 
No Monsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique ! 
And after all that racing and fee to the coachman and all ! 
I spoke to both the porter and the portress , a fine , stout woman , and they know nothing about him ! '' 
Marius breathed freely once more . 
She , Ursule or the Lark , he no longer knew what to call her , was safe . 
While his exasperated wife vociferated , Thenardier had seated himself on the table . 
For several minutes he uttered not a word , but swung his right foot , which hung down , and stared at the brazier with an air of savage revery . 
Finally , he said to the prisoner , with a slow and singularly ferocious tone : `` A false address ? 
What did you expect to gain by that ? '' 
