That 's what comes of incurring expenses ! '' 
In the meanwhile , M. Leblanc had removed the large brown great-coat which he wore over his blue coat , and had thrown it over the back of the chair . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , '' he said , `` these five francs are all that I have about me , but I shall now take my daughter home , and I will return this evening , -- it is this evening that you must pay , is it not ? '' 
Jondrette 's face lighted up with a strange expression . 
He replied vivaciously : -- `` Yes , respected sir . 
At eight o'clock , I must be at my landlord 's . '' 
`` I will be here at six , and I will fetch you the sixty francs . '' 
`` My benefactor ! '' 
exclaimed Jondrette , overwhelmed . 
And he added , in a low tone : `` Take a good look at him , wife ! '' 
M. Leblanc had taken the arm of the young girl , once more , and had turned towards the door . 
`` Farewell until this evening , my friends ! '' 
said he . 
`` Six o'clock ? '' 
said Jondrette . 
`` Six o'clock precisely . '' 
At that moment , the overcoat lying on the chair caught the eye of the elder Jondrette girl . 
`` You are forgetting your coat , sir , '' said she . 
Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter , accompanied by a formidable shrug of the shoulders . 
M. Leblanc turned back and said , with a smile : -- `` I have not forgotten it , I am leaving it . '' 
`` O my protector ! '' 
said Jondrette , `` my august benefactor , I melt into tears ! 
Permit me to accompany you to your carriage . '' 
`` If you come out , '' answered M. Leblanc , `` put on this coat . 
It really is very cold . '' 
Jondrette did not need to be told twice . 
He hastily donned the brown great-coat . 
And all three went out , Jondrette preceding the two strangers . 
TARIFF OF LICENSED CABS : TWO FRANCS AN HOUR Marius had lost nothing of this entire scene , and yet , in reality , had seen nothing . 
His eyes had remained fixed on the young girl , his heart had , so to speak , seized her and wholly enveloped her from the moment of her very first step in that garret . 
During her entire stay there , he had lived that life of ecstasy which suspends material perceptions and precipitates the whole soul on a single point . 
He contemplated , not that girl , but that light which wore a satin pelisse and a velvet bonnet . 
The star Sirius might have entered the room , and he would not have been any more dazzled . 
While the young girl was engaged in opening the package , unfolding the clothing and the blankets , questioning the sick mother kindly , and the little injured girl tenderly , he watched her every movement , he sought to catch her words . 
He knew her eyes , her brow , her beauty , her form , her walk , he did not know the sound of her voice . 
He had once fancied that he had caught a few words at the Luxembourg , but he was not absolutely sure of the fact . 
He would have given ten years of his life to hear it , in order that he might bear away in his soul a little of that music . 
But everything was drowned in the lamentable exclamations and trumpet bursts of Jondrette . 
This added a touch of genuine wrath to Marius ' ecstasy . 
He devoured her with his eyes . 
He could not believe that it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst of those vile creatures in that monstrous lair . 
It seemed to him that he beheld a humming-bird in the midst of toads . 
When she took her departure , he had but one thought , to follow her , to cling to her trace , not to quit her until he learned where she lived , not to lose her again , at least , after having so miraculously re-discovered her . 
He leaped down from the commode and seized his hat . 
As he laid his hand on the lock of the door , and was on the point of opening it , a sudden reflection caused him to pause . 
The corridor was long , the staircase steep , Jondrette was talkative , M. Leblanc had , no doubt , not yet regained his carriage ; if , on turning round in the corridor , or on the staircase , he were to catch sight of him , Marius , in that house , he would , evidently , take the alarm , and find means to escape from him again , and this time it would be final . 
What was he to do ? 
Should he wait a little ? 
But while he was waiting , the carriage might drive off . 
Marius was perplexed . 
