The officer thought it his duty to smile at her . 
She turned away as in shame and indignation . 
She would gladly have thrown something at his head . 
She fled , re-entered the house , and shut herself up in her chamber to peruse the manuscript once more , to learn it by heart , and to dream . 
When she had thoroughly mastered it she kissed it and put it in her bosom . 
All was over , Cosette had fallen back into deep , seraphic love . 
The abyss of Eden had yawned once more . 
All day long , Cosette remained in a sort of bewilderment . 
She scarcely thought , her ideas were in the state of a tangled skein in her brain , she could not manage to conjecture anything , she hoped through a tremor , what ? 
vague things . 
She dared make herself no promises , and she did not wish to refuse herself anything . 
Flashes of pallor passed over her countenance , and shivers ran through her frame . 
It seemed to her , at intervals , that she was entering the land of chimaeras ; she said to herself : `` Is this reality ? '' 
Then she felt of the dear paper within her bosom under her gown , she pressed it to her heart , she felt its angles against her flesh ; and if Jean Valjean had seen her at the moment , he would have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown joy , which overflowed from beneath her eyelids . 
-- `` Oh yes ! '' 
she thought , `` it is certainly he ! 
This comes from him , and is for me ! '' 
And she told herself that an intervention of the angels , a celestial chance , had given him back to her . 
Oh transfiguration of love ! 
Oh dreams ! 
That celestial chance , that intervention of the angels , was a pellet of bread tossed by one thief to another thief , from the Charlemagne Courtyard to the Lion 's Ditch , over the roofs of La Force . 
OLD PEOPLE ARE MADE TO GO OUT OPPORTUNELY When evening came , Jean Valjean went out ; Cosette dressed herself . 
She arranged her hair in the most becoming manner , and she put on a dress whose bodice had received one snip of the scissors too much , and which , through this slope , permitted a view of the beginning of her throat , and was , as young girls say , `` a trifle indecent . '' 
It was not in the least indecent , but it was prettier than usual . 
She made her toilet thus without knowing why she did so . 
Did she mean to go out ? 
No . 
Was she expecting a visitor ? 
No . 
At dusk , she went down to the garden . 
Toussaint was busy in her kitchen , which opened on the back yard . 
She began to stroll about under the trees , thrusting aside the branches from time to time with her hand , because there were some which hung very low . 
In this manner she reached the bench . 
The stone was still there . 
She sat down , and gently laid her white hand on this stone as though she wished to caress and thank it . 
All at once , she experienced that indefinable impression which one undergoes when there is some one standing behind one , even when she does not see the person . 
She turned her head and rose to her feet . 
It was he . 
His head was bare . 
He appeared to have grown thin and pale . 
His black clothes were hardly discernible . 
The twilight threw a wan light on his fine brow , and covered his eyes in shadows . 
Beneath a veil of incomparable sweetness , he had something about him that suggested death and night . 
His face was illuminated by the light of the dying day , and by the thought of a soul that is taking flight . 
He seemed to be not yet a ghost , and he was no longer a man . 
He had flung away his hat in the thicket , a few paces distant . 
Cosette , though ready to swoon , uttered no cry . 
She retreated slowly , for she felt herself attracted . 
He did not stir . 
By virtue of something ineffable and melancholy which enveloped him , she felt the look in his eyes which she could not see . 
