Therein lay his connection with humanity . 
The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was the terror of that whole class which the annual statistics of the Ministry of Justice designates under the rubric , Vagrants . 
The name of Javert routed them by its mere utterance ; the face of Javert petrified them at sight . 
Such was this formidable man . 
Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine . 
An eye full of suspicion and conjecture . 
M. Madeleine had finally perceived the fact ; but it seemed to be of no importance to him . 
He did not even put a question to Javert ; he neither sought nor avoided him ; he bore that embarrassing and almost oppressive gaze without appearing to notice it . 
He treated Javert with ease and courtesy , as he did all the rest of the world . 
It was divined , from some words which escaped Javert , that he had secretly investigated , with that curiosity which belongs to the race , and into which there enters as much instinct as will , all the anterior traces which Father Madeleine might have left elsewhere . 
He seemed to know , and he sometimes said in covert words , that some one had gleaned certain information in a certain district about a family which had disappeared . 
Once he chanced to say , as he was talking to himself , `` I think I have him ! '' 
Then he remained pensive for three days , and uttered not a word . 
It seemed that the thread which he thought he held had broken . 
Moreover , and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the too absolute sense which certain words might present , there can be nothing really infallible in a human creature , and the peculiarity of instinct is that it can become confused , thrown off the track , and defeated . 
Otherwise , it would be superior to intelligence , and the beast would be found to be provided with a better light than man . 
Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalness and tranquillity of M. Madeleine . 
One day , nevertheless , his strange manner appeared to produce an impression on M. Madeleine . 
It was on the following occasion . 
FATHER FAUCHELEVENT One morning M. Madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of M. sur M. ; he heard a noise , and saw a group some distance away . 
He approached . 
An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallen beneath his cart , his horse having tumbled down . 
This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had at that time . 
When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood , Fauchelevent , an ex-notary and a peasant who was almost educated , had a business which was beginning to be in a bad way . 
Fauchelevent had seen this simple workman grow rich , while he , a lawyer , was being ruined . 
This had filled him with jealousy , and he had done all he could , on every occasion , to injure Madeleine . 
Then bankruptcy had come ; and as the old man had nothing left but a cart and a horse , and neither family nor children , he had turned carter . 
The horse had two broken legs and could not rise . 
The old man was caught in the wheels . 
The fall had been so unlucky that the whole weight of the vehicle rested on his breast . 
The cart was quite heavily laden . 
Father Fauchelevent was rattling in the throat in the most lamentable manner . 
They had tried , but in vain , to drag him out . 
An unmethodical effort , aid awkwardly given , a wrong shake , might kill him . 
It was impossible to disengage him otherwise than by lifting the vehicle off of him . 
Javert , who had come up at the moment of the accident , had sent for a jack-screw . 
M. Madeleine arrived . 
People stood aside respectfully . 
`` Help ! '' 
cried old Fauchelevent . 
`` Who will be good and save the old man ? '' 
M.Madeleine turned towards those present : -- `` Is there a jack-screw to be had ? '' 
`` One has been sent for , '' answered the peasant . 
`` How long will it take to get it ? '' 
`` They have gone for the nearest , to Flachot 's place , where there is a farrier ; but it makes no difference ; it will take a good quarter of an hour . '' 
`` A quarter of an hour ! '' 
exclaimed Madeleine . 
It had rained on the preceding night ; the soil was soaked . 
The cart was sinking deeper into the earth every moment , and crushing the old carter 's breast more and more . 
It was evident that his ribs would be broken in five minutes more . 
