We must not deny our country in the past any more than in the present . 
Why not accept the whole of history ? 
Why not love the whole of France ? 
It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism , which was displeased at criticism and furious at protection . 
The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism , congregation characterized the second . 
Skill follows ardor . 
Let us confine ourselves here to this sketch . 
In the course of this narrative , the author of this book has encountered in his path this curious moment of contemporary history ; he has been forced to cast a passing glance upon it , and to trace once more some of the singular features of this society which is unknown to-day . 
But he does it rapidly and without any bitter or derisive idea . 
Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate , for they touch his mother , attach him to this past . 
Moreover , let us remark , this same petty world had a grandeur of its own . 
One may smile at it , but one can neither despise nor hate it . 
It was the France of former days . 
Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies , as all children do . 
When he emerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand , his grandfather confided him to a worthy professor of the most purely classic innocence . 
This young soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant . 
Marius went through his years of college , then he entered the law school . 
He was a Royalist , fanatical and severe . 
He did not love his grandfather much , as the latter 's gayety and cynicism repelled him , and his feelings towards his father were gloomy . 
He was , on the whole , a cold and ardent , noble , generous , proud , religious , enthusiastic lad ; dignified to harshness , pure to shyness . 
END OF THE BRIGAND The conclusion of Marius ' classical studies coincided with M. Gillenormand 's departure from society . 
The old man bade farewell to the Faubourg Saint-Germain and to Madame de T. 's salon , and established himself in the Mardis , in his house of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
There he had for servants , in addition to the porter , that chambermaid , Nicolette , who had succeeded to Magnon , and that short-breathed and pursy Basque , who have been mentioned above . 
In 1827 , Marius had just attained his seventeenth year . 
One evening , on his return home , he saw his grandfather holding a letter in his hand . 
`` Marius , '' said M. Gillenormand , `` you will set out for Vernon to-morrow . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` To see your father . '' 
Marius was seized with a trembling fit . 
He had thought of everything except this -- that he should one day be called upon to see his father . 
Nothing could be more unexpected , more surprising , and , let us admit it , more disagreeable to him . 
It was forcing estrangement into reconciliation . 
It was not an affliction , but it was an unpleasant duty . 
Marius , in addition to his motives of political antipathy , was convinced that his father , the slasher , as M. Gillenormand called him on his amiable days , did not love him ; this was evident , since he had abandoned him to others . 
Feeling that he was not beloved , he did not love . 
`` Nothing is more simple , '' he said to himself . 
He was so astounded that he did not question M. Gillenormand . 
The grandfather resumed : -- `` It appears that he is ill . 
He demands your presence . '' 
And after a pause , he added : -- `` Set out to-morrow morning . 
I think there is a coach which leaves the Cour des Fontaines at six o'clock , and which arrives in the evening . 
Take it . 
He says that here is haste . '' 
Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket . 
Marius might have set out that very evening and have been with his father on the following morning . 
A diligence from the Rue du Bouloi took the trip to Rouen by night at that date , and passed through Vernon . 
Neither Marius nor M.Gillenormand thought of making inquiries about it . 
The next day , at twilight , Marius reached Vernon . 
People were just beginning to light their candles . 
