Whether Monsieur your father comes in that category , I do not know ! 
I am sorry for it , so much the worse , your humble servant ! '' 
In his turn , it was Marius who was the firebrand and M. Gillenormand who was the bellows . 
Marius quivered in every limb , he did not know what would happen next , his brain was on fire . 
He was the priest who beholds all his sacred wafers cast to the winds , the fakir who beholds a passer-by spit upon his idol . 
It could not be that such things had been uttered in his presence . 
What was he to do ? 
His father had just been trampled under foot and stamped upon in his presence , but by whom ? 
By his grandfather . 
How was he to avenge the one without outraging the other ? 
It was impossible for him to insult his grandfather and it was equally impossible for him to leave his father unavenged . 
On the one hand was a sacred grave , on the other hoary locks . 
He stood there for several moments , staggering as though intoxicated , with all this whirlwind dashing through his head ; then he raised his eyes , gazed fixedly at his grandfather , and cried in a voice of thunder : -- `` Down with the Bourbons , and that great hog of a Louis XVIII . ! '' 
Louis XVIII . 
had been dead for four years ; but it was all the same to him . 
The old man , who had been crimson , turned whiter than his hair . 
He wheeled round towards a bust of M. le Duc de Berry , which stood on the chimney-piece , and made a profound bow , with a sort of peculiar majesty . 
Then he paced twice , slowly and in silence , from the fireplace to the window and from the window to the fireplace , traversing the whole length of the room , and making the polished floor creak as though he had been a stone statue walking . 
On his second turn , he bent over his daughter , who was watching this encounter with the stupefied air of an antiquated lamb , and said to her with a smile that was almost calm : `` A baron like this gentleman , and a bourgeois like myself can not remain under the same roof . '' 
And drawing himself up , all at once , pallid , trembling , terrible , with his brow rendered more lofty by the terrible radiance of wrath , he extended his arm towards Marius and shouted to him : -- `` Be off ! '' 
Marius left the house . 
On the following day , M. Gillenormand said to his daughter : `` You will send sixty pistoles every six months to that blood-drinker , and you will never mention his name to me . '' 
Having an immense reserve fund of wrath to get rid of , and not knowing what to do with it , he continued to address his daughter as you instead of thou for the next three months . 
Marius , on his side , had gone forth in indignation . 
There was one circumstance which , it must be admitted , aggravated his exasperation . 
There are always petty fatalities of the sort which complicate domestic dramas . 
They augment the grievances in such cases , although , in reality , the wrongs are not increased by them . 
While carrying Marius ' `` duds '' precipitately to his chamber , at his grandfather 's command , Nicolette had , inadvertently , let fall , probably , on the attic staircase , which was dark , that medallion of black shagreen which contained the paper penned by the colonel . 
Neither paper nor case could afterwards be found . 
Marius was convinced that `` Monsieur Gillenormand '' -- from that day forth he never alluded to him otherwise -- had flung `` his father 's testament '' in the fire . 
He knew by heart the few lines which the colonel had written , and , consequently , nothing was lost . 
But the paper , the writing , that sacred relic , -- all that was his very heart . 
What had been done with it ? 
Marius had taken his departure without saying whither he was going , and without knowing where , with thirty francs , his watch , and a few clothes in a hand-bag . 
He had entered a hackney-coach , had engaged it by the hour , and had directed his course at hap-hazard towards the Latin quarter . 
What was to become of Marius ? 
A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC At that epoch , which was , to all appearances indifferent , a certain revolutionary quiver was vaguely current . 
Breaths which had started forth from the depths of '89 and '93 were in the air . 
Youth was on the point , may the reader pardon us the word , of moulting . 
People were undergoing a transformation , almost without being conscious of it , through the movement of the age . 
The needle which moves round the compass also moves in souls . 
Each person was taking that step in advance which he was bound to take . 
The Royalists were becoming liberals , liberals were turning democrats . 
It was a flood tide complicated with a thousand ebb movements ; the peculiarity of ebbs is to create intermixtures ; hence the combination of very singular ideas ; people adored both Napoleon and liberty . 
We are making history here . 
These were the mirages of that period . 
Opinions traverse phases . 
Voltairian royalism , a quaint variety , had a no less singular sequel , Bonapartist liberalism . 
Other groups of minds were more serious . 
In that direction , they sounded principles , they attached themselves to the right . 
