Here he took fright ; his balance became disjointed ; one of the scales fell into the abyss , the other rose heavenward , and Javert was no less terrified by the one which was on high than by the one which was below . 
Without being in the least in the world what is called Voltairian or a philosopher , or incredulous , being , on the contrary , respectful by instinct , towards the established church , he knew it only as an august fragment of the social whole ; order was his dogma , and sufficed for him ; ever since he had attained to man 's estate and the rank of a functionary , he had centred nearly all his religion in the police . 
Being , -- and here we employ words without the least irony and in their most serious acceptation , being , as we have said , a spy as other men are priests . 
He had a superior , M. Gisquet ; up to that day he had never dreamed of that other superior , God . 
This new chief , God , he became unexpectedly conscious of , and he felt embarrassed by him . 
This unforeseen presence threw him off his bearings ; he did not know what to do with this superior , he , who was not ignorant of the fact that the subordinate is bound always to bow , that he must not disobey , nor find fault , nor discuss , and that , in the presence of a superior who amazes him too greatly , the inferior has no other resource than that of handing in his resignation . 
But how was he to set about handing in his resignation to God ? 
However things might stand , -- and it was to this point that he reverted constantly , -- one fact dominated everything else for him , and that was , that he had just committed a terrible infraction of the law . 
He had just shut his eyes on an escaped convict who had broken his ban . 
He had just set a galley-slave at large . 
He had just robbed the laws of a man who belonged to them . 
That was what he had done . 
He no longer understood himself . 
The very reasons for his action escaped him ; only their vertigo was left with him . 
Up to that moment he had lived with that blind faith which gloomy probity engenders . 
This faith had quitted him , this probity had deserted him . 
All that he had believed in melted away . 
Truths which he did not wish to recognize were besieging him , inexorably . 
Henceforth , he must be a different man . 
He was suffering from the strange pains of a conscience abruptly operated on for the cataract . 
He saw that which it was repugnant to him to behold . 
He felt himself emptied , useless , put out of joint with his past life , turned out , dissolved . 
Authority was dead within him . 
He had no longer any reason for existing . 
A terrible situation ! 
to be touched . 
To be granite and to doubt ! 
to be the statue of Chastisement cast in one piece in the mould of the law , and suddenly to become aware of the fact that one cherishes beneath one 's breast of bronze something absurd and disobedient which almost resembles a heart ! 
To come to the pass of returning good for good , although one has said to oneself up to that day that that good is evil ! 
to be the watch-dog , and to lick the intruder 's hand ! 
to be ice and melt ! 
to be the pincers and to turn into a hand ! 
to suddenly feel one 's fingers opening ! 
to relax one 's grip , -- what a terrible thing ! 
The man-projectile no longer acquainted with his route and retreating ! 
To be obliged to confess this to oneself : infallibility is not infallible , there may exist error in the dogma , all has not been said when a code speaks , society is not perfect , authority is complicated with vacillation , a crack is possible in the immutable , judges are but men , the law may err , tribunals may make a mistake ! 
to behold a rift in the immense blue pane of the firmament ! 
That which was passing in Javert was the Fampoux of a rectilinear conscience , the derailment of a soul , the crushing of a probity which had been irresistibly launched in a straight line and was breaking against God . 
It certainly was singular that the stoker of order , that the engineer of authority , mounted on the blind iron horse with its rigid road , could be unseated by a flash of light ! 
that the immovable , the direct , the correct , the geometrical , the passive , the perfect , could bend ! 
that there should exist for the locomotive a road to Damascus ! 
God , always within man , and refractory , He , the true conscience , to the false ; a prohibition to the spark to die out ; an order to the ray to remember the sun ; an injunction to the soul to recognize the veritable absolute when confronted with the fictitious absolute , humanity which can not be lost ; the human heart indestructible ; that splendid phenomenon , the finest , perhaps , of all our interior marvels , did Javert understand this ? 
Did Javert penetrate it ? 
Did Javert account for it to himself ? 
Evidently he did not . 
But beneath the pressure of that incontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain bursting . 
He was less the man transfigured than the victim of this prodigy . 
In all this he perceived only the tremendous difficulty of existence . 
It seemed to him that , henceforth , his respiration was repressed forever . 
He was not accustomed to having something unknown hanging over his head . 
