The people saw this . 
It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carried away before it like a theatrical stage-setting . 
It did not perceive that it had , itself , been brought in in the same fashion . 
It did not perceive that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon . 
It thought that it had roots , because it was the past . 
It was mistaken ; it formed a part of the past , but the whole past was France . 
The roots of French society were not fixed in the Bourbons , but in the nations . 
These obscure and lively roots constituted , not the right of a family , but the history of a people . 
They were everywhere , except under the throne . 
The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot in her history , but was no longer the principal element of her destiny , and the necessary base of her politics . 
She could get along without the Bourbons ; she had done without them for two and twenty years ; there had been a break of continuity ; they did not suspect the fact . 
And how should they have suspected it , they who fancied that Louis XVII . 
reigned on the 9th of Thermidor , and that Louis XVIII . 
was reigning at the battle of Marengo ? 
Never , since the origin of history , had princes been so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of divine authority which facts contain and promulgate . 
Never had that pretension here below which is called the right of kings denied to such a point the right from on high . 
A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on the guarantees `` granted '' in 1814 , on the concessions , as it termed them . 
Sad . 
A sad thing ! 
What it termed its concessions were our conquests ; what it termed our encroachments were our rights . 
When the hour seemed to it to have come , the Restoration , supposing itself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country , that is to say , believing itself to be strong and deep , abruptly decided on its plan of action , and risked its stroke . 
One morning it drew itself up before the face of France , and , elevating its voice , it contested the collective title and the individual right of the nation to sovereignty , of the citizen to liberty . 
In other words , it denied to the nation that which made it a nation , and to the citizen that which made him a citizen . 
This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called the ordinances of July . 
The Restoration fell . 
It fell justly . 
But , we admit , it had not been absolutely hostile to all forms of progress . 
Great things had been accomplished , with it alongside . 
Under the Restoration , the nation had grown accustomed to calm discussion , which had been lacking under the Republic , and to grandeur in peace , which had been wanting under the Empire . 
France free and strong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples of Europe . 
The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre ; the cannon had had the word under Bonaparte ; it was under Louis XVIII . 
and Charles X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word . 
The wind ceased , the torch was lighted once more . 
On the lofty heights , the pure light of mind could be seen flickering . 
A magnificent , useful , and charming spectacle . 
For a space of fifteen years , those great principles which are so old for the thinker , so new for the statesman , could be seen at work in perfect peace , on the public square ; equality before the law , liberty of conscience , liberty of speech , liberty of the press , the accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions . 
Thus it proceeded until 1830 . 
The Bourbons were an instrument of civilization which broke in the hands of Providence . 
The fall of the Bourbons was full of grandeur , not on their side , but on the side of the nation . 
They quitted the throne with gravity , but without authority ; their descent into the night was not one of those solemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history ; it was neither the spectral calm of Charles I. , nor the eagle scream of Napoleon . 
They departed , that is all . 
They laid down the crown , and retained no aureole . 
They were worthy , but they were not august . 
They lacked , in a certain measure , the majesty of their misfortune . 
Charles X. during the voyage from Cherbourg , causing a round table to be cut over into a square table , appeared to be more anxious about imperilled etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy . 
This diminution saddened devoted men who loved their persons , and serious men who honored their race . 
The populace was admirable . 
The nation , attacked one morning with weapons , by a sort of royal insurrection , felt itself in the possession of so much force that it did not go into a rage . 
It defended itself , restrained itself , restored things to their places , the government to law , the Bourbons to exile , alas ! 
and then halted ! 
