Now , come with me . 
We will go and get the child . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` so there is a child ? '' 
He added not a word further , and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows his master . 
Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette , who had grown rosy again before the flame of a good fire , was lying asleep in the old gardener 's bed . 
Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more ; his hat , which he had flung over the wall , had been found and picked up . 
While Jean Valjean was putting on his coat , Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap , which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall . 
The two men were warming themselves with their elbows resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese , black bread , a bottle of wine , and two glasses , and the old man was saying to Jean Valjean , as he laid his hand on the latter 's knee : `` Ah ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
You did not recognize me immediately ; you save people 's lives , and then you forget them ! 
That is bad ! 
But they remember you ! 
You are an ingrate ! '' 
WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side , so to speak , had come about in the simplest possible manner . 
When Jean Valjean , on the evening of the very day when Javert had arrested him beside Fantine 's death-bed , had escaped from the town jail of M. sur M. , the police had supposed that he had betaken himself to Paris . 
Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost , and everything disappears in this belly of the world , as in the belly of the sea . 
No forest hides a man as does that crowd . 
Fugitives of every sort know this . 
They go to Paris as to an abyss ; there are gulfs which save . 
The police know it also , and it is in Paris that they seek what they have lost elsewhere . 
They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to Paris to throw light on their researches . 
Javert had , in fact , rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean . 
Javert 's zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M. Chabouillet , secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles . 
M. Chabouillet , who had , moreover , already been Javert 's patron , had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris . 
There Javert rendered himself useful in divers and , though the word may seem strange for such services , honorable manners . 
He no longer thought of Jean Valjean , -- the wolf of to-day causes these dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday , -- when , in December , 1823 , he read a newspaper , he who never read newspapers ; but Javert , a monarchical man , had a desire to know the particulars of the triumphal entry of the `` Prince Generalissimo '' into Bayonne . 
Just as he was finishing the article , which interested him ; a name , the name of Jean Valjean , attracted his attention at the bottom of a page . 
The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead , and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it . 
He confined himself to the remark , `` That 's a good entry . '' 
Then he threw aside the paper , and thought no more about it . 
Some time afterwards , it chanced that a police report was transmitted from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in Paris , concerning the abduction of a child , which had taken place , under peculiar circumstances , as it was said , in the commune of Montfermeil . 
A little girl of seven or eight years of age , the report said , who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper of that neighborhood , had been stolen by a stranger ; this child answered to the name of Cosette , and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine , who had died in the hospital , it was not known where or when . 
This report came under Javert 's eye and set him to thinking . 
The name of Fantine was well known to him . 
He remembered that Jean Valjean had made him , Javert , burst into laughter , by asking him for a respite of three days , for the purpose of going to fetch that creature 's child . 
He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach for Montfermeil . 
Some signs had made him suspect at the time that this was the second occasion of his entering that coach , and that he had already , on the previous day , made an excursion to the neighborhood of that village , for he had not been seen in the village itself . 
What had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil ? 
It could not even be surmised . 
Javert understood it now . 
Fantine 's daughter was there . 
Jean Valjean was going there in search of her . 
And now this child had been stolen by a stranger ! 
Who could that stranger be ? 
Could it be Jean Valjean ? 
But Jean Valjean was dead . 
Javert , without saying anything to anybody , took the coach from the Pewter Platter , Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette , and made a trip to Montfermeil . 
He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there ; he found a great deal of obscurity . 
For the first few days the Thenardiers had chattered in their rage . 
