It is addressed to England as well as to Spain , to Italy as well as to France , to Germany as well as to Ireland , to Republics which have slaves as well as to Empires which have serfs . 
Social problems overstep frontiers . 
The sores of the human race , those great sores which cover the globe , do not halt at the red or blue lines traced upon the map . 
In every place where man is ignorant and despairing , in every place where woman is sold for bread , wherever the child suffers for lack of the book which should instruct him and of the hearth which should warm him , the book of Les Miserables knocks at the door and says : `` Open to me , I come for you . '' 
At the hour of civilization through which we are now passing , and which is still so sombre , the miserable 's name is Man ; he is agonizing in all climes , and he is groaning in all languages . 
Your Italy is no more exempt from the evil than is our France . 
Your admirable Italy has all miseries on the face of it . 
Does not banditism , that raging form of pauperism , inhabit your mountains ? 
Few nations are more deeply eaten by that ulcer of convents which I have endeavored to fathom . 
In spite of your possessing Rome , Milan , Naples , Palermo , Turin , Florence , Sienna , Pisa , Mantua , Bologna , Ferrara , Genoa , Venice , a heroic history , sublime ruins , magnificent ruins , and superb cities , you are , like ourselves , poor . 
You are covered with marvels and vermin . 
Assuredly , the sun of Italy is splendid , but , alas , azure in the sky does not prevent rags on man . 
Like us , you have prejudices , superstitions , tyrannies , fanaticisms , blind laws lending assistance to ignorant customs . 
You taste nothing of the present nor of the future without a flavor of the past being mingled with it . 
You have a barbarian , the monk , and a savage , the lazzarone . 
The social question is the same for you as for us . 
There are a few less deaths from hunger with you , and a few more from fever ; your social hygiene is not much better than ours ; shadows , which are Protestant in England , are Catholic in Italy ; but , under different names , the vescovo is identical with the bishop , and it always means night , and of pretty nearly the same quality . 
To explain the Bible badly amounts to the same thing as to understand the Gospel badly . 
Is it necessary to emphasize this ? 
Must this melancholy parallelism be yet more completely verified ? 
Have you not indigent persons ? 
Glance below . 
Have you not parasites ? 
Glance up . 
Does not that hideous balance , whose two scales , pauperism and parasitism , so mournfully preserve their mutual equilibrium , oscillate before you as it does before us ? 
Where is your army of schoolmasters , the only army which civilization acknowledges ? 
Where are your free and compulsory schools ? 
Does every one know how to read in the land of Dante and of Michael Angelo ? 
Have you made public schools of your barracks ? 
Have you not , like ourselves , an opulent war-budget and a paltry budget of education ? 
Have not you also that passive obedience which is so easily converted into soldierly obedience ? 
military establishment which pushes the regulations to the extreme of firing upon Garibaldi ; that is to say , upon the living honor of Italy ? 
Let us subject your social order to examination , let us take it where it stands and as it stands , let us view its flagrant offences , show me the woman and the child . 
It is by the amount of protection with which these two feeble creatures are surrounded that the degree of civilization is to be measured . 
Is prostitution less heartrending in Naples than in Paris ? 
What is the amount of truth that springs from your laws , and what amount of justice springs from your tribunals ? 
Do you chance to be so fortunate as to be ignorant of the meaning of those gloomy words : public prosecution , legal infamy , prison , the scaffold , the executioner , the death penalty ? 
Italians , with you as with us , Beccaria is dead and Farinace is alive . 
And then , let us scrutinize your state reasons . 
Have you a government which comprehends the identity of morality and politics ? 
You have reached the point where you grant amnesty to heroes ! 
Something very similar has been done in France . 
Stay , let us pass miseries in review , let each one contribute his pile , you are as rich as we . 
Have you not , like ourselves , two condemnations , religious condemnation pronounced by the priest , and social condemnation decreed by the judge ? 
Oh , great nation of Italy , thou resemblest the great nation of France ! 
Alas ! 
our brothers , you are , like ourselves , Miserables . 
From the depths of the gloom wherein you dwell , you do not see much more distinctly than we the radiant and distant portals of Eden . 
Only , the priests are mistaken . 
These holy portals are before and not behind us . 
