On entering , Fantine fell down in a corner , motionless and mute , crouching down like a terrified dog . 
The sergeant of the guard brought a lighted candle to the table . 
Javert seated himself , drew a sheet of stamped paper from his pocket , and began to write . 
This class of women is consigned by our laws entirely to the discretion of the police . 
The latter do what they please , punish them , as seems good to them , and confiscate at their will those two sorry things which they entitle their industry and their liberty . 
Javert was impassive ; his grave face betrayed no emotion whatever . 
Nevertheless , he was seriously and deeply preoccupied . 
It was one of those moments when he was exercising without control , but subject to all the scruples of a severe conscience , his redoubtable discretionary power . 
At that moment he was conscious that his police agent 's stool was a tribunal . 
He was entering judgment . 
He judged and condemned . 
He summoned all the ideas which could possibly exist in his mind , around the great thing which he was doing . 
The more he examined the deed of this woman , the more shocked he felt . 
It was evident that he had just witnessed the commission of a crime . 
He had just beheld , yonder , in the street , society , in the person of a freeholder and an elector , insulted and attacked by a creature who was outside all pales . 
A prostitute had made an attempt on the life of a citizen . 
He had seen that , he , Javert . 
He wrote in silence . 
When he had finished he signed the paper , folded it , and said to the sergeant of the guard , as he handed it to him , `` Take three men and conduct this creature to jail . '' 
Then , turning to Fantine , `` You are to have six months of it . '' 
The unhappy woman shuddered . 
`` Six months ! 
six months of prison ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` Six months in which to earn seven sous a day ! 
But what will become of Cosette ? 
My daughter ! 
my daughter ! 
But I still owe the Thenardiers over a hundred francs ; do you know that , Monsieur Inspector ? '' 
She dragged herself across the damp floor , among the muddy boots of all those men , without rising , with clasped hands , and taking great strides on her knees . 
`` Monsieur Javert , '' said she , `` I beseech your mercy . 
I assure you that I was not in the wrong . 
If you had seen the beginning , you would have seen . 
I swear to you by the good God that I was not to blame ! 
That gentleman , the bourgeois , whom I do not know , put snow in my back . 
Has any one the right to put snow down our backs when we are walking along peaceably , and doing no harm to any one ? 
I am rather ill , as you see . 
And then , he had been saying impertinent things to me for a long time : ` You are ugly ! 
you have no teeth ! ' 
I know well that I have no longer those teeth . 
I did nothing ; I said to myself , ` The gentleman is amusing himself . ' 
I was honest with him ; I did not speak to him . 
It was at that moment that he put the snow down my back . 
Monsieur Javert , good Monsieur Inspector ! 
is there not some person here who saw it and can tell you that this is quite true ? 
Perhaps I did wrong to get angry . 
You know that one is not master of one 's self at the first moment . 
One gives way to vivacity ; and then , when some one puts something cold down your back just when you are not expecting it ! 
I did wrong to spoil that gentleman 's hat . 
Why did he go away ? 
