There are six of you , what matters that to me ? 
You are men . 
Well , I 'm a woman . 
You do n't frighten me . 
I tell you that you sha n't enter this house , because it does n't suit me . 
If you approach , I 'll bark . 
I told you , I 'm the dog , and I do n't care a straw for you . 
Go your way , you bore me ! 
Go where you please , but do n't come here , I forbid it ! 
You can use your knives . 
I 'll use kicks ; it 's all the same to me , come on ! '' 
She advanced a pace nearer the ruffians , she was terrible , she burst out laughing : -- `` Pardine ! 
I 'm not afraid . 
I shall be hungry this summer , and I shall be cold this winter . 
Are n't they ridiculous , these ninnies of men , to think they can scare a girl ! 
What ! 
Scare ? 
Oh , yes , much ! 
Because you have finical poppets of mistresses who hide under the bed when you put on a big voice , forsooth ! 
I ai n't afraid of anything , that I ai n't ! '' 
She fastened her intent gaze upon Thenardier and said : -- `` Not even of you , father ! '' 
Then she continued , as she cast her blood-shot , spectre-like eyes upon the ruffians in turn : -- `` What do I care if I 'm picked up to-morrow morning on the pavement of the Rue Plumet , killed by the blows of my father 's club , or whether I 'm found a year from now in the nets at Saint-Cloud or the Isle of Swans in the midst of rotten old corks and drowned dogs ? '' 
She was forced to pause ; she was seized by a dry cough , her breath came from her weak and narrow chest like the death-rattle . 
She resumed : -- `` I have only to cry out , and people will come , and then slap , bang ! 
There are six of you ; I represent the whole world . '' 
Thenardier made a movement towards her . 
`` Do n't approach ! '' 
she cried . 
He halted , and said gently : -- `` Well , no ; I wo n't approach , but do n't speak so loud . 
So you intend to hinder us in our work , my daughter ? 
But we must earn our living all the same . 
Have you no longer any kind feeling for your father ? '' 
`` You bother me , '' said Eponine . 
`` But we must live , we must eat -- '' `` Burst ! '' 
So saying , she seated herself on the underpinning of the fence and hummed : -- `` Mon bras si dodu , `` My arm so plump , Ma jambe bien faite My leg well formed , Et le temps perdu . '' 
And time wasted . '' 
She had set her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand , and she swung her foot with an air of indifference . 
Her tattered gown permitted a view of her thin shoulder-blades . 
The neighboring street lantern illuminated her profile and her attitude . 
Nothing more resolute and more surprising could be seen . 
The six rascals , speechless and gloomy at being held in check by a girl , retreated beneath the shadow cast by the lantern , and held counsel with furious and humiliated shrugs . 
In the meantime she stared at them with a stern but peaceful air . 
`` There 's something the matter with her , '' said Babet . 
`` A reason . 
Is she in love with the dog ? 
It 's a shame to miss this , anyway . 
Two women , an old fellow who lodges in the back-yard , and curtains that ai n't so bad at the windows . 
The old cove must be a Jew . 
I think the job 's a good one . '' 
`` Well , go in , then , the rest of you , '' exclaimed Montparnasse . 
