` Only , do n't do it again , you hussy ! ' 
Oh ! 
I wo n't do it again , Monsieur Javert ! 
They may do whatever they please to me now ; I will not stir . 
But to-day , you see , I cried because it hurt me . 
I was not expecting that snow from the gentleman at all ; and then as I told you , I am not well ; I have a cough ; I seem to have a burning ball in my stomach , and the doctor tells me , ` Take care of yourself . ' 
Here , feel , give me your hand ; do n't be afraid -- it is here . '' 
She no longer wept , her voice was caressing ; she placed Javert 's coarse hand on her delicate , white throat and looked smilingly at him . 
All at once she rapidly adjusted her disordered garments , dropped the folds of her skirt , which had been pushed up as she dragged herself along , almost to the height of her knee , and stepped towards the door , saying to the soldiers in a low voice , and with a friendly nod : -- `` Children , Monsieur l'Inspecteur has said that I am to be released , and I am going . '' 
She laid her hand on the latch of the door . 
One step more and she would be in the street . 
Javert up to that moment had remained erect , motionless , with his eyes fixed on the ground , cast athwart this scene like some displaced statue , which is waiting to be put away somewhere . 
The sound of the latch roused him . 
He raised his head with an expression of sovereign authority , an expression all the more alarming in proportion as the authority rests on a low level , ferocious in the wild beast , atrocious in the man of no estate . 
`` Sergeant ! '' 
he cried , `` do n't you see that that jade is walking off ! 
Who bade you let her go ? '' 
`` I , '' said Madeleine . 
Fantine trembled at the sound of Javert 's voice , and let go of the latch as a thief relinquishes the article which he has stolen . 
At the sound of Madeleine 's voice she turned around , and from that moment forth she uttered no word , nor dared so much as to breathe freely , but her glance strayed from Madeleine to Javert , and from Javert to Madeleine in turn , according to which was speaking . 
It was evident that Javert must have been exasperated beyond measure before he would permit himself to apostrophize the sergeant as he had done , after the mayor 's suggestion that Fantine should be set at liberty . 
Had he reached the point of forgetting the mayor 's presence ? 
Had he finally declared to himself that it was impossible that any `` authority '' should have given such an order , and that the mayor must certainly have said one thing by mistake for another , without intending it ? 
Or , in view of the enormities of which he had been a witness for the past two hours , did he say to himself , that it was necessary to recur to supreme resolutions , that it was indispensable that the small should be made great , that the police spy should transform himself into a magistrate , that the policeman should become a dispenser of justice , and that , in this prodigious extremity , order , law , morality , government , society in its entirety , was personified in him , Javert ? 
However that may be , when M. Madeleine uttered that word , I , as we have just heard , Police Inspector Javert was seen to turn toward the mayor , pale , cold , with blue lips , and a look of despair , his whole body agitated by an imperceptible quiver and an unprecedented occurrence , and say to him , with downcast eyes but a firm voice : -- `` Mr. Mayor , that can not be . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
said M. Madeleine . 
`` This miserable woman has insulted a citizen . '' 
`` Inspector Javert , '' replied the mayor , in a calm and conciliating tone , `` listen . 
You are an honest man , and I feel no hesitation in explaining matters to you . 
Here is the true state of the case : I was passing through the square just as you were leading this woman away ; there were still groups of people standing about , and I made inquiries and learned everything ; it was the townsman who was in the wrong and who should have been arrested by properly conducted police . '' 
Javert retorted : -- `` This wretch has just insulted Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` That concerns me , '' said M. Madeleine . 
`` My own insult belongs to me , I think . 
I can do what I please about it . '' 
`` I beg Monsieur le Maire 's pardon . 
The insult is not to him but to the law . '' 
`` Inspector Javert , '' replied M. Madeleine , `` the highest law is conscience . 
I have heard this woman ; I know what I am doing . '' 
`` And I , Mr. Mayor , do not know what I see . '' 
`` Then content yourself with obeying . '' 
`` I am obeying my duty . 
My duty demands that this woman shall serve six months in prison . '' 
M. Madeleine replied gently : -- `` Heed this well ; she will not serve a single day . '' 
At this decisive word , Javert ventured to fix a searching look on the mayor and to say , but in a tone of voice that was still profoundly respectful : -- `` I am sorry to oppose Monsieur le Maire ; it is for the first time in my life , but he will permit me to remark that I am within the bounds of my authority . 
I confine myself , since Monsieur le Maire desires it , to the question of the gentleman . 
I was present . 
This woman flung herself on Monsieur Bamatabnois , who is an elector and the proprietor of that handsome house with a balcony , which forms the corner of the esplanade , three stories high and entirely of cut stone . 
Such things as there are in the world ! 
In any case , Monsieur le Maire , this is a question of police regulations in the streets , and concerns me , and I shall detain this woman Fantine . '' 
