their dignity , their intelligence , their genius , are not numbers which those gamblers , heroes and conquerors , can put in the lottery of battles . 
Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered . 
There is less glory and more liberty . 
The drum holds its peace ; reason takes the word . 
It is a game in which he who loses wins . 
Let us , therefore , speak of Waterloo coldly from both sides . 
Let us render to chance that which is due to chance , and to God that which is due to God . 
What is Waterloo ? 
A victory ? 
No . 
The winning number in the lottery . 
The quine -LSB- 11 -RSB- won by Europe , paid by France . 
-LSB- 11 -RSB- Five winning numbers in a lottery . 
It was not worth while to place a lion there . 
Waterloo , moreover , is the strangest encounter in history . 
Napoleon and Wellington . 
They are not enemies ; they are opposites . 
Never did God , who is fond of antitheses , make a more striking contrast , a more extraordinary comparison . 
On one side , precision , foresight , geometry , prudence , an assured retreat , reserves spared , with an obstinate coolness , an imperturbable method , strategy , which takes advantage of the ground , tactics , which preserve the equilibrium of battalions , carnage , executed according to rule , war regulated , watch in hand , nothing voluntarily left to chance , the ancient classic courage , absolute regularity ; on the other , intuition , divination , military oddity , superhuman instinct , a flaming glance , an indescribable something which gazes like an eagle , and which strikes like the lightning , a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity , all the mysteries of a profound soul , associated with destiny ; the stream , the plain , the forest , the hill , summoned , and in a manner , forced to obey , the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle ; faith in a star mingled with strategic science , elevating but perturbing it . 
Wellington was the Bareme of war ; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo ; and on this occasion , genius was vanquished by calculation . 
On both sides some one was awaited . 
It was the exact calculator who succeeded . 
Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy ; he did not come . 
Wellington expected Blucher ; he came . 
Wellington is classic war taking its revenge . 
Bonaparte , at his dawning , had encountered him in Italy , and beaten him superbly . 
The old owl had fled before the young vulture . 
The old tactics had been not only struck as by lightning , but disgraced . 
Who was that Corsican of six and twenty ? 
What signified that splendid ignoramus , who , with everything against him , nothing in his favor , without provisions , without ammunition , without cannon , without shoes , almost without an army , with a mere handful of men against masses , hurled himself on Europe combined , and absurdly won victories in the impossible ? 
Whence had issued that fulminating convict , who almost without taking breath , and with the same set of combatants in hand , pulverized , one after the other , the five armies of the emperor of Germany , upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi , Wurmser on Beaulieu , Melas on Wurmser , Mack on Melas ? 
Who was this novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary ? 
The academical military school excommunicated him , and as it lost its footing ; hence , the implacable rancor of the old Caesarism against the new ; of the regular sword against the flaming sword ; and of the exchequer against genius . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , that rancor had the last word . 
and beneath Lodi , Montebello , Montenotte , Mantua , Arcola , it wrote : Waterloo . 
A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority . 
Destiny consented to this irony . 
In his decline , Napoleon found Wurmser , the younger , again in front of him . 
In fact , to get Wurmser , it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington . 
Waterloo is a battle of the first order , won by a captain of the second . 
That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo , is England ; the English firmness , the English resolution , the English blood ; the superb thing about England there , no offence to her , was herself . 
It was not her captain ; it was her army . 
Wellington , oddly ungrateful , declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst , that his army , the army which fought on the 18th of June , 1815 , was a `` detestable army . '' 
What does that sombre intermingling of bones buried beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that ? 
England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington . 
To make Wellington so great is to belittle England . 
Wellington is nothing but a hero like many another . 
Those Scotch Grays , those Horse Guards , those regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell , that infantry of Pack and Kempt , that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset , those Highlanders playing the pibroch under the shower of grape-shot , those battalions of Rylandt , those utterly raw recruits , who hardly knew how to handle a musket holding their own against Essling 's and Rivoli 's old troops , -- that is what was grand . 
Wellington was tenacious ; in that lay his merit , and we are not seeking to lessen it : but the least of his foot-soldiers and of his cavalry would have been as solid as he . 
The iron soldier is worth as much as the Iron Duke . 
