The narrow , uneven , sinuous streets , full of angles and turns , were admirably chosen ; the neighborhood of the Halles , in particular , a network of streets more intricate than a forest . 
The Society of the Friends of the People had , it was said , undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye . 
A man killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a plan of Paris . 
That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a sort of strange impetuosity which was in the air . 
The insurrection had abruptly built barricades with one hand , and with the other seized nearly all the posts of the garrison . 
In less than three hours , like a train of powder catching fire , the insurgents had invaded and occupied , on the right bank , the Arsenal , the Mayoralty of the Place Royale , the whole of the Marais , the Popincourt arms manufactory , la Galiote , the Chateau-d'Eau , and all the streets near the Halles ; on the left bank , the barracks of the Veterans , Sainte-Pelagie , the Place Maubert , the powder magazine of the Deux-Moulins , and all the barriers . 
At five o'clock in the evening , they were masters of the Bastille , of the Lingerie , of the Blancs-Manteaux ; their scouts had reached the Place des Victoires , and menaced the Bank , the Petits-Peres barracks , and the Post-Office . 
A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters . 
The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points ; and , as a result of the disarming domiciliary visits , and armorers ' shops hastily invaded , was , that the combat which had begun with the throwing of stones was continued with gun-shots . 
About six o'clock in the evening , the Passage du Saumon became the field of battle . 
The uprising was at one end , the troops were at the other . 
They fired from one gate to the other . 
An observer , a dreamer , the author of this book , who had gone to get a near view of this volcano , found himself in the passage between the two fires . 
All that he had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the two half-columns which separate the shops ; he remained in this delicate situation for nearly half an hour . 
Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten , the National Guard armed in haste , the legions emerged from the Mayoralities , the regiments from their barracks . 
Opposite the passage de l'Ancre a drummer received a blow from a dagger . 
Another , in the Rue du Cygne , was assailed by thirty young men who broke his instrument , and took away his sword . 
Another was killed in the Rue Grenier-Saint-Lazare . 
In the Rue-Michelle-Comte , three officers fell dead one after the other . 
Many of the Municipal Guards , on being wounded , in the Rue des Lombards , retreated . 
In front of the Cour-Batave , a detachment of National Guards found a red flag bearing the following inscription : Republican revolution , No. 127 . 
Was this a revolution , in fact ? 
The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort of inextricable , tortuous , colossal citadel . 
There was the hearth ; there , evidently , was the question . 
All the rest was nothing but skirmishes . 
The proof that all would be decided there lay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet . 
In some regiments , the soldiers were uncertain , which added to the fearful uncertainty of the crisis . 
They recalled the popular ovation which had greeted the neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July , 1830 . 
Two intrepid men , tried in great wars , the Marshal Lobau and General Bugeaud , were in command , Bugeaud under Lobau . 
Enormous patrols , composed of battalions of the Line , enclosed in entire companies of the National Guard , and preceded by a commissary of police wearing his scarf of office , went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion . 
The insurgents , on their side , placed videttes at the corners of all open spaces , and audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades . 
Each side was watching the other . 
The Government , with an army in its hand , hesitated ; the night was almost upon them , and the Saint-Merry tocsin began to make itself heard . 
The Minister of War at that time , Marshal Soult , who had seen Austerlitz , regarded this with a gloomy air . 
These old sailors , accustomed to correct manoeuvres and having as resource and guide only tactics , that compass of battles , are utterly disconcerted in the presence of that immense foam which is called public wrath . 
The National Guards of the suburbs rushed up in haste and disorder . 
A battalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis , the 14th of the Line arrived from Courbevoie , the batteries of the Military School had taken up their position on the Carrousel ; cannons were descending from Vincennes . 
Solitude was formed around the Tuileries . 
Louis Philippe was perfectly serene . 
ORIGINALITY OF PARIS During the last two years , as we have said , Paris had witnessed more than one insurrection . 
Nothing is , generally , more singularly calm than the physiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of the rebellious quarters . 
Paris very speedily accustoms herself to anything , -- it is only a riot , -- and Paris has so many affairs on hand , that she does not put herself out for so small a matter . 
These colossal cities alone can offer such spectacles . 
These immense enclosures alone can contain at the same time civil war and an odd and indescribable tranquillity . 
Ordinarily , when an insurrection commences , when the shop-keeper hears the drum , the call to arms , the general alarm , he contents himself with the remark : -- `` There appears to be a squabble in the Rue Saint-Martin . '' 
Or : -- `` In the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . '' 
Often he adds carelessly : -- `` Or somewhere in that direction . '' 
Later on , when the heart-rending and mournful hubbub of musketry and firing by platoons becomes audible , the shopkeeper says : -- `` It 's getting hot ! 
Hullo , it 's getting hot ! '' 
A moment later , the riot approaches and gains in force , he shuts up his shop precipitately , hastily dons his uniform , that is to say , he places his merchandise in safety and risks his own person . 
