Has it been proved ? 
The name of Jean Valjean overwhelms him , and seems to dispense with proofs . 
Do not the attorneys for the Crown always proceed in this manner ? 
He is supposed to be a thief because he is known to be a convict . '' 
In another instant the thought had occurred to him that , when he denounced himself , the heroism of his deed might , perhaps , be taken into consideration , and his honest life for the last seven years , and what he had done for the district , and that they would have mercy on him . 
But this supposition vanished very quickly , and he smiled bitterly as he remembered that the theft of the forty sous from little Gervais put him in the position of a man guilty of a second offence after conviction , that this affair would certainly come up , and , according to the precise terms of the law , would render him liable to penal servitude for life . 
He turned aside from all illusions , detached himself more and more from earth , and sought strength and consolation elsewhere . 
He told himself that he must do his duty ; that perhaps he should not be more unhappy after doing his duty than after having avoided it ; that if he allowed things to take their own course , if he remained at M. sur M. , his consideration , his good name , his good works , the deference and veneration paid to him , his charity , his wealth , his popularity , his virtue , would be seasoned with a crime . 
And what would be the taste of all these holy things when bound up with this hideous thing ? 
while , if he accomplished his sacrifice , a celestial idea would be mingled with the galleys , the post , the iron necklet , the green cap , unceasing toil , and pitiless shame . 
At length he told himself that it must be so , that his destiny was thus allotted , that he had not authority to alter the arrangements made on high , that , in any case , he must make his choice : virtue without and abomination within , or holiness within and infamy without . 
The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage to fail , but his brain grow weary . 
He began to think of other things , of indifferent matters , in spite of himself . 
The veins in his temples throbbed violently ; he still paced to and fro ; midnight sounded first from the parish church , then from the town-hall ; he counted the twelve strokes of the two clocks , and compared the sounds of the two bells ; he recalled in this connection the fact that , a few days previously , he had seen in an ironmonger 's shop an ancient clock for sale , upon which was written the name , Antoine-Albin de Romainville . 
He was cold ; he lighted a small fire ; it did not occur to him to close the window . 
In the meantime he had relapsed into his stupor ; he was obliged to make a tolerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of his thoughts before midnight had struck ; he finally succeeded in doing this . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he said to himself , `` I had resolved to inform against myself . '' 
And then , all of a sudden , he thought of Fantine . 
`` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` and what about that poor woman ? '' 
Here a fresh crisis declared itself . 
Fantine , by appearing thus abruptly in his revery , produced the effect of an unexpected ray of light ; it seemed to him as though everything about him were undergoing a change of aspect : he exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
but I have hitherto considered no one but myself ; it is proper for me to hold my tongue or to denounce myself , to conceal my person or to save my soul , to be a despicable and respected magistrate , or an infamous and venerable convict ; it is I , it is always I and nothing but I : but , good God ! 
all this is egotism ; these are diverse forms of egotism , but it is egotism all the same . 
What if I were to think a little about others ? 
The highest holiness is to think of others ; come , let us examine the matter . 
The I excepted , the I effaced , the I forgotten , what would be the result of all this ? 
What if I denounce myself ? 
I am arrested ; this Champmathieu is released ; I am put back in the galleys ; that is well -- and what then ? 
What is going on here ? 
Ah ! 
here is a country , a town , here are factories , an industry , workers , both men and women , aged grandsires , children , poor people ! 
All this I have created ; all these I provide with their living ; everywhere where there is a smoking chimney , it is I who have placed the brand on the hearth and meat in the pot ; I have created ease , circulation , credit ; before me there was nothing ; I have elevated , vivified , informed with life , fecundated , stimulated , enriched the whole country-side ; lacking me , the soul is lacking ; I take myself off , everything dies : and this woman , who has suffered so much , who possesses so many merits in spite of her fall ; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been ! 
And that child whom I meant to go in search of , whom I have promised to her mother ; do I not also owe something to this woman , in reparation for the evil which I have done her ? 
If I disappear , what happens ? 
The mother dies ; the child becomes what it can ; that is what will take place , if I denounce myself . 
If I do not denounce myself ? 
come , let us see how it will be if I do not denounce myself . '' 
After putting this question to himself , he paused ; he seemed to undergo a momentary hesitation and trepidation ; but it did not last long , and he answered himself calmly : -- `` Well , this man is going to the galleys ; it is true , but what the deuce ! 
he has stolen ! 
There is no use in my saying that he has not been guilty of theft , for he has ! 
I remain here ; I go on : in ten years I shall have made ten millions ; I scatter them over the country ; I have nothing of my own ; what is that to me ? 
It is not for myself that I am doing it ; the prosperity of all goes on augmenting ; industries are aroused and animated ; factories and shops are multiplied ; families , a hundred families , a thousand families , are happy ; the district becomes populated ; villages spring up where there were only farms before ; farms rise where there was nothing ; wretchedness disappears , and with wretchedness debauchery , prostitution , theft , murder ; all vices disappear , all crimes : and this poor mother rears her child ; and behold a whole country rich and honest ! 
Ah ! 
I was a fool ! 
I was absurd ! 
what was that I was saying about denouncing myself ? 
I really must pay attention and not be precipitate about anything . 
What ! 
