She has also found in a corner of the attic two wooden pier-tables of ancient fashion . 
They asked us two crowns of six francs each to regild them , but it is much better to give the money to the poor ; and they are very ugly besides , and I should much prefer a round table of mahogany . 
I am always very happy . 
My brother is so good . 
He gives all he has to the poor and sick . 
We are very much cramped . 
The country is trying in the winter , and we really must do something for those who are in need . 
We are almost comfortably lighted and warmed . 
You see that these are great treats . 
My brother has ways of his own . 
When he talks , he says that a bishop ought to be so . 
Just imagine ! 
the door of our house is never fastened . 
Whoever chooses to enter finds himself at once in my brother 's room . 
He fears nothing , even at night . 
That is his sort of bravery , he says . 
He does not wish me or Madame Magloire feel any fear for him . 
He exposes himself to all sorts of dangers , and he does not like to have us even seem to notice it . 
One must know how to understand him . 
He goes out in the rain , he walks in the water , he travels in winter . 
He fears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters , nor night . 
Last year he went quite alone into a country of robbers . 
He would not take us . 
He was absent for a fortnight . 
On his return nothing had happened to him ; he was thought to be dead , but was perfectly well , and said , `` This is the way I have been robbed ! '' 
And then he opened a trunk full of jewels , all the jewels of the cathedral of Embrun , which the thieves had given him . 
When he returned on that occasion , I could not refrain from scolding him a little , taking care , however , not to speak except when the carriage was making a noise , so that no one might hear me . 
At first I used to say to myself , `` There are no dangers which will stop him ; he is terrible . '' 
Now I have ended by getting used to it . 
I make a sign to Madam Magloire that she is not to oppose him . 
He risks himself as he sees fit . 
I carry off Madam Magloire , I enter my chamber , I pray for him and fall asleep . 
I am at ease , because I know that if anything were to happen to him , it would be the end of me . 
I should go to the good God with my brother and my bishop . 
It has cost Madam Magloire more trouble than it did me to accustom herself to what she terms his imprudences . 
But now the habit has been acquired . 
We pray together , we tremble together , and we fall asleep . 
If the devil were to enter this house , he would be allowed to do so . 
After all , what is there for us to fear in this house ? 
There is always some one with us who is stronger than we . 
The devil may pass through it , but the good God dwells here . 
This suffices me . 
My brother has no longer any need of saying a word to me . 
I understand him without his speaking , and we abandon ourselves to the care of Providence . 
That is the way one has to do with a man who possesses grandeur of soul . 
I have interrogated my brother with regard to the information which you desire on the subject of the Faux family . 
You are aware that he knows everything , and that he has memories , because he is still a very good royalist . 
They really are a very ancient Norman family of the generalship of Caen . 
Five hundred years ago there was a Raoul de Faux , a Jean de Faux , and a Thomas de Faux , who were gentlemen , and one of whom was a seigneur de Rochefort . 
The last was Guy-Etienne-Alexandre , and was commander of a regiment , and something in the light horse of Bretagne . 
