`` It 's lucky that Grantaire is asleep . 
If he were on foot , there would be a good deal of difficulty in saving those bottles . '' 
-- Enjolras , in spite of all murmurs , placed his veto on the fifteen bottles , and , in order that no one might touch them , he had them placed under the table on which Father Mabeuf was lying . 
About two o'clock in the morning , they reckoned up their strength . 
There were still thirty-seven of them . 
The day began to dawn . 
The torch , which had been replaced in its cavity in the pavement , had just been extinguished . 
The interior of the barricade , that species of tiny courtyard appropriated from the street , was bathed in shadows , and resembled , athwart the vague , twilight horror , the deck of a disabled ship . 
The combatants , as they went and came , moved about there like black forms . 
Above that terrible nesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividly outlined ; at the very top , the chimneys stood palely out . 
The sky was of that charming , undecided hue , which may be white and may be blue . 
Birds flew about in it with cries of joy . 
The lofty house which formed the back of the barricade , being turned to the East , had upon its roof a rosy reflection . 
The morning breeze ruffled the gray hair on the head of the dead man at the third-story window . 
`` I am delighted that the torch has been extinguished , '' said Courfeyrac to Feuilly . 
`` That torch flickering in the wind annoyed me . 
It had the appearance of being afraid . 
The light of torches resembles the wisdom of cowards ; it gives a bad light because it trembles . '' 
Dawn awakens minds as it does the birds ; all began to talk . 
Joly , perceiving a cat prowling on a gutter , extracted philosophy from it . 
`` What is the cat ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` It is a corrective . 
The good God , having made the mouse , said : ` Hullo ! 
I have committed a blunder . ' 
And so he made the cat . 
The cat is the erratum of the mouse . 
The mouse , plus the cat , is the proof of creation revised and corrected . '' 
Combeferre , surrounded by students and artisans , was speaking of the dead , of Jean Prouvaire , of Bahorel , of Mabeuf , and even of Cabuc , and of Enjolras ' sad severity . 
He said : -- `` Harmodius and Aristogiton , Brutus , Chereas , Stephanus , Cromwell , Charlotte Corday , Sand , have all had their moment of agony when it was too late . 
Our hearts quiver so , and human life is such a mystery that , even in the case of a civic murder , even in a murder for liberation , if there be such a thing , the remorse for having struck a man surpasses the joy of having served the human race . '' 
And , such are the windings of the exchange of speech , that , a moment later , by a transition brought about through Jean Prouvaire 's verses , Combeferre was comparing the translators of the Georgics , Raux with Cournand , Cournand with Delille , pointing out the passages translated by Malfilatre , particularly the prodigies of Caesar 's death ; and at that word , Caesar , the conversation reverted to Brutus . 
`` Caesar , '' said Combeferre , `` fell justly . 
Cicero was severe towards Caesar , and he was right . 
That severity is not diatribe . 
When Zoilus insults Homer , when Maevius insults Virgil , when Vise insults Moliere , when Pope insults Shakspeare , when Frederic insults Voltaire , it is an old law of envy and hatred which is being carried out ; genius attracts insult , great men are always more or less barked at . 
But Zoilus and Cicero are two different persons . 
Cicero is an arbiter in thought , just as Brutus is an arbiter by the sword . 
For my own part , I blame that last justice , the blade ; but , antiquity admitted it . 
Caesar , the violator of the Rubicon , conferring , as though they came from him , the dignities which emanated from the people , not rising at the entrance of the senate , committed the acts of a king and almost of a tyrant , regia ac pene tyrannica . 
He was a great man ; so much the worse , or so much the better ; the lesson is but the more exalted . 
His twenty-three wounds touch me less than the spitting in the face of Jesus Christ . 
Caesar is stabbed by the senators ; Christ is cuffed by lackeys . 
One feels the God through the greater outrage . '' 
Bossuet , who towered above the interlocutors from the summit of a heap of paving-stones , exclaimed , rifle in hand : -- `` Oh Cydathenaeum , Oh Myrrhinus , Oh Probalinthus , Oh graces of the AEantides ! 
Oh ! 
Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a Greek of Laurium or of Edapteon ? '' 
LIGHT AND SHADOW Enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance . 
He had made his way out through Mondetour lane , gliding along close to the houses . 
The insurgents , we will remark , were full of hope . 
