`` And now there 's the other one ! 
Will you hold your tongue , you hussy ? 
It 's a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates , and where women of the town are cared for like countesses ! 
Ah ! 
But we are going to change all that ; it is high time ! '' 
He stared intently at Fantine , and added , once more taking into his grasp Jean Valjean 's cravat , shirt and collar : -- `` I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is no Monsieur le Maire . 
There is a thief , a brigand , a convict named Jean Valjean ! 
And I have him in my grasp ! 
That 's what there is ! '' 
Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound , supporting herself on her stiffened arms and on both hands : she gazed at Jean Valjean , she gazed at Javert , she gazed at the nun , she opened her mouth as though to speak ; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat , her teeth chattered ; she stretched out her arms in her agony , opening her hands convulsively , and fumbling about her like a drowning person ; then suddenly fell back on her pillow . 
Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her breast , with gaping mouth and staring , sightless eyes . 
She was dead . 
Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert , and opened it as he would have opened the hand of a baby ; then he said to Javert : -- `` You have murdered that woman . '' 
`` Let 's have an end of this ! '' 
shouted Javert , in a fury ; `` I am not here to listen to argument . 
Let us economize all that ; the guard is below ; march on instantly , or you 'll get the thumb-screws ! '' 
In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead , which was in a decidedly decrepit state , and which served the sisters as a camp-bed when they were watching with the sick . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to this bed , in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece , which was already in a dilapidated condition , an easy matter to muscles like his , grasped the principal rod like a bludgeon , and glanced at Javert . 
Javert retreated towards the door . 
Jean Valjean , armed with his bar of iron , walked slowly up to Fantine 's couch . 
When he arrived there he turned and said to Javert , in a voice that was barely audible : -- `` I advise you not to disturb me at this moment . '' 
One thing is certain , and that is , that Javert trembled . 
It did occur to him to summon the guard , but Jean Valjean might avail himself of that moment to effect his escape ; so he remained , grasped his cane by the small end , and leaned against the door-post , without removing his eyes from Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed , and his brow on his hand , and began to contemplate the motionless body of Fantine , which lay extended there . 
He remained thus , mute , absorbed , evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life . 
Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressible pity . 
After a few moments of this meditation he bent towards Fantine , and spoke to her in a low voice . 
What did he say to her ? 
What could this man , who was reproved , say to that woman , who was dead ? 
What words were those ? 
No one on earth heard them . 
Did the dead woman hear them ? 
There are some touching illusions which are , perhaps , sublime realities . 
The point as to which there exists no doubt is , that Sister Simplice , the sole witness of the incident , often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered in Fantine 's ear , she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on those pale lips , and in those dim eyes , filled with the amazement of the tomb . 
Jean Valjean took Fantine 's head in both his hands , and arranged it on the pillow as a mother might have done for her child ; then he tied the string of her chemise , and smoothed her hair back under her cap . 
That done , he closed her eyes . 
Fantine 's face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment . 
Death , that signifies entrance into the great light . 
Fantine 's hand was hanging over the side of the bed . 
Jean Valjean knelt down before that hand , lifted it gently , and kissed it . 
Then he rose , and turned to Javert . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` I am at your disposal . '' 
A SUITABLE TOMB Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison . 
The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation , or rather , an extraordinary commotion in M. sur M . 
We are sorry that we can not conceal the fact , that at the single word , `` He was a convict , '' nearly every one deserted him . 
In less than two hours all the good that he had done had been forgotten , and he was nothing but a `` convict from the galleys . '' 
It is just to add that the details of what had taken place at Arras were not yet known . 
All day long conversations like the following were to be heard in all quarters of the town : -- `` You do n't know ? 
He was a liberated convict ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
