In summer , we 'll go to the Glaciere with Navet , one of my pals , we 'll bathe in the Gare , we 'll run stark naked in front of the rafts on the bridge at Austerlitz , -- that makes the laundresses raging . 
They scream , they get mad , and if you only knew how ridiculous they are ! 
We 'll go and see the man-skeleton . 
And then I 'll take you to the play . 
I 'll take you to see Frederick Lemaitre . 
I have tickets , I know some of the actors , I even played in a piece once . 
There were a lot of us fellers , and we ran under a cloth , and that made the sea . 
I 'll get you an engagement at my theatre . 
We 'll go to see the savages . 
They ai n't real , those savages ai n't . 
They wear pink tights that go all in wrinkles , and you can see where their elbows have been darned with white . 
Then , we 'll go to the Opera . 
We 'll get in with the hired applauders . 
The Opera claque is well managed . 
I would n't associate with the claque on the boulevard . 
At the Opera , just fancy ! 
some of them pay twenty sous , but they 're ninnies . 
They 're called dishclouts . 
And then we 'll go to see the guillotine work . 
I 'll show you the executioner . 
He lives in the Rue des Marais . 
Monsieur Sanson . 
He has a letter-box at his door . 
Ah ! 
we 'll have famous fun ! '' 
At that moment a drop of wax fell on Gavroche 's finger , and recalled him to the realities of life . 
`` The deuce ! '' 
said he , `` there 's the wick giving out . 
Attention ! 
I ca n't spend more than a sou a month on my lighting . 
When a body goes to bed , he must sleep . 
We have n't the time to read M. Paul de Kock 's romances . 
And besides , the light might pass through the cracks of the porte-cochere , and all the bobbies need to do is to see it . '' 
`` And then , '' remarked the elder timidly , -- he alone dared talk to Gavroche , and reply to him , `` a spark might fall in the straw , and we must look out and not burn the house down . '' 
`` People do n't say ` burn the house down , ' '' remarked Gavroche , `` they say ` blaze the crib . ' '' 
The storm increased in violence , and the heavy downpour beat upon the back of the colossus amid claps of thunder . 
`` You 're taken in , rain ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` It amuses me to hear the decanter run down the legs of the house . 
Winter is a stupid ; it wastes its merchandise , it loses its labor , it ca n't wet us , and that makes it kick up a row , old water-carrier that it is . '' 
This allusion to the thunder , all the consequences of which Gavroche , in his character of a philosopher of the nineteenth century , accepted , was followed by a broad flash of lightning , so dazzling that a hint of it entered the belly of the elephant through the crack . 
Almost at the same instant , the thunder rumbled with great fury . 
The two little creatures uttered a shriek , and started up so eagerly that the network came near being displaced , but Gavroche turned his bold face to them , and took advantage of the clap of thunder to burst into a laugh . 
`` Calm down , children . 
Do n't topple over the edifice . 
That 's fine , first-class thunder ; all right . 
That 's no slouch of a streak of lightning . 
Bravo for the good God ! 
Deuce take it ! 
It 's almost as good as it is at the Ambigu . '' 
