Still , how had it come to pass that , having fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , he had been picked up by the police-agent on the banks of the Seine , near the Pont des Invalides ? 
Some one had carried him from the Quartier des Halles to the Champs-Elysees . 
And how ? 
Through the sewer . 
Unheard-of devotion ! 
Some one ? 
Who ? 
This was the man for whom Marius was searching . 
Of this man , who was his savior , nothing ; not a trace ; not the faintest indication . 
Marius , although forced to preserve great reserve , in that direction , pushed his inquiries as far as the prefecture of police . 
There , no more than elsewhere , did the information obtained lead to any enlightenment . 
The prefecture knew less about the matter than did the hackney-coachman . 
They had no knowledge of any arrest having been made on the 6th of June at the mouth of the Grand Sewer . 
No report of any agent had been received there upon this matter , which was regarded at the prefecture as a fable . 
The invention of this fable was attributed to the coachman . 
A coachman who wants a gratuity is capable of anything , even of imagination . 
The fact was assured , nevertheless , and Marius could not doubt it , unless he doubted his own identity , as we have just said . 
Everything about this singular enigma was inexplicable . 
What had become of that man , that mysterious man , whom the coachman had seen emerge from the grating of the Grand Sewer bearing upon his back the unconscious Marius , and whom the police-agent on the watch had arrested in the very act of rescuing an insurgent ? 
What had become of the agent himself ? 
Why had this agent preserved silence ? 
Had the man succeeded in making his escape ? 
Had he bribed the agent ? 
Why did this man give no sign of life to Marius , who owed everything to him ? 
His disinterestedness was no less tremendous than his devotion . 
Why had not that man appeared again ? 
Perhaps he was above compensation , but no one is above gratitude . 
Was he dead ? 
Who was the man ? 
What sort of a face had he ? 
No one could tell him this . 
The coachman answered : `` The night was very dark . '' 
Basque and Nicolette , all in a flutter , had looked only at their young master all covered with blood . 
The porter , whose candle had lighted the tragic arrival of Marius , had been the only one to take note of the man in question , and this is the description that he gave : `` That man was terrible . '' 
Marius had the blood-stained clothing which he had worn when he had been brought back to his grandfather preserved , in the hope that it would prove of service in his researches . 
On examining the coat , it was found that one skirt had been torn in a singular way . 
A piece was missing . 
One evening , Marius was speaking in the presence of Cosette and Jean Valjean of the whole of that singular adventure , of the innumerable inquiries which he had made , and of the fruitlessness of his efforts . 
The cold countenance of `` Monsieur Fauchelevent '' angered him . 
He exclaimed , with a vivacity which had something of wrath in it : `` Yes , that man , whoever he may have been , was sublime . 
Do you know what he did , sir ? 
He intervened like an archangel . 
He must have flung himself into the midst of the battle , have stolen me away , have opened the sewer , have dragged me into it and have carried me through it ! 
He must have traversed more than a league and a half in those frightful subterranean galleries , bent over , weighed down , in the dark , in the cess-pool , -- more than a league and a half , sir , with a corpse upon his back ! 
And with what object ? 
With the sole object of saving the corpse . 
And that corpse I was . 
He said to himself : ` There may still be a glimpse of life there , perchance ; I will risk my own existence for that miserable spark ! ' 
And his existence he risked not once but twenty times ! 
And every step was a danger . 
