There is a market for human flesh ; and it is not with your shadowy hands , shuddering around them , that you will prevent them from entering it ! 
Think of the street , think of the pavement covered with passers-by , think of the shops past which women go and come with necks all bare , and through the mire . 
These women , too , were pure once . 
Think of your sisters , those of you who have them . 
Misery , prostitution , the police , Saint-Lazare -- that is what those beautiful , delicate girls , those fragile marvels of modesty , gentleness and loveliness , fresher than lilacs in the month of May , will come to . 
Ah ! 
you have got yourselves killed ! 
You are no longer on hand ! 
That is well ; you have wished to release the people from Royalty , and you deliver over your daughters to the police . 
Friends , have a care , have mercy . 
Women , unhappy women , we are not in the habit of bestowing much thought on them . 
We trust to the women not having received a man 's education , we prevent their reading , we prevent their thinking , we prevent their occupying themselves with politics ; will you prevent them from going to the dead-house this evening , and recognizing your bodies ? 
Let us see , those who have families must be tractable , and shake hands with us and take themselves off , and leave us here alone to attend to this affair . 
I know well that courage is required to leave , that it is hard ; but the harder it is , the more meritorious . 
You say : ` I have a gun , I am at the barricade ; so much the worse , I shall remain there . ' 
So much the worse is easily said . 
My friends , there is a morrow ; you will not be here to-morrow , but your families will ; and what sufferings ! 
See , here is a pretty , healthy child , with cheeks like an apple , who babbles , prattles , chatters , who laughs , who smells sweet beneath your kiss , -- and do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned ? 
I have seen one , a very small creature , no taller than that . 
His father was dead . 
Poor people had taken him in out of charity , but they had bread only for themselves . 
The child was always hungry . 
It was winter . 
He did not cry . 
You could see him approach the stove , in which there was never any fire , and whose pipe , you know , was of mastic and yellow clay . 
His breathing was hoarse , his face livid , his limbs flaccid , his belly prominent . 
He said nothing . 
If you spoke to him , he did not answer . 
He is dead . 
He was taken to the Necker Hospital , where I saw him . 
I was house-surgeon in that hospital . 
Now , if there are any fathers among you , fathers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child 's tiny hand in their robust hand , let each one of those fathers imagine that this child is his own . 
That poor brat , I remember , and I seem to see him now , when he lay nude on the dissecting table , how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves beneath the grass in a cemetery . 
A sort of mud was found in his stomach . 
There were ashes in his teeth . 
Come , let us examine ourselves conscientiously and take counsel with our heart . 
Statistics show that the mortality among abandoned children is fifty-five per cent . 
I repeat , it is a question of women , it concerns mothers , it concerns young girls , it concerns little children . 
Who is talking to you of yourselves ? 
We know well what you are ; we know well that you are all brave , parbleu ! 
we know well that you all have in your souls the joy and the glory of giving your life for the great cause ; we know well that you feel yourselves elected to die usefully and magnificently , and that each one of you clings to his share in the triumph . 
Very well . 
But you are not alone in this world . 
There are other beings of whom you must think . 
You must not be egoists . '' 
All dropped their heads with a gloomy air . 
Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments . 
Combeferre , who spoke thus , was not an orphan . 
He recalled the mothers of other men , and forgot his own . 
He was about to get himself killed . 
