`` No , not that , '' said Marius , in a supplicating tone . 
`` We have to finish something . '' 
`` Still no ? '' 
Marius assumed a grave tone : `` I assure you , Cosette , that it is impossible . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you put on your man 's voice , sir . 
That is well , I go . 
You , father , have not upheld me . 
Monsieur my father , monsieur my husband , you are tyrants . 
I shall go and tell grandpapa . 
If you think that I am going to return and talk platitudes to you , you are mistaken . 
I am proud . 
I shall wait for you now . 
You shall see , that it is you who are going to be bored without me . 
I am going , it is well . '' 
And she left the room . 
Two seconds later , the door opened once more , her fresh and rosy head was again thrust between the two leaves , and she cried to them : `` I am very angry indeed . '' 
The door closed again , and the shadows descended once more . 
It was as though a ray of sunlight should have suddenly traversed the night , without itself being conscious of it . 
Marius made sure that the door was securely closed . 
`` Poor Cosette ! '' 
he murmured , `` when she finds out ... '' At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb . 
He fixed on Marius a bewildered eye . 
`` Cosette ! 
oh yes , it is true , you are going to tell Cosette about this . 
That is right . 
Stay , I had not thought of that . 
One has the strength for one thing , but not for another . 
Sir , I conjure you , I entreat now , sir , give me your most sacred word of honor , that you will not tell her . 
Is it not enough that you should know it ? 
I have been able to say it myself without being forced to it , I could have told it to the universe , to the whole world , -- it was all one to me . 
But she , she does not know what it is , it would terrify her . 
What , a convict ! 
we should be obliged to explain matters to her , to say to her : ` He is a man who has been in the galleys . ' 
She saw the chain-gang pass by one day . 
Oh ! 
My God ! '' 
... He dropped into an arm-chair and hid his face in his hands . 
His grief was not audible , but from the quivering of his shoulders it was evident that he was weeping . 
Silent tears , terrible tears . 
There is something of suffocation in the sob . 
He was seized with a sort of convulsion , he threw himself against the back of the chair as though to gain breath , letting his arms fall , and allowing Marius to see his face inundated with tears , and Marius heard him murmur , so low that his voice seemed to issue from fathomless depths : `` Oh ! 
would that I could die ! '' 
`` Be at your ease , '' said Marius , `` I will keep your secret for myself alone . '' 
x And , less touched , perhaps , than he ought to have been , but forced , for the last hour , to familiarize himself with something as unexpected as it was dreadful , gradually beholding the convict superposed before his very eyes , upon M. Fauchelevent , overcome , little by little , by that lugubrious reality , and led , by the natural inclination of the situation , to recognize the space which had just been placed between that man and himself , Marius added : `` It is impossible that I should not speak a word to you with regard to the deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted . 
That is an act of probity . 
It is just that some recompense should be bestowed on you . 
Fix the sum yourself , it shall be counted out to you . 
Do not fear to set it very high . '' 
`` I thank you , sir , '' replied Jean Valjean , gently . 
