The shore , beginning with the rubbish heap , was only about thirty paces long , then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of the quay . 
The fugitive could not have thrown himself into the Seine without being seen by the man who was following him . 
What had become of him ? 
The man in the buttoned-up coat walked to the extremity of the shore , and remained there in thought for a moment , his fists clenched , his eyes searching . 
All at once he smote his brow . 
He had just perceived , at the point where the land came to an end and the water began , a large iron grating , low , arched , garnished with a heavy lock and with three massive hinges . 
This grating , a sort of door pierced at the base of the quay , opened on the river as well as on the shore . 
A blackish stream passed under it . 
This stream discharged into the Seine . 
Beyond the heavy , rusty iron bars , a sort of dark and vaulted corridor could be descried . 
The man folded his arms and stared at the grating with an air of reproach . 
As this gaze did not suffice , he tried to thrust it aside ; he shook it , it resisted solidly . 
It is probable that it had just been opened , although no sound had been heard , a singular circumstance in so rusty a grating ; but it is certain that it had been closed again . 
This indicated that the man before whom that door had just opened had not a hook but a key . 
This evidence suddenly burst upon the mind of the man who was trying to move the grating , and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation : `` That is too much ! 
A government key ! '' 
Then , immediately regaining his composure , he expressed a whole world of interior ideas by this outburst of monosyllables accented almost ironically : `` Come ! 
Come ! 
Come ! 
Come ! '' 
That said , and in the hope of something or other , either that he should see the man emerge or other men enter , he posted himself on the watch behind a heap of rubbish , with the patient rage of a pointer . 
The hackney-coach , which regulated all its movements on his , had , in its turn , halted on the quay above him , close to the parapet . 
The coachman , foreseeing a prolonged wait , encased his horses ' muzzles in the bag of oats which is damp at the bottom , and which is so familiar to Parisians , to whom , be it said in parenthesis , the Government sometimes applies it . 
The rare passers-by on the Pont de Jena turned their heads , before they pursued their way , to take a momentary glance at these two motionless items in the landscape , the man on the shore , the carriage on the quay . 
HE ALSO BEARS HIS CROSS Jean Valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused . 
This march became more and more laborious . 
The level of these vaults varies ; the average height is about five feet , six inches , and has been calculated for the stature of a man ; Jean Valjean was forced to bend over , in order not to strike Marius against the vault ; at every step he had to bend , then to rise , and to feel incessantly of the wall . 
The moisture of the stones , and the viscous nature of the timber framework furnished but poor supports to which to cling , either for hand or foot . 
He stumbled along in the hideous dung-heap of the city . 
The intermittent gleams from the air-holes only appeared at very long intervals , and were so wan that the full sunlight seemed like the light of the moon ; all the rest was mist , miasma , opaqueness , blackness . 
Jean Valjean was both hungry and thirsty ; especially thirsty ; and this , like the sea , was a place full of water where a man can not drink . 
His strength , which was prodigious , as the reader knows , and which had been but little decreased by age , thanks to his chaste and sober life , began to give way , nevertheless . 
Fatigue began to gain on him ; and as his strength decreased , it made the weight of his burden increase . 
Marius , who was , perhaps , dead , weighed him down as inert bodies weigh . 
Jean Valjean held him in such a manner that his chest was not oppressed , and so that respiration could proceed as well as possible . 
Between his legs he felt the rapid gliding of the rats . 
One of them was frightened to such a degree that he bit him . 
From time to time , a breath of fresh air reached him through the vent-holes of the mouths of the sewer , and re-animated him . 
It might have been three hours past midday when he reached the belt-sewer . 
He was , at first , astonished at this sudden widening . 
He found himself , all at once , in a gallery where his outstretched hands could not reach the two walls , and beneath a vault which his head did not touch . 
The Grand Sewer is , in fact , eight feet wide and seven feet high . 
At the point where the Montmartre sewer joins the Grand Sewer , two other subterranean galleries , that of the Rue de Provence , and that of the Abattoir , form a square . 
Between these four ways , a less sagacious man would have remained undecided . 
Jean Valjean selected the broadest , that is to say , the belt-sewer . 
But here the question again came up -- should he descend or ascend ? 
He thought that the situation required haste , and that he must now gain the Seine at any risk . 
In other terms , he must descend . 
He turned to the left . 
It was well that he did so , for it is an error to suppose that the belt-sewer has two outlets , the one in the direction of Bercy , the other towards Passy , and that it is , as its name indicates , the subterranean girdle of the Paris on the right bank . 
