The first cry of the enlightened and increasing throngs is : death to thieves ! 
Progress is an honest man ; the ideal and the absolute do not filch pocket-handkerchiefs . 
By whom were the wagons containing the wealth of the Tuileries escorted in 1848 ? 
By the rag-pickers of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
Rags mounted guard over the treasure . 
Virtue rendered these tatterdemalions resplendent . 
In those wagons in chests , hardly closed , and some , even , half-open , amid a hundred dazzling caskets , was that ancient crown of France , studded with diamonds , surmounted by the carbuncle of royalty , by the Regent diamond , which was worth thirty millions . 
Barefooted , they guarded that crown . 
Hence , no more Jacquerie . 
I regret it for the sake of the skilful . 
The old fear has produced its last effects in that quarter ; and henceforth it can no longer be employed in politics . 
The principal spring of the red spectre is broken . 
Every one knows it now . 
The scare-crow scares no longer . 
The birds take liberties with the mannikin , foul creatures alight upon it , the bourgeois laugh at it . 
THE TWO DUTIES : TO WATCH AND TO HOPE This being the case , is all social danger dispelled ? 
Certainly not . 
There is no Jacquerie ; society may rest assured on that point ; blood will no longer rush to its head . 
But let society take heed to the manner in which it breathes . 
Apoplexy is no longer to be feared , but phthisis is there . 
Social phthisis is called misery . 
One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck by lightning . 
Let us not weary of repeating , and sympathetic souls must not forget that this is the first of fraternal obligations , and selfish hearts must understand that the first of political necessities consists in thinking first of all of the disinherited and sorrowing throngs , in solacing , airing , enlightening , loving them , in enlarging their horizon to a magnificent extent , in lavishing upon them education in every form , in offering them the example of labor , never the example of idleness , in diminishing the individual burden by enlarging the notion of the universal aim , in setting a limit to poverty without setting a limit to wealth , in creating vast fields of public and popular activity , in having , like Briareus , a hundred hands to extend in all directions to the oppressed and the feeble , in employing the collective power for that grand duty of opening workshops for all arms , schools for all aptitudes , and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence , in augmenting salaries , diminishing trouble , balancing what should be and what is , that is to say , in proportioning enjoyment to effort and a glut to need ; in a word , in evolving from the social apparatus more light and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and those who are ignorant . 
And , let us say it , all this is but the beginning . 
The true question is this : labor can not be a law without being a right . 
We will not insist upon this point ; this is not the proper place for that . 
If nature calls itself Providence , society should call itself foresight . 
Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than material improvement . 
To know is a sacrament , to think is the prime necessity , truth is nourishment as well as grain . 
A reason which fasts from science and wisdom grows thin . 
Let us enter equal complaint against stomachs and minds which do not eat . 
If there is anything more heart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of bread , it is a soul which is dying from hunger for the light . 
The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution . 
Some day we shall be amazed . 
As the human race mounts upward , the deep layers emerge naturally from the zone of distress . 
The obliteration of misery will be accomplished by a simple elevation of level . 
We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation . 
The past is very strong , it is true , at the present moment . 
It censures . 
This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising . 
Behold , it is walking and advancing . 
It seems a victor ; this dead body is a conqueror . 
He arrives with his legions , superstitions , with his sword , despotism , with his banner , ignorance ; a while ago , he won ten battles . 
He advances , he threatens , he laughs , he is at our doors . 
Let us not despair , on our side . 
Let us sell the field on which Hannibal is encamped . 
What have we to fear , we who believe ? 
No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there exists a return of a river on its course . 
But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter . 
When they say `` no '' to progress , it is not the future but themselves that they are condemning . 
