There he turned round , bowed deeply to his grandfather , raised his head erect again , and said : -- `` Five years ago you insulted my father ; to-day you have insulted my wife . 
I ask nothing more of you , sir . 
Farewell . '' 
Father Gillenormand , utterly confounded , opened his mouth , extended his arms , tried to rise , and before he could utter a word , the door closed once more , and Marius had disappeared . 
The old man remained for several minutes motionless and as though struck by lightning , without the power to speak or breathe , as though a clenched fist grasped his throat . 
At last he tore himself from his arm-chair , ran , so far as a man can run at ninety-one , to the door , opened it , and cried : -- `` Help ! 
Help ! '' 
His daughter made her appearance , then the domestics . 
He began again , with a pitiful rattle : `` Run after him ! 
Bring him back ! 
What have I done to him ? 
He is mad ! 
He is going away ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
This time he will not come back ! '' 
He went to the window which looked out on the street , threw it open with his aged and palsied hands , leaned out more than half-way , while Basque and Nicolette held him behind , and shouted : -- `` Marius ! 
Marius ! 
Marius ! 
Marius ! '' 
But Marius could no longer hear him , for at that moment he was turning the corner of the Rue Saint-Louis . 
The octogenarian raised his hands to his temples two or three times with an expression of anguish , recoiled tottering , and fell back into an arm-chair , pulseless , voiceless , tearless , with quivering head and lips which moved with a stupid air , with nothing in his eyes and nothing any longer in his heart except a gloomy and profound something which resembled night . 
JEAN VALJEAN That same day , towards four o'clock in the afternoon , Jean Valjean was sitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in the Champ-de-Mars . 
Either from prudence , or from a desire to meditate , or simply in consequence of one of those insensible changes of habit which gradually introduce themselves into the existence of every one , he now rarely went out with Cosette . 
He had on his workman 's waistcoat , and trousers of gray linen ; and his long-visored cap concealed his countenance . 
He was calm and happy now beside Cosette ; that which had , for a time , alarmed and troubled him had been dissipated ; but for the last week or two , anxieties of another nature had come up . 
One day , while walking on the boulevard , he had caught sight of Thenardier ; thanks to his disguise , Thenardier had not recognized him ; but since that day , Jean Valjean had seen him repeatedly , and he was now certain that Thenardier was prowling about in their neighborhood . 
This had been sufficient to make him come to a decision . 
Moreover , Paris was not tranquil : political troubles presented this inconvenient feature , for any one who had anything to conceal in his life , that the police had grown very uneasy and very suspicious , and that while seeking to ferret out a man like Pepin or Morey , they might very readily discover a man like Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had made up his mind to quit Paris , and even France , and go over to England . 
He had warned Cosette . 
He wished to set out before the end of the week . 
He had seated himself on the slope in the Champ-de-Mars , turning over all sorts of thoughts in his mind , -- Thenardier , the police , the journey , and the difficulty of procuring a passport . 
He was troubled from all these points of view . 
Last of all , an inexplicable circumstance which had just attracted his attention , and from which he had not yet recovered , had added to his state of alarm . 
On the morning of that very day , when he alone of the household was stirring , while strolling in the garden before Cosette 's shutters were open , he had suddenly perceived on the wall , the following line , engraved , probably with a nail : -- 16 Rue de la Verrerie . 
This was perfectly fresh , the grooves in the ancient black mortar were white , a tuft of nettles at the foot of the wall was powdered with the fine , fresh plaster . 
This had probably been written on the preceding night . 
What was this ? 
A signal for others ? 
A warning for himself ? 
In any case , it was evident that the garden had been violated , and that strangers had made their way into it . 
He recalled the odd incidents which had already alarmed the household . 
His mind was now filling in this canvas . 
He took good care not to speak to Cosette of the line written on the wall , for fear of alarming her . 
In the midst of his preoccupations , he perceived , from a shadow cast by the sun , that some one had halted on the crest of the slope immediately behind him . 
He was on the point of turning round , when a paper folded in four fell upon his knees as though a hand had dropped it over his head . 
He took the paper , unfolded it , and read these words written in large characters , with a pencil : -- `` MOVE AWAY FROM YOUR HOUSE . '' 
