-LSB- 57 -RSB- -LSB- 57 -RSB- But some prisons still remain , and I am going to put a stop to this sort of public order . 
Does any one wish to play at skittles ? 
The whole ancient world fell in ruin , when the big ball rolled . 
Good old folks , let us smash with our crutches that Louvre where the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows . 
We have forced its gates . 
On that day , King Charles X. did not stick well and came unglued . 
The post 's recourse to arms was not without result . 
The cart was conquered , the drunken man was taken prisoner . 
The first was put in the pound , the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils of war as an accomplice . 
The public ministry of the day proved its indefatigable zeal in the defence of society , in this instance . 
Gavroche 's adventure , which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters of the Temple , is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly bourgeois of the Marais , and is entitled in their memories : `` The nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment . '' 
-LSB- The end of Volume IV . 
`` Saint Denis '' -RSB- VOLUME IV JEAN VALJEAN THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA OF THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work is laid . 
These two barricades , both of them symbols , under two different aspects , of a redoubtable situation , sprang from the earth at the time of the fatal insurrection of June , 1848 , the greatest war of the streets that history has ever beheld . 
It sometimes happens that , even contrary to principles , even contrary to liberty , equality , and fraternity , even contrary to the universal vote , even contrary to the government , by all for all , from the depths of its anguish , of its discouragements and its destitutions , of its fevers , of its distresses , of its miasmas , of its ignorances , of its darkness , that great and despairing body , the rabble , protests against , and that the populace wages battle against , the people . 
Beggars attack the common right ; the ochlocracy rises against demos . 
These are melancholy days ; for there is always a certain amount of night even in this madness , there is suicide in this duel , and those words which are intended to be insults -- beggars , canaille , ochlocracy , populace -- exhibit , alas ! 
rather the fault of those who reign than the fault of those who suffer ; rather the fault of the privileged than the fault of the disinherited . 
For our own part , we never pronounce those words without pain and without respect , for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they correspond , it often finds many a grandeur beside these miseries . 
Athens was an ochlocracy ; the beggars were the making of Holland ; the populace saved Rome more than once ; and the rabble followed Jesus Christ . 
There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificences of the lower classes . 
It was of this rabble that Saint Jerome was thinking , no doubt , and of all these poor people and all these vagabonds and all these miserable people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs , when he uttered this mysterious saying : `` Fex urbis , lex orbis , '' -- the dregs of the city , the law of the earth . 
The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds , its violences contrary to all sense , directed against the principles which are its life , its masterful deeds against the right , are its popular coups d'etat and should be repressed . 
The man of probity sacrifices himself , and out of his very love for this crowd , he combats it . 
But how excusable he feels it even while holding out against it ! 
How he venerates it even while resisting it ! 
This is one of those rare moments when , while doing that which it is one 's duty to do , one feels something which disconcerts one , and which would dissuade one from proceeding further ; one persists , it is necessary , but conscience , though satisfied , is sad , and the accomplishment of duty is complicated with a pain at the heart . 
June , 1848 , let us hasten to say , was an exceptional fact , and almost impossible of classification , in the philosophy of history . 
All the words which we have just uttered , must be discarded , when it becomes a question of this extraordinary revolt , in which one feels the holy anxiety of toil claiming its rights . 
It was necessary to combat it , and this was a duty , for it attacked the republic . 
But what was June , 1848 , at bottom ? 
A revolt of the people against itself . 
Where the subject is not lost sight of , there is no digression ; may we , then , be permitted to arrest the reader 's attention for a moment on the two absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which characterized this insurrection . 
One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine ; the other defended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple ; those before whom these two fearful masterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneath the brilliant blue sky of June , will never forget them . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous ; it was three stories high , and seven hundred feet wide . 
It barred the vast opening of the faubourg , that is to say , three streets , from angle to angle ; ravined , jagged , cut up , divided , crenelated , with an immense rent , buttressed with piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here and there , powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the faubourg , it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the formidable place which had seen the 14th of July . 
Nineteen barricades were ranged , one behind the other , in the depths of the streets behind this principal barricade . 
At the very sight of it , one felt the agonizing suffering in the immense faubourg , which had reached that point of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe . 
Of what was that barricade made ? 
Of the ruins of three six-story houses demolished expressly , said some . 
Of the prodigy of all wraths , said others . 
It wore the lamentable aspect of all constructions of hatred , ruin . 
It might be asked : Who built this ? 
It might also be said : Who destroyed this ? 
It was the improvisation of the ebullition . 
Hold ! 
take this door ! 
this grating ! 
this penthouse ! 
this chimney-piece ! 
