Then , turning to M. Leblanc , and continuing his lamentations : -- `` You see , sir ! 
All the clothing that I have is my wife 's chemise ! 
And all torn at that ! 
In the depths of winter ! 
I ca n't go out for lack of a coat . 
If I had a coat of any sort , I would go and see Mademoiselle Mars , who knows me and is very fond of me . 
Does she not still reside in the Rue de la Tour-des-Dames ? 
Do you know , sir ? 
We played together in the provinces . 
I shared her laurels . 
Celimene would come to my succor , sir ! 
Elmire would bestow alms on Belisaire ! 
But no , nothing ! 
And not a sou in the house ! 
My wife ill , and not a sou ! 
My daughter dangerously injured , not a sou ! 
My wife suffers from fits of suffocation . 
It comes from her age , and besides , her nervous system is affected . 
She ought to have assistance , and my daughter also ! 
But the doctor ! 
But the apothecary ! 
How am I to pay them ? 
I would kneel to a penny , sir ! 
Such is the condition to which the arts are reduced . 
And do you know , my charming young lady , and you , my generous protector , do you know , you who breathe forth virtue and goodness , and who perfume that church where my daughter sees you every day when she says her prayers ? 
-- For I have brought up my children religiously , sir . 
I did not want them to take to the theatre . 
Ah ! 
the hussies ! 
If I catch them tripping ! 
I do not jest , that I do n't ! 
I read them lessons on honor , on morality , on virtue ! 
Ask them ! 
They have got to walk straight . 
They are none of your unhappy wretches who begin by having no family , and end by espousing the public . 
One is Mamselle Nobody , and one becomes Madame Everybody . 
Deuce take it ! 
None of that in the Fabantou family ! 
I mean to bring them up virtuously , and they shall be honest , and nice , and believe in God , by the sacred name ! 
Well , sir , my worthy sir , do you know what is going to happen to-morrow ? 
To-morrow is the fourth day of February , the fatal day , the last day of grace allowed me by my landlord ; if by this evening I have not paid my rent , to-morrow my oldest daughter , my spouse with her fever , my child with her wound , -- we shall all four be turned out of here and thrown into the street , on the boulevard , without shelter , in the rain , in the snow . 
There , sir . 
I owe for four quarters -- a whole year ! 
that is to say , sixty francs . '' 
Jondrette lied . 
Four quarters would have amounted to only forty francs , and he could not owe four , because six months had not elapsed since Marius had paid for two . 
M. Leblanc drew five francs from his pocket and threw them on the table . 
Jondrette found time to mutter in the ear of his eldest daughter : -- `` The scoundrel ! 
What does he think I can do with his five francs ? 
That wo n't pay me for my chair and pane of glass ! 
