There one could hear the termination in anche of the old Thuneurs . 
Boyanches-tu -LRB- bois-tu -RRB- , do you drink ? 
But perpetual movement remains its law , nevertheless . 
If the philosopher succeeds in fixing , for a moment , for purposes of observation , this language which is incessantly evaporating , he falls into doleful and useful meditation . 
No study is more efficacious and more fecund in instruction . 
There is not a metaphor , not an analogy , in slang , which does not contain a lesson . 
Among these men , to beat means to feign ; one beats a malady ; ruse is their strength . 
For them , the idea of the man is not separated from the idea of darkness . 
The night is called la sorgue ; man , l'orgue . 
Man is a derivative of the night . 
They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light of an atmosphere which kills them , of a fatal force , and they speak of their liberty as one would speak of his health . 
A man under arrest is a sick man ; one who is condemned is a dead man . 
The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in which he is buried , is a sort of glacial chastity , and he calls the dungeon the castus . 
In that funereal place , life outside always presents itself under its most smiling aspect . 
The prisoner has irons on his feet ; you think , perhaps , that his thought is that it is with the feet that one walks ? 
No ; he is thinking that it is with the feet that one dances ; so , when he has succeeded in severing his fetters , his first idea is that now he can dance , and he calls the saw the bastringue -LRB- public-house ball -RRB- . 
-- A name is a centre ; profound assimilation . 
-- The ruffian has two heads , one of which reasons out his actions and leads him all his life long , and the other which he has upon his shoulders on the day of his death ; he calls the head which counsels him in crime la sorbonne , and the head which expiates it la tronche . 
-- When a man has no longer anything but rags upon his body and vices in his heart , when he has arrived at that double moral and material degradation which the word blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations , he is ripe for crime ; he is like a well-whetted knife ; he has two cutting edges , his distress and his malice ; so slang does not say a blackguard , it says un reguise . 
-- What are the galleys ? 
A brazier of damnation , a hell . 
The convict calls himself a fagot . 
-- And finally , what name do malefactors give to their prison ? 
The college . 
A whole penitentiary system can be evolved from that word . 
Does the reader wish to know where the majority of the songs of the galleys , those refrains called in the special vocabulary lirlonfa , have had their birth ? 
Let him listen to what follows : -- There existed at the Chatelet in Paris a large and long cellar . 
This cellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine . 
It had neither windows nor air-holes , its only aperture was the door ; men could enter there , air could not . 
This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone , and for floor ten inches of mud . 
It was flagged ; but the pavement had rotted and cracked under the oozing of the water . 
Eight feet above the floor , a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavation from side to side ; from this beam hung , at short distances apart , chains three feet long , and at the end of these chains there were rings for the neck . 
In this vault , men who had been condemned to the galleys were incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon . 
They were thrust under this beam , where each one found his fetters swinging in the darkness and waiting for him . 
The chains , those pendant arms , and the necklets , those open hands , caught the unhappy wretches by the throat . 
They were rivetted and left there . 
As the chain was too short , they could not lie down . 
They remained motionless in that cavern , in that night , beneath that beam , almost hanging , forced to unheard-of efforts to reach their bread , jug , or their vault overhead , mud even to mid-leg , filth flowing to their very calves , broken asunder with fatigue , with thighs and knees giving way , clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtain some rest , unable to sleep except when standing erect , and awakened every moment by the strangling of the collar ; some woke no more . 
In order to eat , they pushed the bread , which was flung to them in the mud , along their leg with their heel until it reached their hand . 
How long did they remain thus ? 
One month , two months , six months sometimes ; one stayed a year . 
It was the antechamber of the galleys . 
Men were put there for stealing a hare from the king . 
In this sepulchre-hell , what did they do ? 
What man can do in a sepulchre , they went through the agonies of death , and what can man do in hell , they sang ; for song lingers where there is no longer any hope . 
In the waters of Malta , when a galley was approaching , the song could be heard before the sound of the oars . 
Poor Survincent , the poacher , who had gone through the prison-cellar of the Chatelet , said : `` It was the rhymes that kept me up . '' 
Uselessness of poetry . 
What is the good of rhyme ? 
It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth . 
