`` Why do you call me you ? 
Have I done anything to you ? '' 
`` No , '' he answered . 
Certainly , he had nothing against her . 
Far from it . 
Only , he felt that he could not do otherwise , now that he used thou to Cosette , than say you to Eponine . 
As he remained silent , she exclaimed : -- `` Say -- '' Then she paused . 
It seemed as though words failed that creature formerly so heedless and so bold . 
She tried to smile and could not . 
Then she resumed : -- `` Well ? '' 
Then she paused again , and remained with downcast eyes . 
`` Good evening , Mr. Marius , '' said she suddenly and abruptly ; and away she went . 
A CAB RUNS IN ENGLISH AND BARKS IN SLANG The following day was the 3d of June , 1832 , a date which it is necessary to indicate on account of the grave events which at that epoch hung on the horizon of Paris in the state of lightning-charged clouds . 
Marius , at nightfall , was pursuing the same road as on the preceding evening , with the same thoughts of delight in his heart , when he caught sight of Eponine approaching , through the trees of the boulevard . 
Two days in succession -- this was too much . 
He turned hastily aside , quitted the boulevard , changed his course and went to the Rue Plumet through the Rue Monsieur . 
This caused Eponine to follow him to the Rue Plumet , a thing which she had not yet done . 
Up to that time , she had contented herself with watching him on his passage along the boulevard without ever seeking to encounter him . 
It was only on the evening before that she had attempted to address him . 
So Eponine followed him , without his suspecting the fact . 
She saw him displace the bar and slip into the garden . 
She approached the railing , felt of the bars one after the other , and readily recognized the one which Marius had moved . 
She murmured in a low voice and in gloomy accents : -- `` None of that , Lisette ! '' 
She seated herself on the underpinning of the railing , close beside the bar , as though she were guarding it . 
It was precisely at the point where the railing touched the neighboring wall . 
There was a dim nook there , in which Eponine was entirely concealed . 
She remained thus for more than an hour , without stirring and without breathing , a prey to her thoughts . 
Towards ten o'clock in the evening , one of the two or three persons who passed through the Rue Plumet , an old , belated bourgeois who was making haste to escape from this deserted spot of evil repute , as he skirted the garden railings and reached the angle which it made with the wall , heard a dull and threatening voice saying : -- `` I 'm no longer surprised that he comes here every evening . '' 
The passer-by cast a glance around him , saw no one , dared not peer into the black niche , and was greatly alarmed . 
He redoubled his pace . 
This passer-by had reason to make haste , for a very few instants later , six men , who were marching separately and at some distance from each other , along the wall , and who might have been taken for a gray patrol , entered the Rue Plumet . 
The first to arrive at the garden railing halted , and waited for the others ; a second later , all six were reunited . 
These men began to talk in a low voice . 
`` This is the place , '' said one of them . 
`` Is there a cab -LSB- dog -RSB- in the garden ? '' 
asked another . 
`` I do n't know . 
In any case , I have fetched a ball that we 'll make him eat . '' 
`` Have you some putty to break the pane with ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` The railing is old , '' interpolated a fifth , who had the voice of a ventriloquist . 
`` So much the better , '' said the second who had spoken . 
`` It wo n't screech under the saw , and it wo n't be hard to cut . '' 
The sixth , who had not yet opened his lips , now began to inspect the gate , as Eponine had done an hour earlier , grasping each bar in succession , and shaking them cautiously . 
Thus he came to the bar which Marius had loosened . 
As he was on the point of grasping this bar , a hand emerged abruptly from the darkness , fell upon his arm ; he felt himself vigorously thrust aside by a push in the middle of his breast , and a hoarse voice said to him , but not loudly : -- `` There 's a dog . '' 
At the same moment , he perceived a pale girl standing before him . 
The man underwent that shock which the unexpected always brings . 
He bristled up in hideous wise ; nothing is so formidable to behold as ferocious beasts who are uneasy ; their terrified air evokes terror . 
He recoiled and stammered : -- `` What jade is this ? '' 
