`` Because you are a woman and a child . '' 
`` Bah ! 
must men be cold and feel uncomfortable ? '' 
`` Certain men . '' 
`` That is good , I shall come here so often that you will be obliged to have a fire . '' 
And again she said to him : -- `` Father , why do you eat horrible bread like that ? '' 
`` Because , my daughter . '' 
`` Well , if you eat it , I will eat it too . '' 
Then , in order to prevent Cosette eating black bread , Jean Valjean ate white bread . 
Cosette had but a confused recollection of her childhood . 
She prayed morning and evening for her mother whom she had never known . 
The Thenardiers had remained with her as two hideous figures in a dream . 
She remembered that she had gone `` one day , at night , '' to fetch water in a forest . 
She thought that it had been very far from Paris . 
It seemed to her that she had begun to live in an abyss , and that it was Jean Valjean who had rescued her from it . 
Her childhood produced upon her the effect of a time when there had been nothing around her but millepeds , spiders , and serpents . 
When she meditated in the evening , before falling asleep , as she had not a very clear idea that she was Jean Valjean 's daughter , and that he was her father , she fancied that the soul of her mother had passed into that good man and had come to dwell near her . 
When he was seated , she leaned her cheek against his white hair , and dropped a silent tear , saying to herself : `` Perhaps this man is my mother . '' 
Cosette , although this is a strange statement to make , in the profound ignorance of a girl brought up in a convent , -- maternity being also absolutely unintelligible to virginity , -- had ended by fancying that she had had as little mother as possible . 
She did not even know her mother 's name . 
Whenever she asked Jean Valjean , Jean Valjean remained silent . 
If she repeated her question , he responded with a smile . 
Once she insisted ; the smile ended in a tear . 
This silence on the part of Jean Valjean covered Fantine with darkness . 
Was it prudence ? 
Was it respect ? 
Was it a fear that he should deliver this name to the hazards of another memory than his own ? 
So long as Cosette had been small , Jean Valjean had been willing to talk to her of her mother ; when she became a young girl , it was impossible for him to do so . 
It seemed to him that he no longer dared . 
Was it because of Cosette ? 
Was it because of Fantine ? 
He felt a certain religious horror at letting that shadow enter Cosette 's thought ; and of placing a third in their destiny . 
The more sacred this shade was to him , the more did it seem that it was to be feared . 
He thought of Fantine , and felt himself overwhelmed with silence . 
Through the darkness , he vaguely perceived something which appeared to have its finger on its lips . 
Had all the modesty which had been in Fantine , and which had violently quitted her during her lifetime , returned to rest upon her after her death , to watch in indignation over the peace of that dead woman , and in its shyness , to keep her in her grave ? 
Was Jean Valjean unconsciously submitting to the pressure ? 
We who believe in death , are not among the number who will reject this mysterious explanation . 
Hence the impossibility of uttering , even for Cosette , that name of Fantine . 
One day Cosette said to him : -- `` Father , I saw my mother in a dream last night . 
She had two big wings . 
My mother must have been almost a saint during her life . '' 
`` Through martyrdom , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
However , Jean Valjean was happy . 
When Cosette went out with him , she leaned on his arm , proud and happy , in the plenitude of her heart . 
Jean Valjean felt his heart melt within him with delight , at all these sparks of a tenderness so exclusive , so wholly satisfied with himself alone . 
The poor man trembled , inundated with angelic joy ; he declared to himself ecstatically that this would last all their lives ; he told himself that he really had not suffered sufficiently to merit so radiant a bliss , and he thanked God , in the depths of his soul , for having permitted him to be loved thus , he , a wretch , by that innocent being . 
THE ROSE PERCEIVES THAT IT IS AN ENGINE OF WAR One day , Cosette chanced to look at herself in her mirror , and she said to herself : `` Really ! '' 
It seemed to her almost that she was pretty . 
This threw her in a singularly troubled state of mind . 
