Magnificent ! '' 
Between nine o'clock and half-past ten the whole army , incredible as it may appear , had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines , forming , to repeat the Emperor 's expression , `` the figure of six V 's . '' 
A few moments after the formation of the battle-array , in the midst of that profound silence , like that which heralds the beginning of a storm , which precedes engagements , the Emperor tapped Haxo on the shoulder , as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders , detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon , Reille , and Lobau , and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean , which was situated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads , and said to him , `` There are four and twenty handsome maids , General . '' 
Sure of the issue , he encouraged with a smile , as they passed before him , the company of sappers of the first corps , which he had appointed to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried . 
All this serenity had been traversed by but a single word of haughty pity ; perceiving on his left , at a spot where there now stands a large tomb , those admirable Scotch Grays , with their superb horses , massing themselves , he said , `` It is a pity . '' 
Then he mounted his horse , advanced beyond Rossomme , and selected for his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of the road from Genappe to Brussels , which was his second station during the battle . 
The third station , the one adopted at seven o'clock in the evening , between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte , is formidable ; it is a rather elevated knoll , which still exists , and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the plain . 
Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of the road , up to Napoleon himself . 
As at Brienne , he had over his head the shriek of the bullets and of the heavy artillery . 
Mouldy cannon-balls , old sword-blades , and shapeless projectiles , eaten up with rust , were picked up at the spot where his horse ' feet stood . 
Scabra rubigine . 
A few years ago , a shell of sixty pounds , still charged , and with its fuse broken off level with the bomb , was unearthed . 
It was at this last post that the Emperor said to his guide , Lacoste , a hostile and terrified peasant , who was attached to the saddle of a hussar , and who turned round at every discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon : `` Fool , it is shameful ! 
You 'll get yourself killed with a ball in the back . '' 
He who writes these lines has himself found , in the friable soil of this knoll , on turning over the sand , the remains of the neck of a bomb , disintegrated , by the oxidization of six and forty years , and old fragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between the fingers . 
Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains , where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place , are no longer what they were on June 18 , 1815 . 
By taking from this mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it , its real relief has been taken away , and history , disconcerted , no longer finds her bearings there . 
It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifying it . 
Wellington , when he beheld Waterloo once more , two years later , exclaimed , `` They have altered my field of battle ! '' 
Where the great pyramid of earth , surmounted by the lion , rises to-day , there was a hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road , but which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe . 
The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe to Brussels : one , the English tomb , is on the left ; the other , the German tomb , is on the right . 
There is no French tomb . 
The whole of that plain is a sepulchre for France . 
Thanks to the thousands upon thousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one hundred and fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference , the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope . 
On the day of battle , particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte , it was abrupt and difficult of approach . 
The slope there is so steep that the English cannon could not see the farm , situated in the bottom of the valley , which was the centre of the combat . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the rains had still farther increased this acclivity , the mud complicated the problem of the ascent , and the men not only slipped back , but stuck fast in the mire . 
Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trench whose presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine . 
What was this trench ? 
Let us explain . 
Braine-l'Alleud is a Belgian village ; Ohain is another . 
These villages , both of them concealed in curves of the landscape , are connected by a road about a league and a half in length , which traverses the plain along its undulating level , and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow , which makes a ravine of this road in some places . 
In 1815 , as at the present day , this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles ; only , it is now on a level with the plain ; it was then a hollow way . 
Its two slopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock . 
This road was , and still is , a trench throughout the greater portion of its course ; a hollow trench , sometimes a dozen feet in depth , and whose banks , being too steep , crumbled away here and there , particularly in winter , under driving rains . 
Accidents happened here . 
The road was so narrow at the Braine-l'Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart , as is proved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery , and which gives the name of the dead , Monsieur Bernard Debrye , Merchant of Brussels , and the date of the accident , February , 1637 . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- It was so deep on the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant , Mathieu Nicaise , was crushed there , in 1783 , by a slide from the slope , as is stated on another stone cross , the top of which has disappeared in the process of clearing the ground , but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the grassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- This is the inscription : -- D. O. M. CY A ETE ECRASE PAR MALHEUR SOUS UN CHARIOT , MONSIEUR BERNARD DE BRYE MARCHAND A BRUXELLE LE -LSB- Illegible -RSB- FEVRIER 1637 . 
On the day of battle , this hollow road whose existence was in no way indicated , bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean , a trench at the summit of the escarpment , a rut concealed in the soil , was invisible ; that is to say , terrible . 
THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE So , on the morning of Waterloo , Napoleon was content . 
He was right ; the plan of battle conceived by him was , as we have seen , really admirable . 
The battle once begun , its very various changes , -- the resistance of Hougomont ; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte ; the killing of Bauduin ; the disabling of Foy ; the unexpected wall against which Soye 's brigade was shattered ; Guilleminot 's fatal heedlessness when he had neither petard nor powder sacks ; the miring of the batteries ; the fifteen unescorted pieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge ; the small effect of the bombs falling in the English lines , and there embedding themselves in the rain-soaked soil , and only succeeding in producing volcanoes of mud , so that the canister was turned into a splash ; the uselessness of Pire 's demonstration on Braine-l'Alleud ; all that cavalry , fifteen squadrons , almost exterminated ; the right wing of the English badly alarmed , the left wing badly cut into ; Ney 's strange mistake in massing , instead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps ; men delivered over to grape-shot , arranged in ranks twenty-seven deep and with a frontage of two hundred ; the frightful holes made in these masses by the cannon-balls ; attacking columns disorganized ; the side-battery suddenly unmasked on their flank ; Bourgeois , Donzelot , and Durutte compromised ; Quiot repulsed ; Lieutenant Vieux , that Hercules graduated at the Polytechnic School , wounded at the moment when he was beating in with an axe the door of La Haie-Sainte under the downright fire of the English barricade which barred the angle of the road from Genappe to Brussels ; Marcognet 's division caught between the infantry and the cavalry , shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid the grain by Best and Pack , put to the sword by Ponsonby ; his battery of seven pieces spiked ; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding , in spite of the Comte d'Erlon , both Frischemont and Smohain ; the flag of the 105th taken , the flag of the 45th captured ; that black Prussian hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred light cavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit ; the alarming things that had been said by prisoners ; Grouchy 's delay ; fifteen hundred men killed in the orchard of Hougomont in less than an hour ; eighteen hundred men overthrown in a still shorter time about La Haie-Sainte , -- all these stormy incidents passing like the clouds of battle before Napoleon , had hardly troubled his gaze and had not overshadowed that face of imperial certainty . 
Napoleon was accustomed to gaze steadily at war ; he never added up the heart-rending details , cipher by cipher ; ciphers mattered little to him , provided that they furnished the total , victory ; he was not alarmed if the beginnings did go astray , since he thought himself the master and the possessor at the end ; he knew how to wait , supposing himself to be out of the question , and he treated destiny as his equal : he seemed to say to fate , Thou wilt not dare . 
Composed half of light and half of shadow , Napoleon thought himself protected in good and tolerated in evil . 
He had , or thought that he had , a connivance , one might almost say a complicity , of events in his favor , which was equivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity . 
Nevertheless , when one has Beresina , Leipzig , and Fontainebleau behind one , it seems as though one might distrust Waterloo . 
A mysterious frown becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens . 
At the moment when Wellington retreated , Napoleon shuddered . 
He suddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared , and the van of the English army disappear . 
