He found a means to traverse the throng and to pass the bivouac of the troops , he shunned the patrols , he avoided the sentinels . 
He made a circuit , reached the Rue de Bethisy , and directed his course towards the Halles . 
At the corner of the Rue des Bourdonnais , there were no longer any lanterns . 
After having passed the zone of the crowd , he had passed the limits of the troops ; he found himself in something startling . 
There was no longer a passer-by , no longer a soldier , no longer a light , there was no one ; solitude , silence , night , I know not what chill which seized hold upon one . 
Entering a street was like entering a cellar . 
He continued to advance . 
He took a few steps . 
Some one passed close to him at a run . 
Was it a man ? 
Or a woman ? 
Were there many of them ? 
he could not have told . 
It had passed and vanished . 
Proceeding from circuit to circuit , he reached a lane which he judged to be the Rue de la Poterie ; near the middle of this street , he came in contact with an obstacle . 
He extended his hands . 
It was an overturned wagon ; his foot recognized pools of water , gullies , and paving-stones scattered and piled up . 
A barricade had been begun there and abandoned . 
He climbed over the stones and found himself on the other side of the barrier . 
He walked very near the street-posts , and guided himself along the walls of the houses . 
A little beyond the barricade , it seemed to him that he could make out something white in front of him . 
He approached , it took on a form . 
It was two white horses ; the horses of the omnibus harnessed by Bossuet in the morning , who had been straying at random all day from street to street , and had finally halted there , with the weary patience of brutes who no more understand the actions of men , than man understands the actions of Providence . 
Marius left the horses behind him . 
As he was approaching a street which seemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social , a shot coming no one knows whence , and traversing the darkness at random , whistled close by him , and the bullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above his head over a hairdresser 's shop . 
This pierced shaving-dish was still to be seen in 1848 , in the Rue du Contrat-Social , at the corner of the pillars of the market . 
This shot still betokened life . 
From that instant forth he encountered nothing more . 
The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps . 
Nevertheless , Marius pressed forward . 
AN OWL 'S VIEW OF PARIS A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing of the bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle . 
All that old quarter of the Halles , which is like a city within a city , through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin , where a thousand lanes cross , and of which the insurgents had made their redoubt and their stronghold , would have appeared to him like a dark and enormous cavity hollowed out in the centre of Paris . 
There the glance fell into an abyss . 
Thanks to the broken lanterns , thanks to the closed windows , there all radiance , all life , all sound , all movement ceased . 
The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watch everywhere , and maintained order , that is to say , night . 
The necessary tactics of insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity , to multiply every combatant by the possibilities which that obscurity contains . 
At dusk , every window where a candle was burning received a shot . 
The light was extinguished , sometimes the inhabitant was killed . 
Hence nothing was stirring . 
There was nothing but fright , mourning , stupor in the houses ; and in the streets , a sort of sacred horror . 
Not even the long rows of windows and stores , the indentations of the chimneys , and the roofs , and the vague reflections which are cast back by the wet and muddy pavements , were visible . 
An eye cast upward at that mass of shadows might , perhaps , have caught a glimpse here and there , at intervals , of indistinct gleams which brought out broken and eccentric lines , and profiles of singular buildings , something like the lights which go and come in ruins ; it was at such points that the barricades were situated . 
The rest was a lake of obscurity , foggy , heavy , and funereal , above which , in motionless and melancholy outlines , rose the tower of Saint-Jacques , the church of Saint-Merry , and two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giants and the night makes phantoms . 
All around this deserted and disquieting labyrinth , in the quarters where the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated , and where a few street lanterns still burned , the aerial observer might have distinguished the metallic gleam of swords and bayonets , the dull rumble of artillery , and the swarming of silent battalions whose ranks were swelling from minute to minute ; a formidable girdle which was slowly drawing in and around the insurrection . 
The invested quarter was no longer anything more than a monstrous cavern ; everything there appeared to be asleep or motionless , and , as we have just seen , any street which one might come to offered nothing but darkness . 
A wild darkness , full of traps , full of unseen and formidable shocks , into which it was alarming to penetrate , and in which it was terrible to remain , where those who entered shivered before those whom they awaited , where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming . 
Invisible combatants were entrenched at every corner of the street ; snares of the sepulchre concealed in the density of night . 
All was over . 
No more light was to be hoped for , henceforth , except the lightning of guns , no further encounter except the abrupt and rapid apparition of death . 
Where ? 
