It took the old king Charles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV . 
and set him gently on the ground . 
It touched the royal personages only with sadness and precaution . 
It was not one man , it was not a few men , it was France , France entire , France victorious and intoxicated with her victory , who seemed to be coming to herself , and who put into practice , before the eyes of the whole world , these grave words of Guillaume du Vair after the day of the Barricades : -- `` It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of the great , and to spring , like a bird from bough to bough , from an afflicted fortune to a flourishing one , to show themselves harsh towards their Prince in his adversity ; but as for me , the fortune of my Kings and especially of my afflicted Kings , will always be venerable to me . '' 
The Bourbons carried away with them respect , but not regret . 
As we have just stated , their misfortune was greater than they were . 
They faded out in the horizon . 
The Revolution of July instantly had friends and enemies throughout the entire world . 
The first rushed toward her with joy and enthusiasm , the others turned away , each according to his nature . 
At the first blush , the princes of Europe , the owls of this dawn , shut their eyes , wounded and stupefied , and only opened them to threaten . 
A fright which can be comprehended , a wrath which can be pardoned . 
This strange revolution had hardly produced a shock ; it had not even paid to vanquished royalty the honor of treating it as an enemy , and of shedding its blood . 
In the eyes of despotic governments , who are always interested in having liberty calumniate itself , the Revolution of July committed the fault of being formidable and of remaining gentle . 
Nothing , however , was attempted or plotted against it . 
The most discontented , the most irritated , the most trembling , saluted it ; whatever our egotism and our rancor may be , a mysterious respect springs from events in which we are sensible of the collaboration of some one who is working above man . 
The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact . 
A thing which is full of splendor . 
Right overthrowing the fact . 
Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of 1830 , hence , also , its mildness . 
Right triumphant has no need of being violent . 
Right is the just and the true . 
The property of right is to remain eternally beautiful and pure . 
The fact , even when most necessary to all appearances , even when most thoroughly accepted by contemporaries , if it exist only as a fact , and if it contain only too little of right , or none at all , is infallibly destined to become , in the course of time , deformed , impure , perhaps , even monstrous . 
If one desires to learn at one blow , to what degree of hideousness the fact can attain , viewed at the distance of centuries , let him look at Machiavelli . 
Machiavelli is not an evil genius , nor a demon , nor a miserable and cowardly writer ; he is nothing but the fact . 
And he is not only the Italian fact ; he is the European fact , the fact of the sixteenth century . 
He seems hideous , and so he is , in the presence of the moral idea of the nineteenth . 
This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the origin of society . 
To terminate this duel , to amalgamate the pure idea with the humane reality , to cause right to penetrate pacifically into the fact and the fact into right , that is the task of sages . 
BADLY SEWED But the task of sages is one thing , the task of clever men is another . 
The Revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt . 
As soon as a revolution has made the coast , the skilful make haste to prepare the shipwreck . 
The skilful in our century have conferred on themselves the title of Statesmen ; so that this word , statesmen , has ended by becoming somewhat of a slang word . 
It must be borne in mind , in fact , that wherever there is nothing but skill , there is necessarily pettiness . 
To say `` the skilful '' amounts to saying `` the mediocre . '' 
In the same way , to say `` statesmen '' is sometimes equivalent to saying `` traitors . '' 
If , then , we are to believe the skilful , revolutions like the Revolution of July are severed arteries ; a prompt ligature is indispensable . 
The right , too grandly proclaimed , is shaken . 
Also , right once firmly fixed , the state must be strengthened . 
Liberty once assured , attention must be directed to power . 
Here the sages are not , as yet , separated from the skilful , but they begin to be distrustful . 
Power , very good . 
But , in the first place , what is power ? 
In the second , whence comes it ? 
The skilful do not seem to hear the murmured objection , and they continue their manoeuvres . 
According to the politicians , who are ingenious in putting the mask of necessity on profitable fictions , the first requirement of a people after a revolution , when this people forms part of a monarchical continent , is to procure for itself a dynasty . 
In this way , say they , peace , that is to say , time to dress our wounds , and to repair the house , can be had after a revolution . 
The dynasty conceals the scaffolding and covers the ambulance . 
Now , it is not always easy to procure a dynasty . 
If it is absolutely necessary , the first man of genius or even the first man of fortune who comes to hand suffices for the manufacturing of a king . 
