He approached the other door with more hope ; it was frightfully decrepit ; its very immensity rendered it less solid ; the planks were rotten ; the iron bands -- there were only three of them -- were rusted . 
It seemed as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eaten barrier . 
On examining it he found that the door was not a door ; it had neither hinges , cross-bars , lock , nor fissure in the middle ; the iron bands traversed it from side to side without any break . 
Through the crevices in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone roughly cemented together , which passers-by might still have seen there ten years ago . 
He was forced to acknowledge with consternation that this apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a building against which it was placed . 
It was easy to tear off a plank ; but then , one found one 's self face to face with a wall . 
WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at some distance . 
Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street . 
Seven or eight soldiers , drawn up in a platoon , had just debouched into the Rue Polonceau . 
He saw the gleam of their bayonets . 
They were advancing towards him ; these soldiers , at whose head he distinguished Javert 's tall figure , advanced slowly and cautiously . 
They halted frequently ; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of the walls and all the embrasures of the doors and alleys . 
This was some patrol that Javert had encountered -- there could be no mistake as to this surmise -- and whose aid he had demanded . 
Javert 's two acolytes were marching in their ranks . 
At the rate at which they were marching , and in consideration of the halts which they were making , it would take them about a quarter of an hour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood . 
It was a frightful moment . 
A few minutes only separated Jean Valjean from that terrible precipice which yawned before him for the third time . 
And the galleys now meant not only the galleys , but Cosette lost to him forever ; that is to say , a life resembling the interior of a tomb . 
There was but one thing which was possible . 
Jean Valjean had this peculiarity , that he carried , as one might say , two beggar 's pouches : in one he kept his saintly thoughts ; in the other the redoubtable talents of a convict . 
He rummaged in the one or the other , according to circumstances . 
Among his other resources , thanks to his numerous escapes from the prison at Toulon , he was , as it will be remembered , a past master in the incredible art of crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons , by sheer muscular force , by leaning on the nape of his neck , his shoulders , his hips , and his knees , by helping himself on the rare projections of the stone , in the right angle of a wall , as high as the sixth story , if need be ; an art which has rendered so celebrated and so alarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by which Battemolle , condemned to death , made his escape twenty years ago . 
Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied the linden ; it was about eighteen feet in height . 
The angle which it formed with the gable of the large building was filled , at its lower extremity , by a mass of masonry of a triangular shape , probably intended to preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish of those dirty creatures called the passers-by . 
This practice of filling up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris . 
This mass was about five feet in height ; the space above the summit of this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen feet . 
The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping . 
Cosette was the difficulty , for she did not know how to climb a wall . 
Should he abandon her ? 
Jean Valjean did not once think of that . 
It was impossible to carry her . 
A man 's whole strength is required to successfully carry out these singular ascents . 
The least burden would disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards . 
A rope would have been required ; Jean Valjean had none . 
Where was he to get a rope at midnight , in the Rue Polonceau ? 
Certainly , if Jean Valjean had had a kingdom , he would have given it for a rope at that moment . 
All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimes dazzle , sometimes illuminate us . 
Jean Valjean 's despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of the blind alley Genrot . 
At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris . 
At nightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted ; they were ascended and descended by means of a rope , which traversed the street from side to side , and was adjusted in a groove of the post . 
The pulley over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in a little iron box , the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter , and the rope itself was protected by a metal case . 
Jean Valjean , with the energy of a supreme struggle , crossed the street at one bound , entered the blind alley , broke the latch of the little box with the point of his knife , and an instant later he was beside Cosette once more . 
He had a rope . 
These gloomy inventors of expedients work rapidly when they are fighting against fatality . 
We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted that night . 
The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct , like the rest ; and one could pass directly under it without even noticing that it was no longer in its place . 
Nevertheless , the hour , the place , the darkness , Jean Valjean 's absorption , his singular gestures , his goings and comings , all had begun to render Cosette uneasy . 
Any other child than she would have given vent to loud shrieks long before . 
She contented herself with plucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat . 
They could hear the sound of the patrol 's approach ever more and more distinctly . 
