In front of the sixth are placed two English tombs of granite . 
There are loopholes only in the south wall , as the principal attack came from that quarter . 
The wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge ; the French came up , thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge , crossed it , and found the wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade , with the English guards behind it , the thirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower of grape-shot and balls , and Soye 's brigade was broken against it . 
Thus Waterloo began . 
Nevertheless , the orchard was taken . 
As they had no ladders , the French scaled it with their nails . 
They fought hand to hand amid the trees . 
All this grass has been soaked in blood . 
A battalion of Nassau , seven hundred strong , was overwhelmed there . 
The outside of the wall , against which Kellermann 's two batteries were trained , is gnawed by grape-shot . 
This orchard is sentient , like others , in the month of May . 
It has its buttercups and its daisies ; the grass is tall there ; the cart-horses browse there ; cords of hair , on which linen is drying , traverse the spaces between the trees and force the passer-by to bend his head ; one walks over this uncultivated land , and one 's foot dives into mole-holes . 
In the middle of the grass one observes an uprooted tree-bole which lies there all verdant . 
Major Blackmann leaned against it to die . 
Beneath a great tree in the neighborhood fell the German general , Duplat , descended from a French family which fled on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes . 
An aged and falling apple-tree leans far over to one side , its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and of clayey loam . 
Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age . 
There is not one which has not had its bullet or its biscayan . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- The skeletons of dead trees abound in this orchard . 
Crows fly through their branches , and at the end of it is a wood full of violets . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- A bullet as large as an egg . 
Bauduin , killed , Foy wounded , conflagration , massacre , carnage , a rivulet formed of English blood , French blood , German blood mingled in fury , a well crammed with corpses , the regiment of Nassau and the regiment of Brunswick destroyed , Duplat killed , Blackmann killed , the English Guards mutilated , twenty French battalions , besides the forty from Reille 's corps , decimated , three thousand men in that hovel of Hougomont alone cut down , slashed to pieces , shot , burned , with their throats cut , -- and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to the traveller : Monsieur , give me three francs , and if you like , I will explain to you the affair of Waterloo ! 
THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE , 1815 Let us turn back , -- that is one of the story-teller 's rights , -- and put ourselves once more in the year 1815 , and even a little earlier than the epoch when the action narrated in the first part of this book took place . 
If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th of June , 1815 , the fate of Europe would have been different . 
A few drops of water , more or less , decided the downfall of Napoleon . 
All that Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz was a little more rain , and a cloud traversing the sky out of season sufficed to make a world crumble . 
The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven o'clock , and that gave Blucher time to come up . 
Why ? 
Because the ground was wet . 
The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmer before they could manoeuvre . 
Napoleon was an artillery officer , and felt the effects of this . 
The foundation of this wonderful captain was the man who , in the report to the Directory on Aboukir , said : Such a one of our balls killed six men . 
All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles . 
The key to his victory was to make the artillery converge on one point . 
He treated the strategy of the hostile general like a citadel , and made a breach in it . 
He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot ; he joined and dissolved battles with cannon . 
There was something of the sharpshooter in his genius . 
To beat in squares , to pulverize regiments , to break lines , to crush and disperse masses , -- for him everything lay in this , to strike , strike , strike incessantly , -- and he intrusted this task to the cannon-ball . 
A redoubtable method , and one which , united with genius , rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the space of fifteen years . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , he relied all the more on his artillery , because he had numbers on his side . 
Wellington had only one hundred and fifty-nine mouths of fire ; Napoleon had two hundred and forty . 
Suppose the soil dry , and the artillery capable of moving , the action would have begun at six o'clock in the morning . 
The battle would have been won and ended at two o'clock , three hours before the change of fortune in favor of the Prussians . 
What amount of blame attaches to Napoleon for the loss of this battle ? 
Is the shipwreck due to the pilot ? 
Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated this epoch by an inward diminution of force ? 
Had the twenty years of war worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard , the soul as well as the body ? 
Did the veteran make himself disastrously felt in the leader ? 
In a word , was this genius , as many historians of note have thought , suffering from an eclipse ? 
Did he go into a frenzy in order to disguise his weakened powers from himself ? 
