He was on the point of retreating when his eye fell upon the fireplace -- one of those vast tavern chimneys where there is always so little fire when there is any fire at all , and which are so cold to look at . 
There was no fire in this one , there was not even ashes ; but there was something which attracted the stranger 's gaze , nevertheless . 
It was two tiny children 's shoes , coquettish in shape and unequal in size . 
The traveller recalled the graceful and immemorial custom in accordance with which children place their shoes in the chimney on Christmas eve , there to await in the darkness some sparkling gift from their good fairy . 
Eponine and Azelma had taken care not to omit this , and each of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth . 
The traveller bent over them . 
The fairy , that is to say , their mother , had already paid her visit , and in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece . 
The man straightened himself up , and was on the point of withdrawing , when far in , in the darkest corner of the hearth , he caught sight of another object . 
He looked at it , and recognized a wooden shoe , a frightful shoe of the coarsest description , half dilapidated and all covered with ashes and dried mud . 
It was Cosette 's sabot . 
Cosette , with that touching trust of childhood , which can always be deceived yet never discouraged , had placed her shoe on the hearth-stone also . 
Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet and touching thing . 
There was nothing in this wooden shoe . 
The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat , bent over and placed a louis d'or in Cosette 's shoe . 
Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf . 
THENARDIER AND HIS MANOEUVRES On the following morning , two hours at least before day-break , Thenardier , seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern , pen in hand , was making out the bill for the traveller with the yellow coat . 
His wife , standing beside him , and half bent over him , was following him with her eyes . 
They exchanged not a word . 
On the one hand , there was profound meditation , on the other , the religious admiration with which one watches the birth and development of a marvel of the human mind . 
A noise was audible in the house ; it was the Lark sweeping the stairs . 
After the lapse of a good quarter of an hour , and some erasures , Thenardier produced the following masterpiece : -- BILL OF THE GENTLEMAN IN No. 1 . 
Supper ... 3 francs . 
Chamber ... 10 '' Candle ... 5 '' Fire ... 4 '' Service ... 1 '' ---------- Total ... 23 francs . 
Service was written servisse . 
`` Twenty-three francs ! '' 
cried the woman , with an enthusiasm which was mingled with some hesitation . 
Like all great artists , Thenardier was dissatisfied . 
`` Peuh ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France 's bill at the Congress of Vienna . 
`` Monsieur Thenardier , you are right ; he certainly owes that , '' murmured the wife , who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette in the presence of her daughters . 
`` It is just , but it is too much . 
He will not pay it . '' 
Thenardier laughed coldly , as usual , and said : -- `` He will pay . '' 
This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority . 
That which was asserted in this manner must needs be so . 
His wife did not insist . 
She set about arranging the table ; her husband paced the room . 
A moment later he added : -- `` I owe full fifteen hundred francs ! '' 
He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner , meditating , with his feet among the warm ashes . 
`` Ah ! 
by the way , '' resumed his wife , `` you do n't forget that I 'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-day ? 
The monster ! 
She breaks my heart with that doll of hers ! 
I 'd rather marry Louis XVIII . 
than keep her another day in the house ! '' 
Thenardier lighted his pipe , and replied between two puffs : -- `` You will hand that bill to the man . '' 
Then he went out . 
Hardly had he left the room when the traveller entered . 
Thenardier instantly reappeared behind him and remained motionless in the half-open door , visible only to his wife . 
