He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odeon , and said to him : `` Come and dine with me . '' 
They went off to Rousseau 's and spent six francs . 
Marius ate like an ogre . 
He gave the waiter six sous . 
At dessert , he said to Courfeyrac . 
`` Have you read the paper ? 
What a fine discourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered ! '' 
He was desperately in love . 
After dinner , he said to Courfeyrac : `` I will treat you to the play . '' 
They went to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frederick in l'Auberge des Adrets . 
Marius was enormously amused . 
At the same time , he had a redoubled attack of shyness . 
On emerging from the theatre , he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who was stepping across a gutter , and Courfeyrac , who said : `` I should like to put that woman in my collection , '' almost horrified him . 
Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Cafe Voltaire on the following morning . 
Marius went thither , and ate even more than on the preceding evening . 
He was very thoughtful and very merry . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laugh uproariously . 
He tenderly embraced some man or other from the provinces , who was presented to him . 
A circle of students formed round the table , and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State which was uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne , then the conversation fell upon the faults and omissions in Guicherat 's dictionaries and grammars . 
Marius interrupted the discussion to exclaim : `` But it is very agreeable , all the same to have the cross ! '' 
`` That 's queer ! '' 
whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire . 
`` No , '' responded Prouvaire , `` that 's serious . '' 
It was serious ; in fact , Marius had reached that first violent and charming hour with which grand passions begin . 
A glance had wrought all this . 
When the mine is charged , when the conflagration is ready , nothing is more simple . 
A glance is a spark . 
It was all over with him . 
Marius loved a woman . 
His fate was entering the unknown . 
The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels , which are tranquil in appearance yet formidable . 
You pass close to them every day , peaceably and with impunity , and without a suspicion of anything . 
A moment arrives when you forget that the thing is there . 
You go and come , dream , speak , laugh . 
All at once you feel yourself clutched ; all is over . 
The wheels hold you fast , the glance has ensnared you . 
It has caught you , no matter where or how , by some portion of your thought which was fluttering loose , by some distraction which had attacked you . 
You are lost . 
The whole of you passes into it . 
A chain of mysterious forces takes possession of you . 
You struggle in vain ; no more human succor is possible . 
You go on falling from gearing to gearing , from agony to agony , from torture to torture , you , your mind , your fortune , your future , your soul ; and , according to whether you are in the power of a wicked creature , or of a noble heart , you will not escape from this terrifying machine otherwise than disfigured with shame , or transfigured by passion . 
ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO CONJECTURES Isolation , detachment , from everything , pride , independence , the taste of nature , the absence of daily and material activity , the life within himself , the secret conflicts of chastity , a benevolent ecstasy towards all creation , had prepared Marius for this possession which is called passion . 
His worship of his father had gradually become a religion , and , like all religions , it had retreated to the depths of his soul . 
Something was required in the foreground . 
Love came . 
A full month elapsed , during which Marius went every day to the Luxembourg . 
When the hour arrived , nothing could hold him back . 
-- `` He is on duty , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Marius lived in a state of delight . 
