The New Building contained four dormitories , one above the other , and a top story which was called the Bel-Air -LRB- FineAir -RRB- . 
A large chimney-flue , probably from some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de la Force , started from the groundfloor , traversed all four stories , cut the dormitories , where it figured as a flattened pillar , into two portions , and finally pierced the roof . 
Guelemer and Brujon were in the same dormitory . 
They had been placed , by way of precaution , on the lower story . 
Chance ordained that the heads of their beds should rest against the chimney . 
Thenardier was directly over their heads in the top story known as Fine-Air . 
The pedestrian who halts on the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , after passing the barracks of the firemen , in front of the porte-cochere of the bathing establishment , beholds a yard full of flowers and shrubs in wooden boxes , at the extremity of which spreads out a little white rotunda with two wings , brightened up with green shutters , the bucolic dream of Jean Jacques . 
Not more than ten years ago , there rose above that rotunda an enormous black , hideous , bare wall by which it was backed up . 
This was the outer wall of La Force . 
This wall , beside that rotunda , was Milton viewed through Berquin . 
Lofty as it was , this wall was overtopped by a still blacker roof , which could be seen beyond . 
This was the roof of the New Building . 
There one could descry four dormer-windows , guarded with bars ; they were the windows of the Fine-Air . 
A chimney pierced the roof ; this was the chimney which traversed the dormitories . 
The Bel-Air , that top story of the New Building , was a sort of large hall , with a Mansard roof , guarded with triple gratings and double doors of sheet iron , which were studded with enormous bolts . 
When one entered from the north end , one had on one 's left the four dormer-windows , on one 's right , facing the windows , at regular intervals , four square , tolerably vast cages , separated by narrow passages , built of masonry to about the height of the elbow , and the rest , up to the roof , of iron bars . 
Thenardier had been in solitary confinement in one of these cages since the night of the 3d of February . 
No one was ever able to discover how , and by what connivance , he succeeded in procuring , and secreting a bottle of wine , invented , so it is said , by Desrues , with which a narcotic is mixed , and which the band of the Endormeurs , or Sleep-compellers , rendered famous . 
There are , in many prisons , treacherous employees , half-jailers , half-thieves , who assist in escapes , who sell to the police an unfaithful service , and who turn a penny whenever they can . 
On that same night , then , when Little Gavroche picked up the two lost children , Brujon and Guelemer , who knew that Babet , who had escaped that morning , was waiting for them in the street as well as Montparnasse , rose softly , and with the nail which Brujon had found , began to pierce the chimney against which their beds stood . 
The rubbish fell on Brujon 's bed , so that they were not heard . 
Showers mingled with thunder shook the doors on their hinges , and created in the prison a terrible and opportune uproar . 
Those of the prisoners who woke , pretended to fall asleep again , and left Guelemer and Brujon to their own devices . 
Brujon was adroit ; Guelemer was vigorous . 
Before any sound had reached the watcher , who was sleeping in the grated cell which opened into the dormitory , the wall had , been pierced , the chimney scaled , the iron grating which barred the upper orifice of the flue forced , and the two redoubtable ruffians were on the roof . 
The wind and rain redoubled , the roof was slippery . 
`` What a good night to leg it ! '' 
said Brujon . 
An abyss six feet broad and eighty feet deep separated them from the surrounding wall . 
At the bottom of this abyss , they could see the musket of a sentinel gleaming through the gloom . 
They fastened one end of the rope which Brujon had spun in his dungeon to the stumps of the iron bars which they had just wrenched off , flung the other over the outer wall , crossed the abyss at one bound , clung to the coping of the wall , got astride of it , let themselves slip , one after the other , along the rope , upon a little roof which touches the bath-house , pulled their rope after them , jumped down into the courtyard of the bath-house , traversed it , pushed open the porter 's wicket , beside which hung his rope , pulled this , opened the porte-cochere , and found themselves in the street . 
Three-quarters of an hour had not elapsed since they had risen in bed in the dark , nail in hand , and their project in their heads . 
A few moments later they had joined Babet and Montparnasse , who were prowling about the neighborhood . 
They had broken their rope in pulling it after them , and a bit of it remained attached to the chimney on the roof . 
They had sustained no other damage , however , than that of scratching nearly all the skin off their hands . 
That night , Thenardier was warned , without any one being able to explain how , and was not asleep . 
Towards one o'clock in the morning , the night being very dark , he saw two shadows pass along the roof , in the rain and squalls , in front of the dormer-window which was opposite his cage . 
One halted at the window , long enough to dart in a glance . 
This was Brujon . 
Thenardier recognized him , and understood . 
This was enough . 
Thenardier , rated as a burglar , and detained as a measure of precaution under the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush , with armed force , was kept in sight . 
The sentry , who was relieved every two hours , marched up and down in front of his cage with loaded musket . 
The Fine-Air was lighted by a skylight . 
The prisoner had on his feet fetters weighing fifty pounds . 
Every day , at four o'clock in the afternoon , a jailer , escorted by two dogs , -- this was still in vogue at that time , -- entered his cage , deposited beside his bed a loaf of black bread weighing two pounds , a jug of water , a bowl filled with rather thin bouillon , in which swam a few Mayagan beans , inspected his irons and tapped the bars . 
This man and his dogs made two visits during the night . 
Thenardier had obtained permission to keep a sort of iron bolt which he used to spike his bread into a crack in the wall , `` in order to preserve it from the rats , '' as he said . 
As Thenardier was kept in sight , no objection had been made to this spike . 
Still , it was remembered afterwards , that one of the jailers had said : `` It would be better to let him have only a wooden spike . '' 
