John Brown is greater than Washington , and Pisacane is greater than Garibaldi . 
It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the vanquished . 
We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future , when they fail . 
Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad . 
Every barricade seems a crime . 
Their theories are incriminated , their aim suspected , their ulterior motive is feared , their conscience denounced . 
They are reproached with raising , erecting , and heaping up , against the reigning social state , a mass of miseries , of griefs , of iniquities , of wrongs , of despairs , and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow in order therein to embattle themselves and to combat . 
People shout to them : `` You are tearing up the pavements of hell ! '' 
They might reply : `` That is because our barricade is made of good intentions . '' 
The best thing , assuredly , is the pacific solution . 
In short , let us agree that when we behold the pavement , we think of the bear , and it is a good will which renders society uneasy . 
But it depends on society to save itself , it is to its own good will that we make our appeal . 
No violent remedy is necessary . 
To study evil amiably , to prove its existence , then to cure it . 
It is to this that we invite it . 
However that may be , even when fallen , above all when fallen , these men , who at every point of the universe , with their eyes fixed on France , are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal , are august ; they give their life a free offering to progress ; they accomplish the will of providence ; they perform a religious act . 
At the appointed hour , with as much disinterestedness as an actor who answers to his cue , in obedience to the divine stage-manager , they enter the tomb . 
And this hopeless combat , this stoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme and universal consequences , the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 14th of July , 1789 ; these soldiers are priests . 
The French revolution is an act of God . 
Moreover , there are , and it is proper to add this distinction to the distinctions already pointed out in another chapter , -- there are accepted revolutions , revolutions which are called revolutions ; there are refused revolutions , which are called riots . 
An insurrection which breaks out , is an idea which is passing its examination before the people . 
If the people lets fall a black ball , the idea is dried fruit ; the insurrection is a mere skirmish . 
Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it , is not the thing for the peoples . 
Nations have not always and at every hour the temperament of heroes and martyrs . 
They are positive . 
A priori , insurrection is repugnant to them , in the first place , because it often results in a catastrophe , in the second place , because it always has an abstraction as its point of departure . 
Because , and this is a noble thing , it is always for the ideal , and for the ideal alone , that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice themselves . 
An insurrection is an enthusiasm . 
Enthusiasm may wax wroth ; hence the appeal to arms . 
But every insurrection , which aims at a government or a regime , aims higher . 
Thus , for instance , and we insist upon it , what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832 , and , in particular , the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie were combating , was not precisely Louis Philippe . 
The majority of them , when talking freely , did justice to this king who stood midway between monarchy and revolution ; no one hated him . 
But they attacked the younger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had attacked its elder branch in Charles X. ; and that which they wished to overturn in overturning royalty in France , was , as we have explained , the usurpation of man over man , and of privilege over right in the entire universe . 
Paris without a king has as result the world without despots . 
This is the manner in which they reasoned . 
Their aim was distant no doubt , vague perhaps , and it retreated in the face of their efforts ; but it was great . 
Thus it is . 
And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions , which are almost always illusions for the sacrificed , but illusions with which , after all , the whole of human certainty is mingled . 
We throw ourselves into these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we are about to do . 
Who knows ? 
We may succeed . 
We are few in number , we have a whole army arrayed against us ; but we are defending right , the natural law , the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdication is possible , justice and truth , and in case of need , we die like the three hundred Spartans . 
We do not think of Don Quixote but of Leonidas . 
And we march straight before us , and once pledged , we do not draw back , and we rush onwards with head held low , cherishing as our hope an unprecedented victory , revolution completed , progress set free again , the aggrandizement of the human race , universal deliverance ; and in the event of the worst , Thermopylae . 
These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck , and we have just explained why . 
The crowd is restive in the presence of the impulses of paladins . 
Heavy masses , the multitudes which are fragile because of their very weight , fear adventures ; and there is a touch of adventure in the ideal . 
Moreover , and we must not forget this , interests which are not very friendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way . 
Sometimes the stomach paralyzes the heart . 
The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this , that she takes less from the stomach than other nations : she more easily knots the rope about her loins . 
