At the age of four and twenty , in ' 93 , being then M. de Chartres , he had witnessed , from the depth of a box , the trial of Louis XVI. , so well named that poor tyrant . 
The blind clairvoyance of the Revolution , breaking royalty in the King and the King with royalty , did so almost without noticing the man in the fierce crushing of the idea , the vast storm of the Assembly-Tribunal , the public wrath interrogating , Capet not knowing what to reply , the alarming , stupefied vacillation by that royal head beneath that sombre breath , the relative innocence of all in that catastrophe , of those who condemned as well as of the man condemned , -- he had looked on those things , he had contemplated that giddiness ; he had seen the centuries appear before the bar of the Assembly-Convention ; he had beheld , behind Louis XVI. , that unfortunate passer-by who was made responsible , the terrible culprit , the monarchy , rise through the shadows ; and there had lingered in his soul the respectful fear of these immense justices of the populace , which are almost as impersonal as the justice of God . 
The trace left in him by the Revolution was prodigious . 
Its memory was like a living imprint of those great years , minute by minute . 
One day , in the presence of a witness whom we are not permitted to doubt , he rectified from memory the whole of the letter A in the alphabetical list of the Constituent Assembly . 
Louis Philippe was a king of the broad daylight . 
While he reigned the press was free , the tribune was free , conscience and speech were free . 
The laws of September are open to sight . 
Although fully aware of the gnawing power of light on privileges , he left his throne exposed to the light . 
History will do justice to him for this loyalty . 
Louis Philippe , like all historical men who have passed from the scene , is to-day put on his trial by the human conscience . 
His case is , as yet , only in the lower court . 
The hour when history speaks with its free and venerable accent , has not yet sounded for him ; the moment has not come to pronounce a definite judgment on this king ; the austere and illustrious historian Louis Blanc has himself recently softened his first verdict ; Louis Philippe was elected by those two almosts which are called the 221 and 1830 , that is to say , by a half-Parliament , and a half-revolution ; and in any case , from the superior point of view where philosophy must place itself , we can not judge him here , as the reader has seen above , except with certain reservations in the name of the absolute democratic principle ; in the eyes of the absolute , outside these two rights , the right of man in the first place , the right of the people in the second , all is usurpation ; but what we can say , even at the present day , that after making these reserves is , that to sum up the whole , and in whatever manner he is considered , Louis Philippe , taken in himself , and from the point of view of human goodness , will remain , to use the antique language of ancient history , one of the best princes who ever sat on a throne . 
What is there against him ? 
That throne . 
Take away Louis Philippe the king , there remains the man . 
And the man is good . 
He is good at times even to the point of being admirable . 
Often , in the midst of his gravest souvenirs , after a day of conflict with the whole diplomacy of the continent , he returned at night to his apartments , and there , exhausted with fatigue , overwhelmed with sleep , what did he do ? 
He took a death sentence and passed the night in revising a criminal suit , considering it something to hold his own against Europe , but that it was a still greater matter to rescue a man from the executioner . 
He obstinately maintained his opinion against his keeper of the seals ; he disputed the ground with the guillotine foot by foot against the crown attorneys , those chatterers of the law , as he called them . 
Sometimes the pile of sentences covered his table ; he examined them all ; it was anguish to him to abandon these miserable , condemned heads . 
One day , he said to the same witness to whom we have recently referred : `` I won seven last night . '' 
During the early years of his reign , the death penalty was as good as abolished , and the erection of a scaffold was a violence committed against the King . 
The Greve having disappeared with the elder branch , a bourgeois place of execution was instituted under the name of the Barriere-Saint-Jacques ; `` practical men '' felt the necessity of a quasi-legitimate guillotine ; and this was one of the victories of Casimir Perier , who represented the narrow sides of the bourgeoisie , over Louis Philippe , who represented its liberal sides . 
Louis Philippe annotated Beccaria with his own hand . 
After the Fieschi machine , he exclaimed : `` What a pity that I was not wounded ! 
Then I might have pardoned ! '' 
On another occasion , alluding to the resistance offered by his ministry , he wrote in connection with a political criminal , who is one of the most generous figures of our day : `` His pardon is granted ; it only remains for me to obtain it . '' 
Louis Philippe was as gentle as Louis IX . 
and as kindly as Henri IV . 
Now , to our mind , in history , where kindness is the rarest of pearls , the man who is kindly almost takes precedence of the man who is great . 
Louis Philippe having been severely judged by some , harshly , perhaps , by others , it is quite natural that a man , himself a phantom at the present day , who knew that king , should come and testify in his favor before history ; this deposition , whatever else it may be , is evidently and above all things , entirely disinterested ; an epitaph penned by a dead man is sincere ; one shade may console another shade ; the sharing of the same shadows confers the right to praise it ; it is not greatly to be feared that it will ever be said of two tombs in exile : `` This one flattered the other . '' 
CRACKS BENEATH THE FOUNDATION At the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point of penetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelop the beginning of Louis Philippe 's reign , it was necessary that there should be no equivoque , and it became requisite that this book should offer some explanation with regard to this king . 
Louis Philippe had entered into possession of his royal authority without violence , without any direct action on his part , by virtue of a revolutionary change , evidently quite distinct from the real aim of the Revolution , but in which he , the Duc d'Orleans , exercised no personal initiative . 
He had been born a Prince , and he believed himself to have been elected King . 
He had not served this mandate on himself ; he had not taken it ; it had been offered to him , and he had accepted it ; convinced , wrongly , to be sure , but convinced nevertheless , that the offer was in accordance with right and that the acceptance of it was in accordance with duty . 
Hence his possession was in good faith . 
Now , we say it in good conscience , Louis Philippe being in possession in perfect good faith , and the democracy being in good faith in its attack , the amount of terror discharged by the social conflicts weighs neither on the King nor on the democracy . 
A clash of principles resembles a clash of elements . 
The ocean defends the water , the hurricane defends the air , the King defends Royalty , the democracy defends the people ; the relative , which is the monarchy , resists the absolute , which is the republic ; society bleeds in this conflict , but that which constitutes its suffering to-day will constitute its safety later on ; and , in any case , those who combat are not to be blamed ; one of the two parties is evidently mistaken ; the right is not , like the Colossus of Rhodes , on two shores at once , with one foot on the republic , and one in Royalty ; it is indivisible , and all on one side ; but those who are in error are so sincerely ; a blind man is no more a criminal than a Vendean is a ruffian . 
Let us , then , impute to the fatality of things alone these formidable collisions . 
Whatever the nature of these tempests may be , human irresponsibility is mingled with them . 
Let us complete this exposition . 
The government of 1840 led a hard life immediately . 
Born yesterday , it was obliged to fight to-day . 
Hardly installed , it was already everywhere conscious of vague movements of traction on the apparatus of July so recently laid , and so lacking in solidity . 
Resistance was born on the morrow ; perhaps even , it was born on the preceding evening . 
From month to month the hostility increased , and from being concealed it became patent . 
The Revolution of July , which gained but little acceptance outside of France by kings , had been diversely interpreted in France , as we have said . 
