retorted Gavroche . 
`` A glass door is an excellent thing in a barricade . 
It does not prevent an attack , but it prevents the enemy taking it . 
So you 've never prigged apples over a wall where there were broken bottles ? 
A glass door cuts the corns of the National Guard when they try to mount on the barricade . 
Pardi ! 
glass is a treacherous thing . 
Well , you have n't a very wildly lively imagination , comrades . '' 
However , he was furious over his triggerless pistol . 
He went from one to another , demanding : `` A gun , I want a gun ! 
Why do n't you give me a gun ? '' 
`` Give you a gun ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` Come now ! '' 
said Gavroche , `` why not ? 
I had one in 1830 when we had a dispute with Charles X. '' Enjolras shrugged his shoulders . 
`` When there are enough for the men , we will give some to the children . '' 
Gavroche wheeled round haughtily , and answered : -- `` If you are killed before me , I shall take yours . '' 
`` Gamin ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the street created a diversion ! 
Gavroche shouted to him : -- `` Come with us , young fellow ! 
well now , do n't we do anything for this old country of ours ? '' 
The dandy fled . 
PREPARATIONS The journals of the day which said that that nearly impregnable structure , of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , as they call it , reached to the level of the first floor , were mistaken . 
The fact is , that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet . 
It was built in such a manner that the combatants could , at their will , either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale its crest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top of each other and arranged as steps in the interior . 
On the outside , the front of the barricade , composed of piles of paving-stones and casks bound together by beams and planks , which were entangled in the wheels of Anceau 's dray and of the overturned omnibus , had a bristling and inextricable aspect . 
An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been made between the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which was furthest from the wine-shop , so that an exit was possible at this point . 
The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with ropes , and a red flag , fastened to this pole , floated over the barricade . 
The little Mondetour barricade , hidden behind the wine-shop building , was not visible . 
The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt . 
Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other fragment of the Rue Mondetour which opens through the Rue des Precheurs an issue into the Halles , wishing , no doubt , to preserve a possible communication with the outside , and not entertaining much fear of an attack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue des Precheurs . 
With the exception of this issue which was left free , and which constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a branch and taking into account , also , the narrow cutting arranged on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the interior of the barricade , where the wine-shop formed a salient angle , presented an irregular square , closed on all sides . 
There existed an interval of twenty paces between the grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of the street , so that one might say that the barricade rested on these houses , all inhabited , but closed from top to bottom . 
All this work was performed without any hindrance , in less than an hour , and without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skin cap or a single bayonet make their appearance . 
The very bourgeois who still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a glance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie , caught sight of the barricade , and redoubled their pace . 
The two barricades being finished , and the flag run up , a table was dragged out of the wine-shop ; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table . 
Enjolras brought the square coffer , and Courfeyrac opened it . 
This coffer was filled with cartridges . 
When the mob saw the cartridges , a tremor ran through the bravest , and a momentary silence ensued . 
Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile . 
Each one received thirty cartridges . 
Many had powder , and set about making others with the bullets which they had run . 
As for the barrel of powder , it stood on a table on one side , near the door , and was held in reserve . 
The alarm beat which ran through all Paris , did not cease , but it had finally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they no longer paid any attention . 
This noise retreated at times , and again drew near , with melancholy undulations . 
They loaded the guns and carbines , all together , without haste , with solemn gravity . 
