She tried to follow him , but Marius walked briskly , and with immense strides ; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois . 
She lost sight of him in two minutes , and returned breathless , three-quarters choked with asthma , and furious . 
`` If there is any sense , '' she growled , `` in putting on one 's best clothes every day , and making people run like this ! '' 
Marius betook himself to the Luxembourg . 
The young girl was there with M. Leblanc . 
Marius approached as near as he could , pretending to be busy reading a book , but he halted afar off , then returned and seated himself on his bench , where he spent four hours in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk , and who produced on him the impression that they were making sport of him . 
A fortnight passed thus . 
Marius went to the Luxembourg no longer for the sake of strolling there , but to seat himself always in the same spot , and that without knowing why . 
Once arrived there , he did not stir . 
He put on his new coat every morning , for the purpose of not showing himself , and he began all over again on the morrow . 
She was decidedly a marvellous beauty . 
The only remark approaching a criticism , that could be made , was , that the contradiction between her gaze , which was melancholy , and her smile , which was merry , gave a rather wild effect to her face , which sometimes caused this sweet countenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming . 
TAKEN PRISONER On one of the last days of the second week , Marius was seated on his bench , as usual , holding in his hand an open book , of which he had not turned a page for the last two hours . 
All at once he started . 
An event was taking place at the other extremity of the walk . 
Leblanc and his daughter had just left their seat , and the daughter had taken her father 's arm , and both were advancing slowly , towards the middle of the alley where Marius was . 
Marius closed his book , then opened it again , then forced himself to read ; he trembled ; the aureole was coming straight towards him . 
`` Ah ! 
good Heavens ! '' 
thought he , `` I shall not have time to strike an attitude . '' 
Still the white-haired man and the girl advanced . 
It seemed to him that this lasted for a century , and that it was but a second . 
`` What are they coming in this direction for ? '' 
he asked himself . 
`` What ! 
She will pass here ? 
Her feet will tread this sand , this walk , two paces from me ? '' 
He was utterly upset , he would have liked to be very handsome , he would have liked to own the cross . 
He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps . 
He imagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him . 
`` Is that gentleman going to address me ? '' 
he thought to himself . 
He dropped his head ; when he raised it again , they were very near him . 
The young girl passed , and as she passed , she glanced at him . 
She gazed steadily at him , with a pensive sweetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot . 
It seemed to him that she was reproaching him for having allowed so long a time to elapse without coming as far as her , and that she was saying to him : `` I am coming myself . '' 
Marius was dazzled by those eyes fraught with rays and abysses . 
He felt his brain on fire . 
She had come to him , what joy ! 
And then , how she had looked at him ! 
She appeared to him more beautiful than he had ever seen her yet . 
Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminine and angelic , with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing and Dante kneel . 
It seemed to him that he was floating free in the azure heavens . 
At the same time , he was horribly vexed because there was dust on his boots . 
He thought he felt sure that she had looked at his boots too . 
He followed her with his eyes until she disappeared . 
Then he started up and walked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman . 
It is possible that , at times , he laughed to himself and talked aloud . 
He was so dreamy when he came near the children 's nurses , that each one of them thought him in love with her . 
He quitted the Luxembourg , hoping to find her again in the street . 
