how I hate them , and with what joy , jubilation , enthusiasm , and satisfaction I could strangle all those rich folks ! 
all those rich folks ! 
These men who pretend to be charitable , who put on airs , who go to mass , who make presents to the priesthood , preachy , preachy , in their skullcaps , and who think themselves above us , and who come for the purpose of humiliating us , and to bring us ` clothes , ' as they say ! 
old duds that are not worth four sous ! 
And bread ! 
That 's not what I want , pack of rascals that they are , it 's money ! 
Ah ! 
money ! 
Never ! 
Because they say that we would go off and drink it up , and that we are drunkards and idlers ! 
And they ! 
What are they , then , and what have they been in their time ! 
Thieves ! 
They never could have become rich otherwise ! 
Oh ! 
Society ought to be grasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air , all of it ! 
It would all be smashed , very likely , but at least , no one would have anything , and there would be that much gained ! 
But what is that blockhead of a benevolent gentleman doing ? 
Will he come ? 
Perhaps the animal has forgotten the address ! 
I 'll bet that that old beast -- '' At that moment there came a light tap at the door , the man rushed to it and opened it , exclaiming , amid profound bows and smiles of adoration : -- `` Enter , sir ! 
Deign to enter , most respected benefactor , and your charming young lady , also . '' 
A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on the threshold of the attic . 
Marius had not quitted his post . 
His feelings for the moment surpassed the powers of the human tongue . 
It was She ! 
Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in those three letters of that word : She . 
It was certainly she . 
Marius could hardly distinguish her through the luminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes . 
It was that sweet , absent being , that star which had beamed upon him for six months ; it was those eyes , that brow , that mouth , that lovely vanished face which had created night by its departure . 
The vision had been eclipsed , now it reappeared . 
It reappeared in that gloom , in that garret , in that misshapen attic , in all that horror . 
Marius shuddered in dismay . 
What ! 
It was she ! 
The palpitations of his heart troubled his sight . 
He felt that he was on the brink of bursting into tears ! 
What ! 
He beheld her again at last , after having sought her so long ! 
It seemed to him that he had lost his soul , and that he had just found it again . 
She was the same as ever , only a little pale ; her delicate face was framed in a bonnet of violet velvet , her figure was concealed beneath a pelisse of black satin . 
Beneath her long dress , a glimpse could be caught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot . 
She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc . 
She had taken a few steps into the room , and had deposited a tolerably bulky parcel on the table . 
The eldest Jondrette girl had retired behind the door , and was staring with sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet , that silk mantle , and that charming , happy face . 
JONDRETTE COMES NEAR WEEPING The hovel was so dark , that people coming from without felt on entering it the effect produced on entering a cellar . 
The two new-comers advanced , therefore , with a certain hesitation , being hardly able to distinguish the vague forms surrounding them , while they could be clearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes of the inhabitants of the garret , who were accustomed to this twilight . 
M. Leblanc approached , with his sad but kindly look , and said to Jondrette the father : -- `` Monsieur , in this package you will find some new clothes and some woollen stockings and blankets . '' 
`` Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us , '' said Jondrette , bowing to the very earth . 
Then , bending down to the ear of his eldest daughter , while the two visitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior , he added in a low and rapid voice : -- `` Hey ? 
