`` Go away , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' resumed the child , `` give me back my money . '' 
Jean Valjean dropped his head , and made no reply . 
The child began again , `` My money , sir . '' 
Jean Valjean 's eyes remained fixed on the earth . 
`` My piece of money ! '' 
cried the child , `` my white piece ! 
my silver ! '' 
It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him . 
The child grasped him by the collar of his blouse and shook him . 
At the same time he made an effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his treasure . 
`` I want my piece of money ! 
my piece of forty sous ! '' 
The child wept . 
Jean Valjean raised his head . 
He still remained seated . 
His eyes were troubled . 
He gazed at the child , in a sort of amazement , then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a terrible voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
`` I , sir , '' replied the child . 
`` Little Gervais ! 
I ! 
Give me back my forty sous , if you please ! 
Take your foot away , sir , if you please ! '' 
Then irritated , though he was so small , and becoming almost menacing : -- `` Come now , will you take your foot away ? 
Take your foot away , or we 'll see ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
It 's still you ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , and rising abruptly to his feet , his foot still resting on the silver piece , he added : -- `` Will you take yourself off ! '' 
The frightened child looked at him , then began to tremble from head to foot , and after a few moments of stupor he set out , running at the top of his speed , without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry . 
Nevertheless , lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain distance , and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing , in the midst of his own revery . 
At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared . 
The sun had set . 
The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean . 
He had eaten nothing all day ; it is probable that he was feverish . 
He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the child 's flight . 
The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular intervals . 
His gaze , fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him , seemed to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient fragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass . 
All at once he shivered ; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening . 
He settled his cap more firmly on his brow , sought mechanically to cross and button his blouse , advanced a step and stopped to pick up his cudgel . 
At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece , which his foot had half ground into the earth , and which was shining among the pebbles . 
It was as though he had received a galvanic shock . 
`` What is this ? '' 
he muttered between his teeth . 
He recoiled three paces , then halted , without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which his foot had trodden but an instant before , as though the thing which lay glittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him . 
At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the silver coin , seized it , and straightened himself up again and began to gaze afar off over the plain , at the same time casting his eyes towards all points of the horizon , as he stood there erect and shivering , like a terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge . 
He saw nothing . 
Night was falling , the plain was cold and vague , great banks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight . 
He said , `` Ah ! '' 
and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child had disappeared . 
After about thirty paces he paused , looked about him and saw nothing . 
