To her , probably , since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench . 
From whom did it come ? 
An irresistible fascination took possession of her ; she tried to turn away her eyes from the leaflets which were trembling in her hand , she gazed at the sky , the street , the acacias all bathed in light , the pigeons fluttering over a neighboring roof , and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript , and she said to herself that she must know what it contained . 
This is what she read . 
A HEART BENEATH A STONE The reduction of the universe to a single being , the expansion of a single being even to God , that is love . 
Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars . 
How sad is the soul , when it is sad through love ! 
What a void in the absence of the being who , by herself alone fills the world ! 
Oh ! 
how true it is that the beloved being becomes God . 
One could comprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father of all evidently made creation for the soul , and the soul for love . 
The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilac curtain is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of dreams . 
God is behind everything , but everything hides God . 
Things are black , creatures are opaque . 
To love a being is to render that being transparent . 
Certain thoughts are prayers . 
There are moments when , whatever the attitude of the body may be , the soul is on its knees . 
Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices , which possess , however , a reality of their own . 
They are prevented from seeing each other , they can not write to each other ; they discover a multitude of mysterious means to correspond . 
They send each other the song of the birds , the perfume of the flowers , the smiles of children , the light of the sun , the sighings of the breeze , the rays of stars , all creation . 
And why not ? 
All the works of God are made to serve love . 
Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages . 
Oh Spring ! 
Thou art a letter that I write to her . 
The future belongs to hearts even more than it does to minds . 
Love , that is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity . 
In the infinite , the inexhaustible is requisite . 
Love participates of the soul itself . 
It is of the same nature . 
Like it , it is the divine spark ; like it , it is incorruptible , indivisible , imperishable . 
It is a point of fire that exists within us , which is immortal and infinite , which nothing can confine , and which nothing can extinguish . 
We feel it burning even to the very marrow of our bones , and we see it beaming in the very depths of heaven . 
Oh Love ! 
Adorations ! 
voluptuousness of two minds which understand each other , of two hearts which exchange with each other , of two glances which penetrate each other ! 
You will come to me , will you not , bliss ! 
strolls by twos in the solitudes ! 
Blessed and radiant days ! 
I have sometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves from the lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destinies of men . 
God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love , except to give them endless duration . 
After a life of love , an eternity of love is , in fact , an augmentation ; but to increase in intensity even the ineffable felicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world , is impossible , even to God . 
God is the plenitude of heaven ; love is the plenitude of man . 
You look at a star for two reasons , because it is luminous , and because it is impenetrable . 
You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a greater mystery , woman . 
All of us , whoever we may be , have our respirable beings . 
We lack air and we stifle . 
Then we die . 
To die for lack of love is horrible . 
Suffocation of the soul . 
