`` The first street that I entered was deserted . 
I entered a second street . 
Behind the angle formed by the two streets , a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I said to this Man : -- '' ` What country is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man made no reply . 
I saw the door of a house open , and I entered . 
`` The first chamber was deserted . 
I entered the second . 
Behind the door of this chamber a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I inquired of this man , ` Whose house is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man replied not . 
`` The house had a garden . 
I quitted the house and entered the garden . 
The garden was deserted . 
Behind the first tree I found a man standing upright . 
I said to this man , ` What garden is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man did not answer . 
`` I strolled into the village , and perceived that it was a town . 
All the streets were deserted , all the doors were open . 
Not a single living being was passing in the streets , walking through the chambers or strolling in the gardens . 
But behind each angle of the walls , behind each door , behind each tree , stood a silent man . 
Only one was to be seen at a time . 
These men watched me pass . 
`` I left the town and began to ramble about the fields . 
`` After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowd coming up behind me . 
I recognized all the men whom I had seen in that town . 
They had strange heads . 
They did not seem to be in a hurry , yet they walked faster than I did . 
They made no noise as they walked . 
In an instant this crowd had overtaken and surrounded me . 
The faces of these men were earthen in hue . 
`` Then the first one whom I had seen and questioned on entering the town said to me : -- '' ` Whither are you going ! 
Do you not know that you have been dead this long time ? ' 
`` I opened my mouth to reply , and I perceived that there was no one near me . '' 
He woke . 
He was icy cold . 
A wind which was chill like the breeze of dawn was rattling the leaves of the window , which had been left open on their hinges . 
The fire was out . 
The candle was nearing its end . 
It was still black night . 
He rose , he went to the window . 
There were no stars in the sky even yet . 
From his window the yard of the house and the street were visible . 
A sharp , harsh noise , which made him drop his eyes , resounded from the earth . 
Below him he perceived two red stars , whose rays lengthened and shortened in a singular manner through the darkness . 
As his thoughts were still half immersed in the mists of sleep , `` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` there are no stars in the sky . 
