`` What will you say to them ? '' 
`` I will speak to them of Robespierre , pardi ! 
Of Danton . 
Of principles . '' 
`` You ? '' 
`` I . 
But I do n't receive justice . 
When I set about it , I am terrible . 
I have read Prudhomme , I know the Social Contract , I know my constitution of the year Two by heart . 
` The liberty of one citizen ends where the liberty of another citizen begins . ' 
Do you take me for a brute ? 
I have an old bank-bill of the Republic in my drawer . 
The Rights of Man , the sovereignty of the people , sapristi ! 
I am even a bit of a Hebertist . 
I can talk the most superb twaddle for six hours by the clock , watch in hand . '' 
`` Be serious , '' said Enjolras . 
`` I am wild , '' replied Grantaire . 
Enjolras meditated for a few moments , and made the gesture of a man who has taken a resolution . 
`` Grantaire , '' he said gravely , `` I consent to try you . 
You shall go to the Barriere du Maine . '' 
Grantaire lived in furnished lodgings very near the Cafe Musain . 
He went out , and five minutes later he returned . 
He had gone home to put on a Robespierre waistcoat . 
`` Red , '' said he as he entered , and he looked intently at Enjolras . 
Then , with the palm of his energetic hand , he laid the two scarlet points of the waistcoat across his breast . 
And stepping up to Enjolras , he whispered in his ear : -- `` Be easy . '' 
He jammed his hat on resolutely and departed . 
A quarter of an hour later , the back room of the Cafe Musain was deserted . 
All the friends of the A B C were gone , each in his own direction , each to his own task . 
Enjolras , who had reserved the Cougourde of Aix for himself , was the last to leave . 
Those members of the Cougourde of Aix who were in Paris then met on the plain of Issy , in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerous in that side of Paris . 
As Enjolras walked towards this place , he passed the whole situation in review in his own mind . 
The gravity of events was self-evident . 
When facts , the premonitory symptoms of latent social malady , move heavily , the slightest complication stops and entangles them . 
A phenomenon whence arises ruin and new births . 
Enjolras descried a luminous uplifting beneath the gloomy skirts of the future . 
Who knows ? 
Perhaps the moment was at hand . 
The people were again taking possession of right , and what a fine spectacle ! 
The revolution was again majestically taking possession of France and saying to the world : `` The sequel to-morrow ! '' 
Enjolras was content . 
The furnace was being heated . 
He had at that moment a powder train of friends scattered all over Paris . 
He composed , in his own mind , with Combeferre 's philosophical and penetrating eloquence , Feuilly 's cosmopolitan enthusiasm , Courfeyrac 's dash , Bahorel 's smile , Jean Prouvaire 's melancholy , Joly 's science , Bossuet 's sarcasms , a sort of electric spark which took fire nearly everywhere at once . 
All hands to work . 
Surely , the result would answer to the effort . 
This was well . 
This made him think of Grantaire . 
`` Hold , '' said he to himself , `` the Barriere du Maine will not take me far out of my way . 
What if I were to go on as far as Richefeu 's ? 
