`` The rendezvous is appointed outside , '' said Theodule . 
`` Let 's have a look at the lass . '' 
And he advanced on the tips of his boots towards the corner which Marius had turned . 
On arriving there , he halted in amazement . 
Marius , with his forehead clasped in his hands , was kneeling upon the grass on a grave . 
He had strewn his bouquet there . 
At the extremity of the grave , on a little swelling which marked the head , there stood a cross of black wood with this name in white letters : COLONEL BARON PONTMERCY . 
Marius ' sobs were audible . 
The `` lass '' was a grave . 
MARBLE AGAINST GRANITE It was hither that Marius had come on the first occasion of his absenting himself from Paris . 
It was hither that he had come every time that M. Gillenormand had said : `` He is sleeping out . '' 
Lieutenant Theodule was absolutely put out of countenance by this unexpected encounter with a sepulchre ; he experienced a singular and disagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing , and which was composed of respect for the tomb , mingled with respect for the colonel . 
He retreated , leaving Marius alone in the cemetery , and there was discipline in this retreat . 
Death appeared to him with large epaulets , and he almost made the military salute to him . 
Not knowing what to write to his aunt , he decided not to write at all ; and it is probable that nothing would have resulted from the discovery made by Theodule as to the love affairs of Marius , if , by one of those mysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance , the scene at Vernon had not had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris . 
Marius returned from Vernon on the third day , in the middle of the morning , descended at his grandfather 's door , and , wearied by the two nights spent in the diligence , and feeling the need of repairing his loss of sleep by an hour at the swimming-school , he mounted rapidly to his chamber , took merely time enough to throw off his travelling-coat , and the black ribbon which he wore round his neck , and went off to the bath . 
M.Gillenormand , who had risen betimes like all old men in good health , had heard his entrance , and had made haste to climb , as quickly as his old legs permitted , the stairs to the upper story where Marius lived , in order to embrace him , and to question him while so doing , and to find out where he had been . 
But the youth had taken less time to descend than the old man had to ascend , and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic , Marius was no longer there . 
The bed had not been disturbed , and on the bed lay , outspread , but not defiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon . 
`` I like this better , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
And a moment later , he made his entrance into the salon , where Mademoiselle Gillenormand was already seated , busily embroidering her cart-wheels . 
The entrance was a triumphant one . 
M. Gillenormand held in one hand the great-coat , and in the other the neck-ribbon , and exclaimed : -- `` Victory ! 
We are about to penetrate the mystery ! 
We are going to learn the most minute details ; we are going to lay our finger on the debaucheries of our sly friend ! 
Here we have the romance itself . 
I have the portrait ! '' 
In fact , a case of black shagreen , resembling a medallion portrait , was suspended from the ribbon . 
The old man took this case and gazed at it for some time without opening it , with that air of enjoyment , rapture , and wrath , with which a poor hungry fellow beholds an admirable dinner which is not for him , pass under his very nose . 
`` For this evidently is a portrait . 
I know all about such things . 
That is worn tenderly on the heart . 
How stupid they are ! 
Some abominable fright that will make us shudder , probably ! 
Young men have such bad taste nowadays ! '' 
`` Let us see , father , '' said the old spinster . 
The case opened by the pressure of a spring . 
They found in it nothing but a carefully folded paper . 
`` From the same to the same , '' said M. Gillenormand , bursting with laughter . 
`` I know what it is . 
A billet-doux . '' 
`` Ah ! 
let us read it ! '' 
said the aunt . 
And she put on her spectacles . 
They unfolded the paper and read as follows : -- `` For my son . 
-- The Emperor made me a Baron on the battlefield of Waterloo . 
Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my blood , my son shall take it and bear it . 
That he will be worthy of it is a matter of course . '' 
The feelings of father and daughter can not be described . 
