He grew animated on this subject : `` The elixir of gold , '' he exclaimed , `` the yellow dye of Bestucheff , General Lamotte 's drops , in the eighteenth century , -- this was the great remedy for the catastrophes of love , the panacea against Venus , at one louis the half-ounce phial . 
Louis XV . 
sent two hundred phials of it to the Pope . '' 
He would have been greatly irritated and thrown off his balance , had any one told him that the elixir of gold is nothing but the perchloride of iron . 
M. Gillenormand adored the Bourbons , and had a horror of 1789 ; he was forever narrating in what manner he had saved himself during the Terror , and how he had been obliged to display a vast deal of gayety and cleverness in order to escape having his head cut off . 
If any young man ventured to pronounce an eulogium on the Republic in his presence , he turned purple and grew so angry that he was on the point of swooning . 
He sometimes alluded to his ninety years , and said , `` I hope that I shall not see ninety-three twice . '' 
On these occasions , he hinted to people that he meant to live to be a hundred . 
BASQUE AND NICOLETTE He had theories . 
Here is one of them : `` When a man is passionately fond of women , and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little , who is homely , cross , legitimate , with plenty of rights , perched on the code , and jealous at need , there is but one way of extricating himself from the quandry and of procuring peace , and that is to let his wife control the purse-strings . 
This abdication sets him free . 
Then his wife busies herself , grows passionately fond of handling coin , gets her fingers covered with verdigris in the process , undertakes the education of half-share tenants and the training of farmers , convokes lawyers , presides over notaries , harangues scriveners , visits limbs of the law , follows lawsuits , draws up leases , dictates contracts , feels herself the sovereign , sells , buys , regulates , promises and compromises , binds fast and annuls , yields , concedes and retrocedes , arranges , disarranges , hoards , lavishes ; she commits follies , a supreme and personal delight , and that consoles her . 
While her husband disdains her , she has the satisfaction of ruining her husband . '' 
This theory M. Gillenormand had himself applied , and it had become his history . 
His wife -- the second one -- had administered his fortune in such a manner that , one fine day , when M. Gillenormand found himself a widower , there remained to him just sufficient to live on , by sinking nearly the whole of it in an annuity of fifteen thousand francs , three-quarters of which would expire with him . 
He had not hesitated on this point , not being anxious to leave a property behind him . 
Besides , he had noticed that patrimonies are subject to adventures , and , for instance , become national property ; he had been present at the avatars of consolidated three per cents , and he had no great faith in the Great Book of the Public Debt . 
`` All that 's the Rue Quincampois ! '' 
he said . 
His house in the Rue Filles-du-Clavaire belonged to him , as we have already stated . 
He had two servants , `` a male and a female . '' 
When a servant entered his establishment , M. Gillenormand re-baptized him . 
He bestowed on the men the name of their province : Nimois , Comtois , Poitevin , Picard . 
His last valet was a big , foundered , short-winded fellow of fifty-five , who was incapable of running twenty paces ; but , as he had been born at Bayonne , M. Gillenormand called him Basque . 
All the female servants in his house were called Nicolette -LRB- even the Magnon , of whom we shall hear more farther on -RRB- . 
One day , a haughty cook , a cordon bleu , of the lofty race of porters , presented herself . 
`` How much wages do you want a month ? '' 
asked M. Gillenormand . 
`` Thirty francs . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Olympie . '' 
`` You shall have fifty francs , and you shall be called Nicolette . '' 
IN WHICH MAGNON AND HER TWO CHILDREN ARE SEEN With M. Gillenormand , sorrow was converted into wrath ; he was furious at being in despair . 
He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts of liberties . 
One of the facts of which his exterior relief and his internal satisfaction was composed , was , as we have just hinted , that he had remained a brisk spark , and that he passed energetically for such . 
This he called having `` royal renown . '' 
This royal renown sometimes drew down upon him singular windfalls . 
One day , there was brought to him in a basket , as though it had been a basket of oysters , a stout , newly born boy , who was yelling like the deuce , and duly wrapped in swaddling-clothes , which a servant-maid , dismissed six months previously , attributed to him . 
M. Gillenormand had , at that time , fully completed his eighty-fourth year . 
Indignation and uproar in the establishment . 
And whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade to believe that ? 
What audacity ! 
What an abominable calumny ! 
M. Gillenormand himself was not at all enraged . 
He gazed at the brat with the amiable smile of a good man who is flattered by the calumny , and said in an aside : `` Well , what now ? 
What 's the matter ? 
You are finely taken aback , and really , you are excessively ignorant . 
M. le Duc d'Angouleme , the bastard of his Majesty Charles IX. , married a silly jade of fifteen when he was eighty-five ; M. Virginal , Marquis d'Alluye , brother to the Cardinal de Sourdis , Archbishop of Bordeaux , had , at the age of eighty-three , by the maid of Madame la Presidente Jacquin , a son , a real child of love , who became a Chevalier of Malta and a counsellor of state ; one of the great men of this century , the Abbe Tabaraud , is the son of a man of eighty-seven . 
There is nothing out of the ordinary in these things . 
And then , the Bible ! 
