There is no blindness where there is certainty . 
Soul seeks soul , gropingly , and finds it . 
And this soul , found and tested , is a woman . 
A hand sustains you ; it is hers : a mouth lightly touches your brow ; it is her mouth : you hear a breath very near you ; it is hers . 
To have everything of her , from her worship to her pity , never to be left , to have that sweet weakness aiding you , to lean upon that immovable reed , to touch Providence with one 's hands , and to be able to take it in one 's arms , -- God made tangible , -- what bliss ! 
The heart , that obscure , celestial flower , undergoes a mysterious blossoming . 
One would not exchange that shadow for all brightness ! 
The angel soul is there , uninterruptedly there ; if she departs , it is but to return again ; she vanishes like a dream , and reappears like reality . 
One feels warmth approaching , and behold ! 
she is there . 
One overflows with serenity , with gayety , with ecstasy ; one is a radiance amid the night . 
And there are a thousand little cares . 
Nothings , which are enormous in that void . 
The most ineffable accents of the feminine voice employed to lull you , and supplying the vanished universe to you . 
One is caressed with the soul . 
One sees nothing , but one feels that one is adored . 
It is a paradise of shadows . 
It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to the other . 
The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M. sur M. On the following day , M. Madeleine appeared clad wholly in black , and with crape on his hat . 
This mourning was noticed in the town , and commented on . 
It seemed to throw a light on M. Madeleine 's origin . 
It was concluded that some relationship existed between him and the venerable Bishop . 
`` He has gone into mourning for the Bishop of D -- '' said the drawing-rooms ; this raised M. Madeleine 's credit greatly , and procured for him , instantly and at one blow , a certain consideration in the noble world of M. sur M . 
The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditated raising the quarantine against M. Madeleine , the probable relative of a bishop . 
M. Madeleine perceived the advancement which he had obtained , by the more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentiful smiles of the young ones . 
One evening , a ruler in that petty great world , who was curious by right of seniority , ventured to ask him , `` M. le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D -- ? '' 
He said , `` No , Madame . '' 
`` But , '' resumed the dowager , `` you are wearing mourning for him . '' 
He replied , `` It is because I was a servant in his family in my youth . '' 
Another thing which was remarked , was , that every time that he encountered in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the country and seeking chimneys to sweep , the mayor had him summoned , inquired his name , and gave him money . 
The little Savoyards told each other about it : a great many of them passed that way . 
VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON Little by little , and in the course of time , all this opposition subsided . 
There had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine , in virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to , blackening and calumnies ; then they grew to be nothing more than ill-nature , then merely malicious remarks , then even this entirely disappeared ; respect became complete , unanimous , cordial , and towards 1821 the moment arrived when the word `` Monsieur le Maire '' was pronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as `` Monseigneur the Bishop '' had been pronounced in D -- in 1815 . 
People came from a distance of ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine . 
He put an end to differences , he prevented lawsuits , he reconciled enemies . 
Every one took him for the judge , and with good reason . 
It seemed as though he had for a soul the book of the natural law . 
It was like an epidemic of veneration , which in the course of six or seven years gradually took possession of the whole district . 
One single man in the town , in the arrondissement , absolutely escaped this contagion , and , whatever Father Madeleine did , remained his opponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinct kept him on the alert and uneasy . 
It seems , in fact , as though there existed in certain men a veritable bestial instinct , though pure and upright , like all instincts , which creates antipathies and sympathies , which fatally separates one nature from another nature , which does not hesitate , which feels no disquiet , which does not hold its peace , and which never belies itself , clear in its obscurity , infallible , imperious , intractable , stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence and to all the dissolvents of reason , and which , in whatever manner destinies are arranged , secretly warns the man-dog of the presence of the man-cat , and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion . 
It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along a street , calm , affectionate , surrounded by the blessings of all , a man of lofty stature , clad in an iron-gray frock-coat , armed with a heavy cane , and wearing a battered hat , turned round abruptly behind him , and followed him with his eyes until he disappeared , with folded arms and a slow shake of the head , and his upper lip raised in company with his lower to his nose , a sort of significant grimace which might be translated by : `` What is that man , after all ? 
I certainly have seen him somewhere . 
In any case , I am not his dupe . '' 
This person , grave with a gravity which was almost menacing , was one of those men who , even when only seen by a rapid glimpse , arrest the spectator 's attention . 
His name was Javert , and he belonged to the police . 
At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of an inspector . 
He had not seen Madeleine 's beginnings . 
Javert owed the post which he occupied to the protection of M. Chabouillet , the secretary of the Minister of State , Comte Angeles , then prefect of police at Paris . 
When Javert arrived at M. sur M. the fortune of the great manufacturer was already made , and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine . 
Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy , which is complicated with an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority . 
