You would have seen ! 
Oh , if the kind hearts only had fat purses , how much better things would go ! 
I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild 's fortune ! 
How much good he would do ! 
Matelote , embrace me ! 
You are voluptuous and timid ! 
You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister , and lips which claim the kiss of a lover . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , you cask ! '' 
said Courfeyrac . 
Grantaire retorted : -- `` I am the capitoul -LSB- 52 -RSB- and the master of the floral games ! '' 
-LSB- 52 -RSB- Municipal officer of Toulouse . 
Enjolras , who was standing on the crest of the barricade , gun in hand , raised his beautiful , austere face . 
Enjolras , as the reader knows , had something of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition . 
He would have perished at Thermopylae with Leonidas , and burned at Drogheda with Cromwell . 
`` Grantaire , '' he shouted , `` go get rid of the fumes of your wine somewhere else than here . 
This is the place for enthusiasm , not for drunkenness . 
Do n't disgrace the barricade ! '' 
This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire . 
One would have said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face . 
He seemed to be rendered suddenly sober . 
He sat down , put his elbows on a table near the window , looked at Enjolras with indescribable gentleness , and said to him : -- `` Let me sleep here . '' 
`` Go and sleep somewhere else , '' cried Enjolras . 
But Grantaire , still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him , replied : -- `` Let me sleep here , -- until I die . '' 
Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes : -- `` Grantaire , you are incapable of believing , of thinking , of willing , of living , and of dying . '' 
Grantaire replied in a grave tone : -- `` You will see . '' 
He stammered a few more unintelligible words , then his head fell heavily on the table , and , as is the usual effect of the second period of inebriety , into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him , an instant later he had fallen asleep . 
AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP Bahorel , in ecstasies over the barricade , shouted : -- `` Here 's the street in its low-necked dress ! 
How well it looks ! '' 
Courfeyrac , as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent , sought to console the widowed proprietress . 
`` Mother Hucheloup , were n't you complaining the other day because you had had a notice served on you for infringing the law , because Gibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window ? '' 
`` Yes , my good Monsieur Courfeyrac . 
Ah ! 
good Heavens , are you going to put that table of mine in your horror , too ? 
And it was for the counterpane , and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the attic window into the street , that the government collected a fine of a hundred francs . 
If that is n't an abomination , what is ! '' 
`` Well , Mother Hucheloup , we are avenging you . '' 
Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit which she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account . 
She was satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman , who , having received a box on the ear from her husband , went to complain to her father , and cried for vengeance , saying : `` Father , you owe my husband affront for affront . '' 
The father asked : `` On which cheek did you receive the blow ? '' 
`` On the left cheek . '' 
The father slapped her right cheek and said : `` Now you are satisfied . 
Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter 's ears , and that I have accordingly boxed his wife 's . '' 
The rain had ceased . 
Recruits had arrived . 
Workmen had brought under their blouses a barrel of powder , a basket containing bottles of vitriol , two or three carnival torches , and a basket filled with fire-pots , `` left over from the King 's festival . '' 
This festival was very recent , having taken place on the 1st of May . 
It was said that these munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pepin . 
They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis , and all the lanterns in the surrounding streets , de Mondetour , du Cygne , des Precheurs , and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie . 
Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac directed everything . 
Two barricades were now in process of construction at once , both of them resting on the Corinthe house and forming a right angle ; the larger shut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the other closed the Rue Mondetour , on the side of the Rue de Cygne . 
