I was liberated four days ago , and am on my way to Pontarlier , which is my destination . 
I have been walking for four days since I left Toulon . 
I have travelled a dozen leagues to-day on foot . 
This evening , when I arrived in these parts , I went to an inn , and they turned me out , because of my yellow passport , which I had shown at the town-hall . 
I had to do it . 
I went to an inn . 
They said to me , ` Be off , ' at both places . 
No one would take me . 
I went to the prison ; the jailer would not admit me . 
I went into a dog 's kennel ; the dog bit me and chased me off , as though he had been a man . 
One would have said that he knew who I was . 
I went into the fields , intending to sleep in the open air , beneath the stars . 
There were no stars . 
I thought it was going to rain , and I re-entered the town , to seek the recess of a doorway . 
Yonder , in the square , I meant to sleep on a stone bench . 
A good woman pointed out your house to me , and said to me , ` Knock there ! ' 
I have knocked . 
What is this place ? 
Do you keep an inn ? 
I have money -- savings . 
One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which I earned in the galleys by my labor , in the course of nineteen years . 
I will pay . 
What is that to me ? 
I have money . 
I am very weary ; twelve leagues on foot ; I am very hungry . 
Are you willing that I should remain ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will set another place . '' 
The man advanced three paces , and approached the lamp which was on the table . 
`` Stop , '' he resumed , as though he had not quite understood ; `` that 's not it . 
Did you hear ? 
I am a galley-slave ; a convict . 
I come from the galleys . '' 
He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow paper , which he unfolded . 
`` Here 's my passport . 
Yellow , as you see . 
This serves to expel me from every place where I go . 
Will you read it ? 
I know how to read . 
I learned in the galleys . 
There is a school there for those who choose to learn . 
Hold , this is what they put on this passport : ` Jean Valjean , discharged convict , native of ' -- that is nothing to you -- ` has been nineteen years in the galleys : five years for house-breaking and burglary ; fourteen years for having attempted to escape on four occasions . 
He is a very dangerous man . ' 
There ! 
Every one has cast me out . 
Are you willing to receive me ? 
Is this an inn ? 
Will you give me something to eat and a bed ? 
Have you a stable ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will put white sheets on the bed in the alcove . '' 
We have already explained the character of the two women 's obedience . 
