Two of the `` chimney-builders '' pushed the drunken man into the corner near the heap of old iron with their feet . 
`` Babet , '' said Thenardier in a low tone to the man with the cudgel , `` why did you bring so many ; they were not needed . '' 
`` What can you do ? '' 
replied the man with the cudgel , `` they all wanted to be in it . 
This is a bad season . 
There 's no business going on . '' 
The pallet on which M. Leblanc had been thrown was a sort of hospital bed , elevated on four coarse wooden legs , roughly hewn . 
M. Leblanc let them take their own course . 
The ruffians bound him securely , in an upright attitude , with his feet on the ground at the head of the bed , the end which was most remote from the window , and nearest to the fireplace . 
When the last knot had been tied , Thenardier took a chair and seated himself almost facing M. Leblanc . 
Thenardier no longer looked like himself ; in the course of a few moments his face had passed from unbridled violence to tranquil and cunning sweetness . 
Marius found it difficult to recognize in that polished smile of a man in official life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but a moment before ; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarming metamorphosis , and he felt as a man might feel who should behold a tiger converted into a lawyer . 
`` Monsieur -- '' said Thenardier . 
And dismissing with a gesture the ruffians who still kept their hands on M. Leblanc : -- `` Stand off a little , and let me have a talk with the gentleman . '' 
All retired towards the door . 
He went on : -- `` Monsieur , you did wrong to try to jump out of the window . 
You might have broken your leg . 
Now , if you will permit me , we will converse quietly . 
In the first place , I must communicate to you an observation which I have made which is , that you have not uttered the faintest cry . '' 
Thenardier was right , this detail was correct , although it had escaped Marius in his agitation . 
M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words , without raising his voice , and even during his struggle with the six ruffians near the window he had preserved the most profound and singular silence . 
Thenardier continued : -- `` Mon Dieu ! 
You might have shouted ` stop thief ' a bit , and I should not have thought it improper . 
` Murder ! ' 
That , too , is said occasionally , and , so far as I am concerned , I should not have taken it in bad part . 
It is very natural that you should make a little row when you find yourself with persons who do n't inspire you with sufficient confidence . 
You might have done that , and no one would have troubled you on that account . 
You would not even have been gagged . 
And I will tell you why . 
This room is very private . 
That 's its only recommendation , but it has that in its favor . 
You might fire off a mortar and it would produce about as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of a drunken man . 
Here a cannon would make a boum , and the thunder would make a pouf . 
It 's a handy lodging . 
But , in short , you did not shout , and it is better so . 
I present you my compliments , and I will tell you the conclusion that I draw from that fact : My dear sir , when a man shouts , who comes ? 
The police . 
And after the police ? 
Justice . 
Well ! 
You have not made an outcry ; that is because you do n't care to have the police and the courts come in any more than we do . 
It is because , -- I have long suspected it , -- you have some interest in hiding something . 
On our side we have the same interest . 
So we can come to an understanding . '' 
As he spoke thus , it seemed as though Thenardier , who kept his eyes fixed on M. Leblanc , were trying to plunge the sharp points which darted from the pupils into the very conscience of his prisoner . 
Moreover , his language , which was stamped with a sort of moderated , subdued insolence and crafty insolence , was reserved and almost choice , and in that rascal , who had been nothing but a robber a short time previously , one now felt `` the man who had studied for the priesthood . '' 
The silence preserved by the prisoner , that precaution which had been carried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life , that resistance opposed to the first impulse of nature , which is to utter a cry , all this , it must be confessed , now that his attention had been called to it , troubled Marius , and affected him with painful astonishment . 
Thenardier 's well-grounded observation still further obscured for Marius the dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular person on whom Courfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc . 
But whoever he was , bound with ropes , surrounded with executioners , half plunged , so to speak , in a grave which was closing in upon him to the extent of a degree with every moment that passed , in the presence of Thenardier 's wrath , as in the presence of his sweetness , this man remained impassive ; and Marius could not refrain from admiring at such a moment the superbly melancholy visage . 
Here , evidently , was a soul which was inaccessible to terror , and which did not know the meaning of despair . 
