His second movement was to remain and to venture on at least one question . 
This was Sister Simplice , who had never told a lie in her life . 
Javert knew it , and held her in special veneration in consequence . 
`` Sister , '' said he , `` are you alone in this room ? '' 
A terrible moment ensued , during which the poor portress felt as though she should faint . 
The sister raised her eyes and answered : -- `` Yes . '' 
`` Then , '' resumed Javert , `` you will excuse me if I persist ; it is my duty ; you have not seen a certain person -- a man -- this evening ? 
He has escaped ; we are in search of him -- that Jean Valjean ; you have not seen him ? '' 
The sister replied : -- `` No . '' 
She lied . 
She had lied twice in succession , one after the other , without hesitation , promptly , as a person does when sacrificing herself . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Javert , and he retired with a deep bow . 
O sainted maid ! 
you left this world many years ago ; you have rejoined your sisters , the virgins , and your brothers , the angels , in the light ; may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise ! 
The sister 's affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did not even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been extinguished , and which was still smoking on the table . 
An hour later , a man , marching amid trees and mists , was rapidly departing from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris . 
That man was Jean Valjean . 
It has been established by the testimony of two or three carters who met him , that he was carrying a bundle ; that he was dressed in a blouse . 
Where had he obtained that blouse ? 
No one ever found out . 
But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few days before , leaving behind him nothing but his blouse . 
Perhaps that was the one . 
One last word about Fantine . 
We all have a mother , -- the earth . 
Fantine was given back to that mother . 
The cure thought that he was doing right , and perhaps he really was , in reserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for the poor . 
Who was concerned , after all ? 
A convict and a woman of the town . 
That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine , and reduced it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper 's grave . 
So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs to anybody and everybody , and where the poor are lost . 
Fortunately , God knows where to find the soul again . 
Fantine was laid in the shade , among the first bones that came to hand ; she was subjected to the promiscuousness of ashes . 
She was thrown into the public grave . 
Her grave resembled her bed . 
-LSB- The end of Volume I. `` Fantine '' -RSB- COSETTE WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES Last year -LRB- 1861 -RRB- , on a beautiful May morning , a traveller , the person who is telling this story , was coming from Nivelles , and directing his course towards La Hulpe . 
He was on foot . 
He was pursuing a broad paved road , which undulated between two rows of trees , over the hills which succeed each other , raise the road and let it fall again , and produce something in the nature of enormous waves . 
He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac . 
In the west he perceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud , which has the form of a reversed vase . 
He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence ; and at the angle of the cross-road , by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription Ancient Barrier No. 4 , a public house , bearing on its front this sign : At the Four Winds -LRB- Aux Quatre Vents -RRB- . 
Echabeau , Private Cafe . 
A quarter of a league further on , he arrived at the bottom of a little valley , where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through the embankment of the road . 
The clump of sparsely planted but very green trees , which fills the valley on one side of the road , is dispersed over the meadows on the other , and disappears gracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud . 
On the right , close to the road , was an inn , with a four-wheeled cart at the door , a large bundle of hop-poles , a plough , a heap of dried brushwood near a flourishing hedge , lime smoking in a square hole , and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions . 
A young girl was weeding in a field , where a huge yellow poster , probably of some outside spectacle , such as a parish festival , was fluttering in the wind . 
At one corner of the inn , beside a pool in which a flotilla of ducks was navigating , a badly paved path plunged into the bushes . 
The wayfarer struck into this . 
After traversing a hundred paces , skirting a wall of the fifteenth century , surmounted by a pointed gable , with bricks set in contrast , he found himself before a large door of arched stone , with a rectilinear impost , in the sombre style of Louis XIV. , flanked by two flat medallions . 
A severe facade rose above this door ; a wall , perpendicular to the facade , almost touched the door , and flanked it with an abrupt right angle . 
In the meadow before the door lay three harrows , through which , in disorder , grew all the flowers of May . 
