The name of Voltaire is known , but not the name of Cesar de Bus . 
Nevertheless , Cesar de Bus is a man of blessed memory , and Voltaire one of unblessed memory . 
The last arch-bishop , the Cardinal de Perigord , did not even know that Charles de Gondren succeeded to Berulle , and Francois Bourgoin to Gondren , and Jean-Francois Senault to Bourgoin , and Father Sainte-Marthe to Jean-Francois Senault . 
The name of Father Coton is known , not because he was one of the three who urged the foundation of the Oratorie , but because he furnished Henri IV. , the Huguenot king , with the material for an oath . 
That which pleases people of the world in Saint Francois de Sales , is that he cheated at play . 
And then , religion is attacked . 
Why ? 
Because there have been bad priests , because Sagittaire , Bishop of Gap , was the brother of Salone , Bishop of Embrun , and because both of them followed Mommol . 
What has that to do with the question ? 
Does that prevent Martin de Tours from being a saint , and giving half of his cloak to a beggar ? 
They persecute the saints . 
They shut their eyes to the truth . 
Darkness is the rule . 
The most ferocious beasts are beasts which are blind . 
No one thinks of hell as a reality . 
Oh ! 
how wicked people are ! 
By order of the king signifies to-day , by order of the revolution . 
One no longer knows what is due to the living or to the dead . 
A holy death is prohibited . 
Burial is a civil matter . 
This is horrible . 
Saint Leo II . 
wrote two special letters , one to Pierre Notaire , the other to the king of the Visigoths , for the purpose of combating and rejecting , in questions touching the dead , the authority of the exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor . 
Gauthier , Bishop of Chalons , held his own in this matter against Otho , Duke of Burgundy . 
The ancient magistracy agreed with him . 
In former times we had voices in the chapter , even on matters of the day . 
The Abbot of Citeaux , the general of the order , was councillor by right of birth to the parliament of Burgundy . 
We do what we please with our dead . 
Is not the body of Saint Benoit himself in France , in the abbey of Fleury , called Saint Benoit-sur-Loire , although he died in Italy at Mont-Cassin , on Saturday , the 21st of the month of March , of the year 543 ? 
All this is incontestable . 
I abhor psalm-singers , I hate priors , I execrate heretics , but I should detest yet more any one who should maintain the contrary . 
One has only to read Arnoul Wion , Gabriel Bucelin , Trithemus , Maurolics , and Dom Luc d'Achery . '' 
The prioress took breath , then turned to Fauchelevent . 
`` Is it settled , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` It is settled , reverend Mother . '' 
`` We may depend on you ? '' 
`` I will obey . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` I am entirely devoted to the convent . '' 
`` That is understood . 
You will close the coffin . 
The sisters will carry it to the chapel . 
The office for the dead will then be said . 
Then we shall return to the cloister . 
Between eleven o'clock and midnight , you will come with your iron bar . 
All will be done in the most profound secrecy . 
There will be in the chapel only the four Mother Precentors , Mother Ascension and yourself . '' 
`` And the sister at the post ? '' 
`` She will not turn round . '' 
