What is he doing ? 
`` Napoleon is dead , '' said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo . 
`` He dead ! '' 
cried the soldier ; `` you do n't know him . '' 
Imagination distrusted this man , even when overthrown . 
The depths of Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo . 
Something enormous remained long empty through Napoleon 's disappearance . 
The kings placed themselves in this void . 
Ancient Europe profited by it to undertake reforms . 
There was a Holy Alliance ; Belle-Alliance , Beautiful Alliance , the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance . 
In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed , the features of a new France were sketched out . 
The future , which the Emperor had rallied , made its entry . 
On its brow it bore the star , Liberty . 
The glowing eyes of all young generations were turned on it . 
Singular fact ! 
people were , at one and the same time , in love with the future , Liberty , and the past , Napoleon . 
Defeat had rendered the vanquished greater . 
Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleon erect . 
Those who had triumphed were alarmed . 
England had him guarded by Hudson Lowe , and France had him watched by Montchenu . 
His folded arms became a source of uneasiness to thrones . 
Alexander called him `` my sleeplessness . '' 
This terror was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained in him . 
That is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism . 
This phantom caused the old world to tremble . 
The kings reigned , but ill at their ease , with the rock of Saint Helena on the horizon . 
While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood , the sixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietly rotting , and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world . 
The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815 , and Europe called this the Restoration . 
This is what Waterloo was . 
But what matters it to the Infinite ? 
all that tempest , all that cloud , that war , then that peace ? 
All that darkness did not trouble for a moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from one blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre Dame . 
THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT Let us return -- it is a necessity in this book -- to that fatal battle-field . 
On the 18th of June the moon was full . 
Its light favored Blucher 's ferocious pursuit , betrayed the traces of the fugitives , delivered up that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry , and aided the massacre . 
Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during catastrophes . 
After the last cannon-shot had been fired , the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean remained deserted . 
The English occupied the encampment of the French ; it is the usual sign of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished . 
They established their bivouac beyond Rossomme . 
The Prussians , let loose on the retreating rout , pushed forward . 
Wellington went to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst . 
If ever the sic vos non vobis was applicable , it certainly is to that village of Waterloo . 
Waterloo took no part , and lay half a league from the scene of action . 
Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded , Hougomont was burned , La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault , Papelotte was burned , Plancenoit was burned , La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two conquerors ; these names are hardly known , and Waterloo , which worked not in the battle , bears off all the honor . 
We are not of the number of those who flatter war ; when the occasion presents itself , we tell the truth about it . 
War has frightful beauties which we have not concealed ; it has also , we acknowledge , some hideous features . 
One of the most surprising is the prompt stripping of the bodies of the dead after the victory . 
The dawn which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses . 
Who does this ? 
Who thus soils the triumph ? 
