Cloister walls are not to be stepped over . 
How did he get there with a child ? 
One can not scale a perpendicular wall with a child in one 's arms . 
Who was that child ? 
Where did they both come from ? 
Since Fauchelevent had lived in the convent , he had heard nothing of M. sur M. , and he knew nothing of what had taken place there . 
Father Madeleine had an air which discouraged questions ; and besides , Fauchelevent said to himself : `` One does not question a saint . '' 
M. Madeleine had preserved all his prestige in Fauchelevent 's eyes . 
Only , from some words which Jean Valjean had let fall , the gardener thought he could draw the inference that M. Madeleine had probably become bankrupt through the hard times , and that he was pursued by his creditors ; or that he had compromised himself in some political affair , and was in hiding ; which last did not displease Fauchelevent , who , like many of our peasants of the North , had an old fund of Bonapartism about him . 
While in hiding , M. Madeleine had selected the convent as a refuge , and it was quite simple that he should wish to remain there . 
But the inexplicable point , to which Fauchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain , was that M. Madeleine should be there , and that he should have that little girl with him . 
Fauchelevent saw them , touched them , spoke to them , and still did not believe it possible . 
The incomprehensible had just made its entrance into Fauchelevent 's hut . 
Fauchelevent groped about amid conjectures , and could see nothing clearly but this : `` M. Madeleine saved my life . '' 
This certainty alone was sufficient and decided his course . 
He said to himself : `` It is my turn now . '' 
He added in his conscience : `` M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it was a question of thrusting himself under the cart for the purpose of dragging me out . '' 
He made up his mind to save M. Madeleine . 
Nevertheless , he put many questions to himself and made himself divers replies : `` After what he did for me , would I save him if he were a thief ? 
Just the same . 
If he were an assassin , would I save him ? 
Just the same . 
Since he is a saint , shall I save him ? 
Just the same . '' 
But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent ! 
Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical undertaking ; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than his self-devotion , his good will , and a little of that old rustic cunning , on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generous enterprise , undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister , and the steep escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
Father Fauchelevent was an old man who had been an egoist all his life , and who , towards the end of his days , halt , infirm , with no interest left to him in the world , found it sweet to be grateful , and perceiving a generous action to be performed , flung himself upon it like a man , who at the moment when he is dying , should find close to his hand a glass of good wine which he had never tasted , and should swallow it with avidity . 
We may add , that the air which he had breathed for many years in this convent had destroyed all personality in him , and had ended by rendering a good action of some kind absolutely necessary to him . 
So he took his resolve : to devote himself to M. Madeleine . 
We have just called him a poor peasant of Picardy . 
That description is just , but incomplete . 
At the point of this story which we have now reached , a little of Father Fauchelevent 's physiology becomes useful . 
He was a peasant , but he had been a notary , which added trickery to his cunning , and penetration to his ingenuousness . 
Having , through various causes , failed in his business , he had descended to the calling of a carter and a laborer . 
But , in spite of oaths and lashings , which horses seem to require , something of the notary had lingered in him . 
He had some natural wit ; he talked good grammar ; he conversed , which is a rare thing in a village ; and the other peasants said of him : `` He talks almost like a gentleman with a hat . '' 
Fauchelevent belonged , in fact , to that species , which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last century qualified as demi-bourgeois , demi-lout , and which the metaphors showered by the chateau upon the thatched cottage ticketed in the pigeon-hole of the plebeian : rather rustic , rather citified ; pepper and salt . 
Fauchelevent , though sorely tried and harshly used by fate , worn out , a sort of poor , threadbare old soul , was , nevertheless , an impulsive man , and extremely spontaneous in his actions ; a precious quality which prevents one from ever being wicked . 
His defects and his vices , for he had some , were all superficial ; in short , his physiognomy was of the kind which succeeds with an observer . 
His aged face had none of those disagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead , which signify malice or stupidity . 
At daybreak , Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes , after having done an enormous deal of thinking , and beheld M. Madeleine seated on his truss of straw , and watching Cosette 's slumbers . 
Fauchelevent sat up and said : -- `` Now that you are here , how are you going to contrive to enter ? '' 
This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from his revery . 
The two men took counsel together . 
`` In the first place , '' ' said Fauchelevent , `` you will begin by not setting foot outside of this chamber , either you or the child . 
One step in the garden and we are done for . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` Monsieur Madeleine , '' resumed Fauchelevent , `` you have arrived at a very auspicious moment , I mean to say a very inauspicious moment ; one of the ladies is very ill . 
This will prevent them from looking much in our direction . 
It seems that she is dying . 
