A little while before he had shivered because the garden was deserted , and now he shivered because there was some one there . 
He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors . 
He said to himself that Javert and the spies had , perhaps , not taken their departure ; that they had , no doubt , left people on the watch in the street ; that if this man should discover him in the garden , he would cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up . 
He took the sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap of old furniture , which was out of use , in the most remote corner of the shed . 
Cosette did not stir . 
From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon patch . 
The strange thing about it was , that the sound of the bell followed each of this man 's movements . 
When the man approached , the sound approached ; when the man retreated , the sound retreated ; if he made any hasty gesture , a tremolo accompanied the gesture ; when he halted , the sound ceased . 
It appeared evident that the bell was attached to that man ; but what could that signify ? 
Who was this man who had a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox ? 
As he put these questions to himself , he touched Cosette 's hands . 
They were icy cold . 
`` Ah ! 
good God ! '' 
he cried . 
He spoke to her in a low voice : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
She did not open her eyes . 
He shook her vigorously . 
She did not wake . 
`` Is she dead ? '' 
he said to himself , and sprang to his feet , quivering from head to foot . 
The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind . 
There are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies , and violently force the partitions of our brains . 
When those we love are in question , our prudence invents every sort of madness . 
He remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal . 
Cosette was pale , and had fallen at full length on the ground at his feet , without a movement . 
He listened to her breathing : she still breathed , but with a respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction . 
How was he to warm her back to life ? 
How was he to rouse her ? 
All that was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts . 
He rushed wildly from the ruin . 
It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a fire in less than a quarter of an hour . 
THE MAN WITH THE BELL He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden . 
He had taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his waistcoat . 
The man 's head was bent down , and he did not see him approaching . 
In a few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him . 
Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry : -- `` One hundred francs ! '' 
The man gave a start and raised his eyes . 
`` You can earn a hundred francs , '' went on Jean Valjean , `` if you will grant me shelter for this night . '' 
The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean 's terrified countenance . 
`` What ! 
so it is you , Father Madeleine ! '' 
said the man . 
That name , thus pronounced , at that obscure hour , in that unknown spot , by that strange man , made Jean Valjean start back . 
He had expected anything but that . 
The person who thus addressed him was a bent and lame old man , dressed almost like a peasant , who wore on his left knee a leather knee-cap , whence hung a moderately large bell . 
His face , which was in the shadow , was not distinguishable . 
However , the goodman had removed his cap , and exclaimed , trembling all over : -- `` Ah , good God ! 
How come you here , Father Madeleine ? 
Where did you enter ? 
