People would be greatly annoyed if they did not carry their chins in their cravats . 
The ideal of an urchin of twenty when he marries , is to resemble M. Royer-Collard . 
And do you know what one arrives at with that majesty ? 
at being petty . 
Learn this : joy is not only joyous ; it is great . 
But be in love gayly then , what the deuce ! 
marry , when you marry , with fever and giddiness , and tumult , and the uproar of happiness ! 
Be grave in church , well and good . 
But , as soon as the mass is finished , sarpejou ! 
you must make a dream whirl around the bride . 
A marriage should be royal and chimerical ; it should promenade its ceremony from the cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup . 
I have a horror of a paltry wedding . 
Ventregoulette ! 
be in Olympus for that one day , at least . 
Be one of the gods . 
Ah ! 
people might be sylphs . 
Games and Laughter , argiraspides ; they are stupids . 
My friends , every recently made bridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini . 
Profit by that unique minute in life to soar away to the empyrean with the swans and the eagles , even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into the bourgeoisie of the frogs . 
Do n't economize on the nuptials , do not prune them of their splendors ; do n't scrimp on the day when you beam . 
The wedding is not the housekeeping . 
Oh ! 
if I were to carry out my fancy , it would be gallant , violins would be heard under the trees . 
Here is my programme : sky-blue and silver . 
I would mingle with the festival the rural divinities , I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids . 
The nuptials of Amphitrite , a rosy cloud , nymphs with well dressed locks and entirely naked , an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess , a chariot drawn by marine monsters . 
`` Triton trottait devant , et tirait de sa conque Des sons si ravissants qu'il ravissait quiconque ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- -- there 's a festive programme , there 's a good one , or else I know nothing of such matters , deuce take it ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- `` Triton trotted on before , and drew from his conch-shell sounds so ravishing that he delighted everyone ! '' 
While the grandfather , in full lyrical effusion , was listening to himself , Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at each other . 
Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity . 
Within the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amount of emotions . 
Marius returned , Marius brought back bleeding , Marius brought back from a barricade , Marius dead , then living , Marius reconciled , Marius betrothed , Marius wedding a poor girl , Marius wedding a millionairess . 
The six hundred thousand francs had been her last surprise . 
Then , her indifference of a girl taking her first communion returned to her . 
She went regularly to service , told her beads , read her euchology , mumbled Aves in one corner of the house , while I love you was being whispered in the other , and she beheld Marius and Cosette in a vague way , like two shadows . 
The shadow was herself . 
There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul , neutralized by torpor , a stranger to that which may be designated as the business of living , receives no impressions , either human , or pleasant or painful , with the exception of earthquakes and catastrophes . 
This devotion , as Father Gillenormand said to his daughter , corresponds to a cold in the head . 
You smell nothing of life . 
Neither any bad , nor any good odor . 
Moreover , the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderly spinster 's indecision . 
Her father had acquired the habit of taking her so little into account , that he had not consulted her in the matter of consent to Marius ' marriage . 
He had acted impetuously , according to his wont , having , a despot-turned slave , but a single thought , -- to satisfy Marius . 
As for the aunt , -- it had not even occurred to him that the aunt existed , and that she could have an opinion of her own , and , sheep as she was , this had vexed her . 
Somewhat resentful in her inmost soul , but impassible externally , she had said to herself : `` My father has settled the question of the marriage without reference to me ; I shall settle the question of the inheritance without consulting him . '' 
She was rich , in fact , and her father was not . 
She had reserved her decision on this point . 
It is probable that , had the match been a poor one , she would have left him poor . 
