THE INTERIOR OF DESPAIR Let us try to say it . 
It is necessary that society should look at these things , because it is itself which creates them . 
He was , as we have said , an ignorant man , but he was not a fool . 
The light of nature was ignited in him . 
Unhappiness , which also possesses a clearness of vision of its own , augmented the small amount of daylight which existed in this mind . 
Beneath the cudgel , beneath the chain , in the cell , in hardship , beneath the burning sun of the galleys , upon the plank bed of the convict , he withdrew into his own consciousness and meditated . 
He constituted himself the tribunal . 
He began by putting himself on trial . 
He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustly punished . 
He admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy act ; that that loaf of bread would probably not have been refused to him had he asked for it ; that , in any case , it would have been better to wait until he could get it through compassion or through work ; that it is not an unanswerable argument to say , `` Can one wait when one is hungry ? '' 
That , in the first place , it is very rare for any one to die of hunger , literally ; and next , that , fortunately or unfortunately , man is so constituted that he can suffer long and much , both morally and physically , without dying ; that it is therefore necessary to have patience ; that that would even have been better for those poor little children ; that it had been an act of madness for him , a miserable , unfortunate wretch , to take society at large violently by the collar , and to imagine that one can escape from misery through theft ; that that is in any case a poor door through which to escape from misery through which infamy enters ; in short , that he was in the wrong . 
Then he asked himself -- Whether he had been the only one in fault in his fatal history . 
Whether it was not a serious thing , that he , a laborer , out of work , that he , an industrious man , should have lacked bread . 
And whether , the fault once committed and confessed , the chastisement had not been ferocious and disproportioned . 
Whether there had not been more abuse on the part of the law , in respect to the penalty , than there had been on the part of the culprit in respect to his fault . 
Whether there had not been an excess of weights in one balance of the scale , in the one which contains expiation . 
Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not equivalent to the annihilation of the crime , and did not result in reversing the situation , of replacing the fault of the delinquent by the fault of the repression , of converting the guilty man into the victim , and the debtor into the creditor , and of ranging the law definitely on the side of the man who had violated it . 
Whether this penalty , complicated by successive aggravations for attempts at escape , had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage perpetrated by the stronger upon the feebler , a crime of society against the individual , a crime which was being committed afresh every day , a crime which had lasted nineteen years . 
He asked himself whether human society could have the right to force its members to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack of foresight , and in the other case for its pitiless foresight ; and to seize a poor man forever between a defect and an excess , a default of work and an excess of punishment . 
Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those of its members who were the least well endowed in the division of goods made by chance , and consequently the most deserving of consideration . 
These questions put and answered , he judged society and condemned it . 
He condemned it to his hatred . 
He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering , and he said to himself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to call it to account . 
He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium between the harm which he had caused and the harm which was being done to him ; he finally arrived at the conclusion that his punishment was not , in truth , unjust , but that it most assuredly was iniquitous . 
Anger may be both foolish and absurd ; one can be irritated wrongfully ; one is exasperated only when there is some show of right on one 's side at bottom . 
Jean Valjean felt himself exasperated . 
And besides , human society had done him nothing but harm ; he had never seen anything of it save that angry face which it calls Justice , and which it shows to those whom it strikes . 
Men had only touched him to bruise him . 
Every contact with them had been a blow . 
Never , since his infancy , since the days of his mother , of his sister , had he ever encountered a friendly word and a kindly glance . 
From suffering to suffering , he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a war ; and that in this war he was the conquered . 
He had no other weapon than his hate . 
He resolved to whet it in the galleys and to bear it away with him when he departed . 
There was at Toulon a school for the convicts , kept by the Ignorantin friars , where the most necessary branches were taught to those of the unfortunate men who had a mind for them . 
He was of the number who had a mind . 
He went to school at the age of forty , and learned to read , to write , to cipher . 
He felt that to fortify his intelligence was to fortify his hate . 
In certain cases , education and enlightenment can serve to eke out evil . 
This is a sad thing to say ; after having judged society , which had caused his unhappiness , he judged Providence , which had made society , and he condemned it also . 
Thus during nineteen years of torture and slavery , this soul mounted and at the same time fell . 
Light entered it on one side , and darkness on the other . 
Jean Valjean had not , as we have seen , an evil nature . 
He was still good when he arrived at the galleys . 
He there condemned society , and felt that he was becoming wicked ; he there condemned Providence , and was conscious that he was becoming impious . 
It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point . 
Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom ? 
Can the man created good by God be rendered wicked by man ? 
Can the soul be completely made over by fate , and become evil , fate being evil ? 
Can the heart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities and infirmities under the oppression of a disproportionate unhappiness , as the vertebral column beneath too low a vault ? 
Is there not in every human soul , was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in particular , a first spark , a divine element , incorruptible in this world , immortal in the other , which good can develop , fan , ignite , and make to glow with splendor , and which evil can never wholly extinguish ? 
