In the future no one will kill any one else , the earth will beam with radiance , the human race will love . 
The day will come , citizens , when all will be concord , harmony , light , joy and life ; it will come , and it is in order that it may come that we are about to die . '' 
Enjolras ceased . 
His virgin lips closed ; and he remained for some time standing on the spot where he had shed blood , in marble immobility . 
His staring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones . 
Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other 's hands silently , and , leaning against each other in an angle of the barricade , they watched with an admiration in which there was some compassion , that grave young man , executioner and priest , composed of light , like crystal , and also of rock . 
Let us say at once that later on , after the action , when the bodies were taken to the morgue and searched , a police agent 's card was found on Le Cabuc . 
The author of this book had in his hands , in 1848 , the special report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832 . 
We will add , that if we are to believe a tradition of the police , which is strange but probably well founded , Le Cabuc was Claquesous . 
The fact is , that dating from the death of Le Cabuc , there was no longer any question of Claquesous . 
Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of his disappearance ; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with the invisible . 
His life had been all shadows , his end was night . 
The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotion of that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly terminated , when Courfeyrac again beheld on the barricade , the small young man who had inquired of him that morning for Marius . 
This lad , who had a bold and reckless air , had come by night to join the insurgents . 
BOOK THIRTEENTH . 
-- MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , had produced on him the effect of the voice of destiny . 
He wished to die ; the opportunity presented itself ; he knocked at the door of the tomb , a hand in the darkness offered him the key . 
These melancholy openings which take place in the gloom before despair , are tempting . 
Marius thrust aside the bar which had so often allowed him to pass , emerged from the garden , and said : `` I will go . '' 
Mad with grief , no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in his brain , incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after those two months passed in the intoxication of youth and love , overwhelmed at once by all the reveries of despair , he had but one desire remaining , to make a speedy end of all . 
He set out at rapid pace . 
He found himself most opportunely armed , as he had Javert 's pistols with him . 
The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse , had vanished from his sight in the street . 
Marius , who had emerged from the Rue Plumet by the boulevard , traversed the Esplanade and the bridge of the Invalides , the Champs Elysees , the Place Louis XV. , and reached the Rue de Rivoli . 
The shops were open there , the gas was burning under the arcades , women were making their purchases in the stalls , people were eating ices in the Cafe Laiter , and nibbling small cakes at the English pastry-cook 's shop . 
Only a few posting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hotel des Princes and the Hotel Meurice . 
Marius entered the Rue Saint-Honore through the Passage Delorme . 
There the shops were closed , the merchants were chatting in front of their half-open doors , people were walking about , the street lanterns were lighted , beginning with the first floor , all the windows were lighted as usual . 
There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal . 
Marius followed the Rue Saint-Honore . 
In proportion as he left the Palais-Royal behind him , there were fewer lighted windows , the shops were fast shut , no one was chatting on the thresholds , the street grew sombre , and , at the same time , the crowd increased in density . 
For the passers-by now amounted to a crowd . 
No one could be seen to speak in this throng , and yet there arose from it a dull , deep murmur . 
Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec , there were `` assemblages '' , motionless and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as stones in the midst of running water . 
At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires , the crowd no longer walked . 
It formed a resisting , massive , solid , compact , almost impenetrable block of people who were huddled together , and conversing in low tones . 
There were hardly any black coats or round hats now , but smock frocks , blouses , caps , and bristling and cadaverous heads . 
This multitude undulated confusedly in the nocturnal gloom . 
Its whisperings had the hoarse accent of a vibration . 
Although not one of them was walking , a dull trampling was audible in the mire . 
Beyond this dense portion of the throng , in the Rue du Roule , in the Rue des Prouvaires , and in the extension of the Rue Saint-Honore , there was no longer a single window in which a candle was burning . 
Only the solitary and diminishing rows of lanterns could be seen vanishing into the street in the distance . 
The lanterns of that date resembled large red stars , hanging to ropes , and shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a huge spider . 
These streets were not deserted . 
There could be descried piles of guns , moving bayonets , and troops bivouacking . 
No curious observer passed that limit . 
There circulation ceased . 
There the rabble ended and the army began . 
Marius willed with the will of a man who hopes no more . 
He had been summoned , he must go . 
