Let us , then , go back a few years . 
Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate , the Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire , in company with many other bishops . 
The arrest of the Pope took place , as every one knows , on the night of the 5th to the 6th of July , 1809 ; on this occasion , M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and Italy convened at Paris . 
This synod was held at Notre-Dame , and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June , 1811 , under the presidency of Cardinal Fesch . 
M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five bishops who attended it . 
But he was present only at one sitting and at three or four private conferences . 
Bishop of a mountain diocese , living so very close to nature , in rusticity and deprivation , it appeared that he imported among these eminent personages , ideas which altered the temperature of the assembly . 
He very soon returned to D -- He was interrogated as to this speedy return , and he replied : `` I embarrassed them . 
The outside air penetrated to them through me . 
I produced on them the effect of an open door . '' 
On another occasion he said , `` What would you have ? 
Those gentlemen are princes . 
I am only a poor peasant bishop . '' 
The fact is that he displeased them . 
Among other strange things , it is said that he chanced to remark one evening , when he found himself at the house of one of his most notable colleagues : `` What beautiful clocks ! 
What beautiful carpets ! 
What beautiful liveries ! 
They must be a great trouble . 
I would not have all those superfluities , crying incessantly in my ears : ` There are people who are hungry ! 
There are people who are cold ! 
There are poor people ! 
There are poor people ! ' '' 
Let us remark , by the way , that the hatred of luxury is not an intelligent hatred . 
This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts . 
Nevertheless , in churchmen , luxury is wrong , except in connection with representations and ceremonies . 
It seems to reveal habits which have very little that is charitable about them . 
An opulent priest is a contradiction . 
The priest must keep close to the poor . 
Now , can one come in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress , all these misfortunes , and this poverty , without having about one 's own person a little of that misery , like the dust of labor ? 
Is it possible to imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm ? 
Can one imagine a workman who is working near a furnace , and who has neither a singed hair , nor blackened nails , nor a drop of sweat , nor a speck of ashes on his face ? 
The first proof of charity in the priest , in the bishop especially , is poverty . 
This is , no doubt , what the Bishop of D -- thought . 
It must not be supposed , however , that he shared what we call the `` ideas of the century '' on certain delicate points . 
He took very little part in the theological quarrels of the moment , and maintained silence on questions in which Church and State were implicated ; but if he had been strongly pressed , it seems that he would have been found to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican . 
Since we are making a portrait , and since we do not wish to conceal anything , we are forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline . 
Beginning with 1813 , he gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations . 
He refused to see him , as he passed through on his return from the island of Elba , and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor in his diocese during the Hundred Days . 
Besides his sister , Mademoiselle Baptistine , he had two brothers , one a general , the other a prefect . 
He wrote to both with tolerable frequency . 
He was harsh for a time towards the former , because , holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes , the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape . 
His correspondence with the other brother , the ex-prefect , a fine , worthy man who lived in retirement at Paris , Rue Cassette , remained more affectionate . 
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit , his hour of bitterness , his cloud . 
The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things . 
Certainly , such a man would have done well not to entertain any political opinions . 
Let there be no mistake as to our meaning : we are not confounding what is called `` political opinions '' with the grand aspiration for progress , with the sublime faith , patriotic , democratic , humane , which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous intellect . 
Without going deeply into questions which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book , we will simply say this : It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist , and if his glance had never been , for a single instant , turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly discernible , above the fictions and the hatreds of this world , above the stormy vicissitudes of human things , the beaming of those three pure radiances , truth , justice , and charity . 
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur Welcome , we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right and liberty , his proud opposition , his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon . 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling . 
We only love the fray so long as there is danger , and in any case , the combatants of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last . 
