G -- resumed . 
`` Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me . 
Where were we ? 
What were you saying to me ? 
That '93 was inexorable ? '' 
`` Inexorable ; yes , '' said the Bishop . 
`` What think you of Marat clapping his hands at the guillotine ? '' 
`` What think you of Bossuet chanting the Te Deum over the dragonnades ? '' 
The retort was a harsh one , but it attained its mark with the directness of a point of steel . 
The Bishop quivered under it ; no reply occurred to him ; but he was offended by this mode of alluding to Bossuet . 
The best of minds will have their fetiches , and they sometimes feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic . 
The conventionary began to pant ; the asthma of the agony which is mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice ; still , there was a perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes . 
He went on : -- `` Let me say a few words more in this and that direction ; I am willing . 
Apart from the Revolution , which , taken as a whole , is an immense human affirmation , '93 is , alas ! 
a rejoinder . 
You think it inexorable , sir ; but what of the whole monarchy , sir ? 
Carrier is a bandit ; but what name do you give to Montrevel ? 
Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal ; but what is your opinion as to Lamoignon-Baville ? 
Maillard is terrible ; but Saulx-Tavannes , if you please ? 
Duchene senior is ferocious ; but what epithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier ? 
Jourdan-Coupe-Tete is a monster ; but not so great a one as M. the Marquis de Louvois . 
Sir , sir , I am sorry for Marie Antoinette , archduchess and queen ; but I am also sorry for that poor Huguenot woman , who , in 1685 , under Louis the Great , sir , while with a nursing infant , was bound , naked to the waist , to a stake , and the child kept at a distance ; her breast swelled with milk and her heart with anguish ; the little one , hungry and pale , beheld that breast and cried and agonized ; the executioner said to the woman , a mother and a nurse , ` Abjure ! ' 
giving her her choice between the death of her infant and the death of her conscience . 
What say you to that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother ? 
Bear this well in mind sir : the French Revolution had its reasons for existence ; its wrath will be absolved by the future ; its result is the world made better . 
From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the human race . 
I abridge , I stop , I have too much the advantage ; moreover , I am dying . '' 
And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop , the conventionary concluded his thoughts in these tranquil words : -- `` Yes , the brutalities of progress are called revolutions . 
When they are over , this fact is recognized , -- that the human race has been treated harshly , but that it has progressed . '' 
The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop . 
One remained , however , and from this intrenchment , the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu 's resistance , came forth this reply , wherein appeared nearly all the harshness of the beginning : -- `` Progress should believe in God . 
Good can not have an impious servitor . 
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race . '' 
The former representative of the people made no reply . 
He was seized with a fit of trembling . 
He looked towards heaven , and in his glance a tear gathered slowly . 
When the eyelid was full , the tear trickled down his livid cheek , and he said , almost in a stammer , quite low , and to himself , while his eyes were plunged in the depths : -- `` O thou ! 
O ideal ! 
Thou alone existest ! '' 
The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock . 
After a pause , the old man raised a finger heavenward and said : -- `` The infinite is . 
He is there . 
If the infinite had no person , person would be without limit ; it would not be infinite ; in other words , it would not exist . 
There is , then , an I . 
That I of the infinite is God . '' 
The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice , and with the shiver of ecstasy , as though he beheld some one . 
When he had spoken , his eyes closed . 
The effort had exhausted him . 
It was evident that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been left to him . 
That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in death . 
