Now , he had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon . 
A National Guard had read the words Saint-Simon on the book , and had shouted : `` Death ! '' 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , a company of the National Guards from the suburbs , commanded by the Captain Fannicot , above mentioned , had itself decimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own good pleasure . 
This fact , singular though it may seem , was proved at the judicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of 1832 . 
Captain Fannicot , a bold and impatient bourgeois , a sort of condottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized , a fanatical and intractable governmentalist , could not resist the temptation to fire prematurely , and the ambition of capturing the barricade alone and unaided , that is to say , with his company . 
Exasperated by the successive apparition of the red flag and the old coat which he took for the black flag , he loudly blamed the generals and chiefs of the corps , who were holding council and did not think that the moment for the decisive assault had arrived , and who were allowing `` the insurrection to fry in its own fat , '' to use the celebrated expression of one of them . 
For his part , he thought the barricade ripe , and as that which is ripe ought to fall , he made the attempt . 
He commanded men as resolute as himself , `` raging fellows , '' as a witness said . 
His company , the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet , was the first of the battalion posted at the angle of the street . 
At the moment when they were least expecting it , the captain launched his men against the barricade . 
This movement , executed with more good will than strategy , cost the Fannicot company dear . 
Before it had traversed two thirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from the barricade . 
Four , the most audacious , who were running on in front , were mown down point-blank at the very foot of the redoubt , and this courageous throng of National Guards , very brave men but lacking in military tenacity , were forced to fall back , after some hesitation , leaving fifteen corpses on the pavement . 
This momentary hesitation gave the insurgents time to re-load their weapons , and a second and very destructive discharge struck the company before it could regain the corner of the street , its shelter . 
A moment more , and it was caught between two fires , and it received the volley from the battery piece which , not having received the order , had not discontinued its firing . 
The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from this grape-shot . 
He was killed by the cannon , that is to say , by order . 
This attack , which was more furious than serious , irritated Enjolras . 
-- `` The fools ! '' 
said he . 
`` They are getting their own men killed and they are using up our ammunition for nothing . '' 
Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was . 
Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons . 
Insurrection , which is speedily exhausted , has only a certain number of shots to fire and a certain number of combatants to expend . 
An empty cartridge-box , a man killed , can not be replaced . 
As repression has the army , it does not count its men , and , as it has Vincennes , it does not count its shots . 
Repression has as many regiments as the barricade has men , and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes . 
Thus they are struggles of one against a hundred , which always end in crushing the barricade ; unless the revolution , uprising suddenly , flings into the balance its flaming archangel 's sword . 
This does happen sometimes . 
Then everything rises , the pavements begin to seethe , popular redoubts abound . 
Paris quivers supremely , the quid divinum is given forth , a 10th of August is in the air , a 29th of July is in the air , a wonderful light appears , the yawning maw of force draws back , and the army , that lion , sees before it , erect and tranquil , that prophet , France . 
PASSING GLEAMS In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade , there is a little of everything ; there is bravery , there is youth , honor , enthusiasm , the ideal , conviction , the rage of the gambler , and , above all , intermittences of hope . 
One of these intermittences , one of these vague quivers of hope suddenly traversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at the moment when it was least expected . 
`` Listen , '' suddenly cried Enjolras , who was still on the watch , `` it seems to me that Paris is waking up . '' 
It is certain that , on the morning of the 6th of June , the insurrection broke out afresh for an hour or two , to a certain extent . 
The obstinacy of the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies . 
Barricades were begun in the Rue du Poirier and the Rue des Gravilliers . 
In front of the Porte Saint-Martin , a young man , armed with a rifle , attacked alone a squadron of cavalry . 
In plain sight , on the open boulevard , he placed one knee on the ground , shouldered his weapon , fired , killed the commander of the squadron , and turned away , saying : `` There 's another who will do us no more harm . '' 
He was put to the sword . 
In the Rue Saint-Denis , a woman fired on the National Guard from behind a lowered blind . 
The slats of the blind could be seen to tremble at every shot . 
A child fourteen years of age was arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie , with his pockets full of cartridges . 
Many posts were attacked . 
At the entrance to the Rue Bertin-Poiree , a very lively and utterly unexpected fusillade welcomed a regiment of cuirrassiers , at whose head marched Marshal General Cavaignac de Barague . 
In the Rue Planche-Mibray , they threw old pieces of pottery and household utensils down on the soldiers from the roofs ; a bad sign ; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult , Napoleon 's old lieutenant grew thoughtful , as he recalled Suchet 's saying at Saragossa : `` We are lost when the old women empty their pots de chambre on our heads . '' 
These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when it was thought that the uprising had been rendered local , this fever of wrath , these sparks which flew hither and thither above those deep masses of combustibles which are called the faubourgs of Paris , -- all this , taken together , disturbed the military chiefs . 
They made haste to stamp out these beginnings of conflagration . 
They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuee , de la Chanvrerie and Saint-Merry until these sparks had been extinguished , in order that they might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish them at one blow . 
Columns were thrown into the streets where there was fermentation , sweeping the large , sounding the small , right and left , now slowly and cautiously , now at full charge . 
