In the meantime a gentle light rested over this life and this soul . 
It seemed to him that he beheld Satan by the light of Paradise . 
How many hours did he weep thus ? 
What did he do after he had wept ? 
Whither did he go ! 
No one ever knew . 
The only thing which seems to be authenticated is that that same night the carrier who served Grenoble at that epoch , and who arrived at D -- about three o'clock in the morning , saw , as he traversed the street in which the Bishop 's residence was situated , a man in the attitude of prayer , kneeling on the pavement in the shadow , in front of the door of Monseigneur Welcome . 
THE YEAR 1817 1817 is the year which Louis XVIII. , with a certain royal assurance which was not wanting in pride , entitled the twenty-second of his reign . 
It is the year in which M. Bruguiere de Sorsum was celebrated . 
All the hairdressers ' shops , hoping for powder and the return of the royal bird , were besmeared with azure and decked with fleurs-de-lys . 
It was the candid time at which Count Lynch sat every Sunday as church-warden in the church-warden 's pew of Saint-Germain-des-Pres , in his costume of a peer of France , with his red ribbon and his long nose and the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed a brilliant action . 
The brilliant action performed by M. Lynch was this : being mayor of Bordeaux , on the 12th of March , 1814 , he had surrendered the city a little too promptly to M. the Duke d'Angouleme . 
Hence his peerage . 
In 1817 fashion swallowed up little boys of from four to six years of age in vast caps of morocco leather with ear-tabs resembling Esquimaux mitres . 
The French army was dressed in white , after the mode of the Austrian ; the regiments were called legions ; instead of numbers they bore the names of departments ; Napoleon was at St. Helena ; and since England refused him green cloth , he was having his old coats turned . 
In 1817 Pelligrini sang ; Mademoiselle Bigottini danced ; Potier reigned ; Odry did not yet exist . 
Madame Saqui had succeeded to Forioso . 
There were still Prussians in France . 
M. Delalot was a personage . 
Legitimacy had just asserted itself by cutting off the hand , then the head , of Pleignier , of Carbonneau , and of Tolleron . 
The Prince de Talleyrand , grand chamberlain , and the Abbe Louis , appointed minister of finance , laughed as they looked at each other , with the laugh of the two augurs ; both of them had celebrated , on the 14th of July , 1790 , the mass of federation in the Champ de Mars ; Talleyrand had said it as bishop , Louis had served it in the capacity of deacon . 
In 1817 , in the side-alleys of this same Champ de Mars , two great cylinders of wood might have been seen lying in the rain , rotting amid the grass , painted blue , with traces of eagles and bees , from which the gilding was falling . 
These were the columns which two years before had upheld the Emperor 's platform in the Champ de Mai . 
They were blackened here and there with the scorches of the bivouac of Austrians encamped near Gros-Caillou . 
Two or three of these columns had disappeared in these bivouac fires , and had warmed the large hands of the Imperial troops . 
The Field of May had this remarkable point : that it had been held in the month of June and in the Field of March -LRB- Mars -RRB- . 
In this year , 1817 , two things were popular : the Voltaire-Touquet and the snuff-box a la Charter . 
The most recent Parisian sensation was the crime of Dautun , who had thrown his brother 's head into the fountain of the Flower-Market . 
They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department , on account of the lack of news from that fatal frigate , The Medusa , which was destined to cover Chaumareix with infamy and Gericault with glory . 
Colonel Selves was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha . 
The palace of Thermes , in the Rue de La Harpe , served as a shop for a cooper . 
On the platform of the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny , the little shed of boards , which had served as an observatory to Messier , the naval astronomer under Louis XVI. , was still to be seen . 
The Duchesse de Duras read to three or four friends her unpublished Ourika , in her boudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin . 
The N 's were scratched off the Louvre . 
The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated , and was entitled the bridge of the King 's Garden -LSB- du Jardin du Roi -RSB- , a double enigma , which disguised the bridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes at one stroke . 
Louis XVIII. , much preoccupied while annotating Horace with the corner of his finger-nail , heroes who have become emperors , and makers of wooden shoes who have become dauphins , had two anxieties , -- Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau . 
The French Academy had given for its prize subject , The Happiness procured through Study . 
M. Bellart was officially eloquent . 
In his shadow could be seen germinating that future advocate-general of Broe , dedicated to the sarcasms of Paul-Louis Courier . 
There was a false Chateaubriand , named Marchangy , in the interim , until there should be a false Marchangy , named d'Arlincourt . 
Claire d'Albe and Malek-Adel were masterpieces ; Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of the epoch . 
The Institute had the academician , Napoleon Bonaparte , stricken from its list of members . 
A royal ordinance erected Angouleme into a naval school ; for the Duc d'Angouleme , being lord high admiral , it was evident that the city of Angouleme had all the qualities of a seaport ; otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound . 
In the Council of Ministers the question was agitated whether vignettes representing slack-rope performances , which adorned Franconi 's advertising posters , and which attracted throngs of street urchins , should be tolerated . 
M. Paer , the author of Agnese , a good sort of fellow , with a square face and a wart on his cheek , directed the little private concerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye in the Rue Ville l'Eveque . 
All the young girls were singing the Hermit of Saint-Avelle , with words by Edmond Geraud . 
The Yellow Dwarf was transferred into Mirror . 
The Cafe Lemblin stood up for the Emperor , against the Cafe Valois , which upheld the Bourbons . 
The Duc de Berri , already surveyed from the shadow by Louvel , had just been married to a princess of Sicily . 
Madame de Stael had died a year previously . 
