`` Yes . '' 
`` Have you knocked at that one ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Knock there . '' 
PRUDENCE COUNSELLED TO WISDOM . 
That evening , the Bishop of D -- , after his promenade through the town , remained shut up rather late in his room . 
He was busy over a great work on Duties , which was never completed , unfortunately . 
He was carefully compiling everything that the Fathers and the doctors have said on this important subject . 
His book was divided into two parts : firstly , the duties of all ; secondly , the duties of each individual , according to the class to which he belongs . 
The duties of all are the great duties . 
There are four of these . 
Saint Matthew points them out : duties towards God -LRB- Matt . 
vi . -RRB- 
; duties towards one 's self -LRB- Matt . 
v. 29 , 30 -RRB- ; duties towards one 's neighbor -LRB- Matt . 
vii . 
12 -RRB- ; duties towards animals -LRB- Matt . 
vi . 
20 , 25 -RRB- . 
As for the other duties the Bishop found them pointed out and prescribed elsewhere : to sovereigns and subjects , in the Epistle to the Romans ; to magistrates , to wives , to mothers , to young men , by Saint Peter ; to husbands , fathers , children and servants , in the Epistle to the Ephesians ; to the faithful , in the Epistle to the Hebrews ; to virgins , in the Epistle to the Corinthians . 
Out of these precepts he was laboriously constructing a harmonious whole , which he desired to present to souls . 
At eight o'clock he was still at work , writing with a good deal of inconvenience upon little squares of paper , with a big book open on his knees , when Madame Magloire entered , according to her wont , to get the silver-ware from the cupboard near his bed . 
A moment later , the Bishop , knowing that the table was set , and that his sister was probably waiting for him , shut his book , rose from his table , and entered the dining-room . 
The dining-room was an oblong apartment , with a fireplace , which had a door opening on the street -LRB- as we have said -RRB- , and a window opening on the garden . 
Madame Magloire was , in fact , just putting the last touches to the table . 
As she performed this service , she was conversing with Mademoiselle Baptistine . 
A lamp stood on the table ; the table was near the fireplace . 
A wood fire was burning there . 
One can easily picture to one 's self these two women , both of whom were over sixty years of age . 
Madame Magloire small , plump , vivacious ; Mademoiselle Baptistine gentle , slender , frail , somewhat taller than her brother , dressed in a gown of puce-colored silk , of the fashion of 1806 , which she had purchased at that date in Paris , and which had lasted ever since . 
To borrow vulgar phrases , which possess the merit of giving utterance in a single word to an idea which a whole page would hardly suffice to express , Madame Magloire had the air of a peasant , and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a lady . 
Madame Magloire wore a white quilted cap , a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon her neck , the only bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house , a very white fichu puffing out from a gown of coarse black woollen stuff , with large , short sleeves , an apron of cotton cloth in red and green checks , knotted round the waist with a green ribbon , with a stomacher of the same attached by two pins at the upper corners , coarse shoes on her feet , and yellow stockings , like the women of Marseilles . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine 's gown was cut on the patterns of 1806 , with a short waist , a narrow , sheath-like skirt , puffed sleeves , with flaps and buttons . 
She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known as the baby wig . 
Madame Magloire had an intelligent , vivacious , and kindly air ; the two corners of her mouth unequally raised , and her upper lip , which was larger than the lower , imparted to her a rather crabbed and imperious look . 
So long as Monseigneur held his peace , she talked to him resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom ; but as soon as Monseigneur began to speak , as we have seen , she obeyed passively like her mistress . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine did not even speak . 
She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him . 
She had never been pretty , even when she was young ; she had large , blue , prominent eyes , and a long arched nose ; but her whole visage , her whole person , breathed forth an ineffable goodness , as we stated in the beginning . 
She had always been predestined to gentleness ; but faith , charity , hope , those three virtues which mildly warm the soul , had gradually elevated that gentleness to sanctity . 
Nature had made her a lamb , religion had made her an angel . 
Poor sainted virgin ! 
Sweet memory which has vanished ! 
Mademoiselle Baptistine has so often narrated what passed at the episcopal residence that evening , that there are many people now living who still recall the most minute details . 
At the moment when the Bishop entered , Madame Magloire was talking with considerable vivacity . 
She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on a subject which was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was also accustomed . 
The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door . 
It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper , Madame Magloire had heard things in divers places . 
People had spoken of a prowler of evil appearance ; a suspicious vagabond had arrived who must be somewhere about the town , and those who should take it into their heads to return home late that night might be subjected to unpleasant encounters . 
The police was very badly organized , moreover , because there was no love lost between the Prefect and the Mayor , who sought to injure each other by making things happen . 
