Leaving his arms tied behind his back , they placed about his feet a slender but stout whip-cord , as is done to men on the point of mounting the scaffold , which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in length , and made him walk to the table at the end of the room , where they laid him down , closely bound about the middle of the body . 
By way of further security , and by means of a rope fastened to his neck , they added to the system of ligatures which rendered every attempt at escape impossible , that sort of bond which is called in prisons a martingale , which , starting at the neck , forks on the stomach , and meets the hands , after passing between the legs . 
While they were binding Javert , a man standing on the threshold was surveying him with singular attention . 
The shadow cast by this man made Javert turn his head . 
He raised his eyes , and recognized Jean Valjean . 
He did not even start , but dropped his lids proudly and confined himself to the remark : `` It is perfectly simple . '' 
THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED The daylight was increasing rapidly . 
Not a window was opened , not a door stood ajar ; it was the dawn but not the awaking . 
The end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , opposite the barricade , had been evacuated by the troops , as we have stated it seemed to be free , and presented itself to passers-by with a sinister tranquillity . 
The Rue Saint-Denis was as dumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at Thebes . 
Not a living being in the cross-roads , which gleamed white in the light of the sun . 
Nothing is so mournful as this light in deserted streets . 
Nothing was to be seen , but there was something to be heard . 
A mysterious movement was going on at a certain distance . 
It was evident that the critical moment was approaching . 
As on the previous evening , the sentinels had come in ; but this time all had come . 
The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack . 
Since the departure of the five , they had increased its height still further . 
On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the Halles , Enjolras , for fear of a surprise in the rear , came to a serious decision . 
He had the small gut of the Mondetour lane , which had been left open up to that time , barricaded . 
For this purpose , they tore up the pavement for the length of several houses more . 
In this manner , the barricade , walled on three streets , in front on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la Petite Truanderie , to the right on the Rue Mondetour , was really almost impregnable ; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there . 
It had three fronts , but no exit . 
-- `` A fortress but a rat hole too , '' said Courfeyrac with a laugh . 
Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones `` torn up in excess , '' said Bossuet , piled up near the door of the wine-shop . 
The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must needs come , that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle . 
An allowance of brandy was doled out to each . 
Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault . 
Each man selects his place as though at the theatre . 
They jostle , and elbow and crowd each other . 
There are some who make stalls of paving-stones . 
Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way , it is removed ; here is a redan which may afford protection , they take shelter behind it . 
Left-handed men are precious ; they take the places that are inconvenient to the rest . 
Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture . 
They wish to be at ease to kill , and to die comfortably . 
In the sad war of June , 1848 , an insurgent who was a formidable marksman , and who was firing from the top of a terrace upon a roof , had a reclining-chair brought there for his use ; a charge of grape-shot found him out there . 
As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for action , all disorderly movements cease ; there is no more pulling from one another ; there are no more coteries ; no more asides , there is no more holding aloof ; everything in their spirits converges in , and changes into , a waiting for the assailants . 
A barricade before the arrival of danger is chaos ; in danger , it is discipline itself . 
Peril produces order . 
As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle , and had placed himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for himself , all the rest held their peace . 
A series of faint , sharp noises resounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones . 
It was the men cocking their guns . 
Moreover , their attitudes were prouder , more confident than ever ; the excess of sacrifice strengthens ; they no longer cherished any hope , but they had despair , despair , -- the last weapon , which sometimes gives victory ; Virgil has said so . 
Supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions . 
To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a shipwreck ; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety . 
As on the preceding evening , the attention of all was directed , we might almost say leaned upon , the end of the street , now lighted up and visible . 
They had not long to wait . 
A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu quarter , but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack . 
A clashing of chains , the uneasy jolting of a mass , the click of brass skipping along the pavement , a sort of solemn uproar , announced that some sinister construction of iron was approaching . 
There arose a tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets , pierced and built for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas , and which are not made for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war . 
