The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer . 
Beneath this long , arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion , a perfectly preserved rag-picker 's basket excited the admiration of all connoisseurs . 
Everywhere , the mire , which the sewermen came to handle with intrepidity , abounded in precious objects , jewels of gold and silver , precious stones , coins . 
If a giant had filtered this cesspool , he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair . 
At the point where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye separate , they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper , bearing on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal 's hat , and on the other , a wolf with a tiara on his head . 
The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer . 
This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing but the hinges remained . 
From one of these hinges hung a dirty and shapeless rag which , arrested there in its passage , no doubt , had floated there in the darkness and finished its process of being torn apart . 
Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it . 
It was of very fine batiste , and in one of the corners , less frayed than the rest , they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above these seven letters : LAVBESP . 
The crown was the coronet of a Marquis , and the seven letters signified Laubespine . 
They recognized the fact , that what they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat . 
Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues . 
This was when he was a member of the household of the Comte d'Artois , in the capacity of physician to the Stables . 
From these love affairs , historically proved , with a great lady , he had retained this sheet . 
As a waif or a souvenir . 
At his death , as this was the only linen of any fineness which he had in his house , they buried him in it . 
Some old women had shrouded him for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of the people had enjoyed voluptuousness . 
Bruneseau passed on . 
They left that rag where it hung ; they did not put the finishing touch to it . 
Did this arise from scorn or from respect ? 
Marat deserved both . 
And then , destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch it . 
Besides , the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot which they select . 
In short , the relic was a strange one . 
A Marquise had slept in it ; Marat had rotted in it ; it had traversed the Pantheon to end with the rats of the sewer . 
This chamber rag , of which Watteau would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold , had ended in becoming worthy of the fixed gaze of Dante . 
The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lasted seven years , from 1805 to 1812 . 
As he proceeded , Bruneseau drew , directed , and completed considerable works ; in 1808 he lowered the arch of the Ponceau , and , everywhere creating new lines , he pushed the sewer , in 1809 , under the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the fountain of the Innocents ; in 1810 , under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the Salpetriere ; in 1811 under the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Peres , under the Rue du Mail , under the Rue de l'Echarpe , under the Place Royale ; in 1812 , under the Rue de la Paix , and under the Chaussee d'Antin . 
At the same time , he had the whole net-work disinfected and rendered healthful . 
In the second year of his work , Bruneseau engaged the assistance of his son-in-law Nargaud . 
It was thus that , at the beginning of the century , ancient society cleansed its double bottom , and performed the toilet of its sewer . 
There was that much clean , at all events . 
Tortuous , cracked , unpaved , full of fissures , intersected by gullies , jolted by eccentric elbows , mounting and descending illogically , fetid , wild , fierce , submerged in obscurity , with cicatrices on its pavements and scars on its walls , terrible , -- such was , retrospectively viewed , the antique sewer of Paris . 
Ramifications in every direction , crossings , of trenches , branches , goose-feet , stars , as in military mines , coecum , blind alleys , vaults lined with saltpetre , pestiferous pools , scabby sweats , on the walls , drops dripping from the ceilings , darkness ; nothing could equal the horror of this old , waste crypt , the digestive apparatus of Babylon , a cavern , ditch , gulf pierced with streets , a titanic mole-burrow , where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind mole , the past , prowling through the shadows , in the filth which has been splendor . 
This , we repeat , was the sewer of the past . 
PRESENT PROGRESS To-day the sewer is clean , cold , straight , correct . 
It almost realizes the ideal of what is understood in England by the word `` respectable . '' 
It is proper and grayish ; laid out by rule and line ; one might almost say as though it came out of a bandbox . 
It resembles a tradesman who has become a councillor of state . 
One can almost see distinctly there . 
The mire there comports itself with decency . 
At first , one might readily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors , which were so common in former days , and so useful in flights of monarchs and princes , in those good old times , `` when the people loved their kings . '' 
The present sewer is a beautiful sewer ; the pure style reigns there ; the classical rectilinear alexandrine which , driven out of poetry , appears to have taken refuge in architecture , seems mingled with all the stones of that long , dark and whitish vault ; each outlet is an arcade ; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer . 
However , if the geometrical line is in place anywhere , it is certainly in the drainage trench of a great city . 
There , everything should be subordinated to the shortest road . 
The sewer has , nowadays , assumed a certain official aspect . 
The very police reports , of which it sometimes forms the subject , no longer are wanting in respect towards it . 
The words which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and dignified . 
What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery ; what used to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice . 
