The disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village . 
He immediately obtained numerous versions of the story , which ended in the abduction of a child . 
Hence the police report . 
But their first vexation having passed off , Thenardier , with his wonderful instinct , had very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the prosecutor of the Crown , and that his complaints with regard to the abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon himself , and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand , the glittering eye of justice . 
The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle brought to them . 
And in the first place , how explain the fifteen hundred francs which he had received ? 
He turned squarely round , put a gag on his wife 's mouth , and feigned astonishment when the stolen child was mentioned to him . 
He understood nothing about it ; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature `` taken from him '' so hastily ; he should have liked to keep her two or three days longer , out of tenderness ; but her `` grandfather '' had come for her in the most natural way in the world . 
He added the `` grandfather , '' which produced a good effect . 
This was the story that Javert hit upon when he arrived at Montfermeil . 
The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish . 
Nevertheless , Javert dropped a few questions , like plummets , into Thenardier 's history . 
`` Who was that grandfather ? 
and what was his name ? '' 
Thenardier replied with simplicity : `` He is a wealthy farmer . 
I saw his passport . 
I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert . '' 
Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name . 
Thereupon Javert returned to Paris . 
`` Jean Valjean is certainly dead , '' said he , `` and I am a ninny . '' 
He had again begun to forget this history , when , in the course of March , 1824 , he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish of Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed `` the mendicant who gives alms . '' 
This person , the story ran , was a man of means , whose name no one knew exactly , and who lived alone with a little girl of eight years , who knew nothing about herself , save that she had come from Montfermeil . 
Montfermeil ! 
that name was always coming up , and it made Javert prick up his ears . 
An old beggar police spy , an ex-beadle , to whom this person had given alms , added a few more details . 
This gentleman of property was very shy , -- never coming out except in the evening , speaking to no one , except , occasionally to the poor , and never allowing any one to approach him . 
He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat , which was worth many millions , being all wadded with bank-bills . 
This piqued Javert 's curiosity in a decided manner . 
In order to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming him , he borrowed the beadle 's outfit for a day , and the place where the old spy was in the habit of crouching every evening , whining orisons through his nose , and playing the spy under cover of prayer . 
`` The suspected individual '' did indeed approach Javert thus disguised , and bestow alms on him . 
At that moment Javert raised his head , and the shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean . 
However , the darkness might have misled him ; Jean Valjean 's death was official ; Javert cherished very grave doubts ; and when in doubt , Javert , the man of scruples , never laid a finger on any one 's collar . 
He followed his man to the Gorbeau house , and got `` the old woman '' to talking , which was no difficult matter . 
The old woman confirmed the fact regarding the coat lined with millions , and narrated to him the episode of the thousand-franc bill . 
She had seen it ! 
She had handled it ! 
Javert hired a room ; that evening he installed himself in it . 
He came and listened at the mysterious lodger 's door , hoping to catch the sound of his voice , but Jean Valjean saw his candle through the key-hole , and foiled the spy by keeping silent . 
On the following day Jean Valjean decamped ; but the noise made by the fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman , who , hearing the rattling of coin , suspected that he might be intending to leave , and made haste to warn Javert . 
At night , when Jean Valjean came out , Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two men . 
Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture , but he had not mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize ; that was his secret , and he had kept it for three reasons : in the first place , because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert ; next , because , to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead , on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort , was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert , and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict ; and lastly , because Javert , being an artist , had a taste for the unforeseen . 
He hated those well-heralded successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off . 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the last . 
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree , then from corner to corner of the street , and had not lost sight of him for a single instant ; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert 's eye had been on him . 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean ? 
Because he was still in doubt . 
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at its ease ; the free press embarrassed it ; several arbitrary arrests denounced by the newspapers , had echoed even as far as the Chambers , and had rendered the Prefecture timid . 
Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter . 
The police agents were afraid of making a mistake ; the prefect laid the blame on them ; a mistake meant dismissal . 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph , reproduced by twenty newspapers , would have caused in Paris : `` Yesterday , an aged grandfather , with white hair , a respectable and well-to-do gentleman , who was walking with his grandchild , aged eight , was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict ! '' 
