However , this is according to the tactics of barricades ; to fire for a long while , in order to exhaust the insurgents ' ammunition , if they commit the mistake of replying . 
When it is perceived , from the slackening of their fire , that they have no more powder and ball , the assault is made . 
Enjolras had not fallen into this trap ; the barricade did not reply . 
At every discharge by platoons , Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his tongue , a sign of supreme disdain . 
`` Good for you , '' said he , `` rip up the cloth . 
We want some lint . '' 
Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect which it produced , and said to the cannon : `` You are growing diffuse , my good fellow . '' 
One gets puzzled in battle , as at a ball . 
It is probable that this silence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers uneasy , and to make them fear some unexpected incident , and that they felt the necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap of paving-stones , and of knowing what was going on behind that impassable wall which received blows without retorting . 
The insurgents suddenly perceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof . 
A fireman had placed his back against a tall chimney , and seemed to be acting as sentinel . 
His glance fell directly down into the barricade . 
`` There 's an embarrassing watcher , '' said Enjolras . 
Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras ' rifle , but he had his own gun . 
Without saying a word , he took aim at the fireman , and , a second later , the helmet , smashed by a bullet , rattled noisily into the street . 
The terrified soldier made haste to disappear . 
A second observer took his place . 
This one was an officer . 
Jean Valjean , who had re-loaded his gun , took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer 's casque to join the soldier 's . 
The officer did not persist , and retired speedily . 
This time the warning was understood . 
No one made his appearance thereafter on that roof ; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned . 
`` Why did you not kill the man ? '' 
Bossuet asked Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean made no reply . 
DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER Bossuet muttered in Combeferre 's ear : `` He did not answer my question . '' 
`` He is a man who does good by gun-shots , '' said Combeferre . 
Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch know that the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant against insurrections . 
It was particularly zealous and intrepid in the days of June , 1832 . 
A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la Cunette , whose `` establishment '' had been closed by the riots , became leonine at the sight of his deserted dance-hall , and got himself killed to preserve the order represented by a tea-garden . 
In that bourgeois and heroic time , in the presence of ideas which had their knights , interests had their paladins . 
The prosiness of the originators detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement . 
The diminution of a pile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise . 
They shed their blood lyrically for the counting-house ; and they defended the shop , that immense diminutive of the fatherland , with Lacedaemonian enthusiasm . 
At bottom , we will observe , there was nothing in all this that was not extremely serious . 
It was social elements entering into strife , while awaiting the day when they should enter into equilibrium . 
Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism -LSB- the barbarous name of the correct party -RSB- . 
People were for order in combination with lack of discipline . 
The drum suddenly beat capricious calls , at the command of such or such a Colonel of the National Guard ; such and such a captain went into action through inspiration ; such and such National Guardsmen fought , `` for an idea , '' and on their own account . 
At critical moments , on `` days '' they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts . 
There existed in the army of order , veritable guerilleros , some of the sword , like Fannicot , others of the pen , like Henri Fonfrede . 
Civilization , unfortunately , represented at this epoch rather by an aggregation of interests than by a group of principles , was or thought itself , in peril ; it set up the cry of alarm ; each , constituting himself a centre , defended it , succored it , and protected it with his own head ; and the first comer took it upon himself to save society . 
Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination . 
A platoon of the National Guard would constitute itself on its own authority a private council of war , and judge and execute a captured insurgent in five minutes . 
It was an improvisation of this sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire . 
Fierce Lynch law , with which no one party had any right to reproach the rest , for it has been applied by the Republic in America , as well as by the monarchy in Europe . 
This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes . 
On one day of rioting , a young poet , named Paul Aime Garnier , was pursued in the Place Royale , with a bayonet at his loins , and only escaped by taking refuge under the porte-cochere of No. 6 . 
They shouted : -- `` There 's another of those Saint-Simonians ! '' 
and they wanted to kill him . 
