My father was a porter at the Prytaneum -LSB- Town-Hall -RSB- . 
He destined me for literature . 
But he had reverses . 
He had losses on ` change . 
I was obliged to renounce the profession of author . 
But I am still a public writer . '' 
`` So you are not a grave-digger , then ? '' 
returned Fauchelevent , clutching at this branch , feeble as it was . 
`` The one does not hinder the other . 
I cumulate . '' 
Fauchelevent did not understand this last word . 
`` Come have a drink , '' said he . 
Here a remark becomes necessary . 
Fauchelevent , whatever his anguish , offered a drink , but he did not explain himself on one point ; who was to pay ? 
Generally , Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid . 
An offer of a drink was the evident result of the novel situation created by the new grave-digger , and it was necessary to make this offer , but the old gardener left the proverbial quarter of an hour named after Rabelais in the dark , and that not unintentionally . 
As for himself , Fauchelevent did not wish to pay , troubled as he was . 
The grave-digger went on with a superior smile : -- `` One must eat . 
I have accepted Father Mestienne 's reversion . 
One gets to be a philosopher when one has nearly completed his classes . 
To the labor of the hand I join the labor of the arm . 
I have my scrivener 's stall in the market of the Rue de Sevres . 
You know ? 
the Umbrella Market . 
All the cooks of the Red Cross apply to me . 
I scribble their declarations of love to the raw soldiers . 
In the morning I write love letters ; in the evening I dig graves . 
Such is life , rustic . '' 
The hearse was still advancing . 
Fauchelevent , uneasy to the last degree , was gazing about him on all sides . 
Great drops of perspiration trickled down from his brow . 
`` But , '' continued the grave-digger , `` a man can not serve two mistresses . 
I must choose between the pen and the mattock . 
The mattock is ruining my hand . '' 
The hearse halted . 
The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach , then the priest . 
One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little on a pile of earth , beyond which an open grave was visible . 
`` What a farce this is ! '' 
repeated Fauchelevent in consternation . 
BETWEEN FOUR PLANKS Who was in the coffin ? 
The reader knows . 
Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there , and he could almost breathe . 
It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience confers security of the rest . 
Every combination thought out by Jean Valjean had been progressing , and progressing favorably , since the preceding day . 
He , like Fauchelevent , counted on Father Mestienne . 
He had no doubt as to the end . 
Never was there a more critical situation , never more complete composure . 
The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace . 
It seemed as though something of the repose of the dead entered into Jean Valjean 's tranquillity . 
