On the cover sprawled the following title , printed in large capitals : GOD ; THE KING ; HONOR AND THE LADIES ; BY DUCRAY DUMINIL , 1814 . 
As the man wrote , he talked aloud , and Marius heard his words : -- `` The idea that there is no equality , even when you are dead ! 
Just look at Pere Lachaise ! 
The great , those who are rich , are up above , in the acacia alley , which is paved . 
They can reach it in a carriage . 
The little people , the poor , the unhappy , well , what of them ? 
they are put down below , where the mud is up to your knees , in the damp places . 
They are put there so that they will decay the sooner ! 
You can not go to see them without sinking into the earth . '' 
He paused , smote the table with his fist , and added , as he ground his teeth : -- `` Oh ! 
I could eat the whole world ! '' 
A big woman , who might be forty years of age , or a hundred , was crouching near the fireplace on her bare heels . 
She , too , was clad only in a chemise and a knitted petticoat patched with bits of old cloth . 
A coarse linen apron concealed the half of her petticoat . 
Although this woman was doubled up and bent together , it could be seen that she was of very lofty stature . 
She was a sort of giant , beside her husband . 
She had hideous hair , of a reddish blond which was turning gray , and which she thrust back from time to time , with her enormous shining hands , with their flat nails . 
Beside her , on the floor , wide open , lay a book of the same form as the other , and probably a volume of the same romance . 
On one of the pallets , Marius caught a glimpse of a sort of tall pale young girl , who sat there half naked and with pendant feet , and who did not seem to be listening or seeing or living . 
No doubt the younger sister of the one who had come to his room . 
She seemed to be eleven or twelve years of age . 
On closer scrutiny it was evident that she really was fourteen . 
She was the child who had said , on the boulevard the evening before : `` I bolted , bolted , bolted ! '' 
She was of that puny sort which remains backward for a long time , then suddenly starts up rapidly . 
It is indigence which produces these melancholy human plants . 
These creatures have neither childhood nor youth . 
At fifteen years of age they appear to be twelve , at sixteen they seem twenty . 
To-day a little girl , to-morrow a woman . 
One might say that they stride through life , in order to get through with it the more speedily . 
At this moment , this being had the air of a child . 
Moreover , no trace of work was revealed in that dwelling ; no handicraft , no spinning-wheel , not a tool . 
In one corner lay some ironmongery of dubious aspect . 
It was the dull listlessness which follows despair and precedes the death agony . 
Marius gazed for a while at this gloomy interior , more terrifying than the interior of a tomb , for the human soul could be felt fluttering there , and life was palpitating there . 
The garret , the cellar , the lowly ditch where certain indigent wretches crawl at the very bottom of the social edifice , is not exactly the sepulchre , but only its antechamber ; but , as the wealthy display their greatest magnificence at the entrance of their palaces , it seems that death , which stands directly side by side with them , places its greatest miseries in that vestibule . 
The man held his peace , the woman spoke no word , the young girl did not even seem to breathe . 
The scratching of the pen on the paper was audible . 
The man grumbled , without pausing in his writing . 
`` Canaille ! 
canaille ! 
everybody is canaille ! '' 
This variation to Solomon 's exclamation elicited a sigh from the woman . 
`` Calm yourself , my little friend , '' she said . 
`` Do n't hurt yourself , my dear . 
You are too good to write to all those people , husband . '' 
Bodies press close to each other in misery , as in cold , but hearts draw apart . 
This woman must have loved this man , to all appearance , judging from the amount of love within her ; but probably , in the daily and reciprocal reproaches of the horrible distress which weighed on the whole group , this had become extinct . 
There no longer existed in her anything more than the ashes of affection for her husband . 
Nevertheless , caressing appellations had survived , as is often the case . 
She called him : My dear , my little friend , my good man , etc. , with her mouth while her heart was silent . 
