was put with so profound a faith , with so much certainty , with such a complete absence of disquiet and of doubt , that he found not a word of reply . 
She continued : -- `` I knew that you were there . 
I was asleep , but I saw you . 
I have seen you for a long , long time . 
I have been following you with my eyes all night long . 
You were in a glory , and you had around you all sorts of celestial forms . '' 
He raised his glance to the crucifix . 
`` But , '' she resumed , `` tell me where Cosette is . 
Why did not you place her on my bed against the moment of my waking ? '' 
He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able to recall . 
Fortunately , the doctor had been warned , and he now made his appearance . 
He came to the aid of M. Madeleine . 
`` Calm yourself , my child , '' said the doctor ; `` your child is here . '' 
Fantine 's eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light . 
She clasped her hands with an expression which contained all that is possible to prayer in the way of violence and tenderness . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` bring her to me ! '' 
Touching illusion of a mother ! 
Cosette was , for her , still the little child who is carried . 
`` Not yet , '' said the doctor , `` not just now . 
You still have some fever . 
The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm . 
You must be cured first . '' 
She interrupted him impetuously : -- `` But I am cured ! 
Oh , I tell you that I am cured ! 
What an ass that doctor is ! 
The idea ! 
I want to see my child ! '' 
`` You see , '' said the doctor , `` how excited you become . 
So long as you are in this state I shall oppose your having your child . 
It is not enough to see her ; it is necessary that you should live for her . 
When you are reasonable , I will bring her to you myself . '' 
The poor mother bowed her head . 
`` I beg your pardon , doctor , I really beg your pardon . 
Formerly I should never have spoken as I have just done ; so many misfortunes have happened to me , that I sometimes do not know what I am saying . 
I understand you ; you fear the emotion . 
I will wait as long as you like , but I swear to you that it would not have harmed me to see my daughter . 
I have been seeing her ; I have not taken my eyes from her since yesterday evening . 
Do you know ? 
If she were brought to me now , I should talk to her very gently . 
That is all . 
Is it not quite natural that I should desire to see my daughter , who has been brought to me expressly from Montfermeil ? 
I am not angry . 
I know well that I am about to be happy . 
All night long I have seen white things , and persons who smiled at me . 
When Monsieur le Docteur pleases , he shall bring me Cosette . 
I have no longer any fever ; I am well . 
I am perfectly conscious that there is nothing the matter with me any more ; but I am going to behave as though I were ill , and not stir , to please these ladies here . 
When it is seen that I am very calm , they will say , ` She must have her child . ' '' 
M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed . 
