When one has passed one 's time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great airs which reasons of state , the oath , political sagacity , human justice , professional probity , the austerities of situation , incorruptible robes all assume , it solaces one to enter a sewer and to behold the mire which befits it . 
This is instructive at the same time . 
We have just said that history passes through the sewer . 
The Saint-Barthelemys filter through there , drop by drop , between the paving-stones . 
Great public assassinations , political and religious butcheries , traverse this underground passage of civilization , and thrust their corpses there . 
For the eye of the thinker , all historic murderers are to be found there , in that hideous penumbra , on their knees , with a scrap of their winding-sheet for an apron , dismally sponging out their work . 
Louis XI . 
is there with Tristan , Francois I. with Duprat , Charles IX . 
is there with his mother , Richelieu is there with Louis XIII. , Louvois is there , Letellier is there , Hebert and Maillard are there , scratching the stones , and trying to make the traces of their actions disappear . 
Beneath these vaults one hears the brooms of spectres . 
One there breathes the enormous fetidness of social catastrophes . 
One beholds reddish reflections in the corners . 
There flows a terrible stream , in which bloody hands have been washed . 
The social observer should enter these shadows . 
They form a part of his laboratory . 
Philosophy is the microscope of the thought . 
Everything desires to flee from it , but nothing escapes it . 
Tergiversation is useless . 
What side of oneself does one display in evasions ? 
the shameful side . 
Philosophy pursues with its glance , probes the evil , and does not permit it to escape into nothingness . 
In the obliteration of things which disappear , in the watching of things which vanish , it recognizes all . 
It reconstructs the purple from the rag , and the woman from the scrap of her dress . 
From the cess-pool , it re-constitutes the city ; from mud , it reconstructs manners ; from the potsherd it infers the amphora or the jug . 
By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of parchment , it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry of the Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto . 
It re-discovers in what remains that which has been , good , evil , the true , the blood-stain of the palace , the ink-blot of the cavern , the drop of sweat from the brothel , trials undergone , temptations welcomed , orgies cast forth , the turn which characters have taken as they became abased , the trace of prostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable , and on the vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina 's elbowing . 
BRUNESEAU The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary . 
In the sixteenth century , Henri II . 
attempted a bore , which failed . 
Not a hundred years ago , the cess-pool , Mercier attests the fact , was abandoned to itself , and fared as best it might . 
Such was this ancient Paris , delivered over to quarrels , to indecision , and to gropings . 
It was tolerably stupid for a long time . 
Later on , '89 showed how understanding comes to cities . 
But in the good , old times , the capital had not much head . 
It did not know how to manage its own affairs either morally or materially , and could not sweep out filth any better than it could abuses . 
Everything presented an obstacle , everything raised a question . 
The sewer , for example , was refractory to every itinerary . 
One could no more find one 's bearings in the sewer than one could understand one 's position in the city ; above the unintelligible , below the inextricable ; beneath the confusion of tongues there reigned the confusion of caverns ; Daedalus backed up Babel . 
Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow , as though this misunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage . 
There occurred , infamous to relate , inundations of the sewer . 
At times , that stomach of civilization digested badly , the cess-pool flowed back into the throat of the city , and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth . 
These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points ; they were warnings ; very badly accepted , however ; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire , and did not admit that the filth should return . 
Drive it out better . 
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the age of eighty . 
The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires , where stands the statue of Louis XIV. ; it entered the Rue Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer , the Rue Pierre-a-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie , the Rue Popincourt , through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert , the Rue de la Roquette , through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe ; it covered the drain of the Rue des Champs-Elysees to the height of thirty-five centimetres ; and , to the South , through the vent of the Seine , performing its functions in inverse sense , it penetrated the Rue Mazarine , the Rue de l'Echaude , and the Rue des Marais , where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres , a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had lived , respecting , in the seventeenth century , the poet more than the King . 
It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre , where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the water-spout , and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin , where it spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length . 
At the beginning of this century , the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious place . 
Mud can never enjoy a good fame ; but in this case its evil renown reached the verge of the terrible . 
Paris knew , in a confused way , that she had under her a terrible cavern . 
People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length , and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub . 
