We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor 's office or to the church . 
One does not follow a pair of lovers to that extent , and one is accustomed to turn one 's back on the drama as soon as it puts a wedding nosegay in its buttonhole . 
We will confine ourselves to noting an incident which , though unnoticed by the wedding party , marked the transit from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire to the church of Saint-Paul . 
At that epoch , the northern extremity of the Rue Saint-Louis was in process of repaving . 
It was barred off , beginning with the Rue du Pare-Royal . 
It was impossible for the wedding carriages to go directly to Saint-Paul . 
They were obliged to alter their course , and the simplest way was to turn through the boulevard . 
One of the invited guests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday , and that there would be a jam of vehicles . 
-- `` Why ? '' 
asked M. Gillenormand -- `` Because of the maskers . '' 
-- `` Capital , '' said the grandfather , `` let us go that way . 
These young folks are on the way to be married ; they are about to enter the serious part of life . 
This will prepare them for seeing a bit of the masquerade . '' 
They went by way of the boulevard . 
The first wedding coach held Cosette and Aunt Gillenormand , M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean . 
Marius , still separated from his betrothed according to usage , did not come until the second . 
The nuptial train , on emerging from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , became entangled in a long procession of vehicles which formed an endless chain from the Madeleine to the Bastille , and from the Bastille to the Madeleine . 
Maskers abounded on the boulevard . 
In spite of the fact that it was raining at intervals , Merry-Andrew , Pantaloon and Clown persisted . 
In the good humor of that winter of 1833 , Paris had disguised itself as Venice . 
Such Shrove Tuesdays are no longer to be seen now-a-days . 
Everything which exists being a scattered Carnival , there is no longer any Carnival . 
The sidewalks were overflowing with pedestrians and the windows with curious spectators . 
The terraces which crown the peristyles of the theatres were bordered with spectators . 
Besides the maskers , they stared at that procession -- peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as to Longchamps , -- of vehicles of every description , citadines , tapissieres , carioles , cabriolets marching in order , rigorously riveted to each other by the police regulations , and locked into rails , as it were . 
Any one in these vehicles is at once a spectator and a spectacle . 
Police-sergeants maintained , on the sides of the boulevard , these two interminable parallel files , moving in contrary directions , and saw to it that nothing interfered with that double current , those two brooks of carriages , flowing , the one down stream , the other up stream , the one towards the Chaussee d'Antin , the other towards the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The carriages of the peers of France and of the Ambassadors , emblazoned with coats of arms , held the middle of the way , going and coming freely . 
Certain joyous and magnificent trains , notably that of the Boeuf Gras , had the same privilege . 
In this gayety of Paris , England cracked her whip ; Lord Seymour 's post-chaise , harassed by a nickname from the populace , passed with great noise . 
In the double file , along which the municipal guards galloped like sheep-dogs , honest family coaches , loaded down with great-aunts and grandmothers , displayed at their doors fresh groups of children in disguise , Clowns of seven years of age , Columbines of six , ravishing little creatures , who felt that they formed an official part of the public mirth , who were imbued with the dignity of their harlequinade , and who possessed the gravity of functionaries . 
From time to time , a hitch arose somewhere in the procession of vehicles ; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot was disentangled ; one carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the whole line . 
Then they set out again on the march . 
The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille , and skirting the right side of the Boulevard . 
At the top of the Pont-aux-Choux , there was a stoppage . 
Nearly at the same moment , the other file , which was proceeding towards the Madeleine , halted also . 
At that point of the file there was a carriage-load of maskers . 
These carriages , or to speak more correctly , these wagon-loads of maskers are very familiar to Parisians . 
If they were missing on a Shrove Tuesday , or at the Mid-Lent , it would be taken in bad part , and people would say : `` There 's something behind that . 
Probably the ministry is about to undergo a change . '' 
A pile of Cassandras , Harlequins and Columbines , jolted along high above the passers-by , all possible grotesquenesses , from the Turk to the savage , Hercules supporting Marquises , fishwives who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears just as the Maenads made Aristophanes drop his eyes , tow wigs , pink tights , dandified hats , spectacles of a grimacer , three-cornered hats of Janot tormented with a butterfly , shouts directed at pedestrians , fists on hips , bold attitudes , bare shoulders , immodesty unchained ; a chaos of shamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers ; this is what that institution was like . 
Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis , France stands in need of the hackney-coach of Vade . 
Everything can be parodied , even parody . 
The Saturnalia , that grimace of antique beauty , ends , through exaggeration after exaggeration , in Shrove Tuesday ; and the Bacchanal , formerly crowned with sprays of vine leaves and grapes , inundated with sunshine , displaying her marble breast in a divine semi-nudity , having at the present day lost her shape under the soaked rags of the North , has finally come to be called the Jack-pudding . 
The tradition of carriage-loads of maskers runs back to the most ancient days of the monarchy . 
The accounts of Louis XI . 
allot to the bailiff of the palace `` twenty sous , Tournois , for three coaches of mascarades in the cross-roads . '' 
In our day , these noisy heaps of creatures are accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancient cuckoo carriage , whose imperial they load down , or they overwhelm a hired landau , with its top thrown back , with their tumultuous groups . 
Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six . 
They cling to the seats , to the rumble , on the cheeks of the hood , on the shafts . 
