And he held out the envelope containing the four letters . 
She clapped her hands and exclaimed : -- `` We have been looking everywhere for that ! '' 
Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope , saying as she did so : -- `` Dieu de Dieu ! 
how my sister and I have hunted ! 
And it was you who found it ! 
On the boulevard , was it not ? 
It must have been on the boulevard ? 
You see , we let it fall when we were running . 
It was that brat of a sister of mine who was so stupid . 
When we got home , we could not find it anywhere . 
As we did not wish to be beaten , as that is useless , as that is entirely useless , as that is absolutely useless , we said that we had carried the letters to the proper persons , and that they had said to us : ` Nix . ' 
So here they are , those poor letters ! 
And how did you find out that they belonged to me ? 
Ah ! 
yes , the writing . 
So it was you that we jostled as we passed last night . 
We could n't see . 
I said to my sister : ` Is it a gentleman ? ' 
My sister said to me : ` I think it is a gentleman . ' '' 
In the meanwhile she had unfolded the petition addressed to `` the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
`` Here ! '' 
said she , `` this is for that old fellow who goes to mass . 
By the way , this is his hour . 
I 'll go and carry it to him . 
Perhaps he will give us something to breakfast on . '' 
Then she began to laugh again , and added : -- `` Do you know what it will mean if we get a breakfast today ? 
It will mean that we shall have had our breakfast of the day before yesterday , our breakfast of yesterday , our dinner of to-day , and all that at once , and this morning . 
Come ! 
Parbleu ! 
if you are not satisfied , dogs , burst ! '' 
This reminded Marius of the wretched girl 's errand to himself . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , and found nothing there . 
The young girl went on , and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius ' presence . 
`` I often go off in the evening . 
Sometimes I do n't come home again . 
Last winter , before we came here , we lived under the arches of the bridges . 
We huddled together to keep from freezing . 
My little sister cried . 
How melancholy the water is ! 
When I thought of drowning myself , I said to myself : ` No , it 's too cold . ' 
I go out alone , whenever I choose , I sometimes sleep in the ditches . 
Do you know , at night , when I walk along the boulevard , I see the trees like forks , I see houses , all black and as big as Notre Dame , I fancy that the white walls are the river , I say to myself : ` Why , there 's water there ! ' 
The stars are like the lamps in illuminations , one would say that they smoked and that the wind blew them out , I am bewildered , as though horses were breathing in my ears ; although it is night , I hear hand-organs and spinning-machines , and I do n't know what all . 
I think people are flinging stones at me , I flee without knowing whither , everything whirls and whirls . 
You feel very queer when you have had no food . '' 
And then she stared at him with a bewildered air . 
By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets , Marius had finally collected five francs sixteen sous . 
This was all he owned in the world for the moment . 
`` At all events , '' he thought , `` there is my dinner for to-day , and to-morrow we will see . '' 
He kept the sixteen sous , and handed the five francs to the young girl . 
