Jean Valjean sprang hastily to his feet ; there was no one on the slope ; he gazed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a child , not so large as a man , clad in a gray blouse and trousers of dust-colored cotton velvet , who was jumping over the parapet and who slipped into the moat of the Champde-Mars . 
Jean Valjean returned home at once , in a very thoughtful mood . 
MARIUS Marius had left M. Gillenormand in despair . 
He had entered the house with very little hope , and quitted it with immense despair . 
However , and those who have observed the depths of the human heart will understand this , the officer , the lancer , the ninny , Cousin Theodule , had left no trace in his mind . 
Not the slightest . 
The dramatic poet might , apparently , expect some complications from this revelation made point-blank by the grandfather to the grandson . 
But what the drama would gain thereby , truth would lose . 
Marius was at an age when one believes nothing in the line of evil ; later on comes the age when one believes everything . 
Suspicions are nothing else than wrinkles . 
Early youth has none of them . 
That which overwhelmed Othello glides innocuous over Candide . 
Suspect Cosette ! 
There are hosts of crimes which Marius could sooner have committed . 
He began to wander about the streets , the resource of those who suffer . 
He thought of nothing , so far as he could afterwards remember . 
At two o'clock in the morning he returned to Courfeyrac 's quarters and flung himself , without undressing , on his mattress . 
The sun was shining brightly when he sank into that frightful leaden slumber which permits ideas to go and come in the brain . 
When he awoke , he saw Courfeyrac , Enjolras , Feuilly , and Combeferre standing in the room with their hats on and all ready to go out . 
Courfeyrac said to him : -- `` Are you coming to General Lamarque 's funeral ? '' 
It seemed to him that Courfeyrac was speaking Chinese . 
He went out some time after them . 
He put in his pocket the pistols which Javert had given him at the time of the adventure on the 3d of February , and which had remained in his hands . 
These pistols were still loaded . 
It would be difficult to say what vague thought he had in his mind when he took them with him . 
All day long he prowled about , without knowing where he was going ; it rained at times , he did not perceive it ; for his dinner , he purchased a penny roll at a baker 's , put it in his pocket and forgot it . 
It appears that he took a bath in the Seine without being aware of it . 
There are moments when a man has a furnace within his skull . 
Marius was passing through one of those moments . 
He no longer hoped for anything ; this step he had taken since the preceding evening . 
He waited for night with feverish impatience , he had but one idea clearly before his mind ; -- this was , that at nine o'clock he should see Cosette . 
This last happiness now constituted his whole future ; after that , gloom . 
At intervals , as he roamed through the most deserted boulevards , it seemed to him that he heard strange noises in Paris . 
He thrust his head out of his revery and said : `` Is there fighting on hand ? '' 
At nightfall , at nine o'clock precisely , as he had promised Cosette , he was in the Rue Plumet . 
When he approached the grating he forgot everything . 
It was forty-eight hours since he had seen Cosette ; he was about to behold her once more ; every other thought was effaced , and he felt only a profound and unheard-of joy . 
Those minutes in which one lives centuries always have this sovereign and wonderful property , that at the moment when they are passing they fill the heart completely . 
Marius displaced the bar , and rushed headlong into the garden . 
Cosette was not at the spot where she ordinarily waited for him . 
He traversed the thicket , and approached the recess near the flight of steps : `` She is waiting for me there , '' said he . 
Cosette was not there . 
He raised his eyes , and saw that the shutters of the house were closed . 
He made the tour of the garden , the garden was deserted . 
Then he returned to the house , and , rendered senseless by love , intoxicated , terrified , exasperated with grief and uneasiness , like a master who returns home at an evil hour , he tapped on the shutters . 
He knocked and knocked again , at the risk of seeing the window open , and her father 's gloomy face make its appearance , and demand : `` What do you want ? '' 
This was nothing in comparison with what he dimly caught a glimpse of . 
When he had rapped , he lifted up his voice and called Cosette . 
-- `` Cosette ! '' 
he cried ; `` Cosette ! '' 
