He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise , and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he , Marius , had used in this very barricade , and not only did he recall his face , but his name as well . 
This recollection was misty and troubled , however , like all his ideas . 
It was not an affirmation that he made , but a question which he put to himself : `` Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was Javert ? '' 
Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man . 
But , in the first place , he must know whether this was Javert . 
Marius called to Enjolras , who had just stationed himself at the other extremity of the barricade : `` Enjolras ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` What is the name of yonder man ? '' 
`` What man ? '' 
`` The police agent . 
Do you know his name ? '' 
`` Of course . 
He told us . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Marius sprang to his feet . 
At that moment , they heard the report of the pistol . 
Jean Valjean re-appeared and cried : `` It is done . '' 
A gloomy chill traversed Marius ' heart . 
THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THE WRONG The death agony of the barricade was about to begin . 
Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment ; a thousand mysterious crashes in the air , the breath of armed masses set in movement in the streets which were not visible , the intermittent gallop of cavalry , the heavy shock of artillery on the march , the firing by squads , and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris , the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs , indescribable and vaguely terrible cries , lightnings of menace everywhere , the tocsin of Saint-Merry , which now had the accents of a sob , the mildness of the weather , the splendor of the sky filled with sun and clouds , the beauty of the day , and the alarming silence of the houses . 
For , since the preceding evening , the two rows of houses in the Rue de la Chanvrerie had become two walls ; ferocious walls , doors closed , windows closed , shutters closed . 
In those days , so different from those in which we live , when the hour was come , when the people wished to put an end to a situation , which had lasted too long , with a charter granted or with a legal country , when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere , when the city consented to the tearing up of the pavements , when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear , then the inhabitant , thoroughly penetrated with the revolt , so to speak , was the auxiliary of the combatant , and the house fraternized with the improvised fortress which rested on it . 
When the situation was not ripe , when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted , when the masses disowned the movement , all was over with the combatants , the city was changed into a desert around the revolt , souls grew chilled , refuges were nailed up , and the street turned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade . 
A people can not be forced , through surprise , to walk more quickly than it chooses . 
Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand ! 
A people does not let itself go at random . 
Then it abandons the insurrection to itself . 
The insurgents become noxious , infected with the plague . 
A house is an escarpment , a door is a refusal , a facade is a wall . 
This wall hears , sees and will not . 
It might open and save you . 
No . 
This wall is a judge . 
It gazes at you and condemns you . 
What dismal things are closed houses . 
They seem dead , they are living . 
Life which is , as it were , suspended there , persists there . 
No one has gone out of them for four and twenty hours , but no one is missing from them . 
In the interior of that rock , people go and come , go to bed and rise again ; they are a family party there ; there they eat and drink ; they are afraid , a terrible thing ! 
Fear excuses this fearful lack of hospitality ; terror is mixed with it , an extenuating circumstance . 
Sometimes , even , and this has been actually seen , fear turns to passion ; fright may change into fury , as prudence does into rage ; hence this wise saying : `` The enraged moderates . '' 
There are outbursts of supreme terror , whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke . 
-- `` What do these people want ? 
What have they come there to do ? 
Let them get out of the scrape . 
So much the worse for them . 
It is their fault . 
They are only getting what they deserve . 
It does not concern us . 
