Folded arms toil , clasped hands work . 
A gaze fixed on heaven is a work . 
Thales remained motionless for four years . 
He founded philosophy . 
In our opinion , cenobites are not lazy men , and recluses are not idlers . 
To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing . 
Without invalidating anything that we have just said , we believe that a perpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living . 
On this point , the priest and the philosopher agree . 
We must die . 
The Abbe de la Trappe replies to Horace . 
To mingle with one 's life a certain presence of the sepulchre , -- this is the law of the sage ; and it is the law of the ascetic . 
In this respect , the ascetic and the sage converge . 
There is a material growth ; we admit it . 
There is a moral grandeur ; we hold to that . 
Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say : -- `` What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery ? 
What purpose do they serve ? 
What do they do ? '' 
Alas ! 
In the presence of the darkness which environs us , and which awaits us , in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of us , we reply : `` There is probably no work more divine than that performed by these souls . '' 
And we add : `` There is probably no work which is more useful . '' 
There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never pray at all . 
In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that is mingled with prayer . 
Leibnitz praying is grand , Voltaire adoring is fine . 
Deo erexit Voltaire . 
We are for religion as against religions . 
We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons , and the sublimity of prayer . 
Moreover , at this minute which we are now traversing , -- a minute which will not , fortunately , leave its impress on the nineteenth century , -- at this hour , when so many men have low brows and souls but little elevated , among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment , and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter , whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us . 
The monastery is a renunciation . 
Sacrifice wrongly directed is still sacrifice . 
To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its own . 
Taken by itself , and ideally , and in order to examine the truth on all sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted , the monastery , the female convent in particular , -- for in our century it is woman who suffers the most , and in this exile of the cloister there is something of protestation , -- the female convent has incontestably a certain majesty . 
This cloistered existence which is so austere , so depressing , a few of whose features we have just traced , is not life , for it is not liberty ; it is not the tomb , for it is not plenitude ; it is the strange place whence one beholds , as from the crest of a lofty mountain , on one side the abyss where we are , on the other , the abyss whither we shall go ; it is the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds , illuminated and obscured by both at the same time , where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death ; it is the half obscurity of the tomb . 
We , who do not believe what these women believe , but who , like them , live by faith , -- we have never been able to think without a sort of tender and religious terror , without a sort of pity , that is full of envy , of those devoted , trembling and trusting creatures , of these humble and august souls , who dare to dwell on the very brink of the mystery , waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which is not yet open , turned towards the light which one can not see , possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is , aspiring towards the gulf , and the unknown , their eyes fixed motionless on the darkness , kneeling , bewildered , stupefied , shuddering , half lifted , at times , by the deep breaths of eternity . 
BOOK EIGHTH . 
-- CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT It was into this house that Jean Valjean had , as Fauchelevent expressed it , `` fallen from the sky . '' 
He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue Polonceau . 
That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of the night , was the nuns chanting matins ; that hall , of which he had caught a glimpse in the gloom , was the chapel . 
That phantom which he had seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was making reparation ; that bell , the sound of which had so strangely surprised him , was the gardener 's bell attached to the knee of Father Fauchelevent . 
Cosette once put to bed , Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had , as we have already seen , supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a good , crackling fire ; then , the only bed in the hut being occupied by Cosette , each threw himself on a truss of straw . 
Before he shut his eyes , Jean Valjean said : `` I must remain here henceforth . '' 
This remark trotted through Fauchelevent 's head all night long . 
To tell the truth , neither of them slept . 
Jean Valjean , feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his scent , understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to Paris . 
Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded him in this cloister . 
Jean Valjean had , henceforth , but one thought , -- to remain there . 
Now , for an unfortunate man in his position , this convent was both the safest and the most dangerous of places ; the most dangerous , because , as no men might enter there , if he were discovered , it was a flagrant offence , and Jean Valjean would find but one step intervening between the convent and prison ; the safest , because , if he could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there , who would ever seek him in such a place ? 
To dwell in an impossible place was safety . 
On his side , Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains . 
He began by declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter . 
How had M. Madeleine got there , when the walls were what they were ? 
