Nevertheless , athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideas which was not even a monologue , so feeble had action become in him , and he had no longer the force to care to despair , athwart this melancholy absorption , sensations from without did reach him . 
He heard behind him , beneath him , on both banks of the river , the laundresses of the Gobelins beating their linen , and above his head , the birds chattering and singing in the elm-trees . 
On the one hand , the sound of liberty , the careless happiness of the leisure which has wings ; on the other , the sound of toil . 
What caused him to meditate deeply , and almost reflect , were two cheerful sounds . 
All at once , in the midst of his dejected ecstasy , he heard a familiar voice saying : -- `` Come ! 
Here he is ! '' 
He raised his eyes , and recognized that wretched child who had come to him one morning , the elder of the Thenardier daughters , Eponine ; he knew her name now . 
Strange to say , she had grown poorer and prettier , two steps which it had not seemed within her power to take . 
She had accomplished a double progress , towards the light and towards distress . 
She was barefooted and in rags , as on the day when she had so resolutely entered his chamber , only her rags were two months older now , the holes were larger , the tatters more sordid . 
It was the same harsh voice , the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan , the same free , wild , and vacillating glance . 
She had besides , more than formerly , in her face that indescribably terrified and lamentable something which sojourn in a prison adds to wretchedness . 
She had bits of straw and hay in her hair , not like Ophelia through having gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet 's madness , but because she had slept in the loft of some stable . 
And in spite of it all , she was beautiful . 
What a star art thou , O youth ! 
In the meantime , she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joy in her livid countenance , and something which resembled a smile . 
She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech . 
`` So I have met you at last ! '' 
she said at length . 
`` Father Mabeuf was right , it was on this boulevard ! 
How I have hunted for you ! 
If you only knew ! 
Do you know ? 
I have been in the jug . 
A fortnight ! 
They let me out ! 
seeing that there was nothing against me , and that , moreover , I had not reached years of discretion . 
I lack two months of it . 
Oh ! 
how I have hunted for you ! 
These six weeks ! 
So you do n't live down there any more ? '' 
`` No , '' said Marius . 
`` Ah ! 
I understand . 
Because of that affair . 
Those take-downs are disagreeable . 
You cleared out . 
Come now ! 
Why do you wear old hats like this ! 
A young man like you ought to have fine clothes . 
Do you know , Monsieur Marius , Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius , I do n't know what . 
It is n't true that you are a baron ? 
Barons are old fellows , they go to the Luxembourg , in front of the chateau , where there is the most sun , and they read the Quotidienne for a sou . 
I once carried a letter to a baron of that sort . 
He was over a hundred years old . 
Say , where do you live now ? '' 
Marius made no reply . 
`` Ah ! '' 
she went on , `` you have a hole in your shirt . 
