The body-guard hissed Mademoiselle Mars . 
The grand newspapers were all very small . 
Their form was restricted , but their liberty was great . 
The Constitutionnel was constitutional . 
La Minerve called Chateaubriand Chateaubriant . 
That t made the good middle-class people laugh heartily at the expense of the great writer . 
In journals which sold themselves , prostituted journalists , insulted the exiles of 1815 . 
David had no longer any talent , Arnault had no longer any wit , Carnot was no longer honest , Soult had won no battles ; it is true that Napoleon had no longer any genius . 
No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent to an exile by post very rarely reached him , as the police made it their religious duty to intercept them . 
This is no new fact ; Descartes complained of it in his exile . 
Now David , having , in a Belgian publication , shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had been written to him , it struck the royalist journals as amusing ; and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion . 
What separated two men more than an abyss was to say , the regicides , or to say the voters ; to say the enemies , or to say the allies ; to say Napoleon , or to say Buonaparte . 
All sensible people were agreed that the era of revolution had been closed forever by King Louis XVIII. , surnamed `` The Immortal Author of the Charter . '' 
On the platform of the Pont-Neuf , the word Redivivus was carved on the pedestal that awaited the statue of Henry IV . 
M. Piet , in the Rue Therese , No. 4 , was making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the monarchy . 
The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures , `` We must write to Bacot . '' 
MM . 
Canuel , O'Mahoney , and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch , to some extent with Monsieur 's approval , of what was to become later on `` The Conspiracy of the Bord de l'Eau '' -- of the waterside . 
L'Epingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter . 
Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff . 
M. Decazes , who was liberal to a degree , reigned . 
Chateaubriand stood every morning at his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique , clad in footed trousers , and slippers , with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair , with his eyes fixed on a mirror , a complete set of dentist 's instruments spread out before him , cleaning his teeth , which were charming , while he dictated The Monarchy according to the Charter to M. Pilorge , his secretary . 
Criticism , assuming an authoritative tone , preferred Lafon to Talma . 
M. de Feletez signed himself A. ; M. Hoffmann signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote Therese Aubert . 
Divorce was abolished . 
Lyceums called themselves colleges . 
The collegians , decorated on the collar with a golden fleur-de-lys , fought each other apropos of the King of Rome . 
The counter-police of the chateau had denounced to her Royal Highness Madame , the portrait , everywhere exhibited , of M. the Duc d'Orleans , who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of hussars than M. the Duc de Berri , in his uniform of colonel-general of dragoons -- a serious inconvenience . 
The city of Paris was having the dome of the Invalides regilded at its own expense . 
Serious men asked themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such an occasion ; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M. Clausel de Coussergues ; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied . 
The comedian Picard , who belonged to the Academy , which the comedian Moliere had not been able to do , had The Two Philiberts played at the Odeon , upon whose pediment the removal of the letters still allowed THEATRE OF THE EMPRESS to be plainly read . 
People took part for or against Cugnet de Montarlot . 
Fabvier was factious ; Bavoux was revolutionary . 
The Liberal , Pelicier , published an edition of Voltaire , with the following title : Works of Voltaire , of the French Academy . 
`` That will attract purchasers , '' said the ingenious editor . 
The general opinion was that M. Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century ; envy was beginning to gnaw at him -- a sign of glory ; and this verse was composed on him : -- `` Even when Loyson steals , one feels that he has paws . '' 
As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign , M. de Pins , Archbishop of Amasie , administered the diocese of Lyons . 
The quarrel over the valley of Dappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from Captain , afterwards General Dufour . 
Saint-Simon , ignored , was erecting his sublime dream . 
There was a celebrated Fourier at the Academy of Science , whom posterity has forgotten ; and in some garret an obscure Fourier , whom the future will recall . 
Lord Byron was beginning to make his mark ; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France in these terms : a certain Lord Baron . 
David d'Angers was trying to work in marble . 
The Abbe Caron was speaking , in terms of praise , to a private gathering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines , of an unknown priest , named Felicite-Robert , who , at a latter date , became Lamennais . 
A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the Tuileries , from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV. ; it was a piece of mechanism which was not good for much ; a sort of plaything , the idle dream of a dream-ridden inventor ; an utopia -- a steamboat . 
The Parisians stared indifferently at this useless thing . 
M. de Vaublanc , the reformer of the Institute by a coup d'etat , the distinguished author of numerous academicians , ordinances , and batches of members , after having created them , could not succeed in becoming one himself . 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the pavilion de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau for prefect of police , on account of his piety . 
Dupuytren and Recamier entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine , and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of the divinity of Jesus Christ . 
Cuvier , with one eye on Genesis and the other on nature , tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with texts and by making mastodons flatter Moses . 
M. Francois de Neufchateau , the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory of Parmentier , made a thousand efforts to have pomme de terre -LSB- potato -RSB- pronounced parmentiere , and succeeded therein not at all . 
