Gavroche immediately began to take observations . 
One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with the other . 
Gavroche was well placed to watch the course of events . 
The bedroom had turned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment . 
Montparnasse on the hunt at such an hour , in such a place , betokened something threatening . 
Gavroche felt his gamin 's heart moved with compassion for the old man . 
What was he to do ? 
Interfere ? 
One weakness coming to the aid of another ! 
It would be merely a laughing matter for Montparnasse . 
Gavroche did not shut his eyes to the fact that the old man , in the first place , and the child in the second , would make but two mouthfuls for that redoubtable ruffian eighteen years of age . 
While Gavroche was deliberating , the attack took place , abruptly and hideously . 
The attack of the tiger on the wild ass , the attack of the spider on the fly . 
Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose , bounded upon the old man , seized him by the collar , grasped and clung to him , and Gavroche with difficulty restrained a scream . 
A moment later one of these men was underneath the other , groaning , struggling , with a knee of marble upon his breast . 
Only , it was not just what Gavroche had expected . 
The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse ; the one who was on top was the old man . 
All this took place a few paces distant from Gavroche . 
The old man had received the shock , had returned it , and that in such a terrible fashion , that in a twinkling , the assailant and the assailed had exchanged roles . 
`` Here 's a hearty veteran ! '' 
thought Gavroche . 
He could not refrain from clapping his hands . 
But it was applause wasted . 
It did not reach the combatants , absorbed and deafened as they were , each by the other , as their breath mingled in the struggle . 
Silence ensued . 
Montparnasse ceased his struggles . 
Gavroche indulged in this aside : `` Can he be dead ! '' 
The goodman had not uttered a word , nor given vent to a cry . 
He rose to his feet , and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse : -- `` Get up . '' 
Montparnasse rose , but the goodman held him fast . 
Montparnasse 's attitude was the humiliated and furious attitude of the wolf who has been caught by a sheep . 
Gavroche looked on and listened , making an effort to reinforce his eyes with his ears . 
He was enjoying himself immensely . 
He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of a spectator . 
He was able to catch on the wing a dialogue which borrowed from the darkness an indescribably tragic accent . 
The goodman questioned , Montparnasse replied . 
`` How old are you ? '' 
`` Nineteen . '' 
`` You are strong and healthy . 
Why do you not work ? '' 
`` It bores me . '' 
`` What is your trade ? '' 
`` An idler . '' 
`` Speak seriously . 
Can anything be done for you ? 
What would you like to be ? '' 
`` A thief . '' 
A pause ensued . 
The old man seemed absorbed in profound thought . 
He stood motionless , and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse . 
