Marius made a movement . 
`` Oh ! 
do n't go away , '' said she , `` it will not be long now . '' 
She was sitting almost upright , but her voice was very low and broken by hiccoughs . 
At intervals , the death rattle interrupted her . 
She put her face as near that of Marius as possible . 
She added with a strange expression : -- `` Listen , I do not wish to play you a trick . 
I have a letter in my pocket for you . 
I was told to put it in the post . 
I kept it . 
I did not want to have it reach you . 
But perhaps you will be angry with me for it when we meet again presently ? 
Take your letter . '' 
She grasped Marius ' hand convulsively with her pierced hand , but she no longer seemed to feel her sufferings . 
She put Marius ' hand in the pocket of her blouse . 
There , in fact , Marius felt a paper . 
`` Take it , '' said she . 
Marius took the letter . 
She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment . 
`` Now , for my trouble , promise me -- '' And she stopped . 
`` What ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` Promise me ! '' 
`` I promise . '' 
`` Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead . 
-- I shall feel it . '' 
She dropped her head again on Marius ' knees , and her eyelids closed . 
He thought the poor soul had departed . 
Eponine remained motionless . 
All at once , at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever , she slowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity of death , and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already to proceed from another world : -- `` And by the way , Monsieur Marius , I believe that I was a little bit in love with you . '' 
She tried to smile once more and expired . 
GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES Marius kept his promise . 
He dropped a kiss on that livid brow , where the icy perspiration stood in beads . 
This was no infidelity to Cosette ; it was a gentle and pensive farewell to an unhappy soul . 
It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Eponine had given him . 
He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight . 
He was impatient to read it . 
The heart of man is so constituted that the unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of unfolding this paper . 
He laid her gently on the ground , and went away . 
Something told him that he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body . 
He drew near to a candle in the tap-room . 
It was a small note , folded and sealed with a woman 's elegant care . 
The address was in a woman 's hand and ran : -- `` To Monsieur , Monsieur Marius Pontmercy , at M. Courfeyrac 's , Rue de la Verrerie , No. 16 . '' 
He broke the seal and read : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even acquainted with Cosette 's handwriting . 
