Every one has noticed with what nimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away and hides , and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable . 
There are thoughts which play us the same trick ; they nestle away in a corner of our brain ; that is the end of them ; they are lost ; it is impossible to lay the memory on them . 
Cosette was somewhat vexed at the useless little effort made by her memory . 
She told herself , that it was very naughty and very wicked of her , to have forgotten the words uttered by Marius . 
She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul and body , her prayers and her toilet . 
One may , in a case of exigency , introduce the reader into a nuptial chamber , not into a virginal chamber . 
Verse would hardly venture it , prose must not . 
It is the interior of a flower that is not yet unfolded , it is whiteness in the dark , it is the private cell of a closed lily , which must not be gazed upon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it . 
Woman in the bud is sacred . 
That innocent bud which opens , that adorable half-nudity which is afraid of itself , that white foot which takes refuge in a slipper , that throat which veils itself before a mirror as though a mirror were an eye , that chemise which makes haste to rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture or a passing vehicle , those cords tied , those clasps fastened , those laces drawn , those tremors , those shivers of cold and modesty , that exquisite affright in every movement , that almost winged uneasiness where there is no cause for alarm , the successive phases of dressing , as charming as the clouds of dawn , -- it is not fitting that all this should be narrated , and it is too much to have even called attention to it . 
The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising of a young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star . 
The possibility of hurting should inspire an augmentation of respect . 
The down on the peach , the bloom on the plum , the radiated crystal of the snow , the wing of the butterfly powdered with feathers , are coarse compared to that chastity which does not even know that it is chaste . 
The young girl is only the flash of a dream , and is not yet a statue . 
Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal . 
The indiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra . 
Here , contemplation is profanation . 
We shall , therefore , show nothing of that sweet little flutter of Cosette 's rising . 
An oriental tale relates how the rose was made white by God , but that Adam looked upon her when she was unfolding , and she was ashamed and turned crimson . 
We are of the number who fall speechless in the presence of young girls and flowers , since we think them worthy of veneration . 
Cosette dressed herself very hastily , combed and dressed her hair , which was a very simple matter in those days , when women did not swell out their curls and bands with cushions and puffs , and did not put crinoline in their locks . 
Then she opened the window and cast her eyes around her in every direction , hoping to descry some bit of the street , an angle of the house , an edge of pavement , so that she might be able to watch for Marius there . 
But no view of the outside was to be had . 
The back court was surrounded by tolerably high walls , and the outlook was only on several gardens . 
Cosette pronounced these gardens hideous : for the first time in her life , she found flowers ugly . 
The smallest scrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better . 
She decided to gaze at the sky , as though she thought that Marius might come from that quarter . 
All at once , she burst into tears . 
Not that this was fickleness of soul ; but hopes cut in twain by dejection -- that was her case . 
She had a confused consciousness of something horrible . 
Thoughts were rife in the air , in fact . 
She told herself that she was not sure of anything , that to withdraw herself from sight was to be lost ; and the idea that Marius could return to her from heaven appeared to her no longer charming but mournful . 
Then , as is the nature of these clouds , calm returned to her , and hope and a sort of unconscious smile , which yet indicated trust in God . 
Every one in the house was still asleep . 
A country-like silence reigned . 
Not a shutter had been opened . 
The porter 's lodge was closed . 
Toussaint had not risen , and Cosette , naturally , thought that her father was asleep . 
She must have suffered much , and she must have still been suffering greatly , for she said to herself , that her father had been unkind ; but she counted on Marius . 
The eclipse of such a light was decidedly impossible . 
Now and then , she heard sharp shocks in the distance , and she said : `` It is odd that people should be opening and shutting their carriage gates so early . '' 
They were the reports of the cannon battering the barricade . 
A few feet below Cosette 's window , in the ancient and perfectly black cornice of the wall , there was a martin 's nest ; the curve of this nest formed a little projection beyond the cornice , so that from above it was possible to look into this little paradise . 
The mother was there , spreading her wings like a fan over her brood ; the father fluttered about , flew away , then came back , bearing in his beak food and kisses . 
The dawning day gilded this happy thing , the great law , `` Multiply , '' lay there smiling and august , and that sweet mystery unfolded in the glory of the morning . 
Cosette , with her hair in the sunlight , her soul absorbed in chimeras , illuminated by love within and by the dawn without , bent over mechanically , and almost without daring to avow to herself that she was thinking at the same time of Marius , began to gaze at these birds , at this family , at that male and female , that mother and her little ones , with the profound trouble which a nest produces on a virgin . 
THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE The assailants ' fire continued . 
Musketry and grape-shot alternated , but without committing great ravages , to tell the truth . 
The top alone of the Corinthe facade suffered ; the window on the first floor , and the attic window in the roof , riddled with buck-shot and biscaiens , were slowly losing their shape . 
The combatants who had been posted there had been obliged to withdraw . 
