Why did you leave my house ? 
To go and become a Republican ! 
Pssst ! 
In the first place , the people want none of your republic , they have common sense , they know well that there always have been kings , and that there always will be ; they know well that the people are only the people , after all , they make sport of it , of your republic -- do you understand , idiot ? 
Is it not a horrible caprice ? 
To fall in love with Pere Duchesne , to make sheep 's - eyes at the guillotine , to sing romances , and play on the guitar under the balcony of ' 93 -- it 's enough to make one spit on all these young fellows , such fools are they ! 
They are all alike . 
Not one escapes . 
It suffices for them to breathe the air which blows through the street to lose their senses . 
The nineteenth century is poison . 
The first scamp that happens along lets his beard grow like a goat 's , thinks himself a real scoundrel , and abandons his old relatives . 
He 's a Republican , he 's a romantic . 
What does that mean , romantic ? 
Do me the favor to tell me what it is . 
All possible follies . 
A year ago , they ran to Hernani . 
Now , I just ask you , Hernani ! 
antitheses ! 
abominations which are not even written in French ! 
And then , they have cannons in the courtyard of the Louvre . 
Such are the rascalities of this age ! '' 
`` You are right , uncle , '' said Theodule . 
M. Gillenormand resumed : -- `` Cannons in the courtyard of the Museum ! 
For what purpose ? 
Do you want to fire grape-shot at the Apollo Belvedere ? 
What have those cartridges to do with the Venus de Medici ? 
Oh ! 
the young men of the present day are all blackguards ! 
What a pretty creature is their Benjamin Constant ! 
And those who are not rascals are simpletons ! 
They do all they can to make themselves ugly , they are badly dressed , they are afraid of women , in the presence of petticoats they have a mendicant air which sets the girls into fits of laughter ; on my word of honor , one would say the poor creatures were ashamed of love . 
They are deformed , and they complete themselves by being stupid ; they repeat the puns of Tiercelin and Potier , they have sack coats , stablemen 's waistcoats , shirts of coarse linen , trousers of coarse cloth , boots of coarse leather , and their rigmarole resembles their plumage . 
One might make use of their jargon to put new soles on their old shoes . 
And all this awkward batch of brats has political opinions , if you please . 
Political opinions should be strictly forbidden . 
They fabricate systems , they recast society , they demolish the monarchy , they fling all laws to the earth , they put the attic in the cellar 's place and my porter in the place of the King , they turn Europe topsy-turvy , they reconstruct the world , and all their love affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of the laundresses as these women climb into their carts . 
Ah ! 
Marius ! 
Ah ! 
you blackguard ! 
to go and vociferate on the public place ! 
to discuss , to debate , to take measures ! 
They call that measures , just God ! 
Disorder humbles itself and becomes silly . 
I have seen chaos , I now see a mess . 
Students deliberating on the National Guard , -- such a thing could not be seen among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches ! 
Savages who go naked , with their noddles dressed like a shuttlecock , with a club in their paws , are less of brutes than those bachelors of arts ! 
The four-penny monkeys ! 
And they set up for judges ! 
Those creatures deliberate and ratiocinate ! 
