`` But that is impossible ! '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank ? '' 
What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was , we repeat , a simple matter to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had been in worse straits than this . 
Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contract himself to fit the diameter of the escape . 
The prisoner is subject to flight as the sick man is subject to a crisis which saves or kills him . 
An escape is a cure . 
What does not a man undergo for the sake of a cure ? 
To have himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a bale of goods , to live for a long time in a box , to find air where there is none , to economize his breath for hours , to know how to stifle without dying -- this was one of Jean Valjean 's gloomy talents . 
Moreover , a coffin containing a living being , -- that convict 's expedient , -- is also an imperial expedient . 
If we are to credit the monk Austin Castillejo , this was the means employed by Charles the Fifth , desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication . 
He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yuste in this manner . 
Fauchelevent , who had recovered himself a little , exclaimed : -- `` But how will you manage to breathe ? '' 
`` I will breathe . '' 
`` In that box ! 
The mere thought of it suffocates me . '' 
`` You surely must have a gimlet , you will make a few holes here and there , around my mouth , and you will nail the top plank on loosely . '' 
`` Good ! 
And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze ? '' 
`` A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze . '' 
And Jean Valjean added : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , we must come to a decision : I must either be caught here , or accept this escape through the hearse . '' 
Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing and lounging between the two leaves of a half-shut door . 
Who is there who has not said to a cat , `` Do come in ! '' 
There are men who , when an incident stands half-open before them , have the same tendency to halt in indecision between two resolutions , at the risk of getting crushed through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate . 
The over-prudent , cats as they are , and because they are cats , sometimes incur more danger than the audacious . 
Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature . 
But Jean Valjean 's coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself . 
He grumbled : -- `` Well , since there is no other means . '' 
Jean Valjean resumed : -- `` The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at the cemetery . '' 
`` That is the very point that is not troublesome , '' exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
`` If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right , I am sure of getting you out of the grave . 
The grave-digger is a drunkard , and a friend of mine . 
He is Father Mestienne . 
An old fellow of the old school . 
The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave , and I put the grave-digger in my pocket . 
I will tell you what will take place . 
They will arrive a little before dusk , three-quarters of an hour before the gates of the cemetery are closed . 
The hearse will drive directly up to the grave . 
I shall follow ; that is my business . 
I shall have a hammer , a chisel , and some pincers in my pocket . 
The hearse halts , the undertaker 's men knot a rope around your coffin and lower you down . 
The priest says the prayers , makes the sign of the cross , sprinkles the holy water , and takes his departure . 
I am left alone with Father Mestienne . 
He is my friend , I tell you . 
One of two things will happen , he will either be sober , or he will not be sober . 
If he is not drunk , I shall say to him : ` Come and drink a bout while the Bon Coing -LSB- the Good Quince -RSB- is open . ' 
I carry him off , I get him drunk , -- it does not take long to make Father Mestienne drunk , he always has the beginning of it about him , -- I lay him under the table , I take his card , so that I can get into the cemetery again , and I return without him . 
Then you have no longer any one but me to deal with . 
If he is drunk , I shall say to him : ` Be off ; I will do your work for you . ' 
