Nevertheless , the Bishop meditated on the subject , and from time to time he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked the valley of the former member of the Convention , and he said , `` There is a soul yonder which is lonely . '' 
And he added , deep in his own mind , `` I owe him a visit . '' 
But , let us avow it , this idea , which seemed natural at the first blush , appeared to him after a moment 's reflection , as strange , impossible , and almost repulsive . 
For , at bottom , he shared the general impression , and the old member of the Convention inspired him , without his being clearly conscious of the fact himself , with that sentiment which borders on hate , and which is so well expressed by the word estrangement . 
Still , should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil ? 
No . 
But what a sheep ! 
The good Bishop was perplexed . 
Sometimes he set out in that direction ; then he returned . 
Finally , the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of young shepherd , who served the member of the Convention in his hovel , had come in quest of a doctor ; that the old wretch was dying , that paralysis was gaining on him , and that he would not live over night . 
-- `` Thank God ! '' 
some added . 
The Bishop took his staff , put on his cloak , on account of his too threadbare cassock , as we have mentioned , and because of the evening breeze which was sure to rise soon , and set out . 
The sun was setting , and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop arrived at the excommunicated spot . 
With a certain beating of the heart , he recognized the fact that he was near the lair . 
He strode over a ditch , leaped a hedge , made his way through a fence of dead boughs , entered a neglected paddock , took a few steps with a good deal of boldness , and suddenly , at the extremity of the waste land , and behind lofty brambles , he caught sight of the cavern . 
It was a very low hut , poor , small , and clean , with a vine nailed against the outside . 
Near the door , in an old wheel-chair , the arm-chair of the peasants , there was a white-haired man , smiling at the sun . 
Near the seated man stood a young boy , the shepherd lad . 
He was offering the old man a jar of milk . 
While the Bishop was watching him , the old man spoke : `` Thank you , '' he said , `` I need nothing . '' 
And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon the child . 
The Bishop stepped forward . 
At the sound which he made in walking , the old man turned his head , and his face expressed the sum total of the surprise which a man can still feel after a long life . 
`` This is the first time since I have been here , '' said he , `` that any one has entered here . 
Who are you , sir ? '' 
The Bishop answered : -- `` My name is Bienvenu Myriel . '' 
`` Bienvenu Myriel ? 
I have heard that name . 
Are you the man whom the people call Monseigneur Welcome ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
The old man resumed with a half-smile `` In that case , you are my bishop ? '' 
`` Something of that sort . '' 
`` Enter , sir . '' 
The member of the Convention extended his hand to the Bishop , but the Bishop did not take it . 
The Bishop confined himself to the remark : -- `` I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed . 
You certainly do not seem to me to be ill . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the old man , `` I am going to recover . '' 
He paused , and then said : -- `` I shall die three hours hence . '' 
Then he continued : -- `` I am something of a doctor ; I know in what fashion the last hour draws on . 
Yesterday , only my feet were cold ; to-day , the chill has ascended to my knees ; now I feel it mounting to my waist ; when it reaches the heart , I shall stop . 
The sun is beautiful , is it not ? 
I had myself wheeled out here to take a last look at things . 
You can talk to me ; it does not fatigue me . 
You have done well to come and look at a man who is on the point of death . 
It is well that there should be witnesses at that moment . 
One has one 's caprices ; I should have liked to last until the dawn , but I know that I shall hardly live three hours . 
It will be night then . 
What does it matter , after all ? 
Dying is a simple affair . 
