Leave the barricade instantly '' -LRB- Gavroche began to scratch his ear uneasily -RRB- `` and to-morrow morning , you will deliver it at its address to Mademoiselle Cosette , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
The heroic child replied `` Well , but ! 
in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken , and I shall not be there . '' 
`` The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak , according to all appearances , and will not be taken before to-morrow noon . '' 
The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade had , in fact , been prolonged . 
It was one of those intermissions which frequently occur in nocturnal combats , which are always followed by an increase of rage . 
`` Well , '' said Gavroche , `` what if I were to go and carry your letter to-morrow ? '' 
`` It will be too late . 
The barricade will probably be blockaded , all the streets will be guarded , and you will not be able to get out . 
Go at once . '' 
Gavroche could think of no reply to this , and stood there in indecision , scratching his ear sadly . 
All at once , he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements which were common with him . 
`` All right , '' said he . 
And he started off at a run through Mondetour lane . 
An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision , but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some objection to it . 
This was the idea : -- `` It is barely midnight , the Rue de l'Homme Arme is not far off ; I will go and deliver the letter at once , and I shall get back in time . '' 
A DRINKER IS A BABBLER What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of the soul ? 
Man is a depth still greater than the people . 
Jean Valjean at that very moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval . 
Every sort of gulf had opened again within him . 
He also was trembling , like Paris , on the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution . 
A few hours had sufficed to bring this about . 
His destiny and his conscience had suddenly been covered with gloom . 
Of him also , as well as of Paris , it might have been said : `` Two principles are face to face . 
The white angel and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of the abyss . 
Which of the two will hurl the other over ? 
Who will carry the day ? '' 
On the evening preceding this same 5th of June , Jean Valjean , accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
A change awaited him there . 
Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort at resistance . 
For the first time since they had lived side by side , Cosette 's will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct , and had been in opposition , at least , if they had not clashed . 
There had been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other . 
The abrupt advice : `` Leave your house , '' hurled at Jean Valjean by a stranger , had alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory . 
He thought that he had been traced and followed . 
Cosette had been obliged to give way . 
Both had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme without opening their lips , and without uttering a word , each being absorbed in his own personal preoccupation ; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette 's sadness , Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean 's uneasiness . 
Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him , a thing which he had never done in his previous absences . 
He perceived the possibility of not returning to the Rue Plumet , and he could neither leave Toussaint behind nor confide his secret to her . 
Besides , he felt that she was devoted and trustworthy . 
Treachery between master and servant begins in curiosity . 
Now Toussaint , as though she had been destined to be Jean Valjean 's servant , was not curious . 
She stammered in her peasant dialect of Barneville : `` I am made so ; I do my work ; the rest is no affair of mine . '' 
In this departure from the Rue Plumet , which had been almost a flight , Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise , baptized by Cosette `` the inseparable . '' 
Full trunks would have required porters , and porters are witnesses . 
A fiacre had been summoned to the door on the Rue de Babylone , and they had taken their departure . 
It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack up a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles . 
Cosette had taken only her portfolio and her blotting-book . 
Jean Valjean , with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery of this departure , had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumet only at dusk , which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to Marius . 
They had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme after night had fully fallen . 
They had gone to bed in silence . 
