This struck him as strange ; usually , there was no noise in M. Madeleine 's chamber until he rose in the morning . 
A moment later the cashier heard a noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened , and then shut again ; then a piece of furniture was disarranged ; then a pause ensued ; then the step began again . 
The cashier sat up in bed , quite awake now , and staring ; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of a lighted window reflected on the opposite wall ; from the direction of the rays , it could only come from the window of M. Madeleine 's chamber . 
The reflection wavered , as though it came rather from a fire which had been lighted than from a candle . 
The shadow of the window-frame was not shown , which indicated that the window was wide open . 
The fact that this window was open in such cold weather was surprising . 
The cashier fell asleep again . 
An hour or two later he waked again . 
The same step was still passing slowly and regularly back and forth overhead . 
The reflection was still visible on the wall , but now it was pale and peaceful , like the reflection of a lamp or of a candle . 
The window was still open . 
This is what had taken place in M. Madeleine 's room . 
A TEMPEST IN A SKULL The reader has , no doubt , already divined that M. Madeleine is no other than Jean Valjean . 
We have already gazed into the depths of this conscience ; the moment has now come when we must take another look into it . 
We do so not without emotion and trepidation . 
There is nothing more terrible in existence than this sort of contemplation . 
The eye of the spirit can nowhere find more dazzling brilliance and more shadow than in man ; it can fix itself on no other thing which is more formidable , more complicated , more mysterious , and more infinite . 
There is a spectacle more grand than the sea ; it is heaven : there is a spectacle more grand than heaven ; it is the inmost recesses of the soul . 
To make the poem of the human conscience , were it only with reference to a single man , were it only in connection with the basest of men , would be to blend all epics into one superior and definitive epic . 
Conscience is the chaos of chimeras , of lusts , and of temptations ; the furnace of dreams ; the lair of ideas of which we are ashamed ; it is the pandemonium of sophisms ; it is the battlefield of the passions . 
Penetrate , at certain hours , past the livid face of a human being who is engaged in reflection , and look behind , gaze into that soul , gaze into that obscurity . 
There , beneath that external silence , battles of giants , like those recorded in Homer , are in progress ; skirmishes of dragons and hydras and swarms of phantoms , as in Milton ; visionary circles , as in Dante . 
What a solemn thing is this infinity which every man bears within him , and which he measures with despair against the caprices of his brain and the actions of his life ! 
Alighieri one day met with a sinister-looking door , before which he hesitated . 
Here is one before us , upon whose threshold we hesitate . 
Let us enter , nevertheless . 
We have but little to add to what the reader already knows of what had happened to Jean Valjean after the adventure with Little Gervais . 
From that moment forth he was , as we have seen , a totally different man . 
What the Bishop had wished to make of him , that he carried out . 
It was more than a transformation ; it was a transfiguration . 
He succeeded in disappearing , sold the Bishop 's silver , reserving only the candlesticks as a souvenir , crept from town to town , traversed France , came to M. sur M. , conceived the idea which we have mentioned , accomplished what we have related , succeeded in rendering himself safe from seizure and inaccessible , and , thenceforth , established at M. sur M. , happy in feeling his conscience saddened by the past and the first half of his existence belied by the last , he lived in peace , reassured and hopeful , having henceforth only two thoughts , -- to conceal his name and to sanctify his life ; to escape men and to return to God . 
These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that they formed but a single one there ; both were equally absorbing and imperative and ruled his slightest actions . 
In general , they conspired to regulate the conduct of his life ; they turned him towards the gloom ; they rendered him kindly and simple ; they counselled him to the same things . 
Sometimes , however , they conflicted . 
In that case , as the reader will remember , the man whom all the country of M. sur M. called M. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second -- his security to his virtue . 
Thus , in spite of all his reserve and all his prudence , he had preserved the Bishop 's candlesticks , worn mourning for him , summoned and interrogated all the little Savoyards who passed that way , collected information regarding the families at Faverolles , and saved old Fauchelevent 's life , despite the disquieting insinuations of Javert . 
It seemed , as we have already remarked , as though he thought , following the example of all those who have been wise , holy , and just , that his first duty was not towards himself . 
At the same time , it must be confessed , nothing just like this had yet presented itself . 
Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferings we are narrating , engaged in so serious a struggle . 
He understood this confusedly but profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert , when the latter entered his study . 
At the moment when that name , which he had buried beneath so many layers , was so strangely articulated , he was struck with stupor , and as though intoxicated with the sinister eccentricity of his destiny ; and through this stupor he felt that shudder which precedes great shocks . 
He bent like an oak at the approach of a storm , like a soldier at the approach of an assault . 
He felt shadows filled with thunders and lightnings descending upon his head . 
As he listened to Javert , the first thought which occurred to him was to go , to run and denounce himself , to take that Champmathieu out of prison and place himself there ; this was as painful and as poignant as an incision in the living flesh . 
Then it passed away , and he said to himself , `` We will see ! 
We will see ! '' 
He repressed this first , generous instinct , and recoiled before heroism . 
It would be beautiful , no doubt , after the Bishop 's holy words , after so many years of repentance and abnegation , in the midst of a penitence admirably begun , if this man had not flinched for an instant , even in the presence of so terrible a conjecture , but had continued to walk with the same step towards this yawning precipice , at the bottom of which lay heaven ; that would have been beautiful ; but it was not thus . 
We must render an account of the things which went on in this soul , and we can only tell what there was there . 
He was carried away , at first , by the instinct of self-preservation ; he rallied all his ideas in haste , stifled his emotions , took into consideration Javert 's presence , that great danger , postponed all decision with the firmness of terror , shook off thought as to what he had to do , and resumed his calmness as a warrior picks up his buckler . 
