this one is a clear case also . 
It is about a sort of blackguard ; a man arrested for a second offence ; a convict who has been guilty of theft . 
I do n't know his name exactly . 
There 's a bandit 's phiz for you ! 
I 'd send him to the galleys on the strength of his face alone . '' 
`` Is there any way of getting into the court-room , sir ? '' 
said he . 
`` I really think that there is not . 
There is a great crowd . 
However , the hearing has been suspended . 
Some people have gone out , and when the hearing is resumed , you might make an effort . '' 
`` Where is the entrance ? '' 
`` Through yonder large door . '' 
The lawyer left him . 
In the course of a few moments he had experienced , almost simultaneously , almost intermingled with each other , all possible emotions . 
The words of this indifferent spectator had , in turn , pierced his heart like needles of ice and like blades of fire . 
When he saw that nothing was settled , he breathed freely once more ; but he could not have told whether what he felt was pain or pleasure . 
He drew near to many groups and listened to what they were saying . 
The docket of the session was very heavy ; the president had appointed for the same day two short and simple cases . 
They had begun with the infanticide , and now they had reached the convict , the old offender , the `` return horse . '' 
This man had stolen apples , but that did not appear to be entirely proved ; what had been proved was , that he had already been in the galleys at Toulon . 
It was that which lent a bad aspect to his case . 
However , the man 's examination and the depositions of the witnesses had been completed , but the lawyer 's plea , and the speech of the public prosecutor were still to come ; it could not be finished before midnight . 
The man would probably be condemned ; the attorney-general was very clever , and never missed his culprits ; he was a brilliant fellow who wrote verses . 
An usher stood at the door communicating with the hall of the Assizes . 
He inquired of this usher : -- `` Will the door be opened soon , sir ? '' 
`` It will not be opened at all , '' replied the usher . 
`` What ! 
It will not be opened when the hearing is resumed ? 
Is not the hearing suspended ? '' 
`` The hearing has just been begun again , '' replied the usher , `` but the door will not be opened again . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because the hall is full . '' 
`` What ! 
There is not room for one more ? '' 
`` Not another one . 
The door is closed . 
No one can enter now . '' 
The usher added after a pause : `` There are , to tell the truth , two or three extra places behind Monsieur le President , but Monsieur le President only admits public functionaries to them . '' 
So saying , the usher turned his back . 
He retired with bowed head , traversed the antechamber , and slowly descended the stairs , as though hesitating at every step . 
It is probable that he was holding counsel with himself . 
The violent conflict which had been going on within him since the preceding evening was not yet ended ; and every moment he encountered some new phase of it . 
On reaching the landing-place , he leaned his back against the balusters and folded his arms . 
All at once he opened his coat , drew out his pocket-book , took from it a pencil , tore out a leaf , and upon that leaf he wrote rapidly , by the light of the street lantern , this line : M. Madeleine , Mayor of M. sur M. ; then he ascended the stairs once more with great strides , made his way through the crowd , walked straight up to the usher , handed him the paper , and said in an authoritative manner : -- `` Take this to Monsieur le President . '' 
The usher took the paper , cast a glance upon it , and obeyed . 
AN ENTRANCE BY FAVOR Although he did not suspect the fact , the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed a sort of celebrity . 
For the space of seven years his reputation for virtue had filled the whole of Bas Boulonnais ; it had eventually passed the confines of a small district and had been spread abroad through two or three neighboring departments . 
Besides the service which he had rendered to the chief town by resuscitating the black jet industry , there was not one out of the hundred and forty communes of the arrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him for some benefit . 
He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply the industries of other arrondissements . 
