There was in Tholomyes a district attorney , and in Courfeyrac a paladin . 
Enjolras was the chief , Combeferre was the guide , Courfeyrac was the centre . 
The others gave more light , he shed more warmth ; the truth is , that he possessed all the qualities of a centre , roundness and radiance . 
Bahorel had figured in the bloody tumult of June , 1822 , on the occasion of the burial of young Lallemand . 
Bahorel was a good-natured mortal , who kept bad company , brave , a spendthrift , prodigal , and to the verge of generosity , talkative , and at times eloquent , bold to the verge of effrontery ; the best fellow possible ; he had daring waistcoats , and scarlet opinions ; a wholesale blusterer , that is to say , loving nothing so much as a quarrel , unless it were an uprising ; and nothing so much as an uprising , unless it were a revolution ; always ready to smash a window-pane , then to tear up the pavement , then to demolish a government , just to see the effect of it ; a student in his eleventh year . 
He had nosed about the law , but did not practise it . 
He had taken for his device : `` Never a lawyer , '' and for his armorial bearings a nightstand in which was visible a square cap . 
Every time that he passed the law-school , which rarely happened , he buttoned up his frock-coat , -- the paletot had not yet been invented , -- and took hygienic precautions . 
Of the school porter he said : `` What a fine old man ! '' 
and of the dean , M. Delvincourt : `` What a monument ! '' 
In his lectures he espied subjects for ballads , and in his professors occasions for caricature . 
He wasted a tolerably large allowance , something like three thousand francs a year , in doing nothing . 
He had peasant parents whom he had contrived to imbue with respect for their son . 
He said of them : `` They are peasants and not bourgeois ; that is the reason they are intelligent . '' 
Bahorel , a man of caprice , was scattered over numerous cafes ; the others had habits , he had none . 
He sauntered . 
To stray is human . 
To saunter is Parisian . 
In reality , he had a penetrating mind and was more of a thinker than appeared to view . 
He served as a connecting link between the Friends of the A B C and other still unorganized groups , which were destined to take form later on . 
In this conclave of young heads , there was one bald member . 
The Marquis d'Avaray , whom Louis XVIII . 
made a duke for having assisted him to enter a hackney-coach on the day when he emigrated , was wont to relate , that in 1814 , on his return to France , as the King was disembarking at Calais , a man handed him a petition . 
`` What is your request ? '' 
said the King . 
`` Sire , a post-office . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` L'Aigle . '' 
The King frowned , glanced at the signature of the petition and beheld the name written thus : LESGLE . 
This non-Bonoparte orthography touched the King and he began to smile . 
`` Sire , '' resumed the man with the petition , `` I had for ancestor a keeper of the hounds surnamed Lesgueules . 
This surname furnished my name . 
I am called Lesgueules , by contraction Lesgle , and by corruption l'Aigle . '' 
This caused the King to smile broadly . 
Later on he gave the man the posting office of Meaux , either intentionally or accidentally . 
The bald member of the group was the son of this Lesgle , or Legle , and he signed himself , Legle -LSB- de Meaux -RSB- . 
As an abbreviation , his companions called him Bossuet . 
Bossuet was a gay but unlucky fellow . 
His specialty was not to succeed in anything . 
As an offset , he laughed at everything . 
At five and twenty he was bald . 
His father had ended by owning a house and a field ; but he , the son , had made haste to lose that house and field in a bad speculation . 
He had nothing left . 
He possessed knowledge and wit , but all he did miscarried . 
Everything failed him and everybody deceived him ; what he was building tumbled down on top of him . 
If he were splitting wood , he cut off a finger . 
If he had a mistress , he speedily discovered that he had a friend also . 
Some misfortune happened to him every moment , hence his joviality . 
He said : `` I live under falling tiles . '' 
He was not easily astonished , because , for him , an accident was what he had foreseen , he took his bad luck serenely , and smiled at the teasing of fate , like a person who is listening to pleasantries . 
