said she , `` books ! '' 
A flash pierced her glassy eye . 
She resumed , and her accent expressed the happiness which she felt in boasting of something , to which no human creature is insensible : -- `` I know how to read , I do ! '' 
She eagerly seized a book which lay open on the table , and read with tolerable fluency : -- '' -- General Bauduin received orders to take the chateau of Hougomont which stands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo , with five battalions of his brigade . '' 
She paused . 
`` Ah ! 
Waterloo ! 
I know about that . 
It was a battle long ago . 
My father was there . 
My father has served in the armies . 
We are fine Bonapartists in our house , that we are ! 
Waterloo was against the English . '' 
She laid down the book , caught up a pen , and exclaimed : -- `` And I know how to write , too ! '' 
She dipped her pen in the ink , and turning to Marius : -- `` Do you want to see ? 
Look here , I 'm going to write a word to show you . '' 
And before he had time to answer , she wrote on a sheet of white paper , which lay in the middle of the table : `` The bobbies are here . '' 
Then throwing down the pen : -- `` There are no faults of orthography . 
You can look . 
We have received an education , my sister and I . 
We have not always been as we are now . 
We were not made -- '' Here she paused , fixed her dull eyes on Marius , and burst out laughing , saying , with an intonation which contained every form of anguish , stifled by every form of cynicism : -- `` Bah ! '' 
And she began to hum these words to a gay air : -- `` J'ai faim , mon pere . '' 
I am hungry , father . 
Pas de fricot . 
I have no food . 
J'ai froid , ma mere . 
I am cold , mother . 
Pas de tricot . 
I have no clothes . 
Grelotte , Lolotte ! 
Lolotte ! 
Shiver , Sanglote , Sob , Jacquot ! '' 
Jacquot ! '' 
She had hardly finished this couplet , when she exexclaimed : -- `` Do you ever go to the play , Monsieur Marius ? 
I do . 
I have a little brother who is a friend of the artists , and who gives me tickets sometimes . 
But I do n't like the benches in the galleries . 
One is cramped and uncomfortable there . 
There are rough people there sometimes ; and people who smell bad . '' 
Then she scrutinized Marius , assumed a singular air and said : -- `` Do you know , Mr. Marius , that you are a very handsome fellow ? '' 
And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both , and made her smile and him blush . 
She stepped up to him , and laid her hand on his shoulder : `` You pay no heed to me , but I know you , Mr. Marius . 
I meet you here on the staircase , and then I often see you going to a person named Father Mabeuf who lives in the direction of Austerlitz , sometimes when I have been strolling in that quarter . 
It is very becoming to you to have your hair tumbled thus . '' 
She tried to render her voice soft , but only succeeded in making it very deep . 
A portion of her words was lost in the transit from her larynx to her lips , as though on a piano where some notes are missing . 
Marius had retreated gently . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' said he , with his cool gravity , `` I have here a package which belongs to you , I think . 
Permit me to return it to you . '' 
