He tried to rise , to flee , to make his escape ; he could not move his feet . 
Sometimes , the things that you see seize upon you and hold you fast . 
He remained nailed to the spot , petrified , stupid , asking himself , athwart confused and inexpressible anguish , what this sepulchral persecution signified , and whence had come that pandemonium which was pursuing him . 
All at once , he raised his hand to his brow , a gesture habitual to those whose memory suddenly returns ; he remembered that this was , in fact , the usual itinerary , that it was customary to make this detour in order to avoid all possibility of encountering royalty on the road to Fontainebleau , and that , five and thirty years before , he had himself passed through that barrier . 
Cosette was no less terrified , but in a different way . 
She did not understand ; what she beheld did not seem to her to be possible ; at length she cried : -- `` Father ! 
What are those men in those carts ? '' 
Jean Valjean replied : `` Convicts . '' 
`` Whither are they going ? '' 
`` To the galleys . '' 
At that moment , the cudgelling , multiplied by a hundred hands , became zealous , blows with the flat of the sword were mingled with it , it was a perfect storm of whips and clubs ; the convicts bent before it , a hideous obedience was evoked by the torture , and all held their peace , darting glances like chained wolves . 
Cosette trembled in every limb ; she resumed : -- `` Father , are they still men ? '' 
`` Sometimes , '' answered the unhappy man . 
It was the chain-gang , in fact , which had set out before daybreak from Bicetre , and had taken the road to Mans in order to avoid Fontainebleau , where the King then was . 
This caused the horrible journey to last three or four days longer ; but torture may surely be prolonged with the object of sparing the royal personage a sight of it . 
Jean Valjean returned home utterly overwhelmed . 
Such encounters are shocks , and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thorough shaking up . 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not observe that , on his way back to the Rue de Babylone with Cosette , the latter was plying him with other questions on the subject of what they had just seen ; perhaps he was too much absorbed in his own dejection to notice her words and reply to them . 
But when Cosette was leaving him in the evening , to betake herself to bed , he heard her say in a low voice , and as though talking to herself : `` It seems to me , that if I were to find one of those men in my pathway , oh , my God , I should die merely from the sight of him close at hand . '' 
Fortunately , chance ordained that on the morrow of that tragic day , there was some official solemnity apropos of I know not what , -- fetes in Paris , a review in the Champ de Mars , jousts on the Seine , theatrical performances in the Champs-Elysees , fireworks at the Arc de l'Etoile , illuminations everywhere . 
Jean Valjean did violence to his habits , and took Cosette to see these rejoicings , for the purpose of diverting her from the memory of the day before , and of effacing , beneath the smiling tumult of all Paris , the abominable thing which had passed before her . 
The review with which the festival was spiced made the presence of uniforms perfectly natural ; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a national guard with the vague inward feeling of a man who is betaking himself to shelter . 
However , this trip seemed to attain its object . 
Cosette , who made it her law to please her father , and to whom , moreover , all spectacles were a novelty , accepted this diversion with the light and easy good grace of youth , and did not pout too disdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public fete ; so that Jean Valjean was able to believe that he had succeeded , and that no trace of that hideous vision remained . 
Some days later , one morning , when the sun was shining brightly , and they were both on the steps leading to the garden , another infraction of the rules which Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself , and to the custom of remaining in her chamber which melancholy had caused Cosette to adopt , Cosette , in a wrapper , was standing erect in that negligent attire of early morning which envelops young girls in an adorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud drawn over a star ; and , with her head bathed in light , rosy after a good sleep , submitting to the gentle glances of the tender old man , she was picking a daisy to pieces . 
Cosette did not know the delightful legend , I love a little , passionately , etc. -- who was there who could have taught her ? 
She was handling the flower instinctively , innocently , without a suspicion that to pluck a daisy apart is to do the same by a heart . 
If there were a fourth , and smiling Grace called Melancholy , she would have worn the air of that Grace . 
Jean Valjean was fascinated by the contemplation of those tiny fingers on that flower , and forgetful of everything in the radiance emitted by that child . 
A red-breast was warbling in the thicket , on one side . 
White cloudlets floated across the sky , so gayly , that one would have said that they had just been set at liberty . 
Cosette went on attentively tearing the leaves from her flower ; she seemed to be thinking about something ; but whatever it was , it must be something charming ; all at once she turned her head over her shoulder with the delicate languor of a swan , and said to Jean Valjean : `` Father , what are the galleys like ? '' 
A WOUND WITHOUT , HEALING WITHIN Thus their life clouded over by degrees . 
But one diversion , which had formerly been a happiness , remained to them , which was to carry bread to those who were hungry , and clothing to those who were cold . 
Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on these visits to the poor , on which they recovered some remnants of their former free intercourse ; and sometimes , when the day had been a good one , and they had assisted many in distress , and cheered and warmed many little children , Cosette was rather merry in the evening . 
It was at this epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette den . 
On the day following that visit , Jean Valjean made his appearance in the pavilion in the morning , calm as was his wont , but with a large wound on his left arm which was much inflamed , and very angry , which resembled a burn , and which he explained in some way or other . 
This wound resulted in his being detained in the house for a month with fever . 
He would not call in a doctor . 
When Cosette urged him , `` Call the dog-doctor , '' said he . 
Cosette dressed the wound morning and evening with so divine an air and such angelic happiness at being of use to him , that Jean Valjean felt all his former joy returning , his fears and anxieties dissipating , and he gazed at Cosette , saying : `` Oh ! 
what a kindly wound ! 
Oh ! 
what a good misfortune ! '' 
Cosette on perceiving that her father was ill , had deserted the pavilion and again taken a fancy to the little lodging and the back courtyard . 
She passed nearly all her days beside Jean Valjean and read to him the books which he desired . 
Generally they were books of travel . 
Jean Valjean was undergoing a new birth ; his happiness was reviving in these ineffable rays ; the Luxembourg , the prowling young stranger , Cosette 's coldness , -- all these clouds upon his soul were growing dim . 
He had reached the point where he said to himself : `` I imagined all that . 
I am an old fool . '' 
