His mind had two attitudes , one on the side towards man , the other on that towards God ; he studied or he contemplated . 
All day long , he buried himself in social questions , salary , capital , credit , marriage , religion , liberty of thought , education , penal servitude , poverty , association , property , production and sharing , the enigma of this lower world which covers the human ant-hill with darkness ; and at night , he gazed upon the planets , those enormous beings . 
Like Enjolras , he was wealthy and an only son . 
He spoke softly , bowed his head , lowered his eyes , smiled with embarrassment , dressed badly , had an awkward air , blushed at a mere nothing , and was very timid . 
Yet he was intrepid . 
Feuilly was a workingman , a fan-maker , orphaned both of father and mother , who earned with difficulty three francs a day , and had but one thought , to deliver the world . 
He had one other preoccupation , to educate himself ; he called this also , delivering himself . 
He had taught himself to read and write ; everything that he knew , he had learned by himself . 
Feuilly had a generous heart . 
The range of his embrace was immense . 
This orphan had adopted the peoples . 
As his mother had failed him , he meditated on his country . 
He brooded with the profound divination of the man of the people , over what we now call the idea of the nationality , had learned history with the express object of raging with full knowledge of the case . 
In this club of young Utopians , occupied chiefly with France , he represented the outside world . 
He had for his specialty Greece , Poland , Hungary , Roumania , Italy . 
He uttered these names incessantly , appropriately and inappropriately , with the tenacity of right . 
The violations of Turkey on Greece and Thessaly , of Russia on Warsaw , of Austria on Venice , enraged him . 
Above all things , the great violence of 1772 aroused him . 
There is no more sovereign eloquence than the true in indignation ; he was eloquent with that eloquence . 
He was inexhaustible on that infamous date of 1772 , on the subject of that noble and valiant race suppressed by treason , and that three-sided crime , on that monstrous ambush , the prototype and pattern of all those horrible suppressions of states , which , since that time , have struck many a noble nation , and have annulled their certificate of birth , so to speak . 
All contemporary social crimes have their origin in the partition of Poland . 
The partition of Poland is a theorem of which all present political outrages are the corollaries . 
There has not been a despot , nor a traitor for nearly a century back , who has not signed , approved , counter-signed , and copied , ne variatur , the partition of Poland . 
When the record of modern treasons was examined , that was the first thing which made its appearance . 
The congress of Vienna consulted that crime before consummating its own . 
1772 sounded the onset ; 1815 was the death of the game . 
Such was Feuilly 's habitual text . 
This poor workingman had constituted himself the tutor of Justice , and she recompensed him by rendering him great . 
The fact is , that there is eternity in right . 
Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can be Teuton . 
Kings lose their pains and their honor in the attempt to make them so . 
Sooner or later , the submerged part floats to the surface and reappears . 
Greece becomes Greece again , Italy is once more Italy . 
The protest of right against the deed persists forever . 
The theft of a nation can not be allowed by prescription . 
These lofty deeds of rascality have no future . 
A nation can not have its mark extracted like a pocket handkerchief . 
Courfeyrac had a father who was called M. de Courfeyrac . 
One of the false ideas of the bourgeoisie under the Restoration as regards aristocracy and the nobility was to believe in the particle . 
The particle , as every one knows , possesses no significance . 
But the bourgeois of the epoch of la Minerve estimated so highly that poor de , that they thought themselves bound to abdicate it . 
M. de Chauvelin had himself called M. Chauvelin ; M. de Caumartin , M. Caumartin ; M. de Constant de Robecque , Benjamin Constant ; M. de Lafayette , M. Lafayette . 
Courfeyrac had not wished to remain behind the rest , and called himself plain Courfeyrac . 
We might almost , so far as Courfeyrac is concerned , stop here , and confine ourselves to saying with regard to what remains : `` For Courfeyrac , see Tholomyes . '' 
Courfeyrac had , in fact , that animation of youth which may be called the beaute du diable of the mind . 
Later on , this disappears like the playfulness of the kitten , and all this grace ends , with the bourgeois , on two legs , and with the tomcat , on four paws . 
This sort of wit is transmitted from generation to generation of the successive levies of youth who traverse the schools , who pass it from hand to hand , quasi cursores , and is almost always exactly the same ; so that , as we have just pointed out , any one who had listened to Courfeyrac in 1828 would have thought he heard Tholomyes in 1817 . 
Only , Courfeyrac was an honorable fellow . 
Beneath the apparent similarities of the exterior mind , the difference between him and Tholomyes was very great . 
The latent man which existed in the two was totally different in the first from what it was in the second . 
