He felt , even in the very roots of his hair , the immense reawakening of egotism , and the I in this man 's abyss howled . 
There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil . 
A despairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting aside and breaking certain profound elements which , in some cases , are the very man himself . 
Grief , when it attains this shape , is a headlong flight of all the forces of the conscience . 
These are fatal crises . 
Few among us emerge from them still like ourselves and firm in duty . 
When the limit of endurance is overstepped , the most imperturbable virtue is disconcerted . 
Jean Valjean took the blotter again , and convinced himself afresh ; he remained bowed and as though petrified and with staring eyes , over those four unobjectionable lines ; and there arose within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything in this soul was crumbling away . 
He examined this revelation , athwart the exaggerations of revery , with an apparent and terrifying calmness , for it is a fearful thing when a man 's calmness reaches the coldness of the statue . 
He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his having a suspicion of the fact ; he recalled his fears of the preceding summer , so foolishly dissipated ; he recognized the precipice , it was still the same ; only , Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink , he was at the bottom of it . 
The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had fallen without perceiving it . 
All the light of his life had departed , while he still fancied that he beheld the sun . 
His instinct did not hesitate . 
He put together certain circumstances , certain dates , certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette 's part , and he said to himself : `` It is he . '' 
The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never misses its aim . 
He struck Marius with his first conjecture . 
He did not know the name , but he found the man instantly . 
He distinctly perceived , in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories , the unknown prowler of the Luxembourg , that wretched seeker of love adventures , that idler of romance , that idiot , that coward , for it is cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a father who loves them . 
After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at the bottom of this situation , and that everything proceeded from that quarter , he , Jean Valjean , the regenerated man , the man who had so labored over his soul , the man who had made so many efforts to resolve all life , all misery , and all unhappiness into love , looked into his own breast and there beheld a spectre , Hate . 
Great griefs contain something of dejection . 
They discourage one with existence . 
The man into whom they enter feels something within him withdraw from him . 
In his youth , their visits are lugubrious ; later on they are sinister . 
Alas , if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is hot , when the hair is black , when the head is erect on the body like the flame on the torch , when the roll of destiny still retains its full thickness , when the heart , full of desirable love , still possesses beats which can be returned to it , when one has time for redress , when all women and all smiles and all the future and all the horizon are before one , when the force of life is complete , what is it in old age , when the years hasten on , growing ever paler , to that twilight hour when one begins to behold the stars of the tomb ? 
While he was meditating , Toussaint entered . 
Jean Valjean rose and asked her : -- `` In what quarter is it ? 
Do you know ? '' 
Toussaint was struck dumb , and could only answer him : -- `` What is it , sir ? '' 
Jean Valjean began again : `` Did you not tell me that just now that there is fighting going on ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , sir , '' replied Toussaint . 
`` It is in the direction of Saint-Merry . '' 
There is a mechanical movement which comes to us , unconsciously , from the most profound depths of our thought . 
It was , no doubt , under the impulse of a movement of this sort , and of which he was hardly conscious , that Jean Valjean , five minutes later , found himself in the street . 
Bareheaded , he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house . 
He seemed to be listening . 
Night had come . 
THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT How long did he remain thus ? 
What was the ebb and flow of this tragic meditation ? 
Did he straighten up ? 
Did he remain bowed ? 
Had he been bent to breaking ? 
Could he still rise and regain his footing in his conscience upon something solid ? 
He probably would not have been able to tell himself . 
The street was deserted . 
A few uneasy bourgeois , who were rapidly returning home , hardly saw him . 
Each one for himself in times of peril . 
The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situated precisely opposite the door of No. 7 , and then went away . 
Jean Valjean would not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examined him in that shadow . 
He sat there on the post of his door , motionless as a form of ice . 
