He asked the first person whom be met for `` M. Pontmercy 's house . '' 
For in his own mind , he agreed with the Restoration , and like it , did not recognize his father 's claim to the title of either colonel or baron . 
The house was pointed out to him . 
He rang ; a woman with a little lamp in her hand opened the door . 
`` M. Pontmercy ? '' 
said Marius . 
The woman remained motionless . 
`` Is this his house ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
The woman nodded affirmatively . 
`` Can I speak with him ? '' 
The woman shook her head . 
`` But I am his son ! '' 
persisted Marius . 
`` He is expecting me . '' 
`` He no longer expects you , '' said the woman . 
Then he perceived that she was weeping . 
She pointed to the door of a room on the ground-floor ; he entered . 
In that room , which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on the chimney-piece , there were three men , one standing erect , another kneeling , and one lying at full length , on the floor in his shirt . 
The one on the floor was the colonel . 
The other two were the doctor , and the priest , who was engaged in prayer . 
The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously . 
As he had a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness , he had written to M. Gillenormand to demand his son . 
The malady had grown worse . 
On the very evening of Marius ' arrival at Vernon , the colonel had had an attack of delirium ; he had risen from his bed , in spite of the servant 's efforts to prevent him , crying : `` My son is not coming ! 
I shall go to meet him ! '' 
Then he ran out of his room and fell prostrate on the floor of the antechamber . 
He had just expired . 
The doctor had been summoned , and the cure . 
The doctor had arrived too late . 
The son had also arrived too late . 
By the dim light of the candle , a large tear could be distinguished on the pale and prostrate colonel 's cheek , where it had trickled from his dead eye . 
The eye was extinguished , but the tear was not yet dry . 
That tear was his son 's delay . 
Marius gazed upon that man whom he beheld for the first time , on that venerable and manly face , on those open eyes which saw not , on those white locks , those robust limbs , on which , here and there , brown lines , marking sword-thrusts , and a sort of red stars , which indicated bullet-holes , were visible . 
He contemplated that gigantic sear which stamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprinted goodness . 
He reflected that this man was his father , and that this man was dead , and a chill ran over him . 
The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in the presence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out in death . 
Anguish , poignant anguish , was in that chamber . 
The servant-woman was lamenting in a corner , the cure was praying , and his sobs were audible , the doctor was wiping his eyes ; the corpse itself was weeping . 
The doctor , the priest , and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst of their affliction without uttering a word ; he was the stranger there . 
Marius , who was far too little affected , felt ashamed and embarrassed at his own attitude ; he held his hat in his hand ; and he dropped it on the floor , in order to produce the impression that grief had deprived him of the strength to hold it . 
At the same time , he experienced remorse , and he despised himself for behaving in this manner . 
But was it his fault ? 
He did not love his father ? 
Why should he ! 
The colonel had left nothing . 
The sale of big furniture barely paid the expenses of his burial . 
The servant found a scrap of paper , which she handed to Marius . 
It contained the following , in the colonel 's handwriting : -- `` For my son . 
