One personage , whose name has remained unknown , announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been won over , would throw open the doors of a factory of arms to the people . 
That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of those present was enthusiasm mingled with dejection . 
Here and there , also , in that multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions , there were visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths which said : `` Let us plunder ! '' 
There are certain agitations which stir up the bottoms of marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water . 
A phenomenon to which `` well drilled '' policemen are no strangers . 
The procession proceeded , with feverish slowness , from the house of the deceased , by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille . 
It rained from time to time ; the rain mattered nothing to that throng . 
Many incidents , the coffin borne round the Vendome column , stones thrown at the Duc de Fitz-James , who was seen on a balcony with his hat on his head , the Gallic cock torn from a popular flag and dragged in the mire , a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin , an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud : `` I am a Republican , '' the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly against orders to remain at home , the shouts of : `` Long live the Polytechnique ! 
Long live the Republic ! '' 
marked the passage of the funeral train . 
At the Bastille , long files of curious and formidable people who descended from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , effected a junction with the procession , and a certain terrible seething began to agitate the throng . 
One man was heard to say to another : `` Do you see that fellow with a red beard , he 's the one who will give the word when we are to fire . '' 
It appears that this red beard was present , at another riot , the Quenisset affair , entrusted with this same function . 
The hearse passed the Bastille , traversed the small bridge , and reached the esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz . 
There it halted . 
The crowd , surveyed at that moment with a bird ` seye view , would have presented the aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail spread out over the Quai Bourdon , covered the Bastille , and was prolonged on the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin . 
A circle was traced around the hearse . 
The vast rout held their peace . 
Lafayette spoke and bade Lamarque farewell . 
This was a touching and august instant , all heads uncovered , all hearts beat high . 
All at once , a man on horseback , clad in black , made his appearance in the middle of the group with a red flag , others say , with a pike surmounted with a red liberty-cap . 
Lafayette turned aside his head . 
Exelmans quitted the procession . 
This red flag raised a storm , and disappeared in the midst of it . 
From the Boulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamors which resemble billows stirred the multitude . 
Two prodigious shouts went up : `` Lamarque to the Pantheon ! 
-- Lafayette to the Town-hall ! '' 
Some young men , amid the declamations of the throng , harnessed themselves and began to drag Lamarque in the hearse across the bridge of Austerlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland . 
In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette , it was noticed that a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder , who died a centenarian afterwards , who had also been in the war of 1776 , and who had fought at Trenton under Washington , and at Brandywine under Lafayette . 
In the meantime , the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set in motion , and came to bar the bridge , on the right bank the dragoons emerged from the Celestins and deployed along the Quai Morland . 
The men who were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner of the quay and shouted : `` The dragoons ! '' 
The dragoons advanced at a walk , in silence , with their pistols in their holsters , their swords in their scabbards , their guns slung in their leather sockets , with an air of gloomy expectation . 
They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge . 
The carriage in which sat Lafayette advanced to them , their ranks opened and allowed it to pass , and then closed behind it . 
At that moment the dragoons and the crowd touched . 
The women fled in terror . 
What took place during that fatal minute ? 
No one can say . 
It is the dark moment when two clouds come together . 
Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding the charge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal others that a blow from a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon . 
The fact is , that three shots were suddenly discharged : the first killed Cholet , chief of the squadron , the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act of closing her window , the third singed the shoulder of an officer ; a woman screamed : `` They are beginning too soon ! '' 
and all at once , a squadron of dragoons which had remained in the barracks up to this time , was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared swords , through the Rue Bassompierre and the Boulevard Bourdon , sweeping all before them . 
Then all is said , the tempest is loosed , stones rain down , a fusillade breaks forth , many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank , and pass the small arm of the Seine , now filled in , the timber-yards of the Isle Louviers , that vast citadel ready to hand , bristle with combatants , stakes are torn up , pistol-shots fired , a barricade begun , the young men who are thrust back pass the Austerlitz bridge with the hearse at a run , and the municipal guard , the carabineers rush up , the dragoons ply their swords , the crowd disperses in all directions , a rumor of war flies to all four quarters of Paris , men shout : `` To arms ! '' 
they run , tumble down , flee , resist . 
Wrath spreads abroad the riot as wind spreads a fire . 
THE EBULLITIONS OF FORMER DAYS Nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot . 
Everything bursts forth everywhere at once . 
Was it foreseen ? 
Yes . 
Was it prepared ? 
