He soon rose again and resumed his march . 
He went out of the town , hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford him shelter . 
He walked thus for some time , with his head still drooping . 
When he felt himself far from every human habitation , he raised his eyes and gazed searchingly about him . 
He was in a field . 
Before him was one of those low hills covered with close-cut stubble , which , after the harvest , resemble shaved heads . 
The horizon was perfectly black . 
This was not alone the obscurity of night ; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to rest upon the hill itself , and which were mounting and filling the whole sky . 
Meanwhile , as the moon was about to rise , and as there was still floating in the zenith a remnant of the brightness of twilight , these clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch , whence a gleam of light fell upon the earth . 
The earth was thus better lighted than the sky , which produces a particularly sinister effect , and the hill , whose contour was poor and mean , was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon . 
The whole effect was hideous , petty , lugubrious , and narrow . 
There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree , which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer . 
This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits of intelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious aspects of things ; nevertheless , there was something in that sky , in that hill , in that plain , in that tree , which was so profoundly desolate , that after a moment of immobility and revery he turned back abruptly . 
There are instants when nature seems hostile . 
He retraced his steps ; the gates of D -- were closed . 
D -- , which had sustained sieges during the wars of religion , was still surrounded in 1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been demolished since . 
He passed through a breach and entered the town again . 
It might have been eight o'clock in the evening . 
As he was not acquainted with the streets , he recommenced his walk at random . 
In this way he came to the prefecture , then to the seminary . 
As he passed through the Cathedral Square , he shook his fist at the church . 
At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment . 
It is there that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guard to the army , brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleon himself , were printed for the first time . 
Worn out with fatigue , and no longer entertaining any hope , he lay down on a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office . 
At that moment an old woman came out of the church . 
She saw the man stretched out in the shadow . 
`` What are you doing there , my friend ? '' 
said she . 
He answered harshly and angrily : `` As you see , my good woman , I am sleeping . '' 
The good woman , who was well worthy the name , in fact , was the Marquise de R -- `` On this bench ? '' 
she went on . 
`` I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years , '' said the man ; `` to-day I have a mattress of stone . '' 
`` You have been a soldier ? '' 
`` Yes , my good woman , a soldier . '' 
`` Why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` Because I have no money . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
said Madame de R -- , `` I have only four sous in my purse . '' 
`` Give it to me all the same . '' 
The man took the four sous . 
Madame de R -- continued : `` You can not obtain lodgings in an inn for so small a sum . 
But have you tried ? 
It is impossible for you to pass the night thus . 
You are cold and hungry , no doubt . 
Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity . '' 
`` I have knocked at all doors . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` I have been driven away everywhere . '' 
The `` good woman '' touched the man 's arm , and pointed out to him on the other side of the street a small , low house , which stood beside the Bishop 's palace . 
`` You have knocked at all doors ? '' 
