An unforeseen shock was added to these sad reflections . 
In the isolated life which they led , and since they had come to dwell in the Rue Plumet , they had contracted one habit . 
They sometimes took a pleasure trip to see the sun rise , a mild species of enjoyment which befits those who are entering life and those who are quitting it . 
For those who love solitude , a walk in the early morning is equivalent to a stroll by night , with the cheerfulness of nature added . 
The streets are deserted and the birds are singing . 
Cosette , a bird herself , liked to rise early . 
These matutinal excursions were planned on the preceding evening . 
He proposed , and she agreed . 
It was arranged like a plot , they set out before daybreak , and these trips were so many small delights for Cosette . 
These innocent eccentricities please young people . 
Jean Valjean 's inclination led him , as we have seen , to the least frequented spots , to solitary nooks , to forgotten places . 
There then existed , in the vicinity of the barriers of Paris , a sort of poor meadows , which were almost confounded with the city , where grew in summer sickly grain , and which , in autumn , after the harvest had been gathered , presented the appearance , not of having been reaped , but peeled . 
Jean Valjean loved to haunt these fields . 
Cosette was not bored there . 
It meant solitude to him and liberty to her . 
There , she became a little girl once more , she could run and almost play ; she took off her hat , laid it on Jean Valjean 's knees , and gathered bunches of flowers . 
She gazed at the butterflies on the flowers , but did not catch them ; gentleness and tenderness are born with love , and the young girl who cherishes within her breast a trembling and fragile ideal has mercy on the wing of a butterfly . 
She wove garlands of poppies , which she placed on her head , and which , crossed and penetrated with sunlight , glowing until they flamed , formed for her rosy face a crown of burning embers . 
Even after their life had grown sad , they kept up their custom of early strolls . 
One morning in October , therefore , tempted by the serene perfection of the autumn of 1831 , they set out , and found themselves at break of day near the Barriere du Maine . 
It was not dawn , it was daybreak ; a delightful and stern moment . 
A few constellations here and there in the deep , pale azure , the earth all black , the heavens all white , a quiver amid the blades of grass , everywhere the mysterious chill of twilight . 
A lark , which seemed mingled with the stars , was carolling at a prodigious height , and one would have declared that that hymn of pettiness calmed immensity . 
In the East , the Valde-Grace projected its dark mass on the clear horizon with the sharpness of steel ; Venus dazzlingly brilliant was rising behind that dome and had the air of a soul making its escape from a gloomy edifice . 
All was peace and silence ; there was no one on the road ; a few stray laborers , of whom they caught barely a glimpse , were on their way to their work along the side-paths . 
Jean Valjean was sitting in a cross-walk on some planks deposited at the gate of a timber-yard . 
His face was turned towards the highway , his back towards the light ; he had forgotten the sun which was on the point of rising ; he had sunk into one of those profound absorptions in which the mind becomes concentrated , which imprison even the eye , and which are equivalent to four walls . 
There are meditations which may be called vertical ; when one is at the bottom of them , time is required to return to earth . 
Jean Valjean had plunged into one of these reveries . 
He was thinking of Cosette , of the happiness that was possible if nothing came between him and her , of the light with which she filled his life , a light which was but the emanation of her soul . 
He was almost happy in his revery . 
Cosette , who was standing beside him , was gazing at the clouds as they turned rosy . 
All at once Cosette exclaimed : `` Father , I should think some one was coming yonder . '' 
Jean Valjean raised his eyes . 
Cosette was right . 
The causeway which leads to the ancient Barriere du Maine is a prolongation , as the reader knows , of the Rue de Sevres , and is cut at right angles by the inner boulevard . 
At the elbow of the causeway and the boulevard , at the spot where it branches , they heard a noise which it was difficult to account for at that hour , and a sort of confused pile made its appearance . 
Some shapeless thing which was coming from the boulevard was turning into the road . 
It grew larger , it seemed to move in an orderly manner , though it was bristling and quivering ; it seemed to be a vehicle , but its load could not be distinctly made out . 
There were horses , wheels , shouts ; whips were cracking . 
By degrees the outlines became fixed , although bathed in shadows . 
It was a vehicle , in fact , which had just turned from the boulevard into the highway , and which was directing its course towards the barrier near which sat Jean Valjean ; a second , of the same aspect , followed , then a third , then a fourth ; seven chariots made their appearance in succession , the heads of the horses touching the rear of the wagon in front . 
Figures were moving on these vehicles , flashes were visible through the dusk as though there were naked swords there , a clanking became audible which resembled the rattling of chains , and as this something advanced , the sound of voices waxed louder , and it turned into a terrible thing such as emerges from the cave of dreams . 
As it drew nearer , it assumed a form , and was outlined behind the trees with the pallid hue of an apparition ; the mass grew white ; the day , which was slowly dawning , cast a wan light on this swarming heap which was at once both sepulchral and living , the heads of the figures turned into the faces of corpses , and this is what it proved to be : -- Seven wagons were driving in a file along the road . 
The first six were singularly constructed . 
They resembled coopers ' drays ; they consisted of long ladders placed on two wheels and forming barrows at their rear extremities . 
Each dray , or rather let us say , each ladder , was attached to four horses harnessed tandem . 
On these ladders strange clusters of men were being drawn . 
In the faint light , these men were to be divined rather than seen . 
Twenty-four on each vehicle , twelve on a side , back to back , facing the passers-by , their legs dangling in the air , -- this was the manner in which these men were travelling , and behind their backs they had something which clanked , and which was a chain , and on their necks something which shone , and which was an iron collar . 
