the best way to adore God is to love one 's wife . 
I love thee ! 
that 's my catechism . 
He who loves is orthodox . 
The oath of Henri IV . 
places sanctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness . 
Ventre-saint-gris ! 
I do n't belong to the religion of that oath . 
Woman is forgotten in it . 
This astonishes me on the part of Henri IV . 
My friends , long live women ! 
I am old , they say ; it 's astonishing how much I feel in the mood to be young . 
I should like to go and listen to the bagpipes in the woods . 
Children who contrive to be beautiful and contented , -- that intoxicates me . 
I would like greatly to get married , if any one would have me . 
It is impossible to imagine that God could have made us for anything but this : to idolize , to coo , to preen ourselves , to be dove-like , to be dainty , to bill and coo our loves from morn to night , to gaze at one 's image in one 's little wife , to be proud , to be triumphant , to plume oneself ; that is the aim of life . 
There , let not that displease you which we used to think in our day , when we were young folks . 
Ah ! 
vertu-bamboche ! 
what charming women there were in those days , and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses ! 
I committed my ravages among them . 
Then love each other . 
If people did not love each other , I really do not see what use there would be in having any springtime ; and for my own part , I should pray the good God to shut up all the beautiful things that he shows us , and to take away from us and put back in his box , the flowers , the birds , and the pretty maidens . 
My children , receive an old man 's blessing . 
The evening was gay , lively and agreeable . 
The grandfather 's sovereign good humor gave the key-note to the whole feast , and each person regulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality . 
They danced a little , they laughed a great deal ; it was an amiable wedding . 
Goodman Days of Yore might have been invited to it . 
However , he was present in the person of Father Gillenormand . 
There was a tumult , then silence . 
The married pair disappeared . 
A little after midnight , the Gillenormand house became a temple . 
Here we pause . 
On the threshold of wedding nights stands a smiling angel with his finger on his lips . 
The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where the celebration of love takes place . 
There should be flashes of light athwart such houses . 
The joy which they contain ought to make its escape through the stones of the walls in brilliancy , and vaguely illuminate the gloom . 
It is impossible that this sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radiance to the infinite . 
Love is the sublime crucible wherein the fusion of the man and the woman takes place ; the being one , the being triple , the being final , the human trinity proceeds from it . 
This birth of two souls into one , ought to be an emotion for the gloom . 
The lover is the priest ; the ravished virgin is terrified . 
Something of that joy ascends to God . 
Where true marriage is , that is to say , where there is love , the ideal enters in . 
A nuptial bed makes a nook of dawn amid the shadows . 
If it were given to the eye of the flesh to scan the formidable and charming visions of the upper life , it is probable that we should behold the forms of night , the winged unknowns , the blue passers of the invisible , bend down , a throng of sombre heads , around the luminous house , satisfied , showering benedictions , pointing out to each other the virgin wife gently alarmed , sweetly terrified , and bearing the reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances . 
If at that supreme hour , the wedded pair , dazzled with voluptuousness and believing themselves alone , were to listen , they would hear in their chamber a confused rustling of wings . 
Perfect happiness implies a mutual understanding with the angels . 
That dark little chamber has all heaven for its ceiling . 
When two mouths , rendered sacred by love , approach to create , it is impossible that there should not be , above that ineffable kiss , a quivering throughout the immense mystery of stars . 
These felicities are the true ones . 
