So you are going to have that all to yourself , you scamp ! 
Ah ! 
my rogue , you are getting off nicely with me , you are happy ; if I were not fifteen years too old , we would fight with swords to see which of us should have her . 
Come now ! 
I am in love with you , mademoiselle . 
It 's perfectly simple . 
It is your right . 
You are in the right . 
Ah ! 
what a sweet , charming little wedding this will make ! 
Our parish is Saint-Denis du Saint Sacrament , but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at Saint-Paul . 
The church is better . 
It was built by the Jesuits . 
It is more coquettish . 
It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague . 
The masterpiece of Jesuit architecture is at Namur . 
It is called Saint-Loup . 
You must go there after you are married . 
It is worth the journey . 
Mademoiselle , I am quite of your mind , I think girls ought to marry ; that is what they are made for . 
There is a certain Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed . 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- It 's a fine thing to remain a spinster , but it is chilly . 
The Bible says : Multiply . 
In order to save the people , Jeanne d'Arc is needed ; but in order to make people , what is needed is Mother Goose . 
So , marry , my beauties . 
I really do not see the use in remaining a spinster ! 
I know that they have their chapel apart in the church , and that they fall back on the Society of the Virgin ; but , sapristi , a handsome husband , a fine fellow , and at the expiration of a year , a big , blond brat who nurses lustily , and who has fine rolls of fat on his thighs , and who musses up your breast in handfuls with his little rosy paws , laughing the while like the dawn , -- that 's better than holding a candle at vespers , and chanting Turris eburnea ! '' 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- In allusion to the expression , coiffer Sainte-Catherine , `` to remain unmarried . '' 
The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels , and began to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more : `` Ainsi , bornant les cours de tes revasseries , Alcippe , il est donc vrai , dans peu tu te maries . '' 
-LSB- 63 -RSB- -LSB- 63 -RSB- `` Thus , hemming in the course of thy musings , Alcippus , it is true that thou wilt wed ere long . '' 
`` By the way ! '' 
`` What is it , father ? '' 
`` Have not you an intimate friend ? '' 
`` Yes , Courfeyrac . '' 
`` What has become of him ? '' 
`` He is dead . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
He seated himself near them , made Cosette sit down , and took their four hands in his aged and wrinkled hands : `` She is exquisite , this darling . 
She 's a masterpiece , this Cosette ! 
She is a very little girl and a very great lady . 
She will only be a Baroness , which is a come down for her ; she was born a Marquise . 
What eyelashes she has ! 
Get it well fixed in your noddles , my children , that you are in the true road . 
Love each other . 
Be foolish about it . 
Love is the folly of men and the wit of God . 
Adore each other . 
Only , '' he added , suddenly becoming gloomy , `` what a misfortune ! 
It has just occurred to me ! 
More than half of what I possess is swallowed up in an annuity ; so long as I live , it will not matter , but after my death , a score of years hence , ah ! 
