He took a step and entered the room . 
This room was in a state of perfect calm . 
Here and there vague and confused forms were distinguishable , which in the daylight were papers scattered on a table , open folios , volumes piled upon a stool , an arm-chair heaped with clothing , a prie-Dieu , and which at that hour were only shadowy corners and whitish spots . 
Jean Valjean advanced with precaution , taking care not to knock against the furniture . 
He could hear , at the extremity of the room , the even and tranquil breathing of the sleeping Bishop . 
He suddenly came to a halt . 
He was near the bed . 
He had arrived there sooner than he had thought for . 
Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our actions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness , as though she desired to make us reflect . 
For the last half-hour a large cloud had covered the heavens . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front of the bed , this cloud parted , as though on purpose , and a ray of light , traversing the long window , suddenly illuminated the Bishop 's pale face . 
He was sleeping peacefully . 
He lay in his bed almost completely dressed , on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps , in a garment of brown wool , which covered his arms to the wrists . 
His head was thrown back on the pillow , in the careless attitude of repose ; his hand , adorned with the pastoral ring , and whence had fallen so many good deeds and so many holy actions , was hanging over the edge of the bed . 
His whole face was illumined with a vague expression of satisfaction , of hope , and of felicity . 
It was more than a smile , and almost a radiance . 
He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection of a light which was invisible . 
The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a mysterious heaven . 
A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop . 
It was , at the same time , a luminous transparency , for that heaven was within him . 
That heaven was his conscience . 
At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself , so to speak , upon that inward radiance , the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory . 
It remained , however , gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light . 
That moon in the sky , that slumbering nature , that garden without a quiver , that house which was so calm , the hour , the moment , the silence , added some solemn and unspeakable quality to the venerable repose of this man , and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that white hair , those closed eyes , that face in which all was hope and all was confidence , that head of an old man , and that slumber of an infant . 
There was something almost divine in this man , who was thus august , without being himself aware of it . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadow , and stood motionless , with his iron candlestick in his hand , frightened by this luminous old man . 
Never had he beheld anything like this . 
This confidence terrified him . 
The moral world has no grander spectacle than this : a troubled and uneasy conscience , which has arrived on the brink of an evil action , contemplating the slumber of the just . 
That slumber in that isolation , and with a neighbor like himself , had about it something sublime , of which he was vaguely but imperiously conscious . 
No one could have told what was passing within him , not even himself . 
In order to attempt to form an idea of it , it is necessary to think of the most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle . 
Even on his visage it would have been impossible to distinguish anything with certainty . 
It was a sort of haggard astonishment . 
He gazed at it , and that was all . 
But what was his thought ? 
It would have been impossible to divine it . 
What was evident was , that he was touched and astounded . 
But what was the nature of this emotion ? 
His eye never quitted the old man . 
The only thing which was clearly to be inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange indecision . 
One would have said that he was hesitating between the two abysses , -- the one in which one loses one 's self and that in which one saves one 's self . 
He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kiss that hand . 
At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards his brow , and he took off his cap ; then his arm fell back with the same deliberation , and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more , his cap in his left hand , his club in his right hand , his hair bristling all over his savage head . 
The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifying gaze . 
The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over the chimney-piece , which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them , with a benediction for one and pardon for the other . 
Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow ; then stepped rapidly past the bed , without glancing at the Bishop , straight to the cupboard , which he saw near the head ; he raised his iron candlestick as though to force the lock ; the key was there ; he opened it ; the first thing which presented itself to him was the basket of silverware ; he seized it , traversed the chamber with long strides , without taking any precautions and without troubling himself about the noise , gained the door , re-entered the oratory , opened the window , seized his cudgel , bestrode the window-sill of the ground-floor , put the silver into his knapsack , threw away the basket , crossed the garden , leaped over the wall like a tiger , and fled . 
THE BISHOP WORKS The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling in his garden . 
Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation . 
`` Monseigneur , Monseigneur ! '' 
