At last he accepted the risk and quitted his room . 
There was no one in the corridor . 
He hastened to the stairs . 
There was no one on the staircase . 
He descended in all haste , and reached the boulevard in time to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier , on its way back to Paris . 
Marius rushed headlong in that direction . 
On arriving at the angle of the boulevard , he caught sight of the fiacre again , rapidly descending the Rue Mouffetard ; the carriage was already a long way off , and there was no means of overtaking it ; what ! 
run after it ? 
Impossible ; and besides , the people in the carriage would assuredly notice an individual running at full speed in pursuit of a fiacre , and the father would recognize him . 
At that moment , wonderful and unprecedented good luck , Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the boulevard . 
There was but one thing to be done , to jump into this cab and follow the fiacre . 
That was sure , efficacious , and free from danger . 
Marius made the driver a sign to halt , and called to him : -- `` By the hour ? '' 
Marius wore no cravat , he had on his working-coat , which was destitute of buttons , his shirt was torn along one of the plaits on the bosom . 
The driver halted , winked , and held out his left hand to Marius , rubbing his forefinger gently with his thumb . 
`` What is it ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` Pay in advance , '' said the coachman . 
Marius recollected that he had but sixteen sous about him . 
`` How much ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` Forty sous . '' 
`` I will pay on my return . '' 
The driver 's only reply was to whistle the air of La Palisse and to whip up his horse . 
Marius stared at the retreating cabriolet with a bewildered air . 
For the lack of four and twenty sous , he was losing his joy , his happiness , his love ! 
He had seen , and he was becoming blind again . 
He reflected bitterly , and it must be confessed , with profound regret , on the five francs which he had bestowed , that very morning , on that miserable girl . 
If he had had those five francs , he would have been saved , he would have been born again , he would have emerged from the limbo and darkness , he would have made his escape from isolation and spleen , from his widowed state ; he might have re-knotted the black thread of his destiny to that beautiful golden thread , which had just floated before his eyes and had broken at the same instant , once more ! 
He returned to his hovel in despair . 
He might have told himself that M. Leblanc had promised to return in the evening , and that all he had to do was to set about the matter more skilfully , so that he might follow him on that occasion ; but , in his contemplation , it is doubtful whether he had heard this . 
As he was on the point of mounting the staircase , he perceived , on the other side of the boulevard , near the deserted wall skirting the Rue De la Barriere-des-Gobelins , Jondrette , wrapped in the `` philanthropist 's '' great-coat , engaged in conversation with one of those men of disquieting aspect who have been dubbed by common consent , prowlers of the barriers ; people of equivocal face , of suspicious monologues , who present the air of having evil minds , and who generally sleep in the daytime , which suggests the supposition that they work by night . 
These two men , standing there motionless and in conversation , in the snow which was falling in whirlwinds , formed a group that a policeman would surely have observed , but which Marius hardly noticed . 
Still , in spite of his mournful preoccupation , he could not refrain from saying to himself that this prowler of the barriers with whom Jondrette was talking resembled a certain Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a very dangerous nocturnal roamer . 
This man 's name the reader has learned in the preceding book . 
This Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , figured later on in many criminal trials , and became a notorious rascal . 
He was at that time only a famous rascal . 
To-day he exists in the state of tradition among ruffians and assassins . 
He was at the head of a school towards the end of the last reign . 
And in the evening , at nightfall , at the hour when groups form and talk in whispers , he was discussed at La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions . 
One might even , in that prison , precisely at the spot where the sewer which served the unprecedented escape , in broad daylight , of thirty prisoners , in 1843 , passes under the culvert , read his name , PANCHAUD , audaciously carved by his own hand on the wall of the sewer , during one of his attempts at flight . 
In 1832 , the police already had their eye on him , but he had not as yet made a serious beginning . 
OFFERS OF SERVICE FROM MISERY TO WRETCHEDNESS Marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps ; at the moment when he was about to re-enter his cell , he caught sight of the elder Jondrette girl following him through the corridor . 
The very sight of this girl was odious to him ; it was she who had his five francs , it was too late to demand them back , the cab was no longer there , the fiacre was far away . 
Moreover , she would not have given them back . 
As for questioning her about the residence of the persons who had just been there , that was useless ; it was evident that she did not know , since the letter signed Fabantou had been addressed `` to the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
Marius entered his room and pushed the door to after him . 
It did not close ; he turned round and beheld a hand which held the door half open . 
`` What is it ? '' 
he asked , `` who is there ? '' 
