From year to year the child grew , and so did her wretchedness . 
As long as Cosette was little , she was the scape-goat of the two other children ; as soon as she began to develop a little , that is to say , before she was even five years old , she became the servant of the household . 
Five years old ! 
the reader will say ; that is not probable . 
Alas ! 
it is true . 
Social suffering begins at all ages . 
Have we not recently seen the trial of a man named Dumollard , an orphan turned bandit , who , from the age of five , as the official documents state , being alone in the world , `` worked for his living and stole '' ? 
Cosette was made to run on errands , to sweep the rooms , the courtyard , the street , to wash the dishes , to even carry burdens . 
The Thenardiers considered themselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner , since the mother , who was still at M. sur M. , had become irregular in her payments . 
Some months she was in arrears . 
If this mother had returned to Montfermeil at the end of these three years , she would not have recognized her child . 
Cosette , so pretty and rosy on her arrival in that house , was now thin and pale . 
She had an indescribably uneasy look . 
`` The sly creature , '' said the Thenardiers . 
Injustice had made her peevish , and misery had made her ugly . 
Nothing remained to her except her beautiful eyes , which inspired pain , because , large as they were , it seemed as though one beheld in them a still larger amount of sadness . 
It was a heart-breaking thing to see this poor child , not yet six years old , shivering in the winter in her old rags of linen , full of holes , sweeping the street before daylight , with an enormous broom in her tiny red hands , and a tear in her great eyes . 
She was called the Lark in the neighborhood . 
The populace , who are fond of these figures of speech , had taken a fancy to bestow this name on this trembling , frightened , and shivering little creature , no bigger than a bird , who was awake every morning before any one else in the house or the village , and was always in the street or the fields before daybreak . 
Only the little lark never sang . 
BOOK FIFTH . 
-- THE DESCENT . 
THE HISTORY OF A PROGRESS IN BLACK GLASS TRINKETS And in the meantime , what had become of that mother who according to the people at Montfermeil , seemed to have abandoned her child ? 
Where was she ? 
What was she doing ? 
After leaving her little Cosette with the Thenardiers , she had continued her journey , and had reached M. sur M. This , it will be remembered , was in 1818 . 
Fantine had quitted her province ten years before . 
M. sur M. had changed its aspect . 
While Fantine had been slowly descending from wretchedness to wretchedness , her native town had prospered . 
About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are the grand events of small districts had taken place . 
This detail is important , and we regard it as useful to develop it at length ; we should almost say , to underline it . 
From time immemorial , M. sur M. had had for its special industry the imitation of English jet and the black glass trinkets of Germany . 
This industry had always vegetated , on account of the high price of the raw material , which reacted on the manufacture . 
At the moment when Fantine returned to M. sur M. , an unheard-of transformation had taken place in the production of `` black goods . '' 
Towards the close of 1815 a man , a stranger , had established himself in the town , and had been inspired with the idea of substituting , in this manufacture , gum-lac for resin , and , for bracelets in particular , slides of sheet-iron simply laid together , for slides of soldered sheet-iron . 
This very small change had effected a revolution . 
This very small change had , in fact , prodigiously reduced the cost of the raw material , which had rendered it possible in the first place , to raise the price of manufacture , a benefit to the country ; in the second place , to improve the workmanship , an advantage to the consumer ; in the third place , to sell at a lower price , while trebling the profit , which was a benefit to the manufacturer . 
Thus three results ensued from one idea . 
In less than three years the inventor of this process had become rich , which is good , and had made every one about him rich , which is better . 
He was a stranger in the Department . 
Of his origin , nothing was known ; of the beginning of his career , very little . 
It was rumored that he had come to town with very little money , a few hundred francs at the most . 
It was from this slender capital , enlisted in the service of an ingenious idea , developed by method and thought , that he had drawn his own fortune , and the fortune of the whole countryside . 
On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments , the appearance , and the language of a workingman . 
It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into the little town of M. sur M. , just at nightfall , on a December evening , knapsack on back and thorn club in hand , a large fire had broken out in the town-hall . 
This man had rushed into the flames and saved , at the risk of his own life , two children who belonged to the captain of the gendarmerie ; this is why they had forgotten to ask him for his passport . 
Afterwards they had learned his name . 
He was called Father Madeleine . 
MADELEINE He was a man about fifty years of age , who had a preoccupied air , and who was good . 
