An unheard-of virtue , supreme and sweet , humble in its immensity , appeared to him . 
The convict was transfigured into Christ . 
Marius was dazzled by this prodigy . 
He did not know precisely what he beheld , but it was grand . 
In an instant , a hackney-carriage stood in front of the door . 
Marius helped Cosette in and darted in himself . 
`` Driver , '' said he , `` Rue de l'Homme Arme , Number 7 . '' 
The carriage drove off . 
`` Ah ! 
what happiness ! '' 
ejaculated Cosette . 
`` Rue de l'Homme Arme , I did not dare to speak to you of that . 
We are going to see M. Jean . '' 
`` Thy father ! 
Cosette , thy father more than ever . 
Cosette , I guess it . 
You told me that you had never received the letter that I sent you by Gavroche . 
It must have fallen into his hands . 
Cosette , he went to the barricade to save me . 
As it is a necessity with him to be an angel , he saved others also ; he saved Javert . 
He rescued me from that gulf to give me to you . 
He carried me on his back through that frightful sewer . 
Ah ! 
I am a monster of ingratitude . 
Cosette , after having been your providence , he became mine . 
Just imagine , there was a terrible quagmire enough to drown one a hundred times over , to drown one in mire . 
Cosette ! 
he made me traverse it . 
I was unconscious ; I saw nothing , I heard nothing , I could know nothing of my own adventure . 
We are going to bring him back , to take him with us , whether he is willing or not , he shall never leave us again . 
If only he is at home ! 
Provided only that we can find him , I will pass the rest of my life in venerating him . 
Yes , that is how it should be , do you see , Cosette ? 
Gavroche must have delivered my letter to him . 
All is explained . 
You understand . '' 
Cosette did not understand a word . 
`` You are right , '' she said to him . 
Meanwhile the carriage rolled on . 
A NIGHT BEHIND WHICH THERE IS DAY Jean Valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door . 
`` Come in , '' he said feebly . 
The door opened . 
Cosette and Marius made their appearance . 
Cosette rushed into the room . 
Marius remained on the threshold , leaning against the jamb of the door . 
`` Cosette ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
And he sat erect in his chair , his arms outstretched and trembling , haggard , livid , gloomy , an immense joy in his eyes . 
Cosette , stifling with emotion , fell upon Jean Valjean 's breast . 
`` Father ! '' 
