The sand has covered them . 
He draws his feet out of the sand , he tries to retrace his steps , he turns back , he sinks in more deeply than before . 
The sand is up to his ankles , he tears himself free from it and flings himself to the left , the sand reaches to mid-leg , he flings himself to the right , the sand comes up to his knees . 
Then , with indescribable terror , he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a quicksand , and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in which neither man can walk nor fish can swim . 
He flings away his burden , if he have one , he lightens himself , like a ship in distress ; it is too late , the sand is above his knees . 
He shouts , he waves his hat , or his handkerchief , the sand continually gains on him ; if the beach is deserted , if the land is too far away , if the bank of sand is too ill-famed , there is no hero in the neighborhood , all is over , he is condemned to be engulfed . 
He is condemned to that terrible interment , long , infallible , implacable , which it is impossible to either retard or hasten , which lasts for hours , which will not come to an end , which seizes you erect , free , in the flush of health , which drags you down by the feet , which , at every effort that you attempt , at every shout that you utter , draws you a little lower , which has the air of punishing you for your resistance by a redoubled grasp , which forces a man to return slowly to earth , while leaving him time to survey the horizon , the trees , the verdant country , the smoke of the villages on the plain , the sails of the ships on the sea , the birds which fly and sing , the sun and the sky . 
This engulfment is the sepulchre which assumes a tide , and which mounts from the depths of the earth towards a living man . 
Each minute is an inexorable layer-out of the dead . 
The wretched man tries to sit down , to lie down , to climb ; every movement that he makes buries him deeper ; he straightens himself up , he sinks ; he feels that he is being swallowed up ; he shrieks , implores , cries to the clouds , wrings his hands , grows desperate . 
Behold him in the sand up to his belly , the sand reaches to his breast , he is only a bust now . 
He uplifts his hands , utters furious groans , clenches his nails on the beach , tries to cling fast to that ashes , supports himself on his elbows in order to raise himself from that soft sheath , and sobs frantically ; the sand mounts higher . 
The sand has reached his shoulders , the sand reaches to his throat ; only his face is visible now . 
His mouth cries aloud , the sand fills it ; silence . 
His eyes still gaze forth , the sand closes them , night . 
Then his brow decreases , a little hair quivers above the sand ; a hand projects , pierces the surface of the beach , waves and disappears . 
Sinister obliteration of a man . 
Sometimes a rider is engulfed with his horse ; sometimes the carter is swallowed up with his cart ; all founders in that strand . 
It is shipwreck elsewhere than in the water . 
It is the earth drowning a man . 
The earth , permeated with the ocean , becomes a pitfall . 
It presents itself in the guise of a plain , and it yawns like a wave . 
The abyss is subject to these treacheries . 
This melancholy fate , always possible on certain sea beaches , was also possible , thirty years ago , in the sewers of Paris . 
Before the important works , undertaken in 1833 , the subterranean drain of Paris was subject to these sudden slides . 
The water filtered into certain subjacent strata , which were particularly friable ; the foot-way , which was of flag-stones , as in the ancient sewers , or of cement on concrete , as in the new galleries , having no longer an underpinning , gave way . 
A fold in a flooring of this sort means a crack , means crumbling . 
The framework crumbled away for a certain length . 
This crevice , the hiatus of a gulf of mire , was called a fontis , in the special tongue . 
What is a fontis ? 
It is the quicksands of the seashore suddenly encountered under the surface of the earth ; it is the beach of Mont Saint-Michel in a sewer . 
The soaked soil is in a state of fusion , as it were ; all its molecules are in suspension in soft medium ; it is not earth and it is not water . 
The depth is sometimes very great . 
Nothing can be more formidable than such an encounter . 
If the water predominates , death is prompt , the man is swallowed up ; if earth predominates , death is slow . 
Can any one picture to himself such a death ? 
If being swallowed by the earth is terrible on the seashore , what is it in a cess-pool ? 
Instead of the open air , the broad daylight , the clear horizon , those vast sounds , those free clouds whence rains life , instead of those barks descried in the distance , of that hope under all sorts of forms , of probable passers-by , of succor possible up to the very last moment , -- instead of all this , deafness , blindness , a black vault , the inside of a tomb already prepared , death in the mire beneath a cover ! 
slow suffocation by filth , a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire and clutches you by the throat ; fetidness mingled with the death-rattle ; slime instead of the strand , sulfuretted hydrogen in place of the hurricane , dung in place of the ocean ! 
And to shout , to gnash one 's teeth , and to writhe , and to struggle , and to agonize , with that enormous city which knows nothing of it all , over one 's head ! 
Inexpressible is the horror of dying thus ! 
Death sometimes redeems his atrocity by a certain terrible dignity . 
On the funeral pile , in shipwreck , one can be great ; in the flames as in the foam , a superb attitude is possible ; one there becomes transfigured as one perishes . 
But not here . 
Death is filthy . 
It is humiliating to expire . 
The supreme floating visions are abject . 
Mud is synonymous with shame . 
It is petty , ugly , infamous . 
To die in a butt of Malvoisie , like Clarence , is permissible ; in the ditch of a scavenger , like Escoubleau , is horrible . 
