He was utterly routed . 
`` I know neither Madame Bagration nor M. Dambray , '' said he . 
`` I have never set foot in the house of either of them in my life . '' 
The reply was ungracious . 
The personage , determined to be gracious at any cost , insisted . 
`` Then it must have been at Chateaubriand 's that I have seen Monsieur ! 
I know Chateaubriand very well . 
He is very affable . 
He sometimes says to me : ` Thenard , my friend ... wo n't you drink a glass of wine with me ? ' '' 
Marius ' brow grew more and more severe : `` I have never had the honor of being received by M. de Chateaubriand . 
Let us cut it short . 
What do you want ? '' 
The man bowed lower at that harsh voice . 
`` Monsieur le Baron , deign to listen to me . 
There is in America , in a district near Panama , a village called la Joya . 
That village is composed of a single house , a large , square house of three stories , built of bricks dried in the sun , each side of the square five hundred feet in length , each story retreating twelve feet back of the story below , in such a manner as to leave in front a terrace which makes the circuit of the edifice , in the centre an inner court where the provisions and munitions are kept ; no windows , loopholes , no doors , ladders , ladders to mount from the ground to the first terrace , and from the first to the second , and from the second to the third , ladders to descend into the inner court , no doors to the chambers , trap-doors , no staircases to the chambers , ladders ; in the evening the traps are closed , the ladders are withdrawn carbines and blunderbusses trained from the loopholes ; no means of entering , a house by day , a citadel by night , eight hundred inhabitants , -- that is the village . 
Why so many precautions ? 
because the country is dangerous ; it is full of cannibals . 
Then why do people go there ? 
because the country is marvellous ; gold is found there . '' 
`` What are you driving at ? '' 
interrupted Marius , who had passed from disappointment to impatience . 
`` At this , Monsieur le Baron . 
I am an old and weary diplomat . 
Ancient civilization has thrown me on my own devices . 
I want to try savages . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , egotism is the law of the world . 
The proletarian peasant woman , who toils by the day , turns round when the diligence passes by , the peasant proprietress , who toils in her field , does not turn round . 
The dog of the poor man barks at the rich man , the dog of the rich man barks at the poor man . 
Each one for himself . 
Self-interest -- that 's the object of men . 
Gold , that 's the loadstone . '' 
`` What then ? 
Finish . '' 
`` I should like to go and establish myself at la Joya . 
There are three of us . 
I have my spouse and my young lady ; a very beautiful girl . 
The journey is long and costly . 
I need a little money . '' 
`` What concern is that of mine ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
The stranger stretched his neck out of his cravat , a gesture characteristic of the vulture , and replied with an augmented smile . 
`` Has not Monsieur le Baron perused my letter ? '' 
There was some truth in this . 
The fact is , that the contents of the epistle had slipped Marius ' mind . 
He had seen the writing rather than read the letter . 
He could hardly recall it . 
But a moment ago a fresh start had been given him . 
He had noted that detail : `` my spouse and my young lady . '' 
