Since she was gone , he must needs die . 
Had he not given her his word of honor that he would die ? 
She had gone knowing that ; this meant that it pleased her that Marius should die . 
And then , it was clear that she no longer loved him , since she had departed thus without warning , without a word , without a letter , although she knew his address ! 
What was the good of living , and why should he live now ? 
And then , what ! 
should he retreat after going so far ? 
should he flee from danger after having approached it ? 
should he slip away after having come and peeped into the barricade ? 
slip away , all in a tremble , saying : `` After all , I have had enough of it as it is . 
I have seen it , that suffices , this is civil war , and I shall take my leave ! '' 
Should he abandon his friends who were expecting him ? 
Who were in need of him possibly ! 
who were a mere handful against an army ! 
Should he be untrue at once to his love , to country , to his word ? 
Should he give to his cowardice the pretext of patriotism ? 
But this was impossible , and if the phantom of his father was there in the gloom , and beheld him retreating , he would beat him on the loins with the flat of his sword , and shout to him : `` March on , you poltroon ! '' 
Thus a prey to the conflicting movements of his thoughts , he dropped his head . 
All at once he raised it . 
A sort of splendid rectification had just been effected in his mind . 
There is a widening of the sphere of thought which is peculiar to the vicinity of the grave ; it makes one see clearly to be near death . 
The vision of the action into which he felt that he was , perhaps , on the point of entering , appeared to him no more as lamentable , but as superb . 
The war of the street was suddenly transfigured by some unfathomable inward working of his soul , before the eye of his thought . 
All the tumultuous interrogation points of revery recurred to him in throngs , but without troubling him . 
He left none of them unanswered . 
Let us see , why should his father be indignant ? 
Are there not cases where insurrection rises to the dignity of duty ? 
What was there that was degrading for the son of Colonel Pontmercy in the combat which was about to begin ? 
It is no longer Montmirail nor Champaubert ; it is something quite different . 
The question is no longer one of sacred territory , -- but of a holy idea . 
The country wails , that may be , but humanity applauds . 
But is it true that the country does wail ? 
France bleeds , but liberty smiles ; and in the presence of liberty 's smile , France forgets her wound . 
And then if we look at things from a still more lofty point of view , why do we speak of civil war ? 
Civil war -- what does that mean ? 
Is there a foreign war ? 
Is not all war between men war between brothers ? 
War is qualified only by its object . 
There is no such thing as foreign or civil war ; there is only just and unjust war . 
Until that day when the grand human agreement is concluded , war , that at least which is the effort of the future , which is hastening on against the past , which is lagging in the rear , may be necessary . 
What have we to reproach that war with ? 
War does not become a disgrace , the sword does not become a disgrace , except when it is used for assassinating the right , progress , reason , civilization , truth . 
Then war , whether foreign or civil , is iniquitous ; it is called crime . 
Outside the pale of that holy thing , justice , by what right does one form of man despise another ? 
By what right should the sword of Washington disown the pike of Camille Desmoulins ? 
Leonidas against the stranger , Timoleon against the tyrant , which is the greater ? 
the one is the defender , the other the liberator . 
Shall we brand every appeal to arms within a city 's limits without taking the object into a consideration ? 
Then note the infamy of Brutus , Marcel , Arnould von Blankenheim , Coligny , Hedgerow war ? 
War of the streets ? 
