There men exterminated each other . 
The French , fired on from every point , -- from behind the walls , from the summits of the garrets , from the depths of the cellars , through all the casements , through all the air-holes , through every crack in the stones , -- fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men ; the reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration . 
In the ruined wing , through windows garnished with bars of iron , the dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible ; the English guards were in ambush in these rooms ; the spiral of the staircase , cracked from the ground floor to the very roof , appears like the inside of a broken shell . 
The staircase has two stories ; the English , besieged on the staircase , and massed on its upper steps , had cut off the lower steps . 
These consisted of large slabs of blue stone , which form a heap among the nettles . 
Half a score of steps still cling to the wall ; on the first is cut the figure of a trident . 
These inaccessible steps are solid in their niches . 
All the rest resembles a jaw which has been denuded of its teeth . 
There are two old trees there : one is dead ; the other is wounded at its base , and is clothed with verdure in April . 
Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the staircase . 
A massacre took place in the chapel . 
The interior , which has recovered its calm , is singular . 
The mass has not been said there since the carnage . 
Nevertheless , the altar has been left there -- an altar of unpolished wood , placed against a background of roughhewn stone . 
Four whitewashed walls , a door opposite the altar , two small arched windows ; over the door a large wooden crucifix , below the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay ; on the ground , in one corner , an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces -- such is the chapel . 
Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of Saint Anne , of the fifteenth century ; the head of the infant Jesus has been carried off by a large ball . 
The French , who were masters of the chapel for a moment , and were then dislodged , set fire to it . 
The flames filled this building ; it was a perfect furnace ; the door was burned , the floor was burned , the wooden Christ was not burned . 
The fire preyed upon his feet , of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen ; then it stopped , -- a miracle , according to the assertion of the people of the neighborhood . 
The infant Jesus , decapitated , was less fortunate than the Christ . 
The walls are covered with inscriptions . 
Near the feet of Christ this name is to be read : Henquinez . 
Then these others : Conde de Rio Maior Marques y Marquesa de Almagro -LRB- Habana -RRB- . 
There are French names with exclamation points , -- a sign of wrath . 
The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849 . 
The nations insulted each other there . 
It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which held an axe in its hand ; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros . 
On emerging from the chapel , a well is visible on the left . 
There are two in this courtyard . 
One inquires , Why is there no bucket and pulley to this ? 
It is because water is no longer drawn there . 
Why is water not drawn there ? 
Because it is full of skeletons . 
The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume van Kylsom . 
He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont , and was gardener there . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , his family fled and concealed themselves in the woods . 
The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate people who had been scattered abroad , for many days and nights . 
There are at this day certain traces recognizable , such as old boles of burned trees , which mark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the depths of the thickets . 
Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont , `` to guard the chateau , '' and concealed himself in the cellar . 
The English discovered him there . 
They tore him from his hiding-place , and the combatants forced this frightened man to serve them , by administering blows with the flats of their swords . 
They were thirsty ; this Guillaume brought them water . 
It was from this well that he drew it . 
Many drank there their last draught . 
This well where drank so many of the dead was destined to die itself . 
After the engagement , they were in haste to bury the dead bodies . 
Death has a fashion of harassing victory , and she causes the pest to follow glory . 
The typhus is a concomitant of triumph . 
This well was deep , and it was turned into a sepulchre . 
Three hundred dead bodies were cast into it . 
