Former days did not recognize Yesterday . 
People no longer had the feeling for what was grand . 
There was some one who called Bonaparte Scapin . 
This Society no longer exists . 
Nothing of it , we repeat , exists to-day . 
When we select from it some one figure at random , and attempt to make it live again in thought , it seems as strange to us as the world before the Deluge . 
It is because it , too , as a matter of fact , has been engulfed in a deluge . 
It has disappeared beneath two Revolutions . 
What billows are ideas ! 
How quickly they cover all that it is their mission to destroy and to bury , and how promptly they create frightful gulfs ! 
Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candid times when M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire . 
These salons had a literature and politics of their own . 
They believed in Fievee . 
M. Agier laid down the law in them . 
They commentated M. Colnet , the old bookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais . 
Napoleon was to them thoroughly the Corsican Ogre . 
Later on the introduction into history of M. le Marquis de Bonaparte , Lieutenant-General of the King 's armies , was a concession to the spirit of the age . 
These salons did not long preserve their purity . 
Beginning with 1818 , doctrinarians began to spring up in them , a disturbing shade . 
Their way was to be Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so . 
Where the ultras were very proud , the doctrinarians were rather ashamed . 
They had wit ; they had silence ; their political dogma was suitably impregnated with arrogance ; they should have succeeded . 
They indulged , and usefully too , in excesses in the matter of white neckties and tightly buttoned coats . 
The mistake or the misfortune of the doctrinarian party was to create aged youth . 
They assumed the poses of wise men . 
They dreamed of engrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive principle . 
They opposed , and sometimes with rare intelligence , conservative liberalism to the liberalism which demolishes . 
They were heard to say : `` Thanks for Royalism ! 
It has rendered more than one service . 
It has brought back tradition , worship , religion , respect . 
It is faithful , brave , chivalric , loving , devoted . 
It has mingled , though with regret , the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of the nation . 
Its mistake is not to understand the Revolution , the Empire , glory , liberty , young ideas , young generations , the age . 
But this mistake which it makes with regard to us , -- have we not sometimes been guilty of it towards them ? 
The Revolution , whose heirs we are , ought to be intelligent on all points . 
To attack Royalism is a misconstruction of liberalism . 
What an error ! 
And what blindness ! 
Revolutionary France is wanting in respect towards historic France , that is to say , towards its mother , that is to say , towards itself . 
After the 5th of September , the nobility of the monarchy is treated as the nobility of the Empire was treated after the 5th of July . 
They were unjust to the eagle , we are unjust to the fleur-de-lys . 
It seems that we must always have something to proscribe ! 
Does it serve any purpose to ungild the crown of Louis XIV. , to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV . ? 
We scoff at M. de Vaublanc for erasing the N 's from the bridge of Jena ! 
What was it that he did ? 
What are we doing ? 
Bouvines belongs to us as well as Marengo . 
The fleurs-de-lys are ours as well as the N 's . 
That is our patrimony . 
To what purpose shall we diminish it ? 
