They even bestride the carriage lamps . 
They stand , sit , lie , with their knees drawn up in a knot , and their legs hanging . 
The women sit on the men 's laps . 
Far away , above the throng of heads , their wild pyramid is visible . 
These carriage-loads form mountains of mirth in the midst of the rout . 
Colle , Panard and Piron flow from it , enriched with slang . 
This carriage which has become colossal through its freight , has an air of conquest . 
Uproar reigns in front , tumult behind . 
People vociferate , shout , howl , there they break forth and writhe with enjoyment ; gayety roars ; sarcasm flames forth , joviality is flaunted like a red flag ; two jades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis ; it is the triumphal car of laughter . 
A laughter that is too cynical to be frank . 
In truth , this laughter is suspicious . 
This laughter has a mission . 
It is charged with proving the Carnival to the Parisians . 
These fishwife vehicles , in which one feels one knows not what shadows , set the philosopher to thinking . 
There is government therein . 
There one lays one 's finger on a mysterious affinity between public men and public women . 
It certainly is sad that turpitude heaped up should give a sum total of gayety , that by piling ignominy upon opprobrium the people should be enticed , that the system of spying , and serving as caryatids to prostitution should amuse the rabble when it confronts them , that the crowd loves to behold that monstrous living pile of tinsel rags , half dung , half light , roll by on four wheels howling and laughing , that they should clap their hands at this glory composed of all shames , that there would be no festival for the populace , did not the police promenade in their midst these sorts of twenty-headed hydras of joy . 
But what can be done about it ? 
These be-ribboned and be-flowered tumbrils of mire are insulted and pardoned by the laughter of the public . 
The laughter of all is the accomplice of universal degradation . 
Certain unhealthy festivals disaggregate the people and convert them into the populace . 
And populaces , like tyrants , require buffoons . 
The King has Roquelaure , the populace has the Merry-Andrew . 
Paris is a great , mad city on every occasion that it is a great sublime city . 
There the Carnival forms part of politics . 
Paris , -- let us confess it -- willingly allows infamy to furnish it with comedy . 
She only demands of her masters -- when she has masters -- one thing : `` Paint me the mud . '' 
Rome was of the same mind . 
She loved Nero . 
Nero was a titanic lighterman . 
Chance ordained , as we have just said , that one of these shapeless clusters of masked men and women , dragged about on a vast calash , should halt on the left of the boulevard , while the wedding train halted on the right . 
The carriage-load of masks caught sight of the wedding carriage containing the bridal party opposite them on the other side of the boulevard . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said a masker , `` here 's a wedding . '' 
`` A sham wedding , '' retorted another . 
`` We are the genuine article . '' 
And , being too far off to accost the wedding party , and fearing also , the rebuke of the police , the two maskers turned their eyes elsewhere . 
At the end of another minute , the carriage-load of maskers had their hands full , the multitude set to yelling , which is the crowd 's caress to masquerades ; and the two maskers who had just spoken had to face the throng with their comrades , and did not find the entire repertory of projectiles of the fishmarkets too extensive to retort to the enormous verbal attacks of the populace . 
A frightful exchange of metaphors took place between the maskers and the crowd . 
In the meanwhile , two other maskers in the same carriage , a Spaniard with an enormous nose , an elderly air , and huge black moustache , and a gaunt fishwife , who was quite a young girl , masked with a loup , -LSB- 67 -RSB- had also noticed the wedding , and while their companions and the passers-by were exchanging insults , they had held a dialogue in a low voice . 
-LSB- 67 -RSB- A short mask . 
Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it . 
The gusts of rain had drenched the front of the vehicle , which was wide open ; the breezes of February are not warm ; as the fishwife , clad in a low-necked gown , replied to the Spaniard , she shivered , laughed and coughed . 
Here is their dialogue : `` Say , now . '' 
`` What , daddy ? '' 
`` Do you see that old cove ? '' 
`` What old cove ? '' 
`` Yonder , in the first wedding-cart , on our side . '' 
`` The one with his arm hung up in a black cravat ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
