One of his distant relatives , Madame la Comtesse de Lo , rarely allowed an opportunity to escape of enumerating , in his presence , what she designated as `` the expectations '' of her three sons . 
She had numerous relatives , who were very old and near to death , and of whom her sons were the natural heirs . 
The youngest of the three was to receive from a grand-aunt a good hundred thousand livres of income ; the second was the heir by entail to the title of the Duke , his uncle ; the eldest was to succeed to the peerage of his grandfather . 
The Bishop was accustomed to listen in silence to these innocent and pardonable maternal boasts . 
On one occasion , however , he appeared to be more thoughtful than usual , while Madame de Lo was relating once again the details of all these inheritances and all these `` expectations . '' 
She interrupted herself impatiently : `` Mon Dieu , cousin ! 
What are you thinking about ? '' 
`` I am thinking , '' replied the Bishop , `` of a singular remark , which is to be found , I believe , in St. Augustine , -- ` Place your hopes in the man from whom you do not inherit . ' '' 
At another time , on receiving a notification of the decease of a gentleman of the country-side , wherein not only the dignities of the dead man , but also the feudal and noble qualifications of all his relatives , spread over an entire page : `` What a stout back Death has ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` What a strange burden of titles is cheerfully imposed on him , and how much wit must men have , in order thus to press the tomb into the service of vanity ! '' 
He was gifted , on occasion , with a gentle raillery , which almost always concealed a serious meaning . 
In the course of one Lent , a youthful vicar came to D -- , and preached in the cathedral . 
He was tolerably eloquent . 
The subject of his sermon was charity . 
He urged the rich to give to the poor , in order to avoid hell , which he depicted in the most frightful manner of which he was capable , and to win paradise , which he represented as charming and desirable . 
Among the audience there was a wealthy retired merchant , who was somewhat of a usurer , named M. Geborand , who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarse cloth , serges , and woollen galloons . 
Never in his whole life had M. Geborand bestowed alms on any poor wretch . 
After the delivery of that sermon , it was observed that he gave a sou every Sunday to the poor old beggar-women at the door of the cathedral . 
There were six of them to share it . 
One day the Bishop caught sight of him in the act of bestowing this charity , and said to his sister , with a smile , `` There is M. Geborand purchasing paradise for a sou . '' 
When it was a question of charity , he was not to be rebuffed even by a refusal , and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks which induced reflection . 
Once he was begging for the poor in a drawing-room of the town ; there was present the Marquis de Champtercier , a wealthy and avaricious old man , who contrived to be , at one and the same time , an ultra-royalist and an ultra-Voltairian . 
This variety of man has actually existed . 
When the Bishop came to him , he touched his arm , `` You must give me something , M. le Marquis . '' 
The Marquis turned round and answered dryly , `` I have poor people of my own , Monseigneur . '' 
`` Give them to me , '' replied the Bishop . 
One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral : -- `` My very dear brethren , my good friends , there are thirteen hundred and twenty thousand peasants ' dwellings in France which have but three openings ; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which have but two openings , the door and one window ; and three hundred and forty-six thousand cabins besides which have but one opening , the door . 
And this arises from a thing which is called the tax on doors and windows . 
Just put poor families , old women and little children , in those buildings , and behold the fevers and maladies which result ! 
Alas ! 
God gives air to men ; the law sells it to them . 
I do not blame the law , but I bless God . 
In the department of the Isere , in the Var , in the two departments of the Alpes , the Hautes , and the Basses , the peasants have not even wheelbarrows ; they transport their manure on the backs of men ; they have no candles , and they burn resinous sticks , and bits of rope dipped in pitch . 
That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of the hilly country of Dauphine . 
They make bread for six months at one time ; they bake it with dried cow-dung . 
In the winter they break this bread up with an axe , and they soak it for twenty-four hours , in order to render it eatable . 
My brethren , have pity ! 
behold the suffering on all sides of you ! '' 
Born a Provencal , he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of the south . 
He said , `` En be ! 
moussu , ses sage ? '' 
as in lower Languedoc ; `` Onte anaras passa ? '' 
as in the Basses-Alpes ; `` Puerte un bouen moutu embe un bouen fromage grase , '' as in upper Dauphine . 
This pleased the people extremely , and contributed not a little to win him access to all spirits . 
He was perfectly at home in the thatched cottage and in the mountains . 
He understood how to say the grandest things in the most vulgar of idioms . 
As he spoke all tongues , he entered into all hearts . 
Moreover , he was the same towards people of the world and towards the lower classes . 
He condemned nothing in haste and without taking circumstances into account . 
