All this had been accomplished outside the bounds of absolute right . 
Absolute right cried : `` I protest ! '' 
then , terrible to say , it retired into the darkness . 
LOUIS PHILIPPE Revolutions have a terrible arm and a happy hand , they strike firmly and choose well . 
Even incomplete , even debased and abused and reduced to the state of a junior revolution like the Revolution of 1830 , they nearly always retain sufficient providential lucidity to prevent them from falling amiss . 
Their eclipse is never an abdication . 
Nevertheless , let us not boast too loudly ; revolutions also may be deceived , and grave errors have been seen . 
Let us return to 1830 . 
1830 , in its deviation , had good luck . 
In the establishment which entitled itself order after the revolution had been cut short , the King amounted to more than royalty . 
Louis Philippe was a rare man . 
The son of a father to whom history will accord certain attenuating circumstances , but also as worthy of esteem as that father had been of blame ; possessing all private virtues and many public virtues ; careful of his health , of his fortune , of his person , of his affairs , knowing the value of a minute and not always the value of a year ; sober , serene , peaceable , patient ; a good man and a good prince ; sleeping with his wife , and having in his palace lackeys charged with the duty of showing the conjugal bed to the bourgeois , an ostentation of the regular sleeping-apartment which had become useful after the former illegitimate displays of the elder branch ; knowing all the languages of Europe , and , what is more rare , all the languages of all interests , and speaking them ; an admirable representative of the `` middle class , '' but outstripping it , and in every way greater than it ; possessing excellent sense , while appreciating the blood from which he had sprung , counting most of all on his intrinsic worth , and , on the question of his race , very particular , declaring himself Orleans and not Bourbon ; thoroughly the first Prince of the Blood Royal while he was still only a Serene Highness , but a frank bourgeois from the day he became king ; diffuse in public , concise in private ; reputed , but not proved to be a miser ; at bottom , one of those economists who are readily prodigal at their own fancy or duty ; lettered , but not very sensitive to letters ; a gentleman , but not a chevalier ; simple , calm , and strong ; adored by his family and his household ; a fascinating talker , an undeceived statesman , inwardly cold , dominated by immediate interest , always governing at the shortest range , incapable of rancor and of gratitude , making use without mercy of superiority on mediocrity , clever in getting parliamentary majorities to put in the wrong those mysterious unanimities which mutter dully under thrones ; unreserved , sometimes imprudent in his lack of reserve , but with marvellous address in that imprudence ; fertile in expedients , in countenances , in masks ; making France fear Europe and Europe France ! 
Incontestably fond of his country , but preferring his family ; assuming more domination than authority and more authority than dignity , a disposition which has this unfortunate property , that as it turns everything to success , it admits of ruse and does not absolutely repudiate baseness , but which has this valuable side , that it preserves politics from violent shocks , the state from fractures , and society from catastrophes ; minute , correct , vigilant , attentive , sagacious , indefatigable ; contradicting himself at times and giving himself the lie ; bold against Austria at Ancona , obstinate against England in Spain , bombarding Antwerp , and paying off Pritchard ; singing the Marseillaise with conviction , inaccessible to despondency , to lassitude , to the taste for the beautiful and the ideal , to daring generosity , to Utopia , to chimeras , to wrath , to vanity , to fear ; possessing all the forms of personal intrepidity ; a general at Valmy ; a soldier at Jemappes ; attacked eight times by regicides and always smiling . 
brave as a grenadier , courageous as a thinker ; uneasy only in the face of the chances of a European shaking up , and unfitted for great political adventures ; always ready to risk his life , never his work ; disguising his will in influence , in order that he might be obeyed as an intelligence rather than as a king ; endowed with observation and not with divination ; not very attentive to minds , but knowing men , that is to say requiring to see in order to judge ; prompt and penetrating good sense , practical wisdom , easy speech , prodigious memory ; drawing incessantly on this memory , his only point of resemblance with Caesar , Alexander , and Napoleon ; knowing deeds , facts , details , dates , proper names , ignorant of tendencies , passions , the diverse geniuses of the crowd , the interior aspirations , the hidden and obscure uprisings of souls , in a word , all that can be designated as the invisible currents of consciences ; accepted by the surface , but little in accord with France lower down ; extricating himself by dint of tact ; governing too much and not enough ; his own first minister ; excellent at creating out of the pettiness of realities an obstacle to the immensity of ideas ; mingling a genuine creative faculty of civilization , of order and organization , an indescribable spirit of proceedings and chicanery , the founder and lawyer of a dynasty ; having something of Charlemagne and something of an attorney ; in short , a lofty and original figure , a prince who understood how to create authority in spite of the uneasiness of France , and power in spite of the jealousy of Europe . 
Louis Philippe will be classed among the eminent men of his century , and would be ranked among the most illustrious governors of history had he loved glory but a little , and if he had had the sentiment of what is great to the same degree as the feeling for what is useful . 
Louis Philippe had been handsome , and in his old age he remained graceful ; not always approved by the nation , he always was so by the masses ; he pleased . 
He had that gift of charming . 
He lacked majesty ; he wore no crown , although a king , and no white hair , although an old man ; his manners belonged to the old regime and his habits to the new ; a mixture of the noble and the bourgeois which suited 1830 ; Louis Philippe was transition reigning ; he had preserved the ancient pronunciation and the ancient orthography which he placed at the service of opinions modern ; he loved Poland and Hungary , but he wrote les Polonois , and he pronounced les Hongrais . 
He wore the uniform of the national guard , like Charles X. , and the ribbon of the Legion of Honor , like Napoleon . 
He went a little to chapel , not at all to the chase , never to the opera . 
Incorruptible by sacristans , by whippers-in , by ballet-dancers ; this made a part of his bourgeois popularity . 
He had no heart . 
He went out with his umbrella under his arm , and this umbrella long formed a part of his aureole . 
He was a bit of a mason , a bit of a gardener , something of a doctor ; he bled a postilion who had tumbled from his horse ; Louis Philippe no more went about without his lancet , than did Henri IV . 
without his poniard . 
The Royalists jeered at this ridiculous king , the first who had ever shed blood with the object of healing . 
For the grievances against Louis Philippe , there is one deduction to be made ; there is that which accuses royalty , that which accuses the reign , that which accuses the King ; three columns which all give different totals . 
Democratic right confiscated , progress becomes a matter of secondary interest , the protests of the street violently repressed , military execution of insurrections , the rising passed over by arms , the Rue Transnonain , the counsels of war , the absorption of the real country by the legal country , on half shares with three hundred thousand privileged persons , -- these are the deeds of royalty ; Belgium refused , Algeria too harshly conquered , and , as in the case of India by the English , with more barbarism than civilization , the breach of faith , to Abd-el-Kader , Blaye , Deutz bought , Pritchard paid , -- these are the doings of the reign ; the policy which was more domestic than national was the doing of the King . 
As will be seen , the proper deduction having been made , the King 's charge is decreased . 
This is his great fault ; he was modest in the name of France . 
Whence arises this fault ? 
We will state it . 
Louis Philippe was rather too much of a paternal king ; that incubation of a family with the object of founding a dynasty is afraid of everything and does not like to be disturbed ; hence excessive timidity , which is displeasing to the people , who have the 14th of July in their civil and Austerlitz in their military tradition . 
Moreover , if we deduct the public duties which require to be fulfilled first of all , that deep tenderness of Louis Philippe towards his family was deserved by the family . 
That domestic group was worthy of admiration . 
Virtues there dwelt side by side with talents . 
One of Louis Philippe 's daughters , Marie d'Orleans , placed the name of her race among artists , as Charles d'Orleans had placed it among poets . 
She made of her soul a marble which she named Jeanne d'Arc . 
Two of Louis Philippe 's daughters elicited from Metternich this eulogium : `` They are young people such as are rarely seen , and princes such as are never seen . '' 
This , without any dissimulation , and also without any exaggeration , is the truth about Louis Philippe . 
To be Prince Equality , to bear in his own person the contradiction of the Restoration and the Revolution , to have that disquieting side of the revolutionary which becomes reassuring in governing power , therein lay the fortune of Louis Philippe in 1830 ; never was there a more complete adaptation of a man to an event ; the one entered into the other , and the incarnation took place . 
Louis Philippe is 1830 made man . 
Moreover , he had in his favor that great recommendation to the throne , exile . 
He had been proscribed , a wanderer , poor . 
He had lived by his own labor . 
In Switzerland , this heir to the richest princely domains in France had sold an old horse in order to obtain bread . 
At Reichenau , he gave lessons in mathematics , while his sister Adelaide did wool work and sewed . 
These souvenirs connected with a king rendered the bourgeoisie enthusiastic . 
He had , with his own hands , demolished the iron cage of Mont-Saint-Michel , built by Louis XI , and used by Louis XV . 
He was the companion of Dumouriez , he was the friend of Lafayette ; he had belonged to the Jacobins ' club ; Mirabeau had slapped him on the shoulder ; Danton had said to him : `` Young man ! '' 
