It was rallying , but hiding itself . 
The Emperor half rose in his stirrups . 
The lightning of victory flashed from his eyes . 
Wellington , driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes and destroyed -- that was the definitive conquest of England by France ; it was Crecy , Poitiers , Malplaquet , and Ramillies avenged . 
The man of Marengo was wiping out Agincourt . 
So the Emperor , meditating on this terrible turn of fortune , swept his glass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle . 
His guard , standing behind him with grounded arms , watched him from below with a sort of religion . 
He pondered ; he examined the slopes , noted the declivities , scrutinized the clumps of trees , the square of rye , the path ; he seemed to be counting each bush . 
He gazed with some intentness at the English barricades of the two highways , -- two large abatis of trees , that on the road to Genappe above La Haie-Sainte , armed with two cannon , the only ones out of all the English artillery which commanded the extremity of the field of battle , and that on the road to Nivelles where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chasse 's brigade . 
Near this barricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas , painted white , which stands at the angle of the cross-road near Braine-l'Alleud ; he bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide made a negative sign with his head , which was probably perfidious . 
The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking . 
Wellington had drawn back . 
All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him . 
Napoleon turning round abruptly , despatched an express at full speed to Paris to announce that the battle was won . 
Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts . 
He had just found his clap of thunder . 
He gave orders to Milhaud 's cuirassiers to carry the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
THE UNEXPECTED There were three thousand five hundred of them . 
They formed a front a quarter of a league in extent . 
They were giant men , on colossal horses . 
There were six and twenty squadrons of them ; and they had behind them to support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's division , -- the one hundred and six picked gendarmes , the light cavalry of the Guard , eleven hundred and ninety-seven men , and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances . 
They wore casques without horse-tails , and cuirasses of beaten iron , with horse-pistols in their holsters , and long sabre-swords . 
That morning the whole army had admired them , when , at nine o'clock , with braying of trumpets and all the music playing `` Let us watch o'er the Safety of the Empire , '' they had come in a solid column , with one of their batteries on their flank , another in their centre , and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont , and taken up their position for battle in that powerful second line , so cleverly arranged by Napoleon , which , having on its extreme left Kellermann 's cuirassiers and on its extreme right Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had , so to speak , two wings of iron . 
Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor 's orders . 
Ney drew his sword and placed himself at their head . 
The enormous squadrons were set in motion . 
Then a formidable spectacle was seen . 
All their cavalry , with upraised swords , standards and trumpets flung to the breeze , formed in columns by divisions , descended , by a simultaneous movement and like one man , with the precision of a brazen battering-ram which is effecting a breach , the hill of La Belle Alliance , plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men had already fallen , disappeared there in the smoke , then emerging from that shadow , reappeared on the other side of the valley , still compact and in close ranks , mounting at a full trot , through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them , the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
They ascended , grave , threatening , imperturbable ; in the intervals between the musketry and the artillery , their colossal trampling was audible . 
Being two divisions , there were two columns of them ; Wathier 's division held the right , Delort 's division was on the left . 
It seemed as though two immense adders of steel were to be seen crawling towards the crest of the table-land . 
It traversed the battle like a prodigy . 
Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt of the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry ; Murat was lacking here , but Ney was again present . 
It seemed as though that mass had become a monster and had but one soul . 
Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of a polyp . 
They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke which was rent here and there . 
A confusion of helmets , of cries , of sabres , a stormy heaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons and the flourish of trumpets , a terrible and disciplined tumult ; over all , the cuirasses like the scales on the hydra . 
These narrations seemed to belong to another age . 
Something parallel to this vision appeared , no doubt , in the ancient Orphic epics , which told of the centaurs , the old hippanthropes , those Titans with human heads and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop , horrible , invulnerable , sublime -- gods and beasts . 
Odd numerical coincidence , -- twenty-six battalions rode to meet twenty-six battalions . 
Behind the crest of the plateau , in the shadow of the masked battery , the English infantry , formed into thirteen squares , two battalions to the square , in two lines , with seven in the first line , six in the second , the stocks of their guns to their shoulders , taking aim at that which was on the point of appearing , waited , calm , mute , motionless . 
They did not see the cuirassiers , and the cuirassiers did not see them . 
They listened to the rise of this flood of men . 
They heard the swelling noise of three thousand horse , the alternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot , the jingling of the cuirasses , the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage breathing . 
There ensued a most terrible silence ; then , all at once , a long file of uplifted arms , brandishing sabres , appeared above the crest , and casques , trumpets , and standards , and three thousand heads with gray mustaches , shouting , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
All this cavalry debouched on the plateau , and it was like the appearance of an earthquake . 
All at once , a tragic incident ; on the English left , on our right , the head of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor . 
On arriving at the culminating point of the crest , ungovernable , utterly given over to fury and their course of extermination of the squares and cannon , the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench , -- a trench between them and the English . 
It was the hollow road of Ohain . 
