Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position . 
For his lair he had the sewer of the Arche-Marion . 
He was six feet high , his pectoral muscles were of marble , his biceps of brass , his breath was that of a cavern , his torso that of a colossus , his head that of a bird . 
One thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and a cotton velvet waistcoat . 
Gueulemer , built after this sculptural fashion , might have subdued monsters ; he had found it more expeditious to be one . 
A low brow , large temples , less than forty years of age , but with crow 's - feet , harsh , short hair , cheeks like a brush , a beard like that of a wild boar ; the reader can see the man before him . 
His muscles called for work , his stupidity would have none of it . 
He was a great , idle force . 
He was an assassin through coolness . 
He was thought to be a creole . 
He had , probably , somewhat to do with Marshal Brune , having been a porter at Avignon in 1815 . 
After this stage , he had turned ruffian . 
The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer . 
Babet was thin and learned . 
He was transparent but impenetrable . 
Daylight was visible through his bones , but nothing through his eyes . 
He declared that he was a chemist . 
He had been a jack of all trades . 
He had played in vaudeville at Saint-Mihiel . 
He was a man of purpose , a fine talker , who underlined his smiles and accentuated his gestures . 
His occupation consisted in selling , in the open air , plaster busts and portraits of `` the head of the State . '' 
In addition to this , he extracted teeth . 
He had exhibited phenomena at fairs , and he had owned a booth with a trumpet and this poster : `` Babet , Dental Artist , Member of the Academies , makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids , extracts teeth , undertakes stumps abandoned by his brother practitioners . 
Price : one tooth , one franc , fifty centimes ; two teeth , two francs ; three teeth , two francs , fifty . 
Take advantage of this opportunity . '' 
This Take advantage of this opportunity meant : Have as many teeth extracted as possible . 
He had been married and had had children . 
He did not know what had become of his wife and children . 
He had lost them as one loses his handkerchief . 
Babet read the papers , a striking exception in the world to which he belonged . 
One day , at the period when he had his family with him in his booth on wheels , he had read in the Messager , that a woman had just given birth to a child , who was doing well , and had a calf 's muzzle , and he exclaimed : `` There 's a fortune ! 
my wife has not the wit to present me with a child like that ! '' 
Later on he had abandoned everything , in order to `` undertake Paris . '' 
This was his expression . 
Who was Claquesous ? 
He was night . 
He waited until the sky was daubed with black , before he showed himself . 
At nightfall he emerged from the hole whither he returned before daylight . 
Where was this hole ? 
No one knew . 
He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness , and with his back turned to them . 
Was his name Claquesous ? 
Certainly not . 
If a candle was brought , he put on a mask . 
He was a ventriloquist . 
Babet said : `` Claquesous is a nocturne for two voices . '' 
Claquesous was vague , terrible , and a roamer . 
No one was sure whether he had a name , Claquesous being a sobriquet ; none was sure that he had a voice , as his stomach spoke more frequently than his voice ; no one was sure that he had a face , as he was never seen without his mask . 
He disappeared as though he had vanished into thin air ; when he appeared , it was as though he sprang from the earth . 
A lugubrious being was Montparnasse . 
