`` I do n't want your money , '' said she . 
THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET About the middle of the last century , a chief justice in the Parliament of Paris having a mistress and concealing the fact , for at that period the grand seignors displayed their mistresses , and the bourgeois concealed them , had `` a little house '' built in the Faubourg Saint-Germain , in the deserted Rue Blomet , which is now called Rue Plumet , not far from the spot which was then designated as Combat des Animaux . 
This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion ; two rooms on the ground floor , two chambers on the first floor , a kitchen down stairs , a boudoir up stairs , an attic under the roof , the whole preceded by a garden with a large gate opening on the street . 
This garden was about an acre and a half in extent . 
This was all that could be seen by passers-by ; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard , and at the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of two rooms and a cellar , a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and nurse in case of need . 
This building communicated in the rear by a masked door which opened by a secret spring , with a long , narrow , paved winding corridor , open to the sky , hemmed in with two lofty walls , which , hidden with wonderful art , and lost as it were between garden enclosures and cultivated land , all of whose angles and detours it followed , ended in another door , also with a secret lock which opened a quarter of a league away , almost in another quarter , at the solitary extremity of the Rue du Babylone . 
Through this the chief justice entered , so that even those who were spying on him and following him would merely have observed that the justice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere , and would never have suspected that to go to the Rue de Babylone was to go to the Rue Blomet . 
Thanks to clever purchasers of land , the magistrate had been able to make a secret , sewer-like passage on his own property , and consequently , without interference . 
Later on , he had sold in little parcels , for gardens and market gardens , the lots of ground adjoining the corridor , and the proprietors of these lots on both sides thought they had a party wall before their eyes , and did not even suspect the long , paved ribbon winding between two walls amid their flower-beds and their orchards . 
Only the birds beheld this curiosity . 
It is probable that the linnets and tomtits of the last century gossiped a great deal about the chief justice . 
The pavilion , built of stone in the taste of Mansard , wainscoted and furnished in the Watteau style , rocaille on the inside , old-fashioned on the outside , walled in with a triple hedge of flowers , had something discreet , coquettish , and solemn about it , as befits a caprice of love and magistracy . 
This house and corridor , which have now disappeared , were in existence fifteen years ago . 
In '93 a coppersmith had purchased the house with the idea of demolishing it , but had not been able to pay the price ; the nation made him bankrupt . 
So that it was the house which demolished the coppersmith . 
After that , the house remained uninhabited , and fell slowly to ruin , as does every dwelling to which the presence of man does not communicate life . 
It had remained fitted with its old furniture , was always for sale or to let , and the ten or a dozen people who passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow and illegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since 1819 . 
Towards the end of the Restoration , these same passers-by might have noticed that the bill had disappeared , and even that the shutters on the first floor were open . 
The house was occupied , in fact . 
The windows had short curtains , a sign that there was a woman about . 
In the month of October , 1829 , a man of a certain age had presented himself and had hired the house just as it stood , including , of course , the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone . 
He had had the secret openings of the two doors to this passage repaired . 
The house , as we have just mentioned , was still very nearly furnished with the justice 's old fitting ; the new tenant had ordered some repairs , had added what was lacking here and there , had replaced the paving-stones in the yard , bricks in the floors , steps in the stairs , missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows , and had finally installed himself there with a young girl and an elderly maid-servant , without commotion , rather like a person who is slipping in than like a man who is entering his own house . 
The neighbors did not gossip about him , for the reason that there were no neighbors . 
This unobtrusive tenant was Jean Valjean , the young girl was Cosette . 
The servant was a woman named Toussaint , whom Jean Valjean had saved from the hospital and from wretchedness , and who was elderly , a stammerer , and from the provinces , three qualities which had decided Jean Valjean to take her with him . 
He had hired the house under the name of M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman . 
In all that has been related heretofore , the reader has , doubtless , been no less prompt than Thenardier to recognize Jean Valjean . 
Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus ? 
What had happened ? 
Nothing had happened . 
It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent , so happy that his conscience finally took the alarm . 
He saw Cosette every day , he felt paternity spring up and develop within him more and more , he brooded over the soul of that child , he said to himself that she was his , that nothing could take her from him , that this would last indefinitely , that she would certainly become a nun , being thereto gently incited every day , that thus the convent was henceforth the universe for her as it was for him , that he should grow old there , and that she would grow up there , that she would grow old there , and that he should die there ; that , in short , delightful hope , no separation was possible . 
On reflecting upon this , he fell into perplexity . 
He interrogated himself . 
He asked himself if all that happiness were really his , if it were not composed of the happiness of another , of the happiness of that child which he , an old man , was confiscating and stealing ; if that were not theft ? 
He said to himself , that this child had a right to know life before renouncing it , that to deprive her in advance , and in some sort without consulting her , of all joys , under the pretext of saving her from all trials , to take advantage of her ignorance of her isolation , in order to make an artificial vocation germinate in her , was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lie to God . 
And who knows if , when she came to be aware of all this some day , and found herself a nun to her sorrow , Cosette would not come to hate him ? 
A last , almost selfish thought , and less heroic than the rest , but which was intolerable to him . 
He resolved to quit the convent . 
He resolved on this ; he recognized with anguish , the fact that it was necessary . 
As for objections , there were none . 
Five years ' sojourn between these four walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyed or dispersed the elements of fear . 
He could return tranquilly among men . 
He had grown old , and all had undergone a change . 
Who would recognize him now ? 
And then , to face the worst , there was danger only for himself , and he had no right to condemn Cosette to the cloister for the reason that he had been condemned to the galleys . 
Besides , what is danger in comparison with the right ? 
Finally , nothing prevented his being prudent and taking his precautions . 
As for Cosette 's education , it was almost finished and complete . 
