January 21 . 
The beggars . 
The vagabonds . 
Forward march . 
Robespierre . 
Level . 
Ca Ira . 
The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action . 
These were impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead . 
Other associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mother societies . 
The members of sections complained that they were torn asunder . 
Thus , the Gallic Society , and the committee of organization of the Municipalities . 
Thus the associations for the liberty of the press , for individual liberty , for the instruction of the people against indirect taxes . 
Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was divided into three fractions , the levellers , the communists , the reformers . 
Then the Army of the Bastilles , a sort of cohort organized on a military footing , four men commanded by a corporal , ten by a sergeant , twenty by a sub-lieutenant , forty by a lieutenant ; there were never more than five men who knew each other . 
Creation where precaution is combined with audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius of Venice . 
The central committee , which was at the head , had two arms , the Society of Action , and the Army of the Bastilles . 
A legitimist association , the Chevaliers of Fidelity , stirred about among these the republican affiliations . 
It was denounced and repudiated there . 
The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities , Lyons , Nantes , Lille , Marseilles , and each had its Society of the Rights of Man , the Charbonniere , and The Free Men . 
All had a revolutionary society which was called the Cougourde . 
We have already mentioned this word . 
In Paris , the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , and the schools were no less moved than the faubourgs . 
A cafe in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the Seven Billiards , Rue des Mathurins-Saint-Jacques , served as rallying points for the students . 
The Society of the Friends of the A B C affiliated to the Mutualists of Angers , and to the Cougourde of Aix , met , as we have seen , in the Cafe Musain . 
These same young men assembled also , as we have stated already , in a restaurant wine-shop of the Rue Mondetour which was called Corinthe . 
These meetings were secret . 
Others were as public as possible , and the reader can judge of their boldness from these fragments of an interrogatory undergone in one of the ulterior prosecutions : `` Where was this meeting held ? '' 
`` In the Rue de la Paix . '' 
`` At whose house ? '' 
`` In the street . '' 
`` What sections were there ? '' 
`` Only one . '' 
`` Which ? '' 
`` The Manuel section . '' 
`` Who was its leader ? '' 
`` I. '' `` You are too young to have decided alone upon the bold course of attacking the government . 
Where did your instructions come from ? '' 
`` From the central committee . '' 
The army was mined at the same time as the population , as was proved subsequently by the operations of Beford , Luneville , and Epinard . 
They counted on the fifty-second regiment , on the fifth , on the eighth , on the thirty-seventh , and on the twentieth light cavalry . 
In Burgundy and in the southern towns they planted the liberty tree ; that is to say , a pole surmounted by a red cap . 
Such was the situation . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , more than any other group of the population , as we stated in the beginning , accentuated this situation and made it felt . 
That was the sore point . 
This old faubourg , peopled like an ant-hill , laborious , courageous , and angry as a hive of bees , was quivering with expectation and with the desire for a tumult . 
Everything was in a state of agitation there , without any interruption , however , of the regular work . 
It is impossible to convey an idea of this lively yet sombre physiognomy . 
In this faubourg exists poignant distress hidden under attic roofs ; there also exist rare and ardent minds . 
It is particularly in the matter of distress and intelligence that it is dangerous to have extremes meet . 
