With too much haste perhaps . 
Were they all dead ? 
Legend says they were not . 
It seems that on the night succeeding the interment , feeble voices were heard calling from the well . 
This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard . 
Three walls , part stone , part brick , and simulating a small , square tower , and folded like the leaves of a screen , surround it on all sides . 
The fourth side is open . 
It is there that the water was drawn . 
The wall at the bottom has a sort of shapeless loophole , possibly the hole made by a shell . 
This little tower had a platform , of which only the beams remain . 
The iron supports of the well on the right form a cross . 
On leaning over , the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a heaped-up mass of shadows . 
The base of the walls all about the well is concealed in a growth of nettles . 
This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms the table for all wells in Belgium . 
The slab has here been replaced by a cross-beam , against which lean five or six shapeless fragments of knotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones . 
There is no longer either pail , chain , or pulley ; but there is still the stone basin which served the overflow . 
The rain-water collects there , and from time to time a bird of the neighboring forests comes thither to drink , and then flies away . 
One house in this ruin , the farmhouse , is still inhabited . 
The door of this house opens on the courtyard . 
Upon this door , beside a pretty Gothic lock-plate , there is an iron handle with trefoils placed slanting . 
At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant , Wilda , grasped this handle in order to take refuge in the farm , a French sapper hewed off his hand with an axe . 
The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume van Kylsom , the old gardener , dead long since . 
A woman with gray hair said to us : `` I was there . 
I was three years old . 
My sister , who was older , was terrified and wept . 
They carried us off to the woods . 
I went there in my mother 's arms . 
We glued our ears to the earth to hear . 
I imitated the cannon , and went boum ! 
boum ! '' 
A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard , so we were told . 
The orchard is terrible . 
It is in three parts ; one might almost say , in three acts . 
The first part is a garden , the second is an orchard , the third is a wood . 
These three parts have a common enclosure : on the side of the entrance , the buildings of the chateau and the farm ; on the left , a hedge ; on the right , a wall ; and at the end , a wall . 
The wall on the right is of brick , the wall at the bottom is of stone . 
One enters the garden first . 
It slopes downwards , is planted with gooseberry bushes , choked with a wild growth of vegetation , and terminated by a monumental terrace of cut stone , with balustrade with a double curve . 
It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded Le Notre ; to-day it is ruins and briars . 
The pilasters are surmounted by globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone . 
Forty-three balusters can still be counted on their sockets ; the rest lie prostrate in the grass . 
Almost all bear scratches of bullets . 
One broken baluster is placed on the pediment like a fractured leg . 
It was in this garden , further down than the orchard , that six light-infantry men of the 1st , having made their way thither , and being unable to escape , hunted down and caught like bears in their dens , accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies , one of which was armed with carbines . 
The Hanoverians lined this balustrade and fired from above . 
The infantry men , replying from below , six against two hundred , intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes , took a quarter of an hour to die . 
One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard , properly speaking . 
There , within the limits of those few square fathoms , fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour . 
The wall seems ready to renew the combat . 
Thirty-eight loopholes , pierced by the English at irregular heights , are there still . 
