This strange battle was like a duel between two raging , wounded men , each of whom , still fighting and still resisting , is expending all his blood . 
Which of the two will be the first to fall ? 
The conflict on the plateau continued . 
What had become of the cuirassiers ? 
No one could have told . 
One thing is certain , that on the day after the battle , a cuirassier and his horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean , at the very point where the four roads from Nivelles , Genappe , La Hulpe , and Brussels meet and intersect each other . 
This horseman had pierced the English lines . 
One of the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean . 
His name is Dehaze . 
He was eighteen years old at that time . 
Wellington felt that he was yielding . 
The crisis was at hand . 
The cuirassiers had not succeeded , since the centre was not broken through . 
As every one was in possession of the plateau , no one held it , and in fact it remained , to a great extent , with the English . 
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain ; Ney had only the crest and the slope . 
They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides . 
But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable . 
The bleeding of that army was horrible . 
Kempt , on the left wing , demanded reinforcements . 
`` There are none , '' replied Wellington ; `` he must let himself be killed ! '' 
Almost at that same moment , a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies , Ney demanded infantry from Napoleon , and Napoleon exclaimed , `` Infantry ! 
Where does he expect me to get it ? 
Does he think I can make it ? '' 
Nevertheless , the English army was in the worse case of the two . 
The furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and breasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing . 
A few men clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment ; such and such a battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant ; Alten 's division , already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte , was almost destroyed ; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze 's brigade strewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road ; hardly anything was left of those Dutch grenadiers , who , intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811 , fought against Wellington ; and who , in 1815 , rallied to the English standard , fought against Napoleon . 
The loss in officers was considerable . 
Lord Uxbridge , who had his leg buried on the following day , had his knee shattered . 
If , on the French side , in that tussle of the cuirassiers , Delort , l'Heritier , Colbert , Dnop , Travers , and Blancard were disabled , on the side of the English there was Alten wounded , Barne wounded , Delancey killed , Van Meeren killed , Ompteda killed , the whole of Wellington 's staff decimated , and England had the worse of it in that bloody scale . 
The second regiment of foot-guards had lost five lieutenant-colonels , four captains , and three ensigns ; the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200 soldiers ; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded , 18 officers killed , 450 soldiers killed . 
The Hanoverian hussars of Cumberland , a whole regiment , with Colonel Hacke at its head , who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered , had turned bridle in the presence of the fray , and had fled to the forest of Soignes , sowing defeat all the way to Brussels . 
The transports , ammunition-wagons , the baggage-wagons , the wagons filled with wounded , on perceiving that the French were gaining ground and approaching the forest , rushed headlong thither . 
The Dutch , mowed down by the French cavalry , cried , `` Alarm ! '' 
From Vert-Coucou to Groentendael , for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels , according to the testimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive , the roads were encumbered with fugitives . 
This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin , and Louis XVIII . 
at Ghent . 
With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean , and of Vivian 's and Vandeleur 's brigades , which flanked the left wing , Wellington had no cavalry left . 
A number of batteries lay unhorsed . 
These facts are attested by Siborne ; and Pringle , exaggerating the disaster , goes so far as to say that the Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men . 
The Iron Duke remained calm , but his lips blanched . 
Vincent , the Austrian commissioner , Alava , the Spanish commissioner , who were present at the battle in the English staff , thought the Duke lost . 
At five o'clock Wellington drew out his watch , and he was heard to murmur these sinister words , `` Blucher , or night ! '' 
It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed on the heights in the direction of Frischemont . 
Here comes the change of face in this giant drama . 
A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON ; A GOOD GUIDE TO BULOW The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known . 
Grouchy hoped for , Blucher arriving . 
Death instead of life . 
Fate has these turns ; the throne of the world was expected ; it was Saint Helena that was seen . 
If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow , Blucher 's lieutenant , had advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont , instead of below Plancenoit , the form of the nineteenth century might , perhaps , have been different . 
Napoleon would have won the battle of Waterloo . 
