In 1832 , in a number of streets , in the Rue de l'Etoile , the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue du Temple , the Rue Vielle-duTemple , the Rue Notre-Dame de Nazareth , the Rue Folie-Mericourt , the Quai aux Fleurs , the Rue du Petit-Muse , the Rue du Normandie , the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches , the Rue des Marais , the Faubourg Saint-Martin , the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires , the Faubourg Montmartre , the Rue Grange-Bateliere , in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Jacob , the Rue de Tournon , the ancient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw . 
It consisted of enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts , with monumental effrontery . 
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 1663 ; five thousand three hundred fathoms . 
After Bruneseau , on the 1st of January , 1832 , it had forty thousand three hundred metres . 
Between 1806 and 1831 , there had been built , on an average , seven hundred and fifty metres annually , afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were constructed every year , in masonry , of small stones , with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water , on a cement foundation . 
At two hundred francs the metre , the sixty leagues of Paris ' sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions . 
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the beginning , grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense question : the sewers of Paris . 
Paris is the centre of two sheets , a sheet of water and a sheet of air . 
The sheet of water , lying at a tolerably great depth underground , but already sounded by two bores , is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone ; this layer may be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference ; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze there ; one drinks the Seine , the Marne , the Yonne , the Oise , the Aisne , the Cher , the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle . 
The sheet of water is healthy , it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the earth ; the sheet of air is unhealthy , it comes from the sewer . 
All the miasms of the cess-pool are mingled with the breath of the city ; hence this bad breath . 
The air taken from above a dung-heap , as has been scientifically proved , is purer than the air taken from above Paris . 
In a given time , with the aid of progress , mechanisms become perfected , and as light increases , the sheet of water will be employed to purify the sheet of air ; that is to say , to wash the sewer . 
The reader knows , that by `` washing the sewer '' we mean : the restitution of the filth to the earth ; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields . 
Through this simple act , the entire social community will experience a diminution of misery and an augmentation of health . 
At the present hour , the radiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leagues around the Louvre , taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel . 
We might say that , for ten centuries , the cess-pool has been the disease of Paris . 
The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood . 
The popular instinct has never been deceived in it . 
The occupation of sewermen was formerly almost as perilous , and almost as repugnant to the people , as the occupation of knacker , which was so long held in horror and handed over to the executioner . 
High wages were necessary to induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine ; the ladder of the cess-pool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it ; it was said , in proverbial form : `` to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave ; '' and all sorts of hideous legends , as we have said , covered this colossal sink with terror ; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the revolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man , and where are to be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat . 
THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself . 
Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea . 
As in the ocean , the diver may disappear there . 
The transition was an unheard-of one . 
In the very heart of the city , Jean Valjean had escaped from the city , and , in the twinkling of an eye , in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it , he had passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity , from midday to midnight , from tumult to silence , from the whirlwind of thunders to the stagnation of the tomb , and , by a vicissitude far more tremendous even than that of the Rue Polonceau , from the most extreme peril to the most absolute obscurity . 
An abrupt fall into a cavern ; a disappearance into the secret trap-door of Paris ; to quit that street where death was on every side , for that sort of sepulchre where there was life , was a strange instant . 
He remained for several seconds as though bewildered ; listening , stupefied . 
The waste-trap of safety had suddenly yawned beneath him . 
Celestial goodness had , in a manner , captured him by treachery . 
Adorable ambuscades of providence ! 
Only , the wounded man did not stir , and Jean Valjean did not know whether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or a dead corpse . 
His first sensation was one of blindness . 
All of a sudden , he could see nothing . 
It seemed to him too , that , in one instant , he had become deaf . 
He no longer heard anything . 
The frantic storm of murder which had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him , thanks to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it , as we have said , otherwise than faintly and indistinctly , and like a rumbling , in the depths . 
He felt that the ground was solid under his feet ; that was all ; but that was enough . 
He extended one arm and then the other , touched the walls on both sides , and perceived that the passage was narrow ; he slipped , and thus perceived that the pavement was wet . 
He cautiously put forward one foot , fearing a hole , a sink , some gulf ; he discovered that the paving continued . 
A gust of fetidness informed him of the place in which he stood . 
After the lapse of a few minutes , he was no longer blind . 
A little light fell through the man-hole through which he had descended , and his eyes became accustomed to this cavern . 
He began to distinguish something . 
The passage in which he had burrowed -- no other word can better express the situation -- was walled in behind him . 
It was one of those blind alleys , which the special jargon terms branches . 
In front of him there was another wall , a wall like night . 
The light of the air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean stood , and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls of the sewer . 
Beyond , the opaqueness was massive ; to penetrate thither seemed horrible , an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment . 
A man could , however , plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so to do . 
