To struggle therein is hideous ; at the same time that one is going through the death agony , one is floundering about . 
There are shadows enough for hell , and mire enough to render it nothing but a slough , and the dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a spectre or a frog . 
Everywhere else the sepulchre is sinister ; here it is deformed . 
The depth of the fontis varied , as well as their length and their density , according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil . 
Sometimes a fontis was three or four feet deep , sometimes eight or ten ; sometimes the bottom was unfathomable . 
Here the mire was almost solid , there almost liquid . 
In the Luniere fontis , it would have taken a man a day to disappear , while he would have been devoured in five minutes by the Philippeaux slough . 
The mire bears up more or less , according to its density . 
A child can escape where a man will perish . 
The first law of safety is to get rid of every sort of load . 
Every sewerman who felt the ground giving way beneath him began by flinging away his sack of tools , or his back-basket , or his hod . 
The fontis were due to different causes : the friability of the soil ; some landslip at a depth beyond the reach of man ; the violent summer rains ; the incessant flooding of winter ; long , drizzling showers . 
Sometimes the weight of the surrounding houses on a marly or sandy soil forced out the vaults of the subterranean galleries and caused them to bend aside , or it chanced that a flooring vault burst and split under this crushing thrust . 
In this manner , the heaping up of the Parthenon , obliterated , a century ago , a portion of the vaults of Saint-Genevieve hill . 
When a sewer was broken in under the pressure of the houses , the mischief was sometimes betrayed in the street above by a sort of space , like the teeth of a saw , between the paving-stones ; this crevice was developed in an undulating line throughout the entire length of the cracked vault , and then , the evil being visible , the remedy could be promptly applied . 
It also frequently happened , that the interior ravages were not revealed by any external scar , and in that case , woe to the sewermen . 
When they entered without precaution into the sewer , they were liable to be lost . 
Ancient registers make mention of several scavengers who were buried in fontis in this manner . 
They give many names ; among others , that of the sewerman who was swallowed up in a quagmire under the man-hole of the Rue Careme-Prenant , a certain Blaise Poutrain ; this Blaise Poutrain was the brother of Nicholas Poutrain , who was the last grave-digger of the cemetery called the Charnier des Innocents , in 1785 , the epoch when that cemetery expired . 
There was also that young and charming Vicomte d'Escoubleau , of whom we have just spoken , one of the heroes of the siege of Lerida , where they delivered the assault in silk stockings , with violins at their head . 
D'Escoubleau , surprised one night at his cousin 's , the Duchess de Sourdis ' , was drowned in a quagmire of the Beautreillis sewer , in which he had taken refuge in order to escape from the Duke . 
Madame de Sourdis , when informed of his death , demanded her smelling-bottle , and forgot to weep , through sniffling at her salts . 
In such cases , there is no love which holds fast ; the sewer extinguishes it . 
Hero refuses to wash the body of Leander . 
Thisbe stops her nose in the presence of Pyramus and says : `` Phew ! '' 
THE FONTIS Jean Valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis . 
This sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of the Champs-Elysees , difficult to handle in the hydraulic works and a bad preservative of the subterranean constructions , on account of its excessive fluidity . 
This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of the sands of the Quartier Saint-Georges , which could only be conquered by a stone construction on a concrete foundation , and the clayey strata , infected with gas , of the Quartier des Martyrs , which are so liquid that the only way in which a passage was effected under the gallery des Martyrs was by means of a cast-iron pipe . 
When , in 1836 , the old stone sewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honore , in which we now see Jean Valjean , was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it , the quicksand , which forms the subsoil of the Champs-Elysees as far as the Seine , presented such an obstacle , that the operation lasted nearly six months , to the great clamor of the dwellers on the riverside , particularly those who had hotels and carriages . 
The work was more than unhealthy ; it was dangerous . 
It is true that they had four months and a half of rain , and three floods of the Seine . 
The fontis which Jean Valjean had encountered was caused by the downpour of the preceding day . 
The pavement , badly sustained by the subjacent sand , had given way and had produced a stoppage of the water . 
Infiltration had taken place , a slip had followed . 
The dislocated bottom had sunk into the ooze . 
To what extent ? 
Impossible to say . 
The obscurity was more dense there than elsewhere . 
It was a pit of mire in a cavern of night . 
Jean Valjean felt the pavement vanishing beneath his feet . 
He entered this slime . 
There was water on the surface , slime at the bottom . 
He must pass it . 
To retrace his steps was impossible . 
Marius was dying , and Jean Valjean exhausted . 
Besides , where was he to go ? 
Jean Valjean advanced . 
Moreover , the pit seemed , for the first few steps , not to be very deep . 
But in proportion as he advanced , his feet plunged deeper . 
Soon he had the slime up to his calves and water above his knees . 
