He owned the house . 
This house has since been demolished and rebuilt , and the number has probably been changed in those revolutions of numeration which the streets of Paris undergo . 
He occupied an ancient and vast apartment on the first floor , between street and gardens , furnished to the very ceilings with great Gobelins and Beauvais tapestries representing pastoral scenes ; the subjects of the ceilings and the panels were repeated in miniature on the arm-chairs . 
He enveloped his bed in a vast , nine-leaved screen of Coromandel lacquer . 
Long , full curtains hung from the windows , and formed great , broken folds that were very magnificent . 
The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached to that one of them which formed the angle , by means of a staircase twelve or fifteen steps long , which the old gentleman ascended and descended with great agility . 
In addition to a library adjoining his chamber , he had a boudoir of which he thought a great deal , a gallant and elegant retreat , with magnificent hangings of straw , with a pattern of flowers and fleurs-de-lys made on the galleys of Louis XIV . 
and ordered of his convicts by M. de Vivonne for his mistress . 
M. Gillenormand had inherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt , who had died a centenarian . 
He had had two wives . 
His manners were something between those of the courtier , which he had never been , and the lawyer , which he might have been . 
He was gay , and caressing when he had a mind . 
In his youth he had been one of those men who are always deceived by their wives and never by their mistresses , because they are , at the same time , the most sullen of husbands and the most charming of lovers in existence . 
He was a connoisseur of painting . 
He had in his chamber a marvellous portrait of no one knows whom , painted by Jordaens , executed with great dashes of the brush , with millions of details , in a confused and hap-hazard manner . 
M. Gillenormand 's attire was not the habit of Louis XIV . 
nor yet that of Louis XVI. ; it was that of the Incroyables of the Directory . 
He had thought himself young up to that period and had followed the fashions . 
His coat was of light-weight cloth with voluminous revers , a long swallow-tail and large steel buttons . 
With this he wore knee-breeches and buckle shoes . 
He always thrust his hands into his fobs . 
He said authoritatively : `` The French Revolution is a heap of blackguards . '' 
LUC-ESPRIT At the age of sixteen , one evening at the opera , he had had the honor to be stared at through opera-glasses by two beauties at the same time -- ripe and celebrated beauties then , and sung by Voltaire , the Camargo and the Salle . 
Caught between two fires , he had beaten a heroic retreat towards a little dancer , a young girl named Nahenry , who was sixteen like himself , obscure as a cat , and with whom he was in love . 
He abounded in memories . 
He was accustomed to exclaim : `` How pretty she was -- that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette , the last time I saw her at Longchamps , her hair curled in sustained sentiments , with her come-and-see of turquoises , her gown of the color of persons newly arrived , and her little agitation muff ! '' 
He had worn in his young manhood a waistcoat of Nain-Londrin , which he was fond of talking about effusively . 
`` I was dressed like a Turk of the Levant Levantin , '' said he . 
Madame de Boufflers , having seen him by chance when he was twenty , had described him as `` a charming fool . '' 
He was horrified by all the names which he saw in politics and in power , regarding them as vulgar and bourgeois . 
He read the journals , the newspapers , the gazettes as he said , stifling outbursts of laughter the while . 
`` Oh ! '' 
he said , `` what people these are ! 
Corbiere ! 
Humann ! 
Casimir Perier ! 
There 's a minister for you ! 
I can imagine this in a journal : ` M. Gillenorman , minister ! ' 
that would be a farce . 
Well ! 
They are so stupid that it would pass '' ; he merrily called everything by its name , whether decent or indecent , and did not restrain himself in the least before ladies . 
He uttered coarse speeches , obscenities , and filth with a certain tranquillity and lack of astonishment which was elegant . 
It was in keeping with the unceremoniousness of his century . 
It is to be noted that the age of periphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose . 
His god-father had predicted that he would turn out a man of genius , and had bestowed on him these two significant names : Luc-Esprit . 
A CENTENARIAN ASPIRANT He had taken prizes in his boyhood at the College of Moulins , where he was born , and he had been crowned by the hand of the Duc de Nivernais , whom he called the Duc de Nevers . 
Neither the Convention , nor the death of Louis XVI. , nor the Napoleon , nor the return of the Bourbons , nor anything else had been able to efface the memory of this crowning . 
The Duc de Nevers was , in his eyes , the great figure of the century . 
`` What a charming grand seigneur , '' he said , `` and what a fine air he had with his blue ribbon ! '' 
In the eyes of M. Gillenormand , Catherine the Second had made reparation for the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing , for three thousand roubles , the secret of the elixir of gold , from Bestucheff . 
