The child , whose thoughts were still on the Thenardier , shared his instinct for withdrawing from sight as much as possible . 
Cosette trembled and pressed close to him . 
They heard the tumultuous noise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets ; the blows of their gun-stocks against the stones ; Javert 's appeals to the police spies whom he had posted , and his imprecations mingled with words which could not be distinguished . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though that species of stormy roar were becoming more distant . 
Jean Valjean held his breath . 
He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette 's mouth . 
However , the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm , that this frightful uproar , close and furious as it was , did not disturb him by so much as the shadow of a misgiving . 
It seemed as though those walls had been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak . 
All at once , in the midst of this profound calm , a fresh sound arose ; a sound as celestial , divine , ineffable , ravishing , as the other had been horrible . 
It was a hymn which issued from the gloom , a dazzling burst of prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night ; women 's voices , but voices composed at one and the same time of the pure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children , -- voices which are not of the earth , and which resemble those that the newborn infant still hears , and which the dying man hears already . 
This song proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden . 
At the moment when the hubbub of demons retreated , one would have said that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom . 
Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees . 
They knew not what it was , they knew not where they were ; but both of them , the man and the child , the penitent and the innocent , felt that they must kneel . 
These voices had this strange characteristic , that they did not prevent the building from seeming to be deserted . 
It was a supernatural chant in an uninhabited house . 
While these voices were singing , Jean Valjean thought of nothing . 
He no longer beheld the night ; he beheld a blue sky . 
It seemed to him that he felt those wings which we all have within us , unfolding . 
The song died away . 
It may have lasted a long time . 
Jean Valjean could not have told . 
Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment . 
All fell silent again . 
There was no longer anything in the street ; there was nothing in the garden . 
That which had menaced , that which had reassured him , -- all had vanished . 
The breeze swayed a few dry weeds on the crest of the wall , and they gave out a faint , sweet , melancholy sound . 
CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA The night wind had risen , which indicated that it must be between one and two o'clock in the morning . 
Poor Cosette said nothing . 
As she had seated herself beside him and leaned her head against him , Jean Valjean had fancied that she was asleep . 
He bent down and looked at her . 
Cosette 's eyes were wide open , and her thoughtful air pained Jean Valjean . 
She was still trembling . 
`` Are you sleepy ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` I am very cold , '' she replied . 
A moment later she resumed : -- `` Is she still there ? '' 
`` Who ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Madame Thenardier . '' 
Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed to make Cosette keep silent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he , `` she is gone . 
You need fear nothing further . '' 
The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast . 
The ground was damp , the shed open on all sides , the breeze grew more keen every instant . 
The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it round Cosette . 
`` Are you less cold now ? '' 
said he . 
`` Oh , yes , father . '' 
