One has no need of the light for that . 
So be it . 
I shall die by starlight . '' 
The old man turned to the shepherd lad : -- `` Go to thy bed ; thou wert awake all last night ; thou art tired . '' 
The child entered the hut . 
The old man followed him with his eyes , and added , as though speaking to himself : -- `` I shall die while he sleeps . 
The two slumbers may be good neighbors . '' 
The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been . 
He did not think he discerned God in this manner of dying ; let us say the whole , for these petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated like the rest : he , who on occasion , was so fond of laughing at `` His Grace , '' was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur , and he was almost tempted to retort `` citizen . '' 
He was assailed by a fancy for peevish familiarity , common enough to doctors and priests , but which was not habitual with him . 
This man , after all , this member of the Convention , this representative of the people , had been one of the powerful ones of the earth ; for the first time in his life , probably , the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe . 
Meanwhile , the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a modest cordiality , in which one could have distinguished , possibly , that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning to dust . 
The Bishop , on his side , although he generally restrained his curiosity , which , in his opinion , bordered on a fault , could not refrain from examining the member of the Convention with an attention which , as it did not have its course in sympathy , would have served his conscience as a matter of reproach , in connection with any other man . 
A member of the Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of being outside the pale of the law , even of the law of charity . 
G -- , calm , his body almost upright , his voice vibrating , was one of those octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist . 
The Revolution had many of these men , proportioned to the epoch . 
In this old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof . 
Though so near to his end , he preserved all the gestures of health . 
In his clear glance , in his firm tone , in the robust movement of his shoulders , there was something calculated to disconcert death . 
Azrael , the Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre , would have turned back , and thought that he had mistaken the door . 
G -- seemed to be dying because he willed it so . 
There was freedom in his agony . 
His legs alone were motionless . 
It was there that the shadows held him fast . 
His feet were cold and dead , but his head survived with all the power of life , and seemed full of light . 
G -- , at this solemn moment , resembled the king in that tale of the Orient who was flesh above and marble below . 
There was a stone there . 
The Bishop sat down . 
The exordium was abrupt . 
`` I congratulate you , '' said he , in the tone which one uses for a reprimand . 
`` You did not vote for the death of the king , after all . '' 
The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bitter meaning underlying the words `` after all . '' 
He replied . 
The smile had quite disappeared from his face . 
`` Do not congratulate me too much , sir . 
I did vote for the death of the tyrant . '' 
It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity . 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
resumed the Bishop . 
`` I mean to say that man has a tyrant , -- ignorance . 
I voted for the death of that tyrant . 
That tyrant engendered royalty , which is authority falsely understood , while science is authority rightly understood . 
Man should be governed only by science . '' 
`` And conscience , '' added the Bishop . 
`` It is the same thing . 
Conscience is the quantity of innate science which we have within us . '' 
Monseigneur Bienvenu listened in some astonishment to this language , which was very new to him . 
The member of the Convention resumed : -- `` So far as Louis XVI . 
was concerned , I said ` no . ' 
I did not think that I had the right to kill a man ; but I felt it my duty to exterminate evil . 
