She is the first awake , the last asleep . 
She marches forwards . 
She is a seeker . 
This arises from the fact that she is an artist . 
The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic , the same as the beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true . 
Artistic peoples are also consistent peoples . 
To love beauty is to see the light . 
That is why the torch of Europe , that is to say of civilization , was first borne by Greece , who passed it on to Italy , who handed it on to France . 
Divine , illuminating nations of scouts ! 
Vitaelampada tradunt . 
It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element of its progress . 
The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of imagination . 
Only , a civilizing people should remain a manly people . 
Corinth , yes ; Sybaris , no . 
Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a bastard . 
He must be neither a dilettante nor a virtuoso : but he must be artistic . 
In the matter of civilization , he must not refine , but he must sublime . 
On this condition , one gives to the human race the pattern of the ideal . 
The modern ideal has its type in art , and its means is science . 
It is through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets , the socially beautiful . 
Eden will be reconstructed by A+B . 
At the point which civilization has now reached , the exact is a necessary element of the splendid , and the artistic sentiment is not only served , but completed by the scientific organ ; dreams must be calculated . 
Art , which is the conqueror , should have for support science , which is the walker ; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance . 
The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India as its vehicle ; Alexander on the elephant . 
Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to guide civilization . 
Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes away the muscles which walk and the will which advances . 
Hieratic or mercantile absorption lessens a people 's power of radiance , lowers its horizon by lowering its level , and deprives it of that intelligence , at once both human and divine of the universal goal , which makes missionaries of nations . 
Babylon has no ideal ; Carthage has no ideal . 
Athens and Rome have and keep , throughout all the nocturnal darkness of the centuries , halos of civilization . 
France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy . 
She is Athenian in the matter of beauty , and Roman in her greatness . 
Moreover , she is good . 
She gives herself . 
Oftener than is the case with other races , is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice . 
Only , this humor seizes upon her , and again abandons her . 
And therein lies the great peril for those who run when she desires only to walk , or who walk on when she desires to halt . 
France has her relapses into materialism , and , at certain instants , the ideas which obstruct that sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness and are of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina . 
What is to be done in such a case ? 
The giantess plays at being a dwarf ; immense France has her freaks of pettiness . 
That is all . 
To this there is nothing to say . 
Peoples , like planets , possess the right to an eclipse . 
And all is well , provided that the light returns and that the eclipse does not degenerate into night . 
Dawn and resurrection are synonymous . 
The reappearance of the light is identical with the persistence of the I. Let us state these facts calmly . 
Death on the barricade or the tomb in exile , is an acceptable occasion for devotion . 
The real name of devotion is disinterestedness . 
Let the abandoned allow themselves to be abandoned , let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled , and let us confine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far , when they do retreat . 
One must not push too far in descent under pretext of a return to reason . 
Matter exists , the minute exists , interest exists , the stomach exists ; but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom . 
