Thus , against the wind , it has its cordage and its canvas ; against the water , wood ; against the rocks , its iron , brass , and lead ; against the shadows , its light ; against immensity , a needle . 
If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which , taken as a whole , constitute the ship of the line , one has only to enter one of the six-story covered construction stocks , in the ports of Brest or Toulon . 
The vessels in process of construction are under a bell-glass there , as it were . 
This colossal beam is a yard ; that great column of wood which stretches out on the earth as far as the eye can reach is the main-mast . 
Taking it from its root in the stocks to its tip in the clouds , it is sixty fathoms long , and its diameter at its base is three feet . 
The English main-mast rises to a height of two hundred and seventeen feet above the water-line . 
The navy of our fathers employed cables , ours employs chains . 
The simple pile of chains on a ship of a hundred guns is four feet high , twenty feet in breadth , and eight feet in depth . 
And how much wood is required to make this ship ? 
Three thousand cubic metres . 
It is a floating forest . 
And moreover , let this be borne in mind , it is only a question here of the military vessel of forty years ago , of the simple sailing-vessel ; steam , then in its infancy , has since added new miracles to that prodigy which is called a war vessel . 
At the present time , for example , the mixed vessel with a screw is a surprising machine , propelled by three thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand five hundred horse-power . 
Not to mention these new marvels , the ancient vessel of Christopher Columbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man . 
It is as inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales ; it stores up the wind in its sails , it is precise in the immense vagueness of the billows , it floats , and it reigns . 
There comes an hour , nevertheless , when the gale breaks that sixty-foot yard like a straw , when the wind bends that mast four hundred feet tall , when that anchor , which weighs tens of thousands , is twisted in the jaws of the waves like a fisherman 's hook in the jaws of a pike , when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars , which the hurricane bears forth into the void and into night , when all that power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty which are superior . 
Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immense feebleness it affords men food for thought , Hence in the ports curious people abound around these marvellous machines of war and of navigation , without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why . 
Every day , accordingly , from morning until night , the quays , sluices , and the jetties of the port of Toulon were covered with a multitude of idlers and loungers , as they say in Paris , whose business consisted in staring at the Orion . 
The Orion was a ship that had been ailing for a long time ; in the course of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collected on its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed ; it had gone into the dry dock the year before this , in order to have the barnacles scraped off , then it had put to sea again ; but this cleaning had affected the bolts of the keel : in the neighborhood of the Balearic Isles the sides had been strained and had opened ; and , as the plating in those days was not of sheet iron , the vessel had sprung a leak . 
A violent equinoctial gale had come up , which had first staved in a grating and a porthole on the larboard side , and damaged the foretop-gallant-shrouds ; in consequence of these injuries , the Orion had run back to Toulon . 
It anchored near the Arsenal ; it was fully equipped , and repairs were begun . 
The hull had received no damage on the starboard , but some of the planks had been unnailed here and there , according to custom , to permit of air entering the hold . 
One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident . 
The crew was busy bending the sails ; the topman , who had to take the upper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard , lost his balance ; he was seen to waver ; the multitude thronging the Arsenal quay uttered a cry ; the man 's head overbalanced his body ; the man fell around the yard , with his hands outstretched towards the abyss ; on his way he seized the footrope , first with one hand , then with the other , and remained hanging from it : the sea lay below him at a dizzy depth ; the shock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swinging motion ; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope , like a stone in a sling . 
It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance ; not one of the sailors , all fishermen of the coast , recently levied for the service , dared to attempt it . 
In the meantime , the unfortunate topman was losing his strength ; his anguish could not be discerned on his face , but his exhaustion was visible in every limb ; his arms were contracted in horrible twitchings ; every effort which he made to re-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope ; he did not shout , for fear of exhausting his strength . 
All were awaiting the minute when he should release his hold on the rope , and , from instant to instant , heads were turned aside that his fall might not be seen . 
There are moments when a bit of rope , a pole , the branch of a tree , is life itself , and it is a terrible thing to see a living being detach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit . 
All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility of a tiger-cat ; this man was dressed in red ; he was a convict ; he wore a green cap ; he was a life convict . 
On arriving on a level with the top , a gust of wind carried away his cap , and allowed a perfectly white head to be seen : he was not a young man . 
A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had , in fact , at the very first instant , hastened to the officer of the watch , and , in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew , while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back , he had asked the officer 's permission to risk his life to save the topman ; at an affirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted to his ankle with one blow of a hammer , then he had caught up a rope , and had dashed into the rigging : no one noticed , at the instant , with what ease that chain had been broken ; it was only later on that the incident was recalled . 
In a twinkling he was on the yard ; he paused for a few seconds and appeared to be measuring it with his eye ; these seconds , during which the breeze swayed the topman at the extremity of a thread , seemed centuries to those who were looking on . 
At last , the convict raised his eyes to heaven and advanced a step : the crowd drew a long breath . 
He was seen to run out along the yard : on arriving at the point , he fastened the rope which he had brought to it , and allowed the other end to hang down , then he began to descend the rope , hand over hand , and then , -- and the anguish was indescribable , -- instead of one man suspended over the gulf , there were two . 
One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly , only here the spider brought life , not death . 
Ten thousand glances were fastened on this group ; not a cry , not a word ; the same tremor contracted every brow ; all mouths held their breath as though they feared to add the slightest puff to the wind which was swaying the two unfortunate men . 
In the meantime , the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a position near the sailor . 
It was high time ; one minute more , and the exhausted and despairing man would have allowed himself to fall into the abyss . 
The convict had moored him securely with the cord to which he clung with one hand , while he was working with the other . 
At last , he was seen to climb back on the yard , and to drag the sailor up after him ; he held him there a moment to allow him to recover his strength , then he grasped him in his arms and carried him , walking on the yard himself to the cap , and from there to the main-top , where he left him in the hands of his comrades . 
At that moment the crowd broke into applause : old convict-sergeants among them wept , and women embraced each other on the quay , and all voices were heard to cry with a sort of tender rage , `` Pardon for that man ! '' 
He , in the meantime , had immediately begun to make his descent to rejoin his detachment . 
In order to reach them the more speedily , he dropped into the rigging , and ran along one of the lower yards ; all eyes were following him . 
At a certain moment fear assailed them ; whether it was that he was fatigued , or that his head turned , they thought they saw him hesitate and stagger . 
All at once the crowd uttered a loud shout : the convict had fallen into the sea . 
The fall was perilous . 
The frigate Algesiras was anchored alongside the Orion , and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels : it was to be feared that he would slip under one or the other of them . 
Four men flung themselves hastily into a boat ; the crowd cheered them on ; anxiety again took possession of all souls ; the man had not risen to the surface ; he had disappeared in the sea without leaving a ripple , as though he had fallen into a cask of oil : they sounded , they dived . 
In vain . 
The search was continued until the evening : they did not even find the body . 
