` Jean Valjean ! 
who 's Jean Valjean ? ' 
Champmathieu feigns astonishment . 
` Do n't play the innocent dodge , ' says Brevet . 
` You are Jean Valjean ! 
You have been in the galleys of Toulon ; it was twenty years ago ; we were there together . ' 
Champmathieu denies it . 
Parbleu ! 
You understand . 
The case is investigated . 
The thing was well ventilated for me . 
This is what they discovered : This Champmathieu had been , thirty years ago , a pruner of trees in various localities , notably at Faverolles . 
There all trace of him was lost . 
A long time afterwards he was seen again in Auvergne ; then in Paris , where he is said to have been a wheelwright , and to have had a daughter , who was a laundress ; but that has not been proved . 
Now , before going to the galleys for theft , what was Jean Valjean ? 
A pruner of trees . 
Where ? 
At Faverolles . 
Another fact . 
This Valjean 's Christian name was Jean , and his mother 's surname was Mathieu . 
What more natural to suppose than that , on emerging from the galleys , he should have taken his mother 's name for the purpose of concealing himself , and have called himself Jean Mathieu ? 
He goes to Auvergne . 
The local pronunciation turns Jean into Chan -- he is called Chan Mathieu . 
Our man offers no opposition , and behold him transformed into Champmathieu . 
You follow me , do you not ? 
Inquiries were made at Faverolles . 
The family of Jean Valjean is no longer there . 
It is not known where they have gone . 
You know that among those classes a family often disappears . 
Search was made , and nothing was found . 
When such people are not mud , they are dust . 
And then , as the beginning of the story dates thirty years back , there is no longer any one at Faverolles who knew Jean Valjean . 
Inquiries were made at Toulon . 
Besides Brevet , there are only two convicts in existence who have seen Jean Valjean ; they are Cochepaille and Chenildieu , and are sentenced for life . 
They are taken from the galleys and confronted with the pretended Champmathieu . 
They do not hesitate ; he is Jean Valjean for them as well as for Brevet . 
The same age , -- he is fifty-four , -- the same height , the same air , the same man ; in short , it is he . 
It was precisely at this moment that I forwarded my denunciation to the Prefecture in Paris . 
I was told that I had lost my reason , and that Jean Valjean is at Arras , in the power of the authorities . 
You can imagine whether this surprised me , when I thought that I had that same Jean Valjean here . 
I write to the examining judge ; he sends for me ; Champmathieu is conducted to me -- '' -LSB- 4 -RSB- An ex-convict . 
`` Well ? '' 
interposed M. Madeleine . 
Javert replied , his face incorruptible , and as melancholy as ever : -- `` Mr. Mayor , the truth is the truth . 
I am sorry ; but that man is Jean Valjean . 
I recognized him also . '' 
M. Madeleine resumed in , a very low voice : -- `` You are sure ? '' 
Javert began to laugh , with that mournful laugh which comes from profound conviction . 
`` O ! 
Sure ! '' 
