One was the bearded old woman who swept out his chamber , and caused Courfeyrac to say : `` Seeing that his servant woman wears his beard , Marius does not wear his own beard . '' 
The other was a sort of little girl whom he saw very often , and whom he never looked at . 
For more than a year , Marius had noticed in one of the walks of the Luxembourg , the one which skirts the parapet of the Pepiniere , a man and a very young girl , who were almost always seated side by side on the same bench , at the most solitary end of the alley , on the Rue de l'Ouest side . 
Every time that that chance which meddles with the strolls of persons whose gaze is turned inwards , led Marius to that walk , -- and it was nearly every day , -- he found this couple there . 
The man appeared to be about sixty years of age ; he seemed sad and serious ; his whole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to military men who have retired from the service . 
If he had worn a decoration , Marius would have said : `` He is an ex-officer . '' 
He had a kindly but unapproachable air , and he never let his glance linger on the eyes of any one . 
He wore blue trousers , a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed hat , which always appeared to be new , a black cravat , a quaker shirt , that is to say , it was dazzlingly white , but of coarse linen . 
A grisette who passed near him one day , said : `` Here 's a very tidy widower . '' 
His hair was very white . 
The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seated herself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted , she was a sort of child thirteen or fourteen years of age , so thin as to be almost homely , awkward , insignificant , and with a possible promise of handsome eyes . 
Only , they were always raised with a sort of displeasing assurance . 
Her dress was both aged and childish , like the dress of the scholars in a convent ; it consisted of a badly cut gown of black merino . 
They had the air of being father and daughter . 
Marius scanned this old man , who was not yet aged , and this little girl , who was not yet a person , for a few days , and thereafter paid no attention to them . 
They , on their side , did not appear even to see him . 
They conversed together with a peaceful and indifferent air . 
The girl chattered incessantly and merrily . 
The old man talked but little , and , at times , he fixed on her eyes overflowing with an ineffable paternity . 
Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk . 
He invariably found them there . 
This is the way things went : -- Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest from their bench ; he walked the whole length of the alley , passed in front of them , then returned to the extremity whence he had come , and began again . 
This he did five or six times in the course of his promenade , and the promenade was taken five or six times a week , without its having occurred to him or to these people to exchange a greeting . 
That personage , and that young girl , although they appeared , -- and perhaps because they appeared , -- to shun all glances , had , naturally , caused some attention on the part of the five or six students who strolled along the Pepiniere from time to time ; the studious after their lectures , the others after their game of billiards . 
Courfeyrac , who was among the last , had observed them several times , but , finding the girl homely , he had speedily and carefully kept out of the way . 
He had fled , discharging at them a sobriquet , like a Parthian dart . 
Impressed solely with the child 's gown and the old man 's hair , he had dubbed the daughter Mademoiselle Lanoire , and the father , Monsieur Leblanc , so that as no one knew them under any other title , this nickname became a law in the default of any other name . 
The students said : `` Ah ! 
Monsieur Leblanc is on his bench . '' 
And Marius , like the rest , had found it convenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc . 
We shall follow their example , and we shall say M. Leblanc , in order to facilitate this tale . 
So Marius saw them nearly every day , at the same hour , during the first year . 
He found the man to his taste , but the girl insipid . 
LUX FACTA EST During the second year , precisely at the point in this history which the reader has now reached , it chanced that this habit of the Luxembourg was interrupted , without Marius himself being quite aware why , and nearly six months elapsed , during which he did not set foot in the alley . 
One day , at last , he returned thither once more ; it was a serene summer morning , and Marius was in joyous mood , as one is when the weather is fine . 
It seemed to him that he had in his heart all the songs of the birds that he was listening to , and all the bits of blue sky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees . 
He went straight to `` his alley , '' and when he reached the end of it he perceived , still on the same bench , that well-known couple . 
Only , when he approached , it certainly was the same man ; but it seemed to him that it was no longer the same girl . 
The person whom he now beheld was a tall and beautiful creature , possessed of all the most charming lines of a woman at the precise moment when they are still combined with all the most ingenuous graces of the child ; a pure and fugitive moment , which can be expressed only by these two words , -- `` fifteen years . '' 
She had wonderful brown hair , shaded with threads of gold , a brow that seemed made of marble , cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf , a pale flush , an agitated whiteness , an exquisite mouth , whence smiles darted like sunbeams , and words like music , a head such as Raphael would have given to Mary , set upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributed to a Venus . 
And , in order that nothing might be lacking to this bewitching face , her nose was not handsome -- it was pretty ; neither straight nor curved , neither Italian nor Greek ; it was the Parisian nose , that is to say , spiritual , delicate , irregular , pure , -- which drives painters to despair , and charms poets . 
When Marius passed near her , he could not see her eyes , which were constantly lowered . 
He saw only her long chestnut lashes , permeated with shadow and modesty . 
This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listened to what the white-haired old man was saying to her , and nothing could be more fascinating than that fresh smile , combined with those drooping eyes . 
For a moment , Marius thought that she was another daughter of the same man , a sister of the former , no doubt . 
But when the invariable habit of his stroll brought him , for the second time , near the bench , and he had examined her attentively , he recognized her as the same . 
In six months the little girl had become a young maiden ; that was all . 
Nothing is more frequent than this phenomenon . 
There is a moment when girls blossom out in the twinkling of an eye , and become roses all at once . 
One left them children but yesterday ; today , one finds them disquieting to the feelings . 
