It has been calculated that what with salvos , royal and military politenesses , courteous exchanges of uproar , signals of etiquette , formalities of roadsteads and citadels , sunrises and sunsets , saluted every day by all fortresses and all ships of war , openings and closings of ports , etc. , the civilized world , discharged all over the earth , in the course of four and twenty hours , one hundred and fifty thousand useless shots . 
At six francs the shot , that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day , three hundred millions a year , which vanish in smoke . 
This is a mere detail . 
All this time the poor were dying of hunger . 
The year 1823 was what the Restoration called `` the epoch of the Spanish war . '' 
This war contained many events in one , and a quantity of peculiarities . 
A grand family affair for the house of Bourbon ; the branch of France succoring and protecting the branch of Madrid , that is to say , performing an act devolving on the elder ; an apparent return to our national traditions , complicated by servitude and by subjection to the cabinets of the North ; M. le Duc d'Angouleme , surnamed by the liberal sheets the hero of Andujar , compressing in a triumphal attitude that was somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air , the ancient and very powerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the chimerical terrorism of the liberals ; the sansculottes resuscitated , to the great terror of dowagers , under the name of descamisados ; monarchy opposing an obstacle to progress described as anarchy ; the theories of '89 roughly interrupted in the sap ; a European halt , called to the French idea , which was making the tour of the world ; beside the son of France as generalissimo , the Prince de Carignan , afterwards Charles Albert , enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as a volunteer , with grenadier epaulets of red worsted ; the soldiers of the Empire setting out on a fresh campaign , but aged , saddened , after eight years of repose , and under the white cockade ; the tricolored standard waved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen , as the white standard had been thirty years earlier at Coblentz ; monks mingled with our troops ; the spirit of liberty and of novelty brought to its senses by bayonets ; principles slaughtered by cannonades ; France undoing by her arms that which she had done by her mind ; in addition to this , hostile leaders sold , soldiers hesitating , cities besieged by millions ; no military perils , and yet possible explosions , as in every mine which is surprised and invaded ; but little bloodshed , little honor won , shame for some , glory for no one . 
Such was this war , made by the princes descended from Louis XIV. , and conducted by generals who had been under Napoleon . 
Its sad fate was to recall neither the grand war nor grand politics . 
Some feats of arms were serious ; the taking of the Trocadero , among others , was a fine military action ; but after all , we repeat , the trumpets of this war give back a cracked sound , the whole effect was suspicious ; history approves of France for making a difficulty about accepting this false triumph . 
It seemed evident that certain Spanish officers charged with resistance yielded too easily ; the idea of corruption was connected with the victory ; it appears as though generals and not battles had been won , and the conquering soldier returned humiliated . 
A debasing war , in short , in which the Bank of France could be read in the folds of the flag . 
Soldiers of the war of 1808 , on whom Saragossa had fallen in formidable ruin , frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels , and began to regret Palafox . 
It is the nature of France to prefer to have Rostopchine rather than Ballesteros in front of her . 
From a still more serious point of view , and one which it is also proper to insist upon here , this war , which wounded the military spirit of France , enraged the democratic spirit . 
It was an enterprise of inthralment . 
In that campaign , the object of the French soldier , the son of democracy , was the conquest of a yoke for others . 
A hideous contradiction . 
France is made to arouse the soul of nations , not to stifle it . 
All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the French Revolution : liberty darts rays from France . 
That is a solar fact . 
Blind is he who will not see ! 
It was Bonaparte who said it . 
The war of 1823 , an outrage on the generous Spanish nation , was then , at the same time , an outrage on the French Revolution . 
It was France who committed this monstrous violence ; by foul means , for , with the exception of wars of liberation , everything that armies do is by foul means . 
The words passive obedience indicate this . 
An army is a strange masterpiece of combination where force results from an enormous sum of impotence . 
Thus is war , made by humanity against humanity , despite humanity , explained . 
As for the Bourbons , the war of 1823 was fatal to them . 
They took it for a success . 
They did not perceive the danger that lies in having an idea slain to order . 
They went astray , in their innocence , to such a degree that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime into their establishment as an element of strength . 
The spirit of the ambush entered into their politics . 
1830 had its germ in 1823 . 
The Spanish campaign became in their counsels an argument for force and for adventures by right Divine . 
France , having re-established elrey netto in Spain , might well have re-established the absolute king at home . 
They fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of the soldier for the consent of the nation . 
Such confidence is the ruin of thrones . 
It is not permitted to fall asleep , either in the shadow of a machineel tree , nor in the shadow of an army . 
Let us return to the ship Orion . 
During the operations of the army commanded by the prince generalissimo , a squadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean . 
We have just stated that the Orion belonged to this fleet , and that accidents of the sea had brought it into port at Toulon . 
The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it which attracts and engages a crowd . 
It is because it is great , and the crowd loves what is great . 
A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations of the genius of man with the powers of nature . 
A ship of the line is composed , at the same time , of the heaviest and the lightest of possible matter , for it deals at one and the same time with three forms of substance , -- solid , liquid , and fluid , -- and it must do battle with all three . 
It has eleven claws of iron with which to seize the granite on the bottom of the sea , and more wings and more antennae than winged insects , to catch the wind in the clouds . 
Its breath pours out through its hundred and twenty cannons as through enormous trumpets , and replies proudly to the thunder . 
The ocean seeks to lead it astray in the alarming sameness of its billows , but the vessel has its soul , its compass , which counsels it and always shows it the north . 
In the blackest nights , its lanterns supply the place of the stars . 
