She slipped out while her husband was lavishing salutes and offering M. Leblanc a chair . 
An instant later she returned and whispered in his ear : -- '' 'T is done . '' 
The snow , which had not ceased falling since the morning , was so deep that the arrival of the fiacre had not been audible , and they did not now hear its departure . 
Meanwhile , M. Leblanc had seated himself . 
Jondrette had taken possession of the other chair , facing M. Leblanc . 
Now , in order to form an idea of the scene which is to follow , let the reader picture to himself in his own mind , a cold night , the solitudes of the Salpetriere covered with snow and white as winding-sheets in the moonlight , the taper-like lights of the street lanterns which shone redly here and there along those tragic boulevards , and the long rows of black elms , not a passer-by for perhaps a quarter of a league around , the Gorbeau hovel , at its highest pitch of silence , of horror , and of darkness ; in that building , in the midst of those solitudes , in the midst of that darkness , the vast Jondrette garret lighted by a single candle , and in that den two men seated at a table , M. Leblanc tranquil , Jondrette smiling and alarming , the Jondrette woman , the female wolf , in one corner , and , behind the partition , Marius , invisible , erect , not losing a word , not missing a single movement , his eye on the watch , and pistol in hand . 
However , Marius experienced only an emotion of horror , but no fear . 
He clasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured . 
`` I shall be able to stop that wretch whenever I please , '' he thought . 
He felt that the police were there somewhere in ambuscade , waiting for the signal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm . 
Moreover , he was in hopes , that this violent encounter between Jondrette and M. Leblanc would cast some light on all the things which he was interested in learning . 
OCCUPYING ONE 'S SELF WITH OBSCURE DEPTHS Hardly was M. Leblanc seated , when he turned his eyes towards the pallets , which were empty . 
`` How is the poor little wounded girl ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` Bad , '' replied Jondrette with a heart-broken and grateful smile , `` very bad , my worthy sir . 
Her elder sister has taken her to the Bourbe to have her hurt dressed . 
You will see them presently ; they will be back immediately . '' 
`` Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better , '' went on M. Leblanc , casting his eyes on the eccentric costume of the Jondrette woman , as she stood between him and the door , as though already guarding the exit , and gazed at him in an attitude of menace and almost of combat . 
`` She is dying , '' said Jondrette . 
`` But what do you expect , sir ! 
She has so much courage , that woman has ! 
She 's not a woman , she 's an ox . '' 
The Jondrette , touched by his compliment , deprecated it with the affected airs of a flattered monster . 
`` You are always too good to me , Monsieur Jondrette ! '' 
`` Jondrette ! '' 
said M. Leblanc , `` I thought your name was Fabantou ? '' 
`` Fabantou , alias Jondrette ! '' 
replied the husband hurriedly . 
`` An artistic sobriquet ! '' 
And launching at his wife a shrug of the shoulders which M. Leblanc did not catch , he continued with an emphatic and caressing inflection of voice : -- `` Ah ! 
we have had a happy life together , this poor darling and I ! 
What would there be left for us if we had not that ? 
We are so wretched , my respectable sir ! 
We have arms , but there is no work ! 
We have the will , no work ! 
I do n't know how the government arranges that , but , on my word of honor , sir , I am not Jacobin , sir , I am not a bousingot . 
-LSB- 30 -RSB- I do n't wish them any evil , but if I were the ministers , on my most sacred word , things would be different . 
Here , for instance , I wanted to have my girls taught the trade of paper-box makers . 
You will say to me : ` What ! 
a trade ? ' 
Yes ! 
A trade ! 
A simple trade ! 
A bread-winner ! 
What a fall , my benefactor ! 
What a degradation , when one has been what we have been ! 
Alas ! 
There is nothing left to us of our days of prosperity ! 
One thing only , a picture , of which I think a great deal , but which I am willing to part with , for I must live ! 
Item , one must live ! '' 
