To see a woman of the town spit in the mayor 's face was a thing so monstrous that , in his most daring flights of fancy , he would have regarded it as a sacrilege to believe it possible . 
On the other hand , at the very bottom of his thought , he made a hideous comparison as to what this woman was , and as to what this mayor might be ; and then he , with horror , caught a glimpse of I know not what simple explanation of this prodigious attack . 
But when he beheld that mayor , that magistrate , calmly wipe his face and say , `` Set this woman at liberty , '' he underwent a sort of intoxication of amazement ; thought and word failed him equally ; the sum total of possible astonishment had been exceeded in his case . 
He remained mute . 
The words had produced no less strange an effect on Fantine . 
She raised her bare arm , and clung to the damper of the stove , like a person who is reeling . 
Nevertheless , she glanced about her , and began to speak in a low voice , as though talking to herself : -- `` At liberty ! 
I am to be allowed to go ! 
I am not to go to prison for six months ! 
Who said that ? 
It is not possible that any one could have said that . 
I did not hear aright . 
It can not have been that monster of a mayor ! 
Was it you , my good Monsieur Javert , who said that I was to be set free ? 
Oh , see here ! 
I will tell you about it , and you will let me go . 
That monster of a mayor , that old blackguard of a mayor , is the cause of all . 
Just imagine , Monsieur Javert , he turned me out ! 
all because of a pack of rascally women , who gossip in the workroom . 
If that is not a horror , what is ? 
To dismiss a poor girl who is doing her work honestly ! 
Then I could no longer earn enough , and all this misery followed . 
In the first place , there is one improvement which these gentlemen of the police ought to make , and that is , to prevent prison contractors from wronging poor people . 
I will explain it to you , you see : you are earning twelve sous at shirt-making , the price falls to nine sous ; and it is not enough to live on . 
Then one has to become whatever one can . 
As for me , I had my little Cosette , and I was actually forced to become a bad woman . 
Now you understand how it is that that blackguard of a mayor caused all the mischief . 
After that I stamped on that gentleman 's hat in front of the officers ' cafe ; but he had spoiled my whole dress with snow . 
We women have but one silk dress for evening wear . 
You see that I did not do wrong deliberately -- truly , Monsieur Javert ; and everywhere I behold women who are far more wicked than I , and who are much happier . 
O Monsieur Javert ! 
it was you who gave orders that I am to be set free , was it not ? 
Make inquiries , speak to my landlord ; I am paying my rent now ; they will tell you that I am perfectly honest . 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
I beg your pardon ; I have unintentionally touched the damper of the stove , and it has made it smoke . '' 
M. Madeleine listened to her with profound attention . 
While she was speaking , he fumbled in his waistcoat , drew out his purse and opened it . 
It was empty . 
He put it back in his pocket . 
He said to Fantine , `` How much did you say that you owed ? '' 
Fantine , who was looking at Javert only , turned towards him : -- `` Was I speaking to you ? '' 
Then , addressing the soldiers : -- `` Say , you fellows , did you see how I spit in his face ? 
Ah ! 
you old wretch of a mayor , you came here to frighten me , but I 'm not afraid of you . 
I am afraid of Monsieur Javert . 
I am afraid of my good Monsieur Javert ! '' 
So saying , she turned to the inspector again : -- `` And yet , you see , Mr. Inspector , it is necessary to be just . 
I understand that you are just , Mr. Inspector ; in fact , it is perfectly simple : a man amuses himself by putting snow down a woman 's back , and that makes the officers laugh ; one must divert themselves in some way ; and we -- well , we are here for them to amuse themselves with , of course ! 
And then , you , you come ; you are certainly obliged to preserve order , you lead off the woman who is in the wrong ; but on reflection , since you are a good man , you say that I am to be set at liberty ; it is for the sake of the little one , for six months in prison would prevent my supporting my child . 
