The Petit-Picpus , of which no existing plan has preserved a trace , is indicated with sufficient clearness in the plan of 1727 , published at Paris by Denis Thierry , Rue Saint-Jacques , opposite the Rue du Platre ; and at Lyons , by Jean Girin , Rue Merciere , at the sign of Prudence . 
Petit-Picpus had , as we have just mentioned , a Y of streets , formed by the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , which spread out in two branches , taking on the left the name of Little Picpus Street , and on the right the name of the Rue Polonceau . 
The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex as by a bar ; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur . 
The Rue Polonceau ended there ; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on , and ascended towards the Lenoir market . 
A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the Rue Polonceau , and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur , turning abruptly at a right angle , in front of him the wall of that street , and on his right a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had no issue and was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
It was here that Jean Valjean stood . 
As we have just said , on catching sight of that black silhouette standing on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue Petit-Picpus , he recoiled . 
There could be no doubt of it . 
That phantom was lying in wait for him . 
What was he to do ? 
The time for retreating was passed . 
That which he had perceived in movement an instant before , in the distant darkness , was Javert and his squad without a doubt . 
Javert was probably already at the commencement of the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood . 
Javert , to all appearances , was acquainted with this little labyrinth , and had taken his precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit . 
These surmises , which so closely resembled proofs , whirled suddenly , like a handful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind , through Jean Valjean 's mournful brain . 
He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot ; there he was cut off . 
He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus ; there stood a sentinel . 
He saw that black form standing out in relief against the white pavement , illuminated by the moon ; to advance was to fall into this man 's hands ; to retreat was to fling himself into Javert 's arms . 
Jean Valjean felt himself caught , as in a net , which was slowly contracting ; he gazed heavenward in despair . 
THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT In order to understand what follows , it is requisite to form an exact idea of the Droit-Mur lane , and , in particular , of the angle which one leaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into this lane . 
Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on the right , as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus , by houses of mean aspect ; on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines , composed of numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue Petit-Picpus side ; so that this building , which was very lofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side , was tolerably low on the side adjoining the Rue Polonceau . 
There , at the angle of which we have spoken , it descended to such a degree that it consisted of merely a wall . 
This wall did not abut directly on the Street ; it formed a deeply retreating niche , concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been , one in the Rue Polonceau , the other in the Rue Droit-Mur . 
Beginning with these angles of the niche , the wall extended along the Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49 , and along the Rue Droit-Mur , where the fragment was much shorter , as far as the gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected , thus forming another retreating angle in the street . 
This gable was sombre of aspect ; only one window was visible , or , to speak more correctly , two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept constantly closed . 
The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is rigorously exact , and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in the mind of old inhabitants of the quarter . 
The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and wretched door ; it was a vast , formless assemblage of perpendicular planks , the upper ones being broader than the lower , bound together by long transverse strips of iron . 
At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary dimensions , and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years previously . 
A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche , and the wall was covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau . 
In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself , this sombre building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted him . 
He ran his eyes rapidly over it ; he said to himself , that if he could contrive to get inside it , he might save himself . 
First he conceived an idea , then a hope . 
In the central portion of the front of this building , on the Rue Droit-Mur side , there were at all the windows of the different stories ancient cistern pipes of lead . 
The various branches of the pipes which led from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out a sort of tree on the front . 
These ramifications of pipes with their hundred elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writhe over the fronts of old farm-houses . 
This odd espalier , with its branches of lead and iron , was the first thing that struck Jean Valjean . 
He seated Cosette with her back against a stone post , with an injunction to be silent , and ran to the spot where the conduit touched the pavement . 
Perhaps there was some way of climbing up by it and entering the house . 
But the pipe was dilapidated and past service , and hardly hung to its fastenings . 
Moreover , all the windows of this silent dwelling were grated with heavy iron bars , even the attic windows in the roof . 
And then , the moon fell full upon that facade , and the man who was watching at the corner of the street would have seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing . 
And finally , what was to be done with Cosette ? 
How was she to be drawn up to the top of a three-story house ? 
He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe , and crawled along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau . 
When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette , he noticed that no one could see him there . 
As we have just explained , he was concealed from all eyes , no matter from which direction they were approaching ; besides this , he was in the shadow . 
Finally , there were two doors ; perhaps they might be forced . 
The wall above which he saw the linden-tree and the ivy evidently abutted on a garden where he could , at least , hide himself , although there were as yet no leaves on the trees , and spend the remainder of the night . 
Time was passing ; he must act quickly . 
He felt over the carriage door , and immediately recognized the fact that it was impracticable outside and in . 
