The question was about Olympus , whose part was taken by Jean Prouvaire , out of pure romanticism . 
Jean Prouvaire was timid only in repose . 
Once excited , he burst forth , a sort of mirth accentuated his enthusiasm , and he was at once both laughing and lyric . 
`` Let us not insult the gods , '' said he . 
`` The gods may not have taken their departure . 
Jupiter does not impress me as dead . 
The gods are dreams , you say . 
Well , even in nature , such as it is to-day , after the flight of these dreams , we still find all the grand old pagan myths . 
Such and such a mountain with the profile of a citadel , like the Vignemale , for example , is still to me the headdress of Cybele ; it has not been proved to me that Pan does not come at night to breathe into the hollow trunks of the willows , stopping up the holes in turn with his fingers , and I have always believed that Io had something to do with the cascade of Pissevache . '' 
In the last corner , they were talking politics . 
The Charter which had been granted was getting roughly handled . 
Combeferre was upholding it weakly . 
Courfeyrac was energetically making a breach in it . 
On the table lay an unfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter . 
Courfeyrac had seized it , and was brandishing it , mingling with his arguments the rattling of this sheet of paper . 
`` In the first place , I wo n't have any kings ; if it were only from an economical point of view , I do n't want any ; a king is a parasite . 
One does not have kings gratis . 
Listen to this : the dearness of kings . 
At the death of Francois I. , the national debt of France amounted to an income of thirty thousand livres ; at the death of Louis XIV . 
it was two milliards , six hundred millions , at twenty-eight livres the mark , which was equivalent in 1760 , according to Desmarets , to four milliards , five hundred millions , which would to-day be equivalent to twelve milliards . 
In the second place , and no offence to Combeferre , a charter granted is but a poor expedient of civilization . 
To save the transition , to soften the passage , to deaden the shock , to cause the nation to pass insensibly from the monarchy to democracy by the practice of constitutional fictions , -- what detestable reasons all those are ! 
No ! 
no ! 
let us never enlighten the people with false daylight . 
Principles dwindle and pale in your constitutional cellar . 
No illegitimacy , no compromise , no grant from the king to the people . 
In all such grants there is an Article 14 . 
By the side of the hand which gives there is the claw which snatches back . 
I refuse your charter point-blank . 
A charter is a mask ; the lie lurks beneath it . 
A people which accepts a charter abdicates . 
The law is only the law when entire . 
No ! 
no charter ! '' 
It was winter ; a couple of fagots were crackling in the fireplace . 
This was tempting , and Courfeyrac could not resist . 
He crumpled the poor Touquet Charter in his fist , and flung it in the fire . 
The paper flashed up . 
Combeferre watched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII . 
burn philosophically , and contented himself with saying : -- `` The charter metamorphosed into flame . '' 
And sarcasms , sallies , jests , that French thing which is called entrain , and that English thing which is called humor , good and bad taste , good and bad reasons , all the wild pyrotechnics of dialogue , mounting together and crossing from all points of the room , produced a sort of merry bombardment over their heads . 
ENLARGEMENT OF HORIZON The shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirable property , that one can never foresee the spark , nor divine the lightning flash . 
What will dart out presently ? 
No one knows . 
The burst of laughter starts from a tender feeling . 
At the moment of jest , the serious makes its entry . 
Impulses depend on the first chance word . 
The spirit of each is sovereign , jest suffices to open the field to the unexpected . 
These are conversations with abrupt turns , in which the perspective changes suddenly . 
