`` You see , sister , this doll is more amusing than the other . 
She twists , she cries , she is warm . 
See , sister , let us play with her . 
She shall be my little girl . 
I will be a lady . 
I will come to see you , and you shall look at her . 
Gradually , you will perceive her whiskers , and that will surprise you . 
And then you will see her ears , and then you will see her tail and it will amaze you . 
And you will say to me , ` Ah ! 
Mon Dieu ! ' 
and I will say to you : ` Yes , Madame , it is my little girl . 
Little girls are made like that just at present . ' '' 
Azelma listened admiringly to Eponine . 
In the meantime , the drinkers had begun to sing an obscene song , and to laugh at it until the ceiling shook . 
Thenardier accompanied and encouraged them . 
As birds make nests out of everything , so children make a doll out of anything which comes to hand . 
While Eponine and Azelma were bundling up the cat , Cosette , on her side , had dressed up her sword . 
That done , she laid it in her arms , and sang to it softly , to lull it to sleep . 
The doll is one of the most imperious needs and , at the same time , one of the most charming instincts of feminine childhood . 
To care for , to clothe , to deck , to dress , to undress , to redress , to teach , scold a little , to rock , to dandle , to lull to sleep , to imagine that something is some one , -- therein lies the whole woman 's future . 
While dreaming and chattering , making tiny outfits , and baby clothes , while sewing little gowns , and corsages and bodices , the child grows into a young girl , the young girl into a big girl , the big girl into a woman . 
The first child is the continuation of the last doll . 
A little girl without a doll is almost as unhappy , and quite as impossible , as a woman without children . 
So Cosette had made herself a doll out of the sword . 
Madame Thenardier approached the yellow man ; `` My husband is right , '' she thought ; `` perhaps it is M. Laffitte ; there are such queer rich men ! '' 
She came and set her elbows on the table . 
`` Monsieur , '' said she . 
At this word , Monsieur , the man turned ; up to that time , the Thenardier had addressed him only as brave homme or bonhomme . 
`` You see , sir , '' she pursued , assuming a sweetish air that was even more repulsive to behold than her fierce mien , `` I am willing that the child should play ; I do not oppose it , but it is good for once , because you are generous . 
You see , she has nothing ; she must needs work . '' 
`` Then this child is not yours ? '' 
demanded the man . 
`` Oh ! 
mon Dieu ! 
no , sir ! 
she is a little beggar whom we have taken in through charity ; a sort of imbecile child . 
She must have water on the brain ; she has a large head , as you see . 
We do what we can for her , for we are not rich ; we have written in vain to her native place , and have received no reply these six months . 
It must be that her mother is dead . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the man , and fell into his revery once more . 
`` Her mother did n't amount to much , '' added the Thenardier ; `` she abandoned her child . '' 
During the whole of this conversation Cosette , as though warned by some instinct that she was under discussion , had not taken her eyes from the Thenardier 's face ; she listened vaguely ; she caught a few words here and there . 
Meanwhile , the drinkers , all three-quarters intoxicated , were repeating their unclean refrain with redoubled gayety ; it was a highly spiced and wanton song , in which the Virgin and the infant Jesus were introduced . 
The Thenardier went off to take part in the shouts of laughter . 
Cosette , from her post under the table , gazed at the fire , which was reflected from her fixed eyes . 
She had begun to rock the sort of baby which she had made , and , as she rocked it , she sang in a low voice , `` My mother is dead ! 
my mother is dead ! 
my mother is dead ! '' 
On being urged afresh by the hostess , the yellow man , `` the millionaire , '' consented at last to take supper . 
