It must be done . 
But how will you manage to get out ? '' 
Jean Valjean shook his head . 
`` No one must see me , the whole point lies there , Father Fauchelevent . 
Find some means of getting me out in a basket , under cover , like Cosette . '' 
Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of his left hand , a sign of serious embarrassment . 
A third peal created a diversion . 
`` That is the dead-doctor taking his departure , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` He has taken a look and said : ` She is dead , that is well . ' 
When the doctor has signed the passport for paradise , the undertaker 's company sends a coffin . 
If it is a mother , the mothers lay her out ; if she is a sister , the sisters lay her out . 
After which , I nail her up . 
That forms a part of my gardener 's duty . 
A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger . 
She is placed in a lower hall of the church which communicates with the street , and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead . 
I do n't count the undertaker 's men and myself as men . 
It is in that hall that I nail up the coffin . 
The undertaker 's men come and get it , and whip up , coachman ! 
that 's the way one goes to heaven . 
They fetch a box with nothing in it , they take it away again with something in it . 
That 's what a burial is like . 
De profundis . '' 
A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping Cosette , who lay with her mouth vaguely open , and had the air of an angel drinking in the light . 
Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her . 
He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent . 
That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence . 
The good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble : -- `` The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery . 
They declare that they are going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery . 
It is an ancient cemetery which is outside the regulations , which has no uniform , and which is going to retire . 
It is a shame , for it is convenient . 
I have a friend there , Father Mestienne , the grave-digger . 
The nuns here possess one privilege , it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall . 
There is a special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf . 
But how many events have happened since yesterday ! 
Mother Crucifixion is dead , and Father Madeleine -- '' `` Is buried , '' said Jean Valjean , smiling sadly . 
Fauchelevent caught the word . 
`` Goodness ! 
if you were here for good , it would be a real burial . '' 
A fourth peal burst out . 
Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again . 
`` This time it is for me . 
The Mother Prioress wants me . 
Good , now I am pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle . 
Monsieur Madeleine , do n't stir from here , and wait for me . 
Something new has come up . 
If you are hungry , there is wine , bread and cheese . '' 
And he hastened out of the hut , crying : `` Coming ! 
coming ! '' 
Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his crooked leg would permit , casting a sidelong glance by the way on his melon patch . 
Less than ten minutes later , Father Fauchelevent , whose bell put the nuns in his road to flight , tapped gently at a door , and a gentle voice replied : `` Forever ! 
