His daughter , Marie-Louise , married Adrien-Charles de Gramont , son of the Duke Louis de Gramont , peer of France , colonel of the French guards , and lieutenant-general of the army . 
It is written Faux , Fauq , and Faoucq . 
Good Madame , recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative , Monsieur the Cardinal . 
As for your dear Sylvanie , she has done well in not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me . 
She is well , works as you would wish , and loves me . 
That is all that I desire . 
The souvenir which she sent through you reached me safely , and it makes me very happy . 
My health is not so very bad , and yet I grow thinner every day . 
Farewell ; my paper is at an end , and this forces me to leave you . 
A thousand good wishes . 
BAPTISTINE . 
P.S. Your grand nephew is charming . 
Do you know that he will soon be five years old ? 
Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who had on knee-caps , and he said , `` What has he got on his knees ? '' 
He is a charming child ! 
His little brother is dragging an old broom about the room , like a carriage , and saying , `` Hu ! '' 
As will be perceived from this letter , these two women understood how to mould themselves to the Bishop 's ways with that special feminine genius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself . 
The Bishop of D -- , in spite of the gentle and candid air which never deserted him , sometimes did things that were grand , bold , and magnificent , without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact . 
They trembled , but they let him alone . 
Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a remonstrance in advance , but never at the time , nor afterwards . 
They never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign , in any action once entered upon . 
At certain moments , without his having occasion to mention it , when he was not even conscious of it himself in all probability , so perfect was his simplicity , they vaguely felt that he was acting as a bishop ; then they were nothing more than two shadows in the house . 
They served him passively ; and if obedience consisted in disappearing , they disappeared . 
They understood , with an admirable delicacy of instinct , that certain cares may be put under constraint . 
Thus , even when believing him to be in peril , they understood , I will not say his thought , but his nature , to such a degree that they no longer watched over him . 
They confided him to God . 
Moreover , Baptistine said , as we have just read , that her brother 's end would prove her own . 
Madame Magloire did not say this , but she knew it . 
THE BISHOP IN THE PRESENCE OF AN UNKNOWN LIGHT At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the preceding pages , he did a thing which , if the whole town was to be believed , was even more hazardous than his trip across the mountains infested with bandits . 
In the country near D -- a man lived quite alone . 
This man , we will state at once , was a former member of the Convention . 
His name was G -- Member of the Convention , G -- was mentioned with a sort of horror in the little world of D -- A member of the Convention -- can you imagine such a thing ? 
That existed from the time when people called each other thou , and when they said `` citizen . '' 
This man was almost a monster . 
He had not voted for the death of the king , but almost . 
He was a quasi-regicide . 
He had been a terrible man . 
How did it happen that such a man had not been brought before a provost 's court , on the return of the legitimate princes ? 
They need not have cut off his head , if you please ; clemency must be exercised , agreed ; but a good banishment for life . 
An example , in short , etc. . 
Besides , he was an atheist , like all the rest of those people . 
Gossip of the geese about the vulture . 
Was G -- a vulture after all ? 
Yes ; if he were to be judged by the element of ferocity in this solitude of his . 
As he had not voted for the death of the king , he had not been included in the decrees of exile , and had been able to remain in France . 
He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city , far from any hamlet , far from any road , in some hidden turn of a very wild valley , no one knew exactly where . 
He had there , it was said , a sort of field , a hole , a lair . 
There were no neighbors , not even passers-by . 
Since he had dwelt in that valley , the path which led thither had disappeared under a growth of grass . 
The locality was spoken of as though it had been the dwelling of a hangman . 
