It was a terrible moment . 
The ravine was there , unexpected , yawning , directly under the horses ' feet , two fathoms deep between its double slopes ; the second file pushed the first into it , and the third pushed on the second ; the horses reared and fell backward , landed on their haunches , slid down , all four feet in the air , crushing and overwhelming the riders ; and there being no means of retreat , -- the whole column being no longer anything more than a projectile , -- the force which had been acquired to crush the English crushed the French ; the inexorable ravine could only yield when filled ; horses and riders rolled there pell-mell , grinding each other , forming but one mass of flesh in this gulf : when this trench was full of living men , the rest marched over them and passed on . 
Almost a third of Dubois 's brigade fell into that abyss . 
This began the loss of the battle . 
A local tradition , which evidently exaggerates matters , says that two thousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow road of Ohain . 
This figure probably comprises all the other corpses which were flung into this ravine the day after the combat . 
Let us note in passing that it was Dubois 's sorely tried brigade which , an hour previously , making a charge to one side , had captured the flag of the Lunenburg battalion . 
Napoleon , before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had scrutinized the ground , but had not been able to see that hollow road , which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of the plateau . 
Warned , nevertheless , and put on the alert by the little white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles highway , he had probably put a question as to the possibility of an obstacle , to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide had answered No . 
We might almost affirm that Napoleon 's catastrophe originated in that sign of a peasant 's head . 
Other fatalities were destined to arise . 
Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle ? 
We answer No . 
Why ? 
Because of Wellington ? 
Because of Blucher ? 
No . 
Because of God . 
Bonaparte victor at Waterloo ; that does not come within the law of the nineteenth century . 
Another series of facts was in preparation , in which there was no longer any room for Napoleon . 
The ill will of events had declared itself long before . 
It was time that this vast man should fall . 
The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the balance . 
This individual alone counted for more than a universal group . 
These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head ; the world mounting to the brain of one man , -- this would be mortal to civilization were it to last . 
The moment had arrived for the incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan . 
Probably the principles and the elements , on which the regular gravitations of the moral , as of the material , world depend , had complained . 
Smoking blood , over-filled cemeteries , mothers in tears , -- these are formidable pleaders . 
When the earth is suffering from too heavy a burden , there are mysterious groanings of the shades , to which the abyss lends an ear . 
Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been decided on . 
He embarrassed God . 
Waterloo is not a battle ; it is a change of front on the part of the Universe . 
THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine . 
Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank on the cuirassiers . 
The intrepid General Delort made the military salute to the English battery . 
The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered the squares at a gallop . 
The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a halt . 
The disaster of the hollow road had decimated , but not discouraged them . 
They belonged to that class of men who , when diminished in number , increase in courage . 
Wathier 's column alone had suffered in the disaster ; Delort 's column , which Ney had deflected to the left , as though he had a presentiment of an ambush , had arrived whole . 
The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares . 
At full speed , with bridles loose , swords in their teeth pistols in fist , -- such was the attack . 
There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until the soldier is changed into a statue , and when all this flesh turns into granite . 
The English battalions , desperately assaulted , did not stir . 
Then it was terrible . 
All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once . 
A frenzied whirl enveloped them . 
That cold infantry remained impassive . 
The first rank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets , the second ranks shot them down ; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged their guns , the front of the square parted , permitted the passage of an eruption of grape-shot , and closed again . 
