However , day followed day , and nothing new presented itself . 
It merely seemed to him , that the sombre space which still remained to be traversed by him was growing shorter with every instant . 
He thought that he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss . 
`` What ! '' 
he repeated to himself , `` shall I not see her again before then ! '' 
When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques , left the barrier on one side and followed the old inner boulevard for some distance , you reach the Rue de la Sante , then the Glaciere , and , a little while before arriving at the little river of the Gobelins , you come to a sort of field which is the only spot in the long and monotonous chain of the boulevards of Paris , where Ruysdeel would be tempted to sit down . 
There is something indescribable there which exhales grace , a green meadow traversed by tightly stretched lines , from which flutter rags drying in the wind , and an old market-gardener 's house , built in the time of Louis XIII. , with its great roof oddly pierced with dormer windows , dilapidated palisades , a little water amid poplar-trees , women , voices , laughter ; on the horizon the Pantheon , the pole of the Deaf-Mutes , the Val-de-Grace , black , squat , fantastic , amusing , magnificent , and in the background , the severe square crests of the towers of Notre Dame . 
As the place is worth looking at , no one goes thither . 
Hardly one cart or wagoner passes in a quarter of an hour . 
It chanced that Marius ' solitary strolls led him to this plot of ground , near the water . 
That day , there was a rarity on the boulevard , a passer-by . 
Marius , vaguely impressed with the almost savage beauty of the place , asked this passer-by : -- `` What is the name of this spot ? '' 
The person replied : `` It is the Lark 's meadow . '' 
And he added : `` It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of Ivry . '' 
But after the word `` Lark '' Marius heard nothing more . 
These sudden congealments in the state of revery , which a single word suffices to evoke , do occur . 
The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an idea , and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else . 
The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths of Marius ' melancholy . 
-- `` Stop , '' said he with a sort of unreasoning stupor peculiar to these mysterious asides , `` this is her meadow . 
I shall know where she lives now . '' 
It was absurd , but irresistible . 
And every day he returned to that meadow of the Lark . 
EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF PRISONS Javert 's triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete , but had not been so . 
In the first place , and this constituted the principal anxiety , Javert had not taken the prisoner prisoner . 
The assassinated man who flees is more suspicious than the assassin , and it is probable that this personage , who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians , would be no less fine a prize for the authorities . 
And then , Montparnasse had escaped Javert . 
Another opportunity of laying hands on that `` devil 's dandy '' must be waited for . 
Montparnasse had , in fact , encountered Eponine as she stood on the watch under the trees of the boulevard , and had led her off , preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes with the father . 
It was well that he did so . 
He was free . 
As for Eponine , Javert had caused her to be seized ; a mediocre consolation . 
Eponine had joined Azelma at Les Madelonettes . 
And finally , on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force , one of the principal prisoners , Claquesous , had been lost . 
It was not known how this had been effected , the police agents and the sergeants `` could not understand it at all . '' 
He had converted himself into vapor , he had slipped through the handcuffs , he had trickled through the crevices of the carriage , the fiacre was cracked , and he had fled ; all that they were able to say was , that on arriving at the prison , there was no Claquesous . 
Either the fairies or the police had had a hand in it . 
Had Claquesous melted into the shadows like a snow-flake in water ? 
Had there been unavowed connivance of the police agents ? 
Did this man belong to the double enigma of order and disorder ? 
Was he concentric with infraction and repression ? 
Had this sphinx his fore paws in crime and his hind paws in authority ? 
Javert did not accept such comminations , and would have bristled up against such compromises ; but his squad included other inspectors besides himself , who were more initiated than he , perhaps , although they were his subordinates in the secrets of the Prefecture , and Claquesous had been such a villain that he might make a very good agent . 
It is an excellent thing for ruffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimate juggling terms with the night . 
These double-edged rascals do exist . 
However that may be , Claquesous had gone astray and was not found again . 
Javert appeared to be more irritated than amazed at this . 
As for Marius , `` that booby of a lawyer , '' who had probably become frightened , and whose name Javert had forgotten , Javert attached very little importance to him . 
Moreover , a lawyer can be hunted up at any time . 
But was he a lawyer after all ? 
The investigation had begun . 
