The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble ; for it received the counter-shock of commercial crises , of failures , strikes , slack seasons , all inherent to great political disturbances . 
In times of revolution misery is both cause and effect . 
The blow which it deals rebounds upon it . 
This population full of proud virtue , capable to the highest degree of latent heat , always ready to fly to arms , prompt to explode , irritated , deep , undermined , seemed to be only awaiting the fall of a spark . 
Whenever certain sparks float on the horizon chased by the wind of events , it is impossible not to think of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the very gates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas . 
The wine-shops of the Faubourg Antoine , which have been more than once drawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused , possess historical notoriety . 
In troublous times people grow intoxicated there more on words than on wine . 
A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatus of the future circulates there , swelling hearts and enlarging souls . 
The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns of Mont Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating with the profound and sacred breath ; taverns where the tables were almost tripods , and where was drunk what Ennius calls the sibylline wine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is a reservoir of people . 
Revolutionary agitations create fissures there , through which trickles the popular sovereignty . 
This sovereignty may do evil ; it can be mistaken like any other ; but , even when led astray , it remains great . 
We may say of it as of the blind cyclops , Ingens . 
In ' 93 , according as the idea which was floating about was good or evil , according as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm , there leaped forth from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine now savage legions , now heroic bands . 
Savage . 
Let us explain this word . 
When these bristling men , who in the early days of the revolutionary chaos , tattered , howling , wild , with uplifted bludgeon , pike on high , hurled themselves upon ancient Paris in an uproar , what did they want ? 
They wanted an end to oppression , an end to tyranny , an end to the sword , work for men , instruction for the child , social sweetness for the woman , liberty , equality , fraternity , bread for all , the idea for all , the Edenizing of the world . 
Progress ; and that holy , sweet , and good thing , progress , they claimed in terrible wise , driven to extremities as they were , half naked , club in fist , a roar in their mouths . 
They were savages , yes ; but the savages of civilization . 
They proclaimed right furiously ; they were desirous , if only with fear and trembling , to force the human race to paradise . 
They seemed barbarians , and they were saviours . 
They demanded light with the mask of night . 
Facing these men , who were ferocious , we admit , and terrifying , but ferocious and terrifying for good ends , there are other men , smiling , embroidered , gilded , beribboned , starred , in silk stockings , in white plumes , in yellow gloves , in varnished shoes , who , with their elbows on a velvet table , beside a marble chimney-piece , insist gently on demeanor and the preservation of the past , of the Middle Ages , of divine right , of fanaticism , of innocence , of slavery , of the death penalty , of war , glorifying in low tones and with politeness , the sword , the stake , and the scaffold . 
For our part , if we were forced to make a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilized men of barbarism , we should choose the barbarians . 
But , thank Heaven , still another choice is possible . 
No perpendicular fall is necessary , in front any more than in the rear . 
Neither despotism nor terrorism . 
We desire progress with a gentle slope . 
God takes care of that . 
God 's whole policy consists in rendering slopes less steep . 
ENJOLRAS AND HIS LIEUTENANTS It was about this epoch that Enjolras , in view of a possible catastrophe , instituted a kind of mysterious census . 
All were present at a secret meeting at the Cafe Musain . 
Enjolras said , mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical but significant metaphors : -- `` It is proper that we should know where we stand and on whom we may count . 
If combatants are required , they must be provided . 
It can do no harm to have something with which to strike . 
Passers-by always have more chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than when there are none . 
Let us , therefore , reckon a little on the herd . 
How many of us are there ? 
There is no question of postponing this task until to-morrow . 
Revolutionists should always be hurried ; progress has no time to lose . 
Let us mistrust the unexpected . 
Let us not be caught unprepared . 
We must go over all the seams that we have made and see whether they hold fast . 
This business ought to be concluded to-day . 
Courfeyrac , you will see the polytechnic students . 
It is their day to go out . 
To-day is Wednesday . 
Feuilly , you will see those of the Glaciere , will you not ? 
Combeferre has promised me to go to Picpus . 
