`` Which one ? 
the old one or the new one ? '' 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , '' said Basque , drawing himself up . 
A man is a Baron most of all to his servants . 
He counts for something with them ; they are what a philosopher would call , bespattered with the title , and that flatters them . 
Marius , be it said in passing , a militant republican as he had proved , was now a Baron in spite of himself . 
A small revolution had taken place in the family in connection with this title . 
It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it , and Marius who detached himself from it . 
But Colonel Pontmercy had written : `` My son will bear my title . '' 
Marius obeyed . 
And then , Cosette , in whom the woman was beginning to dawn , was delighted to be a Baroness . 
`` Monsieur le Baron ? '' 
repeated Basque . 
`` I will go and see . 
I will tell him that M. Fauchelevent is here . '' 
`` No . 
Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes to speak to him in private , and mention no name . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque . 
`` I wish to surprise him . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque once more , emitting his second `` ah ! '' 
as an explanation of the first . 
And he left the room . 
Jean Valjean remained alone . 
The drawing-room , as we have just said , was in great disorder . 
It seemed as though , by lending an air , one might still hear the vague noise of the wedding . 
On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which had fallen from garlands and head-dresses . 
The wax candles , burned to stumps , added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the chandeliers . 
Not a single piece of furniture was in its place . 
In the corners , three or four arm-chairs , drawn close together in a circle , had the appearance of continuing a conversation . 
The whole effect was cheerful . 
A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast . 
It has been a happy thing . 
On the chairs in disarray , among those fading flowers , beneath those extinct lights , people have thought of joy . 
The sun had succeeded to the chandelier , and made its way gayly into the drawing-room . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spot where Basque had left him . 
He was very pale . 
His eyes were hollow , and so sunken in his head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared in their orbits . 
His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has been up all night . 
The elbows were whitened with the down which the friction of cloth against linen leaves behind it . 
Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at his feet by the sun . 
There came a sound at the door , and he raised his eyes . 
Marius entered , his head well up , his mouth smiling , an indescribable light on his countenance , his brow expanded , his eyes triumphant . 
He had not slept either . 
`` It is you , father ! '' 
he exclaimed , on catching sight of Jean Valjean ; `` that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air ! 
But you have come too early . 
