The good woman felt of it carefully , and thought she observed in the skirts and revers thicknesses of paper . 
More thousand-franc bank-bills , no doubt ! 
She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets . 
Not only the needles , thread , and scissors which she had seen , but a big pocket-book , a very large knife , and -- a suspicious circumstance -- several wigs of various colors . 
Each pocket of this coat had the air of being in a manner provided against unexpected accidents . 
Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter . 
A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A TUMULT Near Saint-Medard 's church there was a poor man who was in the habit of crouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned , and on whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity . 
He never passed this man without giving him a few sous . 
Sometimes he spoke to him . 
Those who envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police . 
He was an ex-beadle of seventy-five , who was constantly mumbling his prayers . 
One evening , as Jean Valjean was passing by , when he had not Cosette with him , he saw the beggar in his usual place , beneath the lantern which had just been lighted . 
The man seemed engaged in prayer , according to his custom , and was much bent over . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to him and placed his customary alms in his hand . 
The mendicant raised his eyes suddenly , stared intently at Jean Valjean , then dropped his head quickly . 
This movement was like a flash of lightning . 
Jean Valjean was seized with a shudder . 
It seemed to him that he had just caught sight , by the light of the street lantern , not of the placid and beaming visage of the old beadle , but of a well-known and startling face . 
He experienced the same impression that one would have on finding one 's self , all of a sudden , face to face , in the dark , with a tiger . 
He recoiled , terrified , petrified , daring neither to breathe , to speak , to remain , nor to flee , staring at the beggar who had dropped his head , which was enveloped in a rag , and no longer appeared to know that he was there . 
At this strange moment , an instinct -- possibly the mysterious instinct of self-preservation , -- restrained Jean Valjean from uttering a word . 
The beggar had the same figure , the same rags , the same appearance as he had every day . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , `` I am mad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
Impossible ! '' 
And he returned profoundly troubled . 
He hardly dared to confess , even to himself , that the face which he thought he had seen was the face of Javert . 
That night , on thinking the matter over , he regretted not having questioned the man , in order to force him to raise his head a second time . 
On the following day , at nightfall , he went back . 
The beggar was at his post . 
`` Good day , my good man , '' said Jean Valjean , resolutely , handing him a sou . 
The beggar raised his head , and replied in a whining voice , `` Thanks , my good sir . '' 
It was unmistakably the ex-beadle . 
Jean Valjean felt completely reassured . 
He began to laugh . 
`` How the deuce could I have thought that I saw Javert there ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Am I going to lose my eyesight now ? '' 
And he thought no more about it . 
A few days afterwards , -- it might have been at eight o'clock in the evening , -- he was in his room , and engaged in making Cosette spell aloud , when he heard the house door open and then shut again . 
This struck him as singular . 
The old woman , who was the only inhabitant of the house except himself , always went to bed at nightfall , so that she might not burn out her candles . 
Jean Valjean made a sign to Cosette to be quiet . 
He heard some one ascending the stairs . 
It might possibly be the old woman , who might have fallen ill and have been out to the apothecary 's . 
Jean Valjean listened . 
The step was heavy , and sounded like that of a man ; but the old woman wore stout shoes , and there is nothing which so strongly resembles the step of a man as that of an old woman . 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean blew out his candle . 
He had sent Cosette to bed , saying to her in a low voice , `` Get into bed very softly '' ; and as he kissed her brow , the steps paused . 
