they call the King of France `` le Marquis de Pantin . '' 
And behold , they are almost gay . 
A sort of gleam proceeds from these miserable wretches , as though their consciences were not heavy within them any more . 
These lamentable tribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate audacity of actions , they possess the heedless audacity of mind . 
A sign that they are losing the sense of their criminality , and that they feel , even among thinkers and dreamers , some indefinable support which the latter themselves know not of . 
A sign that theft and pillage are beginning to filter into doctrines and sophisms , in such a way as to lose somewhat of their ugliness , while communicating much of it to sophisms and doctrines . 
A sign , in short , of some outbreak which is prodigious and near unless some diversion shall arise . 
Let us pause a moment . 
Whom are we accusing here ? 
Is it the eighteenth century ? 
Is it philosophy ? 
Certainly not . 
The work of the eighteenth century is healthy and good and wholesome . 
The encyclopedists , Diderot at their head ; the physiocrates , Turgot at their head ; the philosophers , Voltaire at their head ; the Utopians , Rousseau at their head , -- these are four sacred legions . 
Humanity 's immense advance towards the light is due to them . 
They are the four vanguards of the human race , marching towards the four cardinal points of progress . 
Diderot towards the beautiful , Turgot towards the useful , Voltaire towards the true , Rousseau towards the just . 
But by the side of and above the philosophers , there were the sophists , a venomous vegetation mingled with a healthy growth , hemlock in the virgin forest . 
While the executioner was burning the great books of the liberators of the century on the grand staircase of the court-house , writers now forgotten were publishing , with the King 's sanction , no one knows what strangely disorganizing writings , which were eagerly read by the unfortunate . 
Some of these publications , odd to say , which were patronized by a prince , are to be found in the Secret Library . 
These facts , significant but unknown , were imperceptible on the surface . 
Sometimes , in the very obscurity of a fact lurks its danger . 
It is obscure because it is underhand . 
Of all these writers , the one who probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was Restif de La Bretonne . 
This work , peculiar to the whole of Europe , effected more ravages in Germany than anywhere else . 
In Germany , during a given period , summed up by Schiller in his famous drama The Robbers , theft and pillage rose up in protest against property and labor , assimilated certain specious and false elementary ideas , which , though just in appearance , were absurd in reality , enveloped themselves in these ideas , disappeared within them , after a fashion , assumed an abstract name , passed into the state of theory , and in that shape circulated among the laborious , suffering , and honest masses , unknown even to the imprudent chemists who had prepared the mixture , unknown even to the masses who accepted it . 
Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself , the case is grave . 
Suffering engenders wrath ; and while the prosperous classes blind themselves or fall asleep , which is the same thing as shutting one 's eyes , the hatred of the unfortunate classes lights its torch at some aggrieved or ill-made spirit which dreams in a corner , and sets itself to the scrutiny of society . 
The scrutiny of hatred is a terrible thing . 
Hence , if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it , those fearful commotions which were formerly called jacqueries , beside which purely political agitations are the merest child 's play , which are no longer the conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor , but the revolt of discomfort against comfort . 
Then everything crumbles . 
Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people . 
It is this peril , possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenth century , which the French Revolution , that immense act of probity , cut short . 
The French Revolution , which is nothing else than the idea armed with the sword , rose erect , and , with the same abrupt movement , closed the door of ill and opened the door of good . 
It put a stop to torture , promulgated the truth , expelled miasma , rendered the century healthy , crowned the populace . 
It may be said of it that it created man a second time , by giving him a second soul , the right . 
The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work , and to-day , the social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simply impossible . 
Blind is he who announces it ! 
Foolish is he who fears it ! 
Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie . 
Thanks to the Revolution , social conditions have changed . 
Feudal and monarchical maladies no longer run in our blood . 
There is no more of the Middle Ages in our constitution . 
We no longer live in the days when terrible swarms within made irruptions , when one heard beneath his feet the obscure course of a dull rumble , when indescribable elevations from mole-like tunnels appeared on the surface of civilization , where the soil cracked open , where the roofs of caverns yawned , and where one suddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the earth . 
The revolutionary sense is a moral sense . 
The sentiment of right , once developed , develops the sentiment of duty . 
The law of all is liberty , which ends where the liberty of others begins , according to Robespierre 's admirable definition . 
Since ' 89 , the whole people has been dilating into a sublime individual ; there is not a poor man , who , possessing his right , has not his ray of sun ; the die-of-hunger feels within him the honesty of France ; the dignity of the citizen is an internal armor ; he who is free is scrupulous ; he who votes reigns . 
Hence incorruptibility ; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts ; hence eyes heroically lowered before temptations . 
The revolutionary wholesomeness is such , that on a day of deliverance , a 14th of July , a 10th of August , there is no longer any populace . 
