`` Did you go in ? '' 
demanded her father . 
`` No , '' replied the girl , `` but as his key is in the door , he must be out . '' 
The father exclaimed : -- `` Go in , nevertheless . '' 
The door opened , and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with a candle in her hand . 
She was as she had been in the morning , only still more repulsive in this light . 
She walked straight up to the bed . 
Marius endured an indescribable moment of anxiety ; but near the bed there was a mirror nailed to the wall , and it was thither that she was directing her steps . 
She raised herself on tiptoe and looked at herself in it . 
In the neighboring room , the sound of iron articles being moved was audible . 
She smoothed her hair with the palm of her hand , and smiled into the mirror , humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice : -- Nos amours ont dure toute une semaine , -LSB- 28 -RSB- Mais que du bonheur les instants sont courts ! 
S'adorer huit jours , c ' etait bien la peine ! 
Le temps des amours devait durer toujours ! 
Devrait durer toujours ! 
devrait durer toujours ! 
-LSB- 28 -RSB- Our love has lasted a whole week , but how short are the instants of happiness ! 
To adore each other for eight days was hardly worth the while ! 
The time of love should last forever . 
In the meantime , Marius trembled . 
It seemed impossible to him that she should not hear his breathing . 
She stepped to the window and looked out with the half-foolish way she had . 
`` How ugly Paris is when it has put on a white chemise ! '' 
said she . 
She returned to the mirror and began again to put on airs before it , scrutinizing herself full-face and three-quarters face in turn . 
`` Well ! '' 
cried her father , `` what are you about there ? '' 
`` I am looking under the bed and the furniture , '' she replied , continuing to arrange her hair ; `` there 's no one here . '' 
`` Booby ! '' 
yelled her father . 
`` Come here this minute ! 
And do n't waste any time about it ! '' 
`` Coming ! 
Coming ! '' 
said she . 
`` One has no time for anything in this hovel ! '' 
She hummed : -- Vous me quittez pour aller a la gloire ; -LSB- 29 -RSB- Mon triste coeur suivra partout . 
-LSB- 29 -RSB- You leave me to go to glory ; my sad heart will follow you everywhere . 
She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out , shutting the door behind her . 
A moment more , and Marius heard the sound of the two young girls ' bare feet in the corridor , and Jondrette 's voice shouting to them : -- `` Pay strict heed ! 
One on the side of the barrier , the other at the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
Do n't lose sight for a moment of the door of this house , and the moment you see anything , rush here on the instant ! 
as hard as you can go ! 
You have a key to get in . '' 
The eldest girl grumbled : -- `` The idea of standing watch in the snow barefoot ! '' 
`` To-morrow you shall have some dainty little green silk boots ! '' 
said the father . 
They ran down stairs , and a few seconds later the shock of the outer door as it banged to announced that they were outside . 
There now remained in the house only Marius , the Jondrettes and probably , also , the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a glimpse in the twilight , behind the door of the unused attic . 
THE USE MADE OF MARIUS ' FIVE-FRANC PIECE Marius decided that the moment had now arrived when he must resume his post at his observatory . 
In a twinkling , and with the agility of his age , he had reached the hole in the partition . 
