THE TWO OLD MEN DO EVERYTHING , EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWN FASHION , TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY Everything was made ready for the wedding . 
The doctor , on being consulted , declared that it might take place in February . 
It was then December . 
A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed . 
The grandfather was not the least happy of them all . 
He remained for a quarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette . 
`` The wonderful , beautiful girl ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` And she has so sweet and good an air ! 
she is , without exception , the most charming girl that I have ever seen in my life . 
Later on , she 'll have virtues with an odor of violets . 
How graceful ! 
one can not live otherwise than nobly with such a creature . 
Marius , my boy , you are a Baron , you are rich , do n't go to pettifogging , I beg of you . '' 
Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise . 
The transition had not been softened , and they would have been stunned , had they not been dazzled by it . 
`` Do you understand anything about it ? '' 
said Marius to Cosette . 
`` No , '' replied Cosette , `` but it seems to me that the good God is caring for us . '' 
Jean Valjean did everything , smoothed away every difficulty , arranged everything , made everything easy . 
He hastened towards Cosette 's happiness with as much ardor , and , apparently with as much joy , as Cosette herself . 
As he had been a mayor , he understood how to solve that delicate problem , with the secret of which he alone was acquainted , Cosette 's civil status . 
If he were to announce her origin bluntly , it might prevent the marriage , who knows ? 
He extricated Cosette from all difficulties . 
He concocted for her a family of dead people , a sure means of not encountering any objections . 
Cosette was the only scion of an extinct family ; Cosette was not his own daughter , but the daughter of the other Fauchelevent . 
Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners to the convent of the Petit-Picpus . 
Inquiry was made at that convent ; the very best information and the most respectable references abounded ; the good nuns , not very apt and but little inclined to fathom questions of paternity , and not attaching any importance to the matter , had never understood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was the daughter . 
They said what was wanted and they said it with zeal . 
An acte de notoriete was drawn up . 
Cosette became in the eyes of the law , Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent . 
She was declared an orphan , both father and mother being dead . 
Jean Valjean so arranged it that he was appointed , under the name of Fauchelevent , as Cosette 's guardian , with M. Gillenormand as supervising guardian over him . 
As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs , they constituted a legacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person , who desired to remain unknown . 
The original legacy had consisted of five hundred and ninety-four thousand francs ; but ten thousand francs had been expended on the education of Mademoiselle Euphrasie , five thousand francs of that amount having been paid to the convent . 
This legacy , deposited in the hands of a third party , was to be turned over to Cosette at her majority , or at the date of her marriage . 
This , taken as a whole , was very acceptable , as the reader will perceive , especially when the sum due was half a million . 
There were some peculiarities here and there , it is true , but they were not noticed ; one of the interested parties had his eyes blindfolded by love , the others by the six hundred thousand francs . 
Cosette learned that she was not the daughter of that old man whom she had so long called father . 
He was merely a kinsman ; another Fauchelevent was her real father . 
At any other time this would have broken her heart . 
But at the ineffable moment which she was then passing through , it cast but a slight shadow , a faint cloud , and she was so full of joy that the cloud did not last long . 
She had Marius . 
The young man arrived , the old man was effaced ; such is life . 
And then , Cosette had , for long years , been habituated to seeing enigmas around her ; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is always prepared for certain renunciations . 
Nevertheless , she continued to call Jean Valjean : Father . 
Cosette , happy as the angels , was enthusiastic over Father Gillenormand . 
It is true that he overwhelmed her with gallant compliments and presents . 
While Jean Valjean was building up for Cosette a normal situation in society and an unassailable status , M. Gillenormand was superintending the basket of wedding gifts . 
Nothing so amused him as being magnificent . 
