And some rushed forward , and others drew up in line , for a passing king always creates a tumult ; besides , the appearance and disappearance of Louis XVIII . 
produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris . 
It was rapid but majestic . 
This impotent king had a taste for a fast gallop ; as he was not able to walk , he wished to run : that cripple would gladly have had himself drawn by the lightning . 
He passed , pacific and severe , in the midst of naked swords . 
His massive couch , all covered with gilding , with great branches of lilies painted on the panels , thundered noisily along . 
There was hardly time to cast a glance upon it . 
In the rear angle on the right there was visible on tufted cushions of white satin a large , firm , and ruddy face , a brow freshly powdered a l'oiseau royal , a proud , hard , crafty eye , the smile of an educated man , two great epaulets with bullion fringe floating over a bourgeois coat , the Golden Fleece , the cross of Saint Louis , the cross of the Legion of Honor , the silver plaque of the Saint-Esprit , a huge belly , and a wide blue ribbon : it was the king . 
Outside of Paris , he held his hat decked with white ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in high English gaiters ; when he re-entered the city , he put on his hat and saluted rarely ; he stared coldly at the people , and they returned it in kind . 
When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter , the whole success which he produced is contained in this remark of an inhabitant of the faubourg to his comrade , `` That big fellow yonder is the government . '' 
This infallible passage of the king at the same hour was , therefore , the daily event of the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in the quarter , and probably did not belong in Paris , for he was ignorant as to this detail . 
When , at two o'clock , the royal carriage , surrounded by a squadron of the body-guard all covered with silver lace , debouched on the boulevard , after having made the turn of the Salpetriere , he appeared surprised and almost alarmed . 
There was no one but himself in this cross-lane . 
He drew up hastily behind the corner of the wall of an enclosure , though this did not prevent M. le Duc de Havre from spying him out . 
M. le Duc de Havre , as captain of the guard on duty that day , was seated in the carriage , opposite the king . 
He said to his Majesty , `` Yonder is an evil-looking man . '' 
Members of the police , who were clearing the king 's route , took equal note of him : one of them received an order to follow him . 
But the man plunged into the deserted little streets of the faubourg , and as twilight was beginning to fall , the agent lost trace of him , as is stated in a report addressed that same evening to M. le Comte d'Angles , Minister of State , Prefect of Police . 
When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track , he redoubled his pace , not without turning round many a time to assure himself that he was not being followed . 
At a quarter-past four , that is to say , when night was fully come , he passed in front of the theatre of the Porte Saint-Martin , where The Two Convicts was being played that day . 
This poster , illuminated by the theatre lanterns , struck him ; for , although he was walking rapidly , he halted to read it . 
An instant later he was in the blind alley of La Planchette , and he entered the Plat d'Etain -LSB- the Pewter Platter -RSB- , where the office of the coach for Lagny was then situated . 
This coach set out at half-past four . 
The horses were harnessed , and the travellers , summoned by the coachman , were hastily climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle . 
The man inquired : -- `` Have you a place ? '' 
`` Only one -- beside me on the box , '' said the coachman . 
`` I will take it . '' 
`` Climb up . '' 
Nevertheless , before setting out , the coachman cast a glance at the traveller 's shabby dress , at the diminutive size of his bundle , and made him pay his fare . 
`` Are you going as far as Lagny ? '' 
demanded the coachman . 
`` Yes , '' said the man . 
The traveller paid to Lagny . 
They started . 
When they had passed the barrier , the coachman tried to enter into conversation , but the traveller only replied in monosyllables . 
The coachman took to whistling and swearing at his horses . 
The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak . 
It was cold . 
The man did not appear to be thinking of that . 
Thus they passed Gournay and Neuilly-sur-Marne . 
Towards six o'clock in the evening they reached Chelles . 
The coachman drew up in front of the carters ' inn installed in the ancient buildings of the Royal Abbey , to give his horses a breathing spell . 
`` I get down here , '' said the man . 
He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle . 
An instant later he had disappeared . 
He did not enter the inn . 
When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later , it did not encounter him in the principal street of Chelles . 
The coachman turned to the inside travellers . 
`` There , '' said he , `` is a man who does not belong here , for I do not know him . 
