`` I have been robbed , '' said the officer ; `` I am sorry for that . 
You should have had them . '' 
The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct . 
`` Some one is coming , '' said the prowler , with the movement of a man who is taking his departure . 
The officer raised his arm feebly , and detained him . 
`` You have saved my life . 
Who are you ? '' 
The prowler answered rapidly , and in a low voice : -- `` Like yourself , I belonged to the French army . 
I must leave you . 
If they were to catch me , they would shoot me . 
I have saved your life . 
Now get out of the scrape yourself . '' 
`` What is your rank ? '' 
`` Sergeant . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Thenardier . '' 
`` I shall not forget that name , '' said the officer ; `` and do you remember mine . 
My name is Pontmercy . '' 
BOOK SECOND . 
-- THE SHIP ORION NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430 Jean Valjean had been recaptured . 
The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the sad details . 
We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs published by the journals of that day , a few months after the surprising events which had taken place at M. sur M . 
These articles are rather summary . 
It must be remembered , that at that epoch the Gazette des Tribunaux was not yet in existence . 
We borrow the first from the Drapeau Blanc . 
It bears the date of July 25 , 1823 . 
An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the theatre of an event quite out of the ordinary course . 
A man , who was a stranger in the Department , and who bore the name of M. Madeleine , had , thanks to the new methods , resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry , the manufacture of jet and of black glass trinkets . 
He had made his fortune in the business , and that of the arrondissement as well , we will admit . 
He had been appointed mayor , in recognition of his services . 
The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than an ex-convict who had broken his ban , condemned in 1796 for theft , and named Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison . 
It appears that previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of M. Laffitte , a sum of over half a million which he had lodged there , and which he had , moreover , and by perfectly legitimate means , acquired in his business . 
No one has been able to discover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since his return to prison at Toulon . 
The second article , which enters a little more into detail , is an extract from the Journal de Paris , of the same date . 
A former convict , who had been liberated , named Jean Valjean , has just appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var , under circumstances calculated to attract attention . 
This wretch had succeeded in escaping the vigilance of the police , he had changed his name , and had succeeded in getting himself appointed mayor of one of our small northern towns ; in this town he had established a considerable commerce . 
He has at last been unmasked and arrested , thanks to the indefatigable zeal of the public prosecutor . 
He had for his concubine a woman of the town , who died of a shock at the moment of his arrest . 
This scoundrel , who is endowed with Herculean strength , found means to escape ; but three or four days after his flight the police laid their hands on him once more , in Paris itself , at the very moment when he was entering one of those little vehicles which run between the capital and the village of Montfermeil -LRB- Seine-et-Oise -RRB- . 
He is said to have profited by this interval of three or four days of liberty , to withdraw a considerable sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers . 
This sum has been estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs . 
If the indictment is to be trusted , he has hidden it in some place known to himself alone , and it has not been possible to lay hands on it . 
However that may be , the said Jean Valjean has just been brought before the Assizes of the Department of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with violence , about eight years ago , on the person of one of those honest children who , as the patriarch of Ferney has said , in immortal verse , '' ... Arrive from Savoy every year , And who , with gentle hands , do clear Those long canals choked up with soot . '' 
This bandit refused to defend himself . 
It was proved by the skilful and eloquent representative of the public prosecutor , that the theft was committed in complicity with others , and that Jean Valjean was a member of a band of robbers in the south . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty and was condemned to the death penalty in consequence . 
This criminal refused to lodge an appeal . 
The king , in his inexhaustible clemency , has deigned to commute his penalty to that of penal servitude for life . 
Jean Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at Toulon . 
