No doubt , Cosette did belong to another ; but should he , Jean Valjean , retain of Cosette all that he could retain ? 
Should he remain the sort of father , half seen but respected , which he had hitherto been ? 
Should he , without saying a word , bring his past to that future ? 
Should he present himself there , as though he had a right , and should he seat himself , veiled , at that luminous fireside ? 
Should he take those innocent hands into his tragic hands , with a smile ? 
Should he place upon the peaceful fender of the Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his , which dragged behind them the disgraceful shadow of the law ? 
Should he enter into participation in the fair fortunes of Cosette and Marius ? 
Should he render the obscurity on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still more dense ? 
Should he place his catastrophe as a third associate in their felicity ? 
Should he continue to hold his peace ? 
In a word , should he be the sinister mute of destiny beside these two happy beings ? 
We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it , in order to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questions appear to us in all their horrible nakedness . 
Good or evil stands behind this severe interrogation point . 
What are you going to do ? 
demands the sphinx . 
This habit of trial Jean Valjean possessed . 
He gazed intently at the sphinx . 
He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects . 
Cosette , that charming existence , was the raft of this shipwreck . 
What was he to do ? 
To cling fast to it , or to let go his hold ? 
If he clung to it , he should emerge from disaster , he should ascend again into the sunlight , he should let the bitter water drip from his garments and his hair , he was saved , he should live . 
And if he let go his hold ? 
Then the abyss . 
Thus he took sad council with his thoughts . 
Or , to speak more correctly , he fought ; he kicked furiously internally , now against his will , now against his conviction . 
Happily for Jean Valjean that he had been able to weep . 
That relieved him , possibly . 
But the beginning was savage . 
A tempest , more furious than the one which had formerly driven him to Arras , broke loose within him . 
The past surged up before him facing the present ; he compared them and sobbed . 
The silence of tears once opened , the despairing man writhed . 
He felt that he had been stopped short . 
Alas ! 
in this fight to the death between our egotism and our duty , when we thus retreat step by step before our immutable ideal , bewildered , furious , exasperated at having to yield , disputing the ground , hoping for a possible flight , seeking an escape , what an abrupt and sinister resistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear ! 
To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle ! 
The invisible inexorable , what an obsession ! 
Then , one is never done with conscience . 
Make your choice , Brutus ; make your choice , Cato . 
It is fathomless , since it is God . 
One flings into that well the labor of one 's whole life , one flings in one 's fortune , one flings in one 's riches , one flings in one 's success , one flings in one 's liberty or fatherland , one flings in one 's well-being , one flings in one 's repose , one flings in one 's joy ! 
More ! 
more ! 
more ! 
Empty the vase ! 
tip the urn ! 
One must finish by flinging in one 's heart . 
Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells , there is a tun like that . 
Is not one pardonable , if one at last refuses ! 
Can the inexhaustible have any right ? 
