Grantaire admired , loved , and venerated Enjolras . 
To whom did this anarchical scoffer unite himself in this phalanx of absolute minds ? 
To the most absolute . 
In what manner had Enjolras subjugated him ? 
By his ideas ? 
No . 
By his character . 
A phenomenon which is often observable . 
A sceptic who adheres to a believer is as simple as the law of complementary colors . 
That which we lack attracts us . 
No one loves the light like the blind man . 
The dwarf adores the drum-major . 
The toad always has his eyes fixed on heaven . 
Why ? 
In order to watch the bird in its flight . 
Grantaire , in whom writhed doubt , loved to watch faith soar in Enjolras . 
He had need of Enjolras . 
That chaste , healthy , firm , upright , hard , candid nature charmed him , without his being clearly aware of it , and without the idea of explaining it to himself having occurred to him . 
He admired his opposite by instinct . 
His soft , yielding , dislocated , sickly , shapeless ideas attached themselves to Enjolras as to a spinal column . 
His moral backbone leaned on that firmness . 
Grantaire in the presence of Enjolras became some one once more . 
He was , himself , moreover , composed of two elements , which were , to all appearance , incompatible . 
He was ironical and cordial . 
His indifference loved . 
His mind could get along without belief , but his heart could not get along without friendship . 
A profound contradiction ; for an affection is a conviction . 
His nature was thus constituted . 
There are men who seem to be born to be the reverse , the obverse , the wrong side . 
They are Pollux , Patrocles , Nisus , Eudamidas , Ephestion , Pechmeja . 
They only exist on condition that they are backed up with another man ; their name is a sequel , and is only written preceded by the conjunction and ; and their existence is not their own ; it is the other side of an existence which is not theirs . 
Grantaire was one of these men . 
He was the obverse of Enjolras . 
One might almost say that affinities begin with the letters of the alphabet . 
In the series O and P are inseparable . 
You can , at will , pronounce O and P or Orestes and Pylades . 
Grantaire , Enjolras ' true satellite , inhabited this circle of young men ; he lived there , he took no pleasure anywhere but there ; he followed them everywhere . 
His joy was to see these forms go and come through the fumes of wine . 
They tolerated him on account of his good humor . 
Enjolras , the believer , disdained this sceptic ; and , a sober man himself , scorned this drunkard . 
He accorded him a little lofty pity . 
Grantaire was an unaccepted Pylades . 
Always harshly treated by Enjolras , roughly repulsed , rejected yet ever returning to the charge , he said of Enjolras : `` What fine marble ! '' 
BLONDEAU 'S FUNERAL ORATION BY BOSSUET On a certain afternoon , which had , as will be seen hereafter , some coincidence with the events heretofore related , Laigle de Meaux was to be seen leaning in a sensual manner against the doorpost of the Cafe Musain . 
He had the air of a caryatid on a vacation ; he carried nothing but his revery , however . 
He was staring at the Place Saint-Michel . 
To lean one 's back against a thing is equivalent to lying down while standing erect , which attitude is not hated by thinkers . 
Laigle de Meaux was pondering without melancholy , over a little misadventure which had befallen him two days previously at the law-school , and which had modified his personal plans for the future , plans which were rather indistinct in any case . 
Revery does not prevent a cab from passing by , nor the dreamer from taking note of that cab . 
Laigle de Meaux , whose eyes were straying about in a sort of diffuse lounging , perceived , athwart his somnambulism , a two-wheeled vehicle proceeding through the place , at a foot pace and apparently in indecision . 
