Marius heard Mother Jondrette 's heavy hand fumbling at his lock in the dark . 
The door opened . 
He remained nailed to the spot with the shock and with horror . 
The Jondrette entered . 
The dormer window permitted the entrance of a ray of moonlight between two blocks of shadow . 
One of these blocks of shadow entirely covered the wall against which Marius was leaning , so that he disappeared within it . 
Mother Jondrette raised her eyes , did not see Marius , took the two chairs , the only ones which Marius possessed , and went away , letting the door fall heavily to behind her . 
She re-entered the lair . 
`` Here are the two chairs . '' 
`` And here is the lantern . 
Go down as quick as you can . '' 
She hastily obeyed , and Jondrette was left alone . 
He placed the two chairs on opposite sides of the table , turned the chisel in the brazier , set in front of the fireplace an old screen which masked the chafing-dish , then went to the corner where lay the pile of rope , and bent down as though to examine something . 
Marius then recognized the fact , that what he had taken for a shapeless mass was a very well-made rope-ladder , with wooden rungs and two hooks with which to attach it . 
This ladder , and some large tools , veritable masses of iron , which were mingled with the old iron piled up behind the door , had not been in the Jondrette hovel in the morning , and had evidently been brought thither in the afternoon , during Marius ' absence . 
`` Those are the utensils of an edge-tool maker , '' thought Marius . 
Had Marius been a little more learned in this line , he would have recognized in what he took for the engines of an edge-tool maker , certain instruments which will force a lock or pick a lock , and others which will cut or slice , the two families of tools which burglars call cadets and fauchants . 
The fireplace and the two chairs were exactly opposite Marius . 
The brazier being concealed , the only light in the room was now furnished by the candle ; the smallest bit of crockery on the table or on the chimney-piece cast a large shadow . 
There was something indescribably calm , threatening , and hideous about this chamber . 
One felt that there existed in it the anticipation of something terrible . 
Jondrette had allowed his pipe to go out , a serious sign of preoccupation , and had again seated himself . 
The candle brought out the fierce and the fine angles of his countenance . 
He indulged in scowls and in abrupt unfoldings of the right hand , as though he were responding to the last counsels of a sombre inward monologue . 
In the course of one of these dark replies which he was making to himself , he pulled the table drawer rapidly towards him , took out a long kitchen knife which was concealed there , and tried the edge of its blade on his nail . 
That done , he put the knife back in the drawer and shut it . 
Marius , on his side , grasped the pistol in his right pocket , drew it out and cocked it . 
The pistol emitted a sharp , clear click , as he cocked it . 
Jondrette started , half rose , listened a moment , then began to laugh and said : -- `` What a fool I am ! 
It 's the partition cracking ! '' 
Marius kept the pistol in his hand . 
MARIUS ' TWO CHAIRS FORM A VIS-A-VIS Suddenly , the distant and melancholy vibration of a clock shook the panes . 
Six o'clock was striking from Saint-Medard . 
Jondrette marked off each stroke with a toss of his head . 
When the sixth had struck , he snuffed the candle with his fingers . 
Then he began to pace up and down the room , listened at the corridor , walked on again , then listened once more . 
`` Provided only that he comes ! '' 
he muttered , then he returned to his chair . 
He had hardly reseated himself when the door opened . 
Mother Jondrette had opened it , and now remained in the corridor making a horrible , amiable grimace , which one of the holes of the dark-lantern illuminated from below . 
`` Enter , sir , '' she said . 
`` Enter , my benefactor , '' repeated Jondrette , rising hastily . 
M. Leblanc made his appearance . 
He wore an air of serenity which rendered him singularly venerable . 
He laid four louis on the table . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , '' said he , `` this is for your rent and your most pressing necessities . 
We will attend to the rest hereafter . '' 
`` May God requite it to you , my generous benefactor ! '' 
said Jondrette . 
And rapidly approaching his wife : -- `` Dismiss the carriage ! '' 
