Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart . 
`` To get out ! '' 
`` Yes , Monsieur Madeleine . 
In order to return here it is first necessary to get out . '' 
And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded , Fauchelevent went on : -- `` You must not be found here in this fashion . 
Whence come you ? 
For me , you fall from heaven , because I know you ; but the nuns require one to enter by the door . '' 
All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` they are ringing up the vocal mothers . 
They are going to the chapter . 
They always hold a chapter when any one dies . 
She died at daybreak . 
People generally do die at daybreak . 
But can not you get out by the way in which you entered ? 
Come , I do not ask for the sake of questioning you , but how did you get in ? '' 
Jean Valjean turned pale ; the very thought of descending again into that terrible street made him shudder . 
You make your way out of a forest filled with tigers , and once out of it , imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to return thither ! 
Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that quarter , agents on the watch , sentinels everywhere , frightful fists extended towards his collar , Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
said he . 
`` Father Fauchelevent , say that I fell from the sky . '' 
`` But I believe it , I believe it , '' retorted Fauchelevent . 
`` You have no need to tell me that . 
The good God must have taken you in his hand for the purpose of getting a good look at you close to , and then dropped you . 
Only , he meant to place you in a man 's convent ; he made a mistake . 
Come , there goes another peal , that is to order the porter to go and inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a corpse . 
All that is the ceremony of dying . 
These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit . 
A doctor is a man who does not believe in anything . 
He lifts the veil . 
Sometimes he lifts something else too . 
How quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time ! 
What is the matter ? 
Your little one is still asleep . 
What is her name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
`` She is your daughter ? 
You are her grandfather , that is ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It will be easy enough for her to get out of here . 
I have my service door which opens on the courtyard . 
I knock . 
The porter opens ; I have my vintage basket on my back , the child is in it , I go out . 
Father Fauchelevent goes out with his basket -- that is perfectly natural . 
You will tell the child to keep very quiet . 
She will be under the cover . 
I will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend , a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert , who is deaf , and who has a little bed . 
I will shout in the fruit-seller 's ear , that she is a niece of mine , and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow . 
Then the little one will re-enter with you ; for I will contrive to have you re-enter . 
