`` Success . '' 
Enjolras shook his head and replied : `` Another quarter of an hour of this success , and there will not be any cartridges left in the barricade . '' 
It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark . 
GAVROCHE OUTSIDE Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the barricade , outside in the street , amid the bullets . 
Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop , had made his way out through the cut , and was quietly engaged in emptying the full cartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on the slope of the redoubt , into his basket . 
`` What are you doing there ? '' 
asked Courfeyrac . 
Gavroche raised his face : -- `` I 'm filling my basket , citizen . '' 
`` Do n't you see the grape-shot ? '' 
Gavroche replied : `` Well , it is raining . 
What then ? '' 
Courfeyrac shouted : -- `` Come in ! '' 
`` Instanter , '' said Gavroche . 
And with a single bound he plunged into the street . 
It will be remembered that Fannicot 's company had left behind it a trail of bodies . 
Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on the pavement , through the whole length of the street . 
Twenty cartouches for Gavroche meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade . 
The smoke in the street was like a fog . 
Whoever has beheld a cloud which has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments can imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows of lofty houses . 
It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed ; hence a twilight which made even the broad daylight turn pale . 
The combatants could hardly see each other from one end of the street to the other , short as it was . 
This obscurity , which had probably been desired and calculated on by the commanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade , was useful to Gavroche . 
Beneath the folds of this veil of smoke , and thanks to his small size , he could advance tolerably far into the street without being seen . 
He rifled the first seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger . 
He crawled flat on his belly , galloped on all fours , took his basket in his teeth , twisted , glided , undulated , wound from one dead body to another , and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a nut . 
They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade , which was quite near , for fear of attracting attention to him . 
On one body , that of a corporal , he found a powder-flask . 
`` For thirst , '' said he , putting it in his pocket . 
By dint of advancing , he reached a point where the fog of the fusillade became transparent . 
So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on the outlook behind their paving-stone dike and the sharpshooters of the banlieue massed at the corner of the street suddenly pointed out to each other something moving through the smoke . 
At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant , who was lying near a stone door-post , of his cartridges , a bullet struck the body . 
`` Fichtre ! '' 
ejaculated Gavroche . 
`` They are killing my dead men for me . '' 
A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him . 
-- A third overturned his basket . 
Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue . 
He sprang to his feet , stood erect , with his hair flying in the wind , his hands on his hips , his eyes fixed on the National Guardsmen who were firing , and sang : `` On est laid a Nanterre , `` Men are ugly at Nanterre , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Et bete a Palaiseau , And dull at Palaiseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Then he picked up his basket , replaced the cartridges which had fallen from it , without missing a single one , and , advancing towards the fusillade , set about plundering another cartridge-box . 
There a fourth bullet missed him , again . 
Gavroche sang : `` Je ne suis pas notaire , `` I am not a notary , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Je suis un petit oiseau , I 'm a little bird , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet . 
`` Joie est mon caractere , `` Joy is my character , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Misere est mon trousseau , Misery is my trousseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Thus it went on for some time . 
It was a charming and terrible sight . 
Gavroche , though shot at , was teasing the fusillade . 
He had the air of being greatly diverted . 
