The blow told . 
`` You are right , in sooth , '' said he ; `` I am a fool . 
Give me my hat . '' 
He folded up the three bank-bills , thrust them into his pocket , and ran out in all haste ; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first . 
Some neighbors , of whom he made inquiries , put him on the track again ; the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry . 
He followed these hints , walking with great strides , and talking to himself the while : -- `` That man is evidently a million dressed in yellow , and I am an animal . 
First he gave twenty sous , then five francs , then fifty francs , then fifteen hundred francs , all with equal readiness . 
He would have given fifteen thousand francs . 
But I shall overtake him . '' 
And then , that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child ; all that was singular ; many mysteries lay concealed under it . 
One does not let mysteries out of one 's hand when one has once grasped them . 
The secrets of the wealthy are sponges of gold ; one must know how to subject them to pressure . 
All these thoughts whirled through his brain . 
`` I am an animal , '' said he . 
When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road takes that runs to Livry , it can be seen stretching out before one to a great distance across the plateau . 
On arriving there , he calculated that he ought to be able to see the old man and the child . 
He looked as far as his vision reached , and saw nothing . 
He made fresh inquiries , but he had wasted time . 
Some passers-by informed him that the man and child of whom he was in search had gone towards the forest in the direction of Gagny . 
He hastened in that direction . 
They were far in advance of him ; but a child walks slowly , and he walked fast ; and then , he was well acquainted with the country . 
All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like a man who has forgotten some essential point and who is ready to retrace his steps . 
`` I ought to have taken my gun , '' said he to himself . 
Thenardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass through our midst without our being aware of the fact , and who disappear without our finding them out , because destiny has only exhibited one side of them . 
It is the fate of many men to live thus half submerged . 
In a calm and even situation , Thenardier possessed all that is required to make -- we will not say to be -- what people have agreed to call an honest trader , a good bourgeois . 
At the same time certain circumstances being given , certain shocks arriving to bring his under-nature to the surface , he had all the requisites for a blackguard . 
He was a shopkeeper in whom there was some taint of the monster . 
Satan must have occasionally crouched down in some corner of the hovel in which Thenardier dwelt , and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this hideous masterpiece . 
After a momentary hesitation : -- `` Bah ! '' 
he thought ; `` they will have time to make their escape . '' 
And he pursued his road , walking rapidly straight ahead , and with almost an air of certainty , with the sagacity of a fox scenting a covey of partridges . 
In truth , when he had passed the ponds and had traversed in an oblique direction the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue de Bellevue , and reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit of the hill , and covers the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey of Chelles , he caught sight , over the top of the brushwood , of the hat on which he had already erected so many conjectures ; it was that man 's hat . 
The brushwood was not high . 
Thenardier recognized the fact that the man and Cosette were sitting there . 
The child could not be seen on account of her small size , but the head of her doll was visible . 
Thenardier was not mistaken . 
The man was sitting there , and letting Cosette get somewhat rested . 
The inn-keeper walked round the brushwood and presented himself abruptly to the eyes of those whom he was in search of . 
`` Pardon , excuse me , sir , '' he said , quite breathless , `` but here are your fifteen hundred francs . '' 
So saying , he handed the stranger the three bank-bills . 
The man raised his eyes . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
Thenardier replied respectfully : -- `` It means , sir , that I shall take back Cosette . '' 
Cosette shuddered , and pressed close to the old man . 
He replied , gazing to the very bottom of Thenardier 's eyes the while , and enunciating every syllable distinctly : -- `` You are go-ing to take back Co-sette ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , I am . 
I will tell you ; I have considered the matter . 
In fact , I have not the right to give her to you . 
I am an honest man , you see ; this child does not belong to me ; she belongs to her mother . 
