There was something indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress . 
She wore a gown of mauve barege , little reddish brown buskins , whose ribbons traced an X on her fine , white , open-worked stockings , and that sort of muslin spencer , a Marseilles invention , whose name , canezou , a corruption of the words quinze aout , pronounced after the fashion of the Canebiere , signifies fine weather , heat , and midday . 
The three others , less timid , as we have already said , wore low-necked dresses without disguise , which in summer , beneath flower-adorned hats , are very graceful and enticing ; but by the side of these audacious outfits , blond Fantine 's canezou , with its transparencies , its indiscretion , and its reticence , concealing and displaying at one and the same time , seemed an alluring godsend of decency , and the famous Court of Love , presided over by the Vicomtesse de Cette , with the sea-green eyes , would , perhaps , have awarded the prize for coquetry to this canezou , in the contest for the prize of modesty . 
The most ingenious is , at times , the wisest . 
This does happen . 
Brilliant of face , delicate of profile , with eyes of a deep blue , heavy lids , feet arched and small , wrists and ankles admirably formed , a white skin which , here and there allowed the azure branching of the veins to be seen , joy , a cheek that was young and fresh , the robust throat of the Juno of AEgina , a strong and supple nape of the neck , shoulders modelled as though by Coustou , with a voluptuous dimple in the middle , visible through the muslin ; a gayety cooled by dreaminess ; sculptural and exquisite -- such was Fantine ; and beneath these feminine adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue , and in that statue a soul . 
Fantine was beautiful , without being too conscious of it . 
Those rare dreamers , mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront everything with perfection , would have caught a glimpse in this little working-woman , through the transparency of her Parisian grace , of the ancient sacred euphony . 
This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred . 
She was beautiful in the two ways -- style and rhythm . 
Style is the form of the ideal ; rhythm is its movement . 
We have said that Fantine was joy ; she was also modesty . 
To an observer who studied her attentively , that which breathed from her athwart all the intoxication of her age , the season , and her love affair , was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty . 
She remained a little astonished . 
This chaste astonishment is the shade of difference which separates Psyche from Venus . 
Fantine had the long , white , fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs the ashes of the sacred fire with a golden pin . 
Although she would have refused nothing to Tholomyes , as we shall have more than ample opportunity to see , her face in repose was supremely virginal ; a sort of serious and almost austere dignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times , and there was nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become so suddenly extinct there , and meditation succeed to cheerfulness without any transition state . 
This sudden and sometimes severely accentuated gravity resembled the disdain of a goddess . 
Her brow , her nose , her chin , presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct from equilibrium of proportion , and from which harmony of countenance results ; in the very characteristic interval which separates the base of the nose from the upper lip , she had that imperceptible and charming fold , a mysterious sign of chastity , which makes Barberousse fall in love with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia . 
Love is a fault ; so be it . 
Fantine was innocence floating high over fault . 
THOLOMYES IS SO MERRY THAT HE SINGS A SPANISH DITTY That day was composed of dawn , from one end to the other . 
All nature seemed to be having a holiday , and to be laughing . 
The flower-beds of Saint-Cloud perfumed the air ; the breath of the Seine rustled the leaves vaguely ; the branches gesticulated in the wind , bees pillaged the jasmines ; a whole bohemia of butterflies swooped down upon the yarrow , the clover , and the sterile oats ; in the august park of the King of France there was a pack of vagabonds , the birds . 
The four merry couples , mingled with the sun , the fields , the flowers , the trees , were resplendent . 
And in this community of Paradise , talking , singing , running , dancing , chasing butterflies , plucking convolvulus , wetting their pink , open-work stockings in the tall grass , fresh , wild , without malice , all received , to some extent , the kisses of all , with the exception of Fantine , who was hedged about with that vague resistance of hers composed of dreaminess and wildness , and who was in love . 
`` You always have a queer look about you , '' said Favourite to her . 
Such things are joys . 
These passages of happy couples are a profound appeal to life and nature , and make a caress and light spring forth from everything . 
There was once a fairy who created the fields and forests expressly for those in love , -- in that eternal hedge-school of lovers , which is forever beginning anew , and which will last as long as there are hedges and scholars . 
Hence the popularity of spring among thinkers . 
The patrician and the knife-grinder , the duke and the peer , the limb of the law , the courtiers and townspeople , as they used to say in olden times , all are subjects of this fairy . 
They laugh and hunt , and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis -- what a transfiguration effected by love ! 
Notaries ' clerks are gods . 
And the little cries , the pursuits through the grass , the waists embraced on the fly , those jargons which are melodies , those adorations which burst forth in the manner of pronouncing a syllable , those cherries torn from one mouth by another , -- all this blazes forth and takes its place among the celestial glories . 
Beautiful women waste themselves sweetly . 
They think that this will never come to an end . 
Philosophers , poets , painters , observe these ecstasies and know not what to make of it , so greatly are they dazzled by it . 
The departure for Cythera ! 
exclaims Watteau ; Lancret , the painter of plebeians , contemplates his bourgeois , who have flitted away into the azure sky ; Diderot stretches out his arms to all these love idyls , and d'Urfe mingles druids with them . 
After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called the King 's Square to see a newly arrived plant from India , whose name escapes our memory at this moment , and which , at that epoch , was attracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud . 
It was an odd and charming shrub with a long stem , whose numerous branches , bristling and leafless and as fine as threads , were covered with a million tiny white rosettes ; this gave the shrub the air of a head of hair studded with flowers . 
There was always an admiring crowd about it . 
After viewing the shrub , Tholomyes exclaimed , `` I offer you asses ! '' 
and having agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses , they returned by way of Vanvres and Issy . 
At Issy an incident occurred . 
The truly national park , at that time owned by Bourguin the contractor , happened to be wide open . 
They passed the gates , visited the manikin anchorite in his grotto , tried the mysterious little effects of the famous cabinet of mirrors , the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become a millionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus . 
They had stoutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebrated by the Abbe de Bernis . 
As he swung these beauties , one after the other , producing folds in the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have found to his taste , amid peals of laughter , the Toulousan Tholomyes , who was somewhat of a Spaniard , Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa , sang , to a melancholy chant , the old ballad gallega , probably inspired by some lovely maid dashing in full flight upon a rope between two trees : -- `` Soy de Badajoz , `` Badajoz is my home , Amor me llama , And Love is my name ; Toda mi alma , To my eyes in flame , Es en mi ojos , All my soul doth come ; Porque ensenas , For instruction meet A tuas piernas . 
