`` So much the worse for my nephew ! 
he is wedding a beggar , let him be a beggar himself ! '' 
But Cosette 's half-million pleased the aunt , and altered her inward situation so far as this pair of lovers were concerned . 
One owes some consideration to six hundred thousand francs , and it was evident that she could not do otherwise than leave her fortune to these young people , since they did not need it . 
It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather -- M. Gillenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber , the finest in the house . 
`` That will make me young again , '' he said . 
`` It 's an old plan of mine . 
I have always entertained the idea of having a wedding in my chamber . '' 
He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles . 
He had the ceiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff , which he had by him in the piece , and which he believed to have emanated from Utrecht with a buttercup-colored satin ground , covered with velvet auricula blossoms . 
-- `` It was with that stuff , '' said he , `` that the bed of the Duchesse d'Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped . '' 
-- On the chimney-piece , he set a little figure in Saxe porcelain , carrying a muff against her nude stomach . 
M. Gillenormand 's library became the lawyer 's study , which Marius needed ; a study , it will be remembered , being required by the council of the order . 
THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS The lovers saw each other every day . 
Cosette came with M. Fauchelevent . 
-- `` This is reversing things , '' said Mademoiselle Gillenormand , `` to have the bride come to the house to do the courting like this . '' 
But Marius ' convalescence had caused the habit to become established , and the arm-chairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue de l'Homme Arme , had rooted it . 
Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other , but did not address each other . 
It seemed as though this had been agreed upon . 
Every girl needs a chaperon . 
Cosette could not have come without M. Fauchelevent . 
In Marius ' eyes , M. Fauchelevent was the condition attached to Cosette . 
He accepted it . 
By dint of discussing political matters , vaguely and without precision , from the point of view of the general amelioration of the fate of all men , they came to say a little more than `` yes '' and `` no . '' 
Once , on the subject of education , which Marius wished to have free and obligatory , multiplied under all forms lavished on every one , like the air and the sun in a word , respirable for the entire population , they were in unison , and they almost conversed . 
M. Fauchelevent talked well , and even with a certain loftiness of language -- still he lacked something indescribable . 
M. Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more , than a man of the world . 
Marius , inwardly , and in the depths of his thought , surrounded with all sorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent , who was to him simply benevolent and cold . 
There were moments when doubts as to his own recollections occurred to him . 
There was a void in his memory , a black spot , an abyss excavated by four months of agony . 
-- Many things had been lost therein . 
He had come to the point of asking himself whether it were really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent , so serious and so calm a man , in the barricade . 
This was not , however , the only stupor which the apparitions and the disappearances of the past had left in his mind . 
It must not be supposed that he was delivered from all those obsessions of the memory which force us , even when happy , even when satisfied , to glance sadly behind us . 
The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that have vanished contains neither thought nor love . 
At times , Marius clasped his face between his hands , and the vague and tumultuous past traversed the twilight which reigned in his brain . 
Again he beheld Mabeuf fall , he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot , he felt beneath his lips the cold brow of Eponine ; Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Bossuet , Grantaire , all his friends rose erect before him , then dispersed into thin air . 
Were all those dear , sorrowful , valiant , charming or tragic beings merely dreams ? 
had they actually existed ? 
The revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke . 
These great fevers create great dreams . 
He questioned himself ; he felt himself ; all these vanished realities made him dizzy . 
Where were they all then ? 
was it really true that all were dead ? 
A fall into the shadows had carried off all except himself . 
It all seemed to him to have disappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre . 
There are curtains like this which drop in life . 
God passes on to the following act . 
And he himself -- was he actually the same man ? 
He , the poor man , was rich ; he , the abandoned , had a family ; he , the despairing , was to marry Cosette . 
