`` So , '' said my convict , turning his eyes on Joe in a moody manner , and without the least glance at me , -- `` so you 're the blacksmith , are you ? 
Than I 'm sorry to say , I 've eat your pie . '' 
`` God knows you 're welcome to it , -- so far as it was ever mine , '' returned Joe , with a saving remembrance of Mrs. Joe . 
`` We do n't know what you have done , but we would n't have you starved to death for it , poor miserable fellow-creatur . 
-- Would us , Pip ? '' 
The something that I had noticed before , clicked in the man 's throat again , and he turned his back . 
The boat had returned , and his guard were ready , so we followed him to the landing-place made of rough stakes and stones , and saw him put into the boat , which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself . 
No one seemed surprised to see him , or interested in seeing him , or glad to see him , or sorry to see him , or spoke a word , except that somebody in the boat growled as if to dogs , `` Give way , you ! '' 
which was the signal for the dip of the oars . 
By the light of the torches , we saw the black Hulk lying out a little way from the mud of the shore , like a wicked Noah 's ark . 
Cribbed and barred and moored by massive rusty chains , the prison-ship seemed in my young eyes to be ironed like the prisoners . 
We saw the boat go alongside , and we saw him taken up the side and disappear . 
Then , the ends of the torches were flung hissing into the water , and went out , as if it were all over with him . 
My state of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had been so unexpectedly exonerated did not impel me to frank disclosure ; but I hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom of it . 
I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in reference to Mrs. Joe , when the fear of being found out was lifted off me . 
But I loved Joe , -- perhaps for no better reason in those early days than because the dear fellow let me love him , -- and , as to him , my inner self was not so easily composed . 
It was much upon my mind -LRB- particularly when I first saw him looking about for his file -RRB- that I ought to tell Joe the whole truth . 
Yet I did not , and for the reason that I mistrusted that if I did , he would think me worse than I was . 
The fear of losing Joe 's confidence , and of thenceforth sitting in the chimney corner at night staring drearily at my forever lost companion and friend , tied up my tongue . 
I morbidly represented to myself that if Joe knew it , I never afterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker , without thinking that he was meditating on it . 
That , if Joe knew it , I never afterwards could see him glance , however casually , at yesterday 's meat or pudding when it came on to-day 's table , without thinking that he was debating whether I had been in the pantry . 
That , if Joe knew it , and at any subsequent period of our joint domestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick , the conviction that he suspected tar in it , would bring a rush of blood to my face . 
In a word , I was too cowardly to do what I knew to be right , as I had been too cowardly to avoid doing what I knew to be wrong . 
I had had no intercourse with the world at that time , and I imitated none of its many inhabitants who act in this manner . 
Quite an untaught genius , I made the discovery of the line of action for myself . 
As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship , Joe took me on his back again and carried me home . 
He must have had a tiresome journey of it , for Mr. Wopsle , being knocked up , was in such a very bad temper that if the Church had been thrown open , he would probably have excommunicated the whole expedition , beginning with Joe and myself . 
In his lay capacity , he persisted in sitting down in the damp to such an insane extent , that when his coat was taken off to be dried at the kitchen fire , the circumstantial evidence on his trousers would have hanged him , if it had been a capital offence . 
By that time , I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little drunkard , through having been newly set upon my feet , and through having been fast asleep , and through waking in the heat and lights and noise of tongues . 
As I came to myself -LRB- with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders , and the restorative exclamation `` Yah ! 
Was there ever such a boy as this ! '' 
from my sister , -RRB- I found Joe telling them about the convict 's confession , and all the visitors suggesting different ways by which he had got into the pantry . 
Mr. Pumblechook made out , after carefully surveying the premises , that he had first got upon the roof of the forge , and had then got upon the roof of the house , and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney by a rope made of his bedding cut into strips ; and as Mr. Pumblechook was very positive and drove his own chaise-cart -- over everybody -- it was agreed that it must be so . 
Mr. Wopsle , indeed , wildly cried out , `` No ! '' 
with the feeble malice of a tired man ; but , as he had no theory , and no coat on , he was unanimously set at naught , -- not to mention his smoking hard behind , as he stood with his back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out : which was not calculated to inspire confidence . 
This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me , as a slumberous offence to the company 's eyesight , and assisted me up to bed with such a strong hand that I seemed to have fifty boots on , and to be dangling them all against the edges of the stairs . 
My state of mind , as I have described it , began before I was up in the morning , and lasted long after the subject had died out , and had ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions . 
At the time when I stood in the churchyard reading the family tombstones , I had just enough learning to be able to spell them out . 
My construction even of their simple meaning was not very correct , for I read `` wife of the Above '' as a complimentary reference to my father 's exaltation to a better world ; and if any one of my deceased relations had been referred to as `` Below , '' I have no doubt I should have formed the worst opinions of that member of the family . 
Neither were my notions of the theological positions to which my Catechism bound me , at all accurate ; for , I have a lively remembrance that I supposed my declaration that I was to `` walk in the same all the days of my life , '' laid me under an obligation always to go through the village from our house in one particular direction , and never to vary it by turning down by the wheelwright 's or up by the mill . 
When I was old enough , I was to be apprenticed to Joe , and until I could assume that dignity I was not to be what Mrs. Joe called `` Pompeyed , '' or -LRB- as I render it -RRB- pampered . 
Therefore , I was not only odd-boy about the forge , but if any neighbor happened to want an extra boy to frighten birds , or pick up stones , or do any such job , I was favored with the employment . 
In order , however , that our superior position might not be compromised thereby , a money-box was kept on the kitchen mantel-shelf , into which it was publicly made known that all my earnings were dropped . 
I have an impression that they were to be contributed eventually towards the liquidation of the National Debt , but I know I had no hope of any personal participation in the treasure . 
Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt kept an evening school in the village ; that is to say , she was a ridiculous old woman of limited means and unlimited infirmity , who used to go to sleep from six to seven every evening , in the society of youth who paid two pence per week each , for the improving opportunity of seeing her do it . 
She rented a small cottage , and Mr. Wopsle had the room upstairs , where we students used to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified and terrific manner , and occasionally bumping on the ceiling . 
There was a fiction that Mr. Wopsle `` examined '' the scholars once a quarter . 
What he did on those occasions was to turn up his cuffs , stick up his hair , and give us Mark Antony 's oration over the body of Caesar . 
This was always followed by Collins 's Ode on the Passions , wherein I particularly venerated Mr. Wopsle as Revenge throwing his blood-stained sword in thunder down , and taking the War-denouncing trumpet with a withering look . 
It was not with me then , as it was in later life , when I fell into the society of the Passions , and compared them with Collins and Wopsle , rather to the disadvantage of both gentlemen . 
Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt , besides keeping this Educational Institution , kept in the same room -- a little general shop . 
She had no idea what stock she had , or what the price of anything in it was ; but there was a little greasy memorandum-book kept in a drawer , which served as a Catalogue of Prices , and by this oracle Biddy arranged all the shop transactions . 
Biddy was Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt 's granddaughter ; I confess myself quite unequal to the working out of the problem , what relation she was to Mr. Wopsle . 
She was an orphan like myself ; like me , too , had been brought up by hand . 
She was most noticeable , I thought , in respect of her extremities ; for , her hair always wanted brushing , her hands always wanted washing , and her shoes always wanted mending and pulling up at heel . 
This description must be received with a week-day limitation . 
On Sundays , she went to church elaborated . 
Much of my unassisted self , and more by the help of Biddy than of Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt , I struggled through the alphabet as if it had been a bramble-bush ; getting considerably worried and scratched by every letter . 
After that I fell among those thieves , the nine figures , who seemed every evening to do something new to disguise themselves and baffle recognition . 
But , at last I began , in a purblind groping way , to read , write , and cipher , on the very smallest scale . 
One night I was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate , expending great efforts on the production of a letter to Joe . 
I think it must have been a full year after our hunt upon the marshes , for it was a long time after , and it was winter and a hard frost . 
With an alphabet on the hearth at my feet for reference , I contrived in an hour or two to print and smear this epistle : -- `` MI DEER JO i OPE U R KRWITE WELL i OPE i SHAL SON B HABELL 4 2 TEEDGE U JO AN THEN WE SHORL B SO GLODD AN WEN i M PRENGTD 2 U JO WOT LARX AN BLEVE ME INF XN PIP . '' 
There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with Joe by letter , inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone . 
But I delivered this written communication -LRB- slate and all -RRB- with my own hand , and Joe received it as a miracle of erudition . 
`` I say , Pip , old chap ! '' 
cried Joe , opening his blue eyes wide , `` what a scholar you are ! 
A n't you ? '' 
`` I should like to be , '' said I , glancing at the slate as he held it ; with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly . 
`` Why , here 's a J , '' said Joe , `` and a O equal to anythink ! 
Here 's a J and a O , Pip , and a J-O , Joe . '' 
I had never heard Joe read aloud to any greater extent than this monosyllable , and I had observed at church last Sunday , when I accidentally held our Prayer-Book upside down , that it seemed to suit his convenience quite as well as if it had been all right . 
Wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding out whether in teaching Joe , I should have to begin quite at the beginning , I said , `` Ah ! 
But read the rest , Jo . '' 
`` The rest , eh , Pip ? '' 
said Joe , looking at it with a slow , searching eye , `` One , two , three . 
Why , here 's three Js , and three Os , and three J-O , Joes in it , Pip ! '' 
I leaned over Joe , and , with the aid of my forefinger read him the whole letter . 
`` Astonishing ! '' 
said Joe , when I had finished . 
`` You ARE a scholar . '' 
`` How do you spell Gargery , Joe ? '' 
I asked him , with a modest patronage . 
`` I do n't spell it at all , '' said Joe . 
`` But supposing you did ? '' 
`` It ca n't be supposed , '' said Joe . 
`` Tho ' I 'm uncommon fond of reading , too . '' 
`` Are you , Joe ? '' 
`` On-common . 
Give me , '' said Joe , `` a good book , or a good newspaper , and sit me down afore a good fire , and I ask no better . 
Lord ! '' 
he continued , after rubbing his knees a little , `` when you do come to a J and a O , and says you , ` Here , at last , is a J-O , Joe , ' how interesting reading is ! '' 
I derived from this , that Joe 's education , like Steam , was yet in its infancy . 
Pursuing the subject , I inquired , -- `` Did n't you ever go to school , Joe , when you were as little as me ? '' 
`` No , Pip . '' 
`` Why did n't you ever go to school , Joe , when you were as little as me ? '' 
`` Well , Pip , '' said Joe , taking up the poker , and settling himself to his usual occupation when he was thoughtful , of slowly raking the fire between the lower bars ; `` I 'll tell you . 
My father , Pip , he were given to drink , and when he were overtook with drink , he hammered away at my mother , most onmerciful . 
It were a ` most the only hammering he did , indeed , ` xcepting at myself . 
And he hammered at me with a wigor only to be equalled by the wigor with which he did n't hammer at his anwil . 
-- You 're a listening and understanding , Pip ? '' 
`` Yes , Joe . '' '' 
` Consequence , my mother and me we ran away from my father several times ; and then my mother she 'd go out to work , and she 'd say , `` Joe , '' she 'd say , `` now , please God , you shall have some schooling , child , '' and she 'd put me to school . 
But my father were that good in his hart that he could n't abear to be without us . 
So , he 'd come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at the doors of the houses where we was , that they used to be obligated to have no more to do with us and to give us up to him . 
And then he took us home and hammered us . 
Which , you see , Pip , '' said Joe , pausing in his meditative raking of the fire , and looking at me , `` were a drawback on my learning . '' 
`` Certainly , poor Joe ! '' 
`` Though mind you , Pip , '' said Joe , with a judicial touch or two of the poker on the top bar , `` rendering unto all their doo , and maintaining equal justice betwixt man and man , my father were that good in his hart , do n't you see ? '' 
I did n't see ; but I did n't say so . 
`` Well ! '' 
Joe pursued , `` somebody must keep the pot a biling , Pip , or the pot wo n't bile , do n't you know ? '' 
I saw that , and said so . '' 
` Consequence , my father did n't make objections to my going to work ; so I went to work at my present calling , which were his too , if he would have followed it , and I worked tolerable hard , I assure you , Pip . 
In time I were able to keep him , and I kep him till he went off in a purple leptic fit . 
And it were my intentions to have had put upon his tombstone that , Whatsume'er the failings on his part , Remember reader he were that good in his heart . '' 
Joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful perspicuity , that I asked him if he had made it himself . 
`` I made it , '' said Joe , `` my own self . 
I made it in a moment . 
It was like striking out a horseshoe complete , in a single blow . 
I never was so much surprised in all my life , -- could n't credit my own ed , -- to tell you the truth , hardly believed it were my own ed . 
As I was saying , Pip , it were my intentions to have had it cut over him ; but poetry costs money , cut it how you will , small or large , and it were not done . 
Not to mention bearers , all the money that could be spared were wanted for my mother . 
She were in poor elth , and quite broke . 
She were n't long of following , poor soul , and her share of peace come round at last . '' 
Joe 's blue eyes turned a little watery ; he rubbed first one of them , and then the other , in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable manner , with the round knob on the top of the poker . 
`` It were but lonesome then , '' said Joe , `` living here alone , and I got acquainted with your sister . 
Now , Pip , '' -- Joe looked firmly at me as if he knew I was not going to agree with him ; -- `` your sister is a fine figure of a woman . '' 
I could not help looking at the fire , in an obvious state of doubt . 
`` Whatever family opinions , or whatever the world 's opinions , on that subject may be , Pip , your sister is , '' Joe tapped the top bar with the poker after every word following , `` a-fine-figure -- of -- a -- woman ! '' 
I could think of nothing better to say than `` I am glad you think so , Joe . '' 
`` So am I , '' returned Joe , catching me up . 
`` I am glad I think so , Pip . 
A little redness or a little matter of Bone , here or there , what does it signify to Me ? '' 
I sagaciously observed , if it did n't signify to him , to whom did it signify ? 
`` Certainly ! '' 
assented Joe . 
`` That 's it . 
You 're right , old chap ! 
When I got acquainted with your sister , it were the talk how she was bringing you up by hand . 
Very kind of her too , all the folks said , and I said , along with all the folks . 
As to you , '' Joe pursued with a countenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed , `` if you could have been aware how small and flabby and mean you was , dear me , you 'd have formed the most contemptible opinion of yourself ! '' 
Not exactly relishing this , I said , `` Never mind me , Joe . '' 
`` But I did mind you , Pip , '' he returned with tender simplicity . 
`` When I offered to your sister to keep company , and to be asked in church at such times as she was willing and ready to come to the forge , I said to her , ` And bring the poor little child . 
God bless the poor little child , ' I said to your sister , ` there 's room for him at the forge ! ' '' 
I broke out crying and begging pardon , and hugged Joe round the neck : who dropped the poker to hug me , and to say , `` Ever the best of friends ; a n't us , Pip ? 
Do n't cry , old chap ! '' 
When this little interruption was over , Joe resumed : -- `` Well , you see , Pip , and here we are ! 
That 's about where it lights ; here we are ! 
Now , when you take me in hand in my learning , Pip -LRB- and I tell you beforehand I am awful dull , most awful dull -RRB- , Mrs. Joe must n't see too much of what we 're up to . 
It must be done , as I may say , on the sly . 
And why on the sly ? 
I 'll tell you why , Pip . '' 
He had taken up the poker again ; without which , I doubt if he could have proceeded in his demonstration . 
`` Your sister is given to government . '' 
`` Given to government , Joe ? '' 
I was startled , for I had some shadowy idea -LRB- and I am afraid I must add , hope -RRB- that Joe had divorced her in a favor of the Lords of the Admiralty , or Treasury . 
`` Given to government , '' said Joe . 
`` Which I meantersay the government of you and myself . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
`` And she a n't over partial to having scholars on the premises , '' Joe continued , `` and in partickler would not be over partial to my being a scholar , for fear as I might rise . 
Like a sort of rebel , do n't you see ? '' 
I was going to retort with an inquiry , and had got as far as `` Why -- '' when Joe stopped me . 
`` Stay a bit . 
I know what you 're a going to say , Pip ; stay a bit ! 
I do n't deny that your sister comes the Mo-gul over us , now and again . 
I do n't deny that she do throw us back-falls , and that she do drop down upon us heavy . 
At such times as when your sister is on the Ram-page , Pip , '' Joe sank his voice to a whisper and glanced at the door , `` candor compels fur to admit that she is a Buster . '' 
Joe pronounced this word , as if it began with at least twelve capital Bs . 
`` Why do n't I rise ? 
That were your observation when I broke it off , Pip ? '' 
`` Yes , Joe . '' 
`` Well , '' said Joe , passing the poker in to his left hand , that he might feel his whisker ; and I had no hope of him whenever he took to that placid occupation ; `` your sister 's a master-mind . 
A master-mind . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
I asked , in some hope of bringing him to a stand . 
But Joe was readier with his definition than I had expected , and completely stopped me by arguing circularly , and answering with a fixed look , `` Her . '' 
`` And I ai n't a master-mind , '' Joe resumed , when he had unfixed his look , and got back to his whisker . 
`` And last of all , Pip , -- and this I want to say very serious to you , old chap , -- I see so much in my poor mother , of a woman drudging and slaving and breaking her honest hart and never getting no peace in her mortal days , that I 'm dead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what 's right by a woman , and I 'd fur rather of the two go wrong the t ` other way , and be a little ill-conwenienced myself . 
I wish it was only me that got put out , Pip ; I wish there war n't no Tickler for you , old chap ; I wish I could take it all on myself ; but this is the up-and-down-and-straight on it , Pip , and I hope you 'll overlook shortcomings . '' 
Young as I was , I believe that I dated a new admiration of Joe from that night . 
We were equals afterwards , as we had been before ; but , afterwards at quiet times when I sat looking at Joe and thinking about him , I had a new sensation of feeling conscious that I was looking up to Joe in my heart . 
`` However , '' said Joe , rising to replenish the fire ; `` here 's the Dutch-clock a working himself up to being equal to strike Eight of 'em , and she 's not come home yet ! 
I hope Uncle Pumblechook 's mare may n't have set a forefoot on a piece o ' ice , and gone down . '' 
Mrs. Joe made occasional trips with Uncle Pumblechook on market-days , to assist him in buying such household stuffs and goods as required a woman 's judgment ; Uncle Pumblechook being a bachelor and reposing no confidences in his domestic servant . 
This was market-day , and Mrs. Joe was out on one of these expeditions . 
Joe made the fire and swept the hearth , and then we went to the door to listen for the chaise-cart . 
It was a dry cold night , and the wind blew keenly , and the frost was white and hard . 
A man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes , I thought . 
And then I looked at the stars , and considered how awful it would be for a man to turn his face up to them as he froze to death , and see no help or pity in all the glittering multitude . 
`` Here comes the mare , '' said Joe , `` ringing like a peal of bells ! '' 
The sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical , as she came along at a much brisker trot than usual . 
We got a chair out , ready for Mrs. Joe 's alighting , and stirred up the fire that they might see a bright window , and took a final survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of its place . 
When we had completed these preparations , they drove up , wrapped to the eyes . 
Mrs. Joe was soon landed , and Uncle Pumblechook was soon down too , covering the mare with a cloth , and we were soon all in the kitchen , carrying so much cold air in with us that it seemed to drive all the heat out of the fire . 
`` Now , '' said Mrs. Joe , unwrapping herself with haste and excitement , and throwing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by the strings , `` if this boy ai n't grateful this night , he never will be ! '' 
I looked as grateful as any boy possibly could , who was wholly uninformed why he ought to assume that expression . 
`` It 's only to be hoped , '' said my sister , `` that he wo n't be Pompeyed . 
But I have my fears . '' 
`` She ai n't in that line , Mum , '' said Mr. Pumblechook . 
`` She knows better . '' 
She ? 
I looked at Joe , making the motion with my lips and eyebrows , `` She ? '' 
Joe looked at me , making the motion with his lips and eyebrows , `` She ? '' 
My sister catching him in the act , he drew the back of his hand across his nose with his usual conciliatory air on such occasions , and looked at her . 
`` Well ? '' 
said my sister , in her snappish way . 
`` What are you staring at ? 
Is the house afire ? '' '' 
-- Which some individual , '' Joe politely hinted , `` mentioned -- she . '' 
`` And she is a she , I suppose ? '' 
said my sister . 
`` Unless you call Miss Havisham a he . 
And I doubt if even you 'll go so far as that . '' 
`` Miss Havisham , up town ? '' 
said Joe . 
`` Is there any Miss Havisham down town ? '' 
returned my sister . 
`` She wants this boy to go and play there . 
And of course he 's going . 
And he had better play there , '' said my sister , shaking her head at me as an encouragement to be extremely light and sportive , `` or I 'll work him . '' 
I had heard of Miss Havisham up town , -- everybody for miles round had heard of Miss Havisham up town , -- as an immensely rich and grim lady who lived in a large and dismal house barricaded against robbers , and who led a life of seclusion . 
`` Well to be sure ! '' 
said Joe , astounded . 
`` I wonder how she come to know Pip ! '' 
`` Noodle ! '' 
cried my sister . 
`` Who said she knew him ? '' '' 
-- Which some individual , '' Joe again politely hinted , `` mentioned that she wanted him to go and play there . '' 
`` And could n't she ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go and play there ? 
Is n't it just barely possible that Uncle Pumblechook may be a tenant of hers , and that he may sometimes -- we wo n't say quarterly or half-yearly , for that would be requiring too much of you -- but sometimes -- go there to pay his rent ? 
And could n't she then ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to go and play there ? 
And could n't Uncle Pumblechook , being always considerate and thoughtful for us -- though you may not think it , Joseph , '' in a tone of the deepest reproach , as if he were the most callous of nephews , `` then mention this boy , standing Prancing here '' -- which I solemnly declare I was not doing -- `` that I have for ever been a willing slave to ? '' 
`` Good again ! '' 
cried Uncle Pumblechook . 
`` Well put ! 
Prettily pointed ! 
Good indeed ! 
Now Joseph , you know the case . '' 
`` No , Joseph , '' said my sister , still in a reproachful manner , while Joe apologetically drew the back of his hand across and across his nose , `` you do not yet -- though you may not think it -- know the case . 
You may consider that you do , but you do not , Joseph . 
For you do not know that Uncle Pumblechook , being sensible that for anything we can tell , this boy 's fortune may be made by his going to Miss Havisham 's , has offered to take him into town to-night in his own chaise-cart , and to keep him to-night , and to take him with his own hands to Miss Havisham 's to-morrow morning . 
And Lor-a-mussy me ! '' 
cried my sister , casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation , `` here I stand talking to mere Mooncalfs , with Uncle Pumblechook waiting , and the mare catching cold at the door , and the boy grimed with crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole of his foot ! '' 
With that , she pounced upon me , like an eagle on a lamb , and my face was squeezed into wooden bowls in sinks , and my head was put under taps of water-butts , and I was soaped , and kneaded , and towelled , and thumped , and harrowed , and rasped , until I really was quite beside myself . 
-LRB- I may here remark that I suppose myself to be better acquainted than any living authority , with the ridgy effect of a wedding-ring , passing unsympathetically over the human countenance . -RRB- 
When my ablutions were completed , I was put into clean linen of the stiffest character , like a young penitent into sackcloth , and was trussed up in my tightest and fearfullest suit . 
I was then delivered over to Mr. Pumblechook , who formally received me as if he were the Sheriff , and who let off upon me the speech that I knew he had been dying to make all along : `` Boy , be forever grateful to all friends , but especially unto them which brought you up by hand ! '' 
`` Good-bye , Joe ! '' 
`` God bless you , Pip , old chap ! '' 
I had never parted from him before , and what with my feelings and what with soapsuds , I could at first see no stars from the chaise-cart . 
But they twinkled out one by one , without throwing any light on the questions why on earth I was going to play at Miss Havisham 's , and what on earth I was expected to play at . 
Mr. Pumblechook 's premises in the High Street of the market town , were of a peppercorny and farinaceous character , as the premises of a cornchandler and seedsman should be . 
It appeared to me that he must be a very happy man indeed , to have so many little drawers in his shop ; and I wondered when I peeped into one or two on the lower tiers , and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside , whether the flower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out of those jails , and bloom . 
It was in the early morning after my arrival that I entertained this speculation . 
On the previous night , I had been sent straight to bed in an attic with a sloping roof , which was so low in the corner where the bedstead was , that I calculated the tiles as being within a foot of my eyebrows . 
In the same early morning , I discovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys . 
Mr. Pumblechook wore corduroys , and so did his shopman ; and somehow , there was a general air and flavor about the corduroys , so much in the nature of seeds , and a general air and flavor about the seeds , so much in the nature of corduroys , that I hardly knew which was which . 
The same opportunity served me for noticing that Mr. Pumblechook appeared to conduct his business by looking across the street at the saddler , who appeared to transact his business by keeping his eye on the coachmaker , who appeared to get on in life by putting his hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker , who in his turn folded his arms and stared at the grocer , who stood at his door and yawned at the chemist . 
The watchmaker , always poring over a little desk with a magnifying-glass at his eye , and always inspected by a group of smock-frocks poring over him through the glass of his shop-window , seemed to be about the only person in the High Street whose trade engaged his attention . 
Mr. Pumblechook and I breakfasted at eight o'clock in the parlor behind the shop , while the shopman took his mug of tea and hunch of bread and butter on a sack of peas in the front premises . 
I considered Mr. Pumblechook wretched company . 
Besides being possessed by my sister 's idea that a mortifying and penitential character ought to be imparted to my diet , -- besides giving me as much crumb as possible in combination with as little butter , and putting such a quantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been more candid to have left the milk out altogether , -- his conversation consisted of nothing but arithmetic . 
On my politely bidding him Good morning , he said , pompously , `` Seven times nine , boy ? '' 
And how should I be able to answer , dodged in that way , in a strange place , on an empty stomach ! 
I was hungry , but before I had swallowed a morsel , he began a running sum that lasted all through the breakfast . 
`` Seven ? '' 
`` And four ? '' 
`` And eight ? '' 
`` And six ? '' 
`` And two ? '' 
`` And ten ? '' 
And so on . 
And after each figure was disposed of , it was as much as I could do to get a bite or a sup , before the next came ; while he sat at his ease guessing nothing , and eating bacon and hot roll , in -LRB- if I may be allowed the expression -RRB- a gorging and gormandizing manner . 
For such reasons , I was very glad when ten o'clock came and we started for Miss Havisham 's ; though I was not at all at my ease regarding the manner in which I should acquit myself under that lady 's roof . 
Within a quarter of an hour we came to Miss Havisham 's house , which was of old brick , and dismal , and had a great many iron bars to it . 
Some of the windows had been walled up ; of those that remained , all the lower were rustily barred . 
There was a courtyard in front , and that was barred ; so we had to wait , after ringing the bell , until some one should come to open it . 
While we waited at the gate , I peeped in -LRB- even then Mr. Pumblechook said , `` And fourteen ? '' 
but I pretended not to hear him -RRB- , and saw that at the side of the house there was a large brewery . 
No brewing was going on in it , and none seemed to have gone on for a long long time . 
A window was raised , and a clear voice demanded `` What name ? '' 
To which my conductor replied , `` Pumblechook . '' 
The voice returned , `` Quite right , '' and the window was shut again , and a young lady came across the court-yard , with keys in her hand . 
`` This , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , `` is Pip . '' 
`` This is Pip , is it ? '' 
returned the young lady , who was very pretty and seemed very proud ; `` come in , Pip . '' 
Mr. Pumblechook was coming in also , when she stopped him with the gate . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she said . 
`` Did you wish to see Miss Havisham ? '' 
`` If Miss Havisham wished to see me , '' returned Mr. Pumblechook , discomfited . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the girl ; `` but you see she do n't . '' 
She said it so finally , and in such an undiscussible way , that Mr. Pumblechook , though in a condition of ruffled dignity , could not protest . 
But he eyed me severely , -- as if I had done anything to him ! 
-- and departed with the words reproachfully delivered : `` Boy ! 
Let your behavior here be a credit unto them which brought you up by hand ! '' 
I was not free from apprehension that he would come back to propound through the gate , `` And sixteen ? '' 
But he did n't . 
My young conductress locked the gate , and we went across the courtyard . 
It was paved and clean , but grass was growing in every crevice . 
The brewery buildings had a little lane of communication with it , and the wooden gates of that lane stood open , and all the brewery beyond stood open , away to the high enclosing wall ; and all was empty and disused . 
The cold wind seemed to blow colder there than outside the gate ; and it made a shrill noise in howling in and out at the open sides of the brewery , like the noise of wind in the rigging of a ship at sea . 
She saw me looking at it , and she said , `` You could drink without hurt all the strong beer that 's brewed there now , boy . '' 
`` I should think I could , miss , '' said I , in a shy way . 
`` Better not try to brew beer there now , or it would turn out sour , boy ; do n't you think so ? '' 
`` It looks like it , miss . '' 
`` Not that anybody means to try , '' she added , `` for that 's all done with , and the place will stand as idle as it is till it falls . 
As to strong beer , there 's enough of it in the cellars already , to drown the Manor House . '' 
`` Is that the name of this house , miss ? '' 
`` One of its names , boy . '' 
`` It has more than one , then , miss ? '' 
`` One more . 
Its other name was Satis ; which is Greek , or Latin , or Hebrew , or all three -- or all one to me -- for enough . '' 
`` Enough House , '' said I ; `` that 's a curious name , miss . '' 
`` Yes , '' she replied ; `` but it meant more than it said . 
It meant , when it was given , that whoever had this house could want nothing else . 
They must have been easily satisfied in those days , I should think . 
But do n't loiter , boy . '' 
Though she called me `` boy '' so often , and with a carelessness that was far from complimentary , she was of about my own age . 
She seemed much older than I , of course , being a girl , and beautiful and self-possessed ; and she was as scornful of me as if she had been one-and-twenty , and a queen . 
We went into the house by a side door , the great front entrance had two chains across it outside , -- and the first thing I noticed was , that the passages were all dark , and that she had left a candle burning there . 
She took it up , and we went through more passages and up a staircase , and still it was all dark , and only the candle lighted us . 
At last we came to the door of a room , and she said , `` Go in . '' 
I answered , more in shyness than politeness , `` After you , miss . '' 
To this she returned : `` Do n't be ridiculous , boy ; I am not going in . '' 
And scornfully walked away , and -- what was worse -- took the candle with her . 
This was very uncomfortable , and I was half afraid . 
However , the only thing to be done being to knock at the door , I knocked , and was told from within to enter . 
I entered , therefore , and found myself in a pretty large room , well lighted with wax candles . 
No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it . 
It was a dressing-room , as I supposed from the furniture , though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me . 
But prominent in it was a draped table with a gilded looking-glass , and that I made out at first sight to be a fine lady 's dressing-table . 
Whether I should have made out this object so soon if there had been no fine lady sitting at it , I can not say . 
In an arm-chair , with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on that hand , sat the strangest lady I have ever seen , or shall ever see . 
She was dressed in rich materials , -- satins , and lace , and silks , -- all of white . 
Her shoes were white . 
And she had a long white veil dependent from her hair , and she had bridal flowers in her hair , but her hair was white . 
Some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands , and some other jewels lay sparkling on the table . 
Dresses , less splendid than the dress she wore , and half-packed trunks , were scattered about . 
She had not quite finished dressing , for she had but one shoe on , -- the other was on the table near her hand , -- her veil was but half arranged , her watch and chain were not put on , and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets , and with her handkerchief , and gloves , and some flowers , and a Prayer-Book all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass . 
It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things , though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed . 
But I saw that everything within my view which ought to be white , had been white long ago , and had lost its lustre and was faded and yellow . 
I saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress , and like the flowers , and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes . 
I saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman , and that the figure upon which it now hung loose had shrunk to skin and bone . 
Once , I had been taken to see some ghastly waxwork at the Fair , representing I know not what impossible personage lying in state . 
Once , I had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of a vault under the church pavement . 
Now , waxwork and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me . 
I should have cried out , if I could . 
`` Who is it ? '' 
said the lady at the table . 
`` Pip , ma'am . '' 
`` Pip ? '' 
`` Mr. Pumblechook 's boy , ma'am . 
Come -- to play . '' 
`` Come nearer ; let me look at you . 
Come close . '' 
It was when I stood before her , avoiding her eyes , that I took note of the surrounding objects in detail , and saw that her watch had stopped at twenty minutes to nine , and that a clock in the room had stopped at twenty minutes to nine . 
`` Look at me , '' said Miss Havisham . 
`` You are not afraid of a woman who has never seen the sun since you were born ? '' 
I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous lie comprehended in the answer `` No . '' 
`` Do you know what I touch here ? '' 
she said , laying her hands , one upon the other , on her left side . 
`` Yes , ma'am . '' 
-LRB- It made me think of the young man . -RRB- 
`` What do I touch ? '' 
`` Your heart . '' 
`` Broken ! '' 
She uttered the word with an eager look , and with strong emphasis , and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it . 
Afterwards she kept her hands there for a little while , and slowly took them away as if they were heavy . 
`` I am tired , '' said Miss Havisham . 
`` I want diversion , and I have done with men and women . 
Play . '' 
I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader , that she could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances . 
`` I sometimes have sick fancies , '' she went on , `` and I have a sick fancy that I want to see some play . 
There , there ! '' 
with an impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand ; `` play , play , play ! '' 
For a moment , with the fear of my sister 's working me before my eyes , I had a desperate idea of starting round the room in the assumed character of Mr. Pumblechook 's chaise-cart . 
But I felt myself so unequal to the performance that I gave it up , and stood looking at Miss Havisham in what I suppose she took for a dogged manner , inasmuch as she said , when we had taken a good look at each other , -- `` Are you sullen and obstinate ? '' 
`` No , ma'am , I am very sorry for you , and very sorry I ca n't play just now . 
If you complain of me I shall get into trouble with my sister , so I would do it if I could ; but it 's so new here , and so strange , and so fine , -- and melancholy -- . '' 
I stopped , fearing I might say too much , or had already said it , and we took another look at each other . 
Before she spoke again , she turned her eyes from me , and looked at the dress she wore , and at the dressing-table , and finally at herself in the looking-glass . 
`` So new to him , '' she muttered , `` so old to me ; so strange to him , so familiar to me ; so melancholy to both of us ! 
Call Estella . '' 
As she was still looking at the reflection of herself , I thought she was still talking to herself , and kept quiet . 
`` Call Estella , '' she repeated , flashing a look at me . 
`` You can do that . 
Call Estella . 
At the door . '' 
To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house , bawling Estella to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive , and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out her name , was almost as bad as playing to order . 
But she answered at last , and her light came along the dark passage like a star . 
Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close , and took up a jewel from the table , and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom and against her pretty brown hair . 
`` Your own , one day , my dear , and you will use it well . 
Let me see you play cards with this boy . '' 
`` With this boy ? 
Why , he is a common laboring boy ! '' 
I thought I overheard Miss Havisham answer , -- only it seemed so unlikely , -- `` Well ? 
