You would not object to cancel his indentures at his request and for his good ? 
You would want nothing for so doing ? '' 
`` Lord forbid that I should want anything for not standing in Pip 's way , '' said Joe , staring . 
`` Lord forbidding is pious , but not to the purpose , '' returned Mr. Jaggers . 
`` The question is , Would you want anything ? 
Do you want anything ? '' 
`` The answer is , '' returned Joe , sternly , `` No . '' 
I thought Mr. Jaggers glanced at Joe , as if he considered him a fool for his disinterestedness . 
But I was too much bewildered between breathless curiosity and surprise , to be sure of it . 
`` Very well , '' said Mr. Jaggers . 
`` Recollect the admission you have made , and do n't try to go from it presently . '' 
`` Who 's a going to try ? '' 
retorted Joe . 
`` I do n't say anybody is . 
Do you keep a dog ? '' 
`` Yes , I do keep a dog . '' 
`` Bear in mind then , that Brag is a good dog , but Holdfast is a better . 
Bear that in mind , will you ? '' 
repeated Mr. Jaggers , shutting his eyes and nodding his head at Joe , as if he were forgiving him something . 
`` Now , I return to this young fellow . 
And the communication I have got to make is , that he has great expectations . '' 
Joe and I gasped , and looked at one another . 
`` I am instructed to communicate to him , '' said Mr. Jaggers , throwing his finger at me sideways , `` that he will come into a handsome property . 
Further , that it is the desire of the present possessor of that property , that he be immediately removed from his present sphere of life and from this place , and be brought up as a gentleman , -- in a word , as a young fellow of great expectations . '' 
My dream was out ; my wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality ; Miss Havisham was going to make my fortune on a grand scale . 
`` Now , Mr. Pip , '' pursued the lawyer , `` I address the rest of what I have to say , to you . 
You are to understand , first , that it is the request of the person from whom I take my instructions that you always bear the name of Pip . 
You will have no objection , I dare say , to your great expectations being encumbered with that easy condition . 
But if you have any objection , this is the time to mention it . '' 
My heart was beating so fast , and there was such a singing in my ears , that I could scarcely stammer I had no objection . 
`` I should think not ! 
Now you are to understand , secondly , Mr. Pip , that the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains a profound secret , until the person chooses to reveal it . 
I am empowered to mention that it is the intention of the person to reveal it at first hand by word of mouth to yourself . 
When or where that intention may be carried out , I can not say ; no one can say . 
It may be years hence . 
Now , you are distinctly to understand that you are most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this head , or any allusion or reference , however distant , to any individual whomsoever as the individual , in all the communications you may have with me . 
If you have a suspicion in your own breast , keep that suspicion in your own breast . 
It is not the least to the purpose what the reasons of this prohibition are ; they may be the strongest and gravest reasons , or they may be mere whim . 
This is not for you to inquire into . 
The condition is laid down . 
Your acceptance of it , and your observance of it as binding , is the only remaining condition that I am charged with , by the person from whom I take my instructions , and for whom I am not otherwise responsible . 
That person is the person from whom you derive your expectations , and the secret is solely held by that person and by me . 
Again , not a very difficult condition with which to encumber such a rise in fortune ; but if you have any objection to it , this is the time to mention it . 
Speak out . '' 
Once more , I stammered with difficulty that I had no objection . 
`` I should think not ! 
Now , Mr. Pip , I have done with stipulations . '' 
Though he called me Mr. Pip , and began rather to make up to me , he still could not get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion ; and even now he occasionally shut his eyes and threw his finger at me while he spoke , as much as to express that he knew all kinds of things to my disparagement , if he only chose to mention them . 
`` We come next , to mere details of arrangement . 
You must know that , although I have used the term ` expectations ' more than once , you are not endowed with expectations only . 
There is already lodged in my hands a sum of money amply sufficient for your suitable education and maintenance . 
You will please consider me your guardian . 
Oh ! '' 
for I was going to thank him , `` I tell you at once , I am paid for my services , or I should n't render them . 
It is considered that you must be better educated , in accordance with your altered position , and that you will be alive to the importance and necessity of at once entering on that advantage . '' 
I said I had always longed for it . 
`` Never mind what you have always longed for , Mr. Pip , '' he retorted ; `` keep to the record . 
If you long for it now , that 's enough . 
Am I answered that you are ready to be placed at once under some proper tutor ? 
Is that it ? '' 
I stammered yes , that was it . 
`` Good . 
Now , your inclinations are to be consulted . 
I do n't think that wise , mind , but it 's my trust . 
Have you ever heard of any tutor whom you would prefer to another ? '' 
I had never heard of any tutor but Biddy and Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt ; so , I replied in the negative . 
`` There is a certain tutor , of whom I have some knowledge , who I think might suit the purpose , '' said Mr. Jaggers . 
`` I do n't recommend him , observe ; because I never recommend anybody . 
The gentleman I speak of is one Mr. Matthew Pocket . '' 
Ah ! 
I caught at the name directly . 
Miss Havisham 's relation . 
The Matthew whom Mr. and Mrs. Camilla had spoken of . 
The Matthew whose place was to be at Miss Havisham 's head , when she lay dead , in her bride 's dress on the bride 's table . 
`` You know the name ? '' 
said Mr. Jaggers , looking shrewdly at me , and then shutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer . 
My answer was , that I had heard of the name . 
`` Oh ! '' 
said he . 
`` You have heard of the name . 
But the question is , what do you say of it ? '' 
I said , or tried to say , that I was much obliged to him for his recommendation -- `` No , my young friend ! '' 
he interrupted , shaking his great head very slowly . 
`` Recollect yourself ! '' 
Not recollecting myself , I began again that I was much obliged to him for his recommendation -- `` No , my young friend , '' he interrupted , shaking his head and frowning and smiling both at once , -- `` no , no , no ; it 's very well done , but it wo n't do ; you are too young to fix me with it . 
Recommendation is not the word , Mr. Pip . 
Try another . '' 
Correcting myself , I said that I was much obliged to him for his mention of Mr. Matthew Pocket -- `` That 's more like it ! '' 
cried Mr. Jaggers . 
-- And -LRB- I added -RRB- , I would gladly try that gentleman . 
`` Good . 
You had better try him in his own house . 
The way shall be prepared for you , and you can see his son first , who is in London . 
When will you come to London ? '' 
I said -LRB- glancing at Joe , who stood looking on , motionless -RRB- , that I supposed I could come directly . 
`` First , '' said Mr. Jaggers , `` you should have some new clothes to come in , and they should not be working-clothes . 
Say this day week . 
You 'll want some money . 
Shall I leave you twenty guineas ? '' 
He produced a long purse , with the greatest coolness , and counted them out on the table and pushed them over to me . 
This was the first time he had taken his leg from the chair . 
He sat astride of the chair when he had pushed the money over , and sat swinging his purse and eyeing Joe . 
`` Well , Joseph Gargery ? 
You look dumbfoundered ? '' 
`` I am ! '' 
said Joe , in a very decided manner . 
`` It was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself , remember ? '' 
`` It were understood , '' said Joe . 
`` And it are understood . 
And it ever will be similar according . '' 
`` But what , '' said Mr. Jaggers , swinging his purse , -- `` what if it was in my instructions to make you a present , as compensation ? '' 
`` As compensation what for ? '' 
Joe demanded . 
`` For the loss of his services . '' 
Joe laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman . 
I have often thought him since , like the steam-hammer that can crush a man or pat an egg-shell , in his combination of strength with gentleness . 
`` Pip is that hearty welcome , '' said Joe , `` to go free with his services , to honor and fortun ' , as no words can tell him . 
But if you think as Money can make compensation to me for the loss of the little child -- what come to the forge -- and ever the best of friends ! 
-- '' O dear good Joe , whom I was so ready to leave and so unthankful to , I see you again , with your muscular blacksmith 's arm before your eyes , and your broad chest heaving , and your voice dying away . 
O dear good faithful tender Joe , I feel the loving tremble of your hand upon my arm , as solemnly this day as if it had been the rustle of an angel 's wing ! 
But I encouraged Joe at the time . 
I was lost in the mazes of my future fortunes , and could not retrace the by-paths we had trodden together . 
I begged Joe to be comforted , for -LRB- as he said -RRB- we had ever been the best of friends , and -LRB- as I said -RRB- we ever would be so . 
Joe scooped his eyes with his disengaged wrist , as if he were bent on gouging himself , but said not another word . 
Mr. Jaggers had looked on at this , as one who recognized in Joe the village idiot , and in me his keeper . 
When it was over , he said , weighing in his hand the purse he had ceased to swing : -- `` Now , Joseph Gargery , I warn you this is your last chance . 
No half measures with me . 
If you mean to take a present that I have it in charge to make you , speak out , and you shall have it . 
If on the contrary you mean to say -- '' Here , to his great amazement , he was stopped by Joe 's suddenly working round him with every demonstration of a fell pugilistic purpose . 
`` Which I meantersay , '' cried Joe , `` that if you come into my place bull-baiting and badgering me , come out ! 
Which I meantersay as sech if you 're a man , come on ! 
Which I meantersay that what I say , I meantersay and stand or fall by ! '' 
I drew Joe away , and he immediately became placable ; merely stating to me , in an obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice to any one whom it might happen to concern , that he were not a going to be bull-baited and badgered in his own place . 
Mr. Jaggers had risen when Joe demonstrated , and had backed near the door . 
Without evincing any inclination to come in again , he there delivered his valedictory remarks . 
They were these . 
`` Well , Mr. Pip , I think the sooner you leave here -- as you are to be a gentleman -- the better . 
Let it stand for this day week , and you shall receive my printed address in the meantime . 
You can take a hackney-coach at the stage-coach office in London , and come straight to me . 
Understand , that I express no opinion , one way or other , on the trust I undertake . 
I am paid for undertaking it , and I do so . 
Now , understand that , finally . 
Understand that ! '' 
He was throwing his finger at both of us , and I think would have gone on , but for his seeming to think Joe dangerous , and going off . 
Something came into my head which induced me to run after him , as he was going down to the Jolly Bargemen , where he had left a hired carriage . 
`` I beg your pardon , Mr. Jaggers . '' 
`` Halloa ! '' 
said he , facing round , `` what 's the matter ? '' 
`` I wish to be quite right , Mr. Jaggers , and to keep to your directions ; so I thought I had better ask . 
Would there be any objection to my taking leave of any one I know , about here , before I go away ? '' 
`` No , '' said he , looking as if he hardly understood me . 
`` I do n't mean in the village only , but up town ? '' 
`` No , '' said he . 
`` No objection . '' 
I thanked him and ran home again , and there I found that Joe had already locked the front door and vacated the state parlor , and was seated by the kitchen fire with a hand on each knee , gazing intently at the burning coals . 
I too sat down before the fire and gazed at the coals , and nothing was said for a long time . 
My sister was in her cushioned chair in her corner , and Biddy sat at her needle-work before the fire , and Joe sat next Biddy , and I sat next Joe in the corner opposite my sister . 
The more I looked into the glowing coals , the more incapable I became of looking at Joe ; the longer the silence lasted , the more unable I felt to speak . 
At length I got out , `` Joe , have you told Biddy ? '' 
`` No , Pip , '' returned Joe , still looking at the fire , and holding his knees tight , as if he had private information that they intended to make off somewhere , `` which I left it to yourself , Pip . '' 
`` I would rather you told , Joe . '' 
`` Pip 's a gentleman of fortun ' then , '' said Joe , `` and God bless him in it ! '' 
Biddy dropped her work , and looked at me . 
Joe held his knees and looked at me . 
I looked at both of them . 
After a pause , they both heartily congratulated me ; but there was a certain touch of sadness in their congratulations that I rather resented . 
I took it upon myself to impress Biddy -LRB- and through Biddy , Joe -RRB- with the grave obligation I considered my friends under , to know nothing and say nothing about the maker of my fortune . 
It would all come out in good time , I observed , and in the meanwhile nothing was to be said , save that I had come into great expectations from a mysterious patron . 
Biddy nodded her head thoughtfully at the fire as she took up her work again , and said she would be very particular ; and Joe , still detaining his knees , said , `` Ay , ay , I 'll be ekervally partickler , Pip ; '' and then they congratulated me again , and went on to express so much wonder at the notion of my being a gentleman that I did n't half like it . 
Infinite pains were then taken by Biddy to convey to my sister some idea of what had happened . 
To the best of my belief , those efforts entirely failed . 
She laughed and nodded her head a great many times , and even repeated after Biddy , the words `` Pip '' and `` Property . '' 
But I doubt if they had more meaning in them than an election cry , and I can not suggest a darker picture of her state of mind . 
I never could have believed it without experience , but as Joe and Biddy became more at their cheerful ease again , I became quite gloomy . 
Dissatisfied with my fortune , of course I could not be ; but it is possible that I may have been , without quite knowing it , dissatisfied with myself . 
Any how , I sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand , looking into the fire , as those two talked about my going away , and about what they should do without me , and all that . 
And whenever I caught one of them looking at me , though never so pleasantly -LRB- and they often looked at me , -- particularly Biddy -RRB- , I felt offended : as if they were expressing some mistrust of me . 
Though Heaven knows they never did by word or sign . 
At those times I would get up and look out at the door ; for our kitchen door opened at once upon the night , and stood open on summer evenings to air the room . 
The very stars to which I then raised my eyes , I am afraid I took to be but poor and humble stars for glittering on the rustic objects among which I had passed my life . 
`` Saturday night , '' said I , when we sat at our supper of bread and cheese and beer . 
`` Five more days , and then the day before the day ! 
They 'll soon go . '' 
`` Yes , Pip , '' observed Joe , whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug . 
`` They 'll soon go . '' 
`` Soon , soon go , '' said Biddy . 
`` I have been thinking , Joe , that when I go down town on Monday , and order my new clothes , I shall tell the tailor that I 'll come and put them on there , or that I 'll have them sent to Mr. Pumblechook 's . 
It would be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the people here . '' 
`` Mr. and Mrs. Hubble might like to see you in your new gen-teel figure too , Pip , '' said Joe , industriously cutting his bread , with his cheese on it , in the palm of his left hand , and glancing at my untasted supper as if he thought of the time when we used to compare slices . 
`` So might Wopsle . 
And the Jolly Bargemen might take it as a compliment . '' 
`` That 's just what I do n't want , Joe . 
They would make such a business of it , -- such a coarse and common business , -- that I could n't bear myself . '' 
`` Ah , that indeed , Pip ! '' 
said Joe . 
`` If you could n't abear yourself -- '' Biddy asked me here , as she sat holding my sister 's plate , `` Have you thought about when you 'll show yourself to Mr. Gargery , and your sister and me ? 
You will show yourself to us ; wo n't you ? '' 
`` Biddy , '' I returned with some resentment , `` you are so exceedingly quick that it 's difficult to keep up with you . '' 
-LRB- `` She always were quick , '' observed Joe . -RRB- 
`` If you had waited another moment , Biddy , you would have heard me say that I shall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening , -- most likely on the evening before I go away . '' 
Biddy said no more . 
Handsomely forgiving her , I soon exchanged an affectionate good night with her and Joe , and went up to bed . 
When I got into my little room , I sat down and took a long look at it , as a mean little room that I should soon be parted from and raised above , for ever . 
It was furnished with fresh young remembrances too , and even at the same moment I fell into much the same confused division of mind between it and the better rooms to which I was going , as I had been in so often between the forge and Miss Havisham 's , and Biddy and Estella . 
The sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic , and the room was warm . 
As I put the window open and stood looking out , I saw Joe come slowly forth at the dark door , below , and take a turn or two in the air ; and then I saw Biddy come , and bring him a pipe and light it for him . 
He never smoked so late , and it seemed to hint to me that he wanted comforting , for some reason or other . 
He presently stood at the door immediately beneath me , smoking his pipe , and Biddy stood there too , quietly talking to him , and I knew that they talked of me , for I heard my name mentioned in an endearing tone by both of them more than once . 
I would not have listened for more , if I could have heard more ; so I drew away from the window , and sat down in my one chair by the bedside , feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this first night of my bright fortunes should be the loneliest I had ever known . 
Looking towards the open window , I saw light wreaths from Joe 's pipe floating there , and I fancied it was like a blessing from Joe , -- not obtruded on me or paraded before me , but pervading the air we shared together . 
I put my light out , and crept into bed ; and it was an uneasy bed now , and I never slept the old sound sleep in it any more . 
Morning made a considerable difference in my general prospect of Life , and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same . 
What lay heaviest on my mind was , the consideration that six days intervened between me and the day of departure ; for I could not divest myself of a misgiving that something might happen to London in the meanwhile , and that , when I got there , it would be either greatly deteriorated or clean gone . 
Joe and Biddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when I spoke of our approaching separation ; but they only referred to it when I did . 
After breakfast , Joe brought out my indentures from the press in the best parlor , and we put them in the fire , and I felt that I was free . 
With all the novelty of my emancipation on me , I went to church with Joe , and thought perhaps the clergyman would n't have read that about the rich man and the kingdom of Heaven , if he had known all . 
After our early dinner , I strolled out alone , purposing to finish off the marshes at once , and get them done with . 
As I passed the church , I felt -LRB- as I had felt during service in the morning -RRB- a sublime compassion for the poor creatures who were destined to go there , Sunday after Sunday , all their lives through , and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds . 
I promised myself that I would do something for them one of these days , and formed a plan in outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef and plum-pudding , a pint of ale , and a gallon of condescension , upon everybody in the village . 
If I had often thought before , with something allied to shame , of my companionship with the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those graves , what were my thoughts on this Sunday , when the place recalled the wretch , ragged and shivering , with his felon iron and badge ! 
My comfort was , that it happened a long time ago , and that he had doubtless been transported a long way off , and that he was dead to me , and might be veritably dead into the bargain . 
No more low , wet grounds , no more dikes and sluices , no more of these grazing cattle , -- though they seemed , in their dull manner , to wear a more respectful air now , and to face round , in order that they might stare as long as possible at the possessor of such great expectations , -- farewell , monotonous acquaintances of my childhood , henceforth I was for London and greatness ; not for smith 's work in general , and for you ! 
I made my exultant way to the old Battery , and , lying down there to consider the question whether Miss Havisham intended me for Estella , fell asleep . 
When I awoke , I was much surprised to find Joe sitting beside me , smoking his pipe . 
He greeted me with a cheerful smile on my opening my eyes , and said , -- `` As being the last time , Pip , I thought I 'd foller . '' 
`` And Joe , I am very glad you did so . '' 
`` Thankee , Pip . '' 
`` You may be sure , dear Joe , '' I went on , after we had shaken hands , `` that I shall never forget you . '' 
`` No , no , Pip ! '' 
said Joe , in a comfortable tone , `` I 'm sure of that . 
Ay , ay , old chap ! 
Bless you , it were only necessary to get it well round in a man 's mind , to be certain on it . 
But it took a bit of time to get it well round , the change come so oncommon plump ; did n't it ? '' 
Somehow , I was not best pleased with Joe 's being so mightily secure of me . 
I should have liked him to have betrayed emotion , or to have said , `` It does you credit , Pip , '' or something of that sort . 
Therefore , I made no remark on Joe 's first head ; merely saying as to his second , that the tidings had indeed come suddenly , but that I had always wanted to be a gentleman , and had often and often speculated on what I would do , if I were one . 
`` Have you though ? '' 
said Joe . 
`` Astonishing ! '' 
`` It 's a pity now , Joe , '' said I , `` that you did not get on a little more , when we had our lessons here ; is n't it ? '' 
`` Well , I do n't know , '' returned Joe . 
`` I 'm so awful dull . 
I 'm only master of my own trade . 
It were always a pity as I was so awful dull ; but it 's no more of a pity now , than it was -- this day twelvemonth -- do n't you see ? '' 
What I had meant was , that when I came into my property and was able to do something for Joe , it would have been much more agreeable if he had been better qualified for a rise in station . 
He was so perfectly innocent of my meaning , however , that I thought I would mention it to Biddy in preference . 
So , when we had walked home and had had tea , I took Biddy into our little garden by the side of the lane , and , after throwing out in a general way for the elevation of her spirits , that I should never forget her , said I had a favor to ask of her . 
`` And it is , Biddy , '' said I , `` that you will not omit any opportunity of helping Joe on , a little . '' 
`` How helping him on ? '' 
asked Biddy , with a steady sort of glance . 
`` Well ! 
Joe is a dear good fellow , -- in fact , I think he is the dearest fellow that ever lived , -- but he is rather backward in some things . 
For instance , Biddy , in his learning and his manners . '' 
Although I was looking at Biddy as I spoke , and although she opened her eyes very wide when I had spoken , she did not look at me . 
`` O , his manners ! 
wo n't his manners do then ? '' 
asked Biddy , plucking a black-currant leaf . 
`` My dear Biddy , they do very well here -- '' `` O ! 
they do very well here ? '' 
interrupted Biddy , looking closely at the leaf in her hand . 
`` Hear me out , -- but if I were to remove Joe into a higher sphere , as I shall hope to remove him when I fully come into my property , they would hardly do him justice . '' 
`` And do n't you think he knows that ? '' 
asked Biddy . 
It was such a very provoking question -LRB- for it had never in the most distant manner occurred to me -RRB- , that I said , snappishly , -- `` Biddy , what do you mean ? '' 
Biddy , having rubbed the leaf to pieces between her hands , -- and the smell of a black-currant bush has ever since recalled to me that evening in the little garden by the side of the lane , -- said , `` Have you never considered that he may be proud ? '' 
`` Proud ? '' 
I repeated , with disdainful emphasis . 
`` O ! 
there are many kinds of pride , '' said Biddy , looking full at me and shaking her head ; `` pride is not all of one kind -- '' `` Well ? 
What are you stopping for ? '' 
said I. `` Not all of one kind , '' resumed Biddy . 
`` He may be too proud to let any one take him out of a place that he is competent to fill , and fills well and with respect . 
To tell you the truth , I think he is ; though it sounds bold in me to say so , for you must know him far better than I do . '' 
`` Now , Biddy , '' said I , `` I am very sorry to see this in you . 
I did not expect to see this in you . 
You are envious , Biddy , and grudging . 
You are dissatisfied on account of my rise in fortune , and you ca n't help showing it . '' 
`` If you have the heart to think so , '' returned Biddy , `` say so . 
Say so over and over again , if you have the heart to think so . '' 
`` If you have the heart to be so , you mean , Biddy , '' said I , in a virtuous and superior tone ; `` do n't put it off upon me . 
I am very sorry to see it , and it 's a -- it 's a bad side of human nature . 
I did intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you might have after I was gone , of improving dear Joe . 
But after this I ask you nothing . 
I am extremely sorry to see this in you , Biddy , '' I repeated . 
`` It 's a -- it 's a bad side of human nature . '' 
`` Whether you scold me or approve of me , '' returned poor Biddy , `` you may equally depend upon my trying to do all that lies in my power , here , at all times . 
And whatever opinion you take away of me , shall make no difference in my remembrance of you . 
Yet a gentleman should not be unjust neither , '' said Biddy , turning away her head . 
I again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature -LRB- in which sentiment , waiving its application , I have since seen reason to think I was right -RRB- , and I walked down the little path away from Biddy , and Biddy went into the house , and I went out at the garden gate and took a dejected stroll until supper-time ; again feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this , the second night of my bright fortunes , should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as the first . 
But , morning once more brightened my view , and I extended my clemency to Biddy , and we dropped the subject . 
Putting on the best clothes I had , I went into town as early as I could hope to find the shops open , and presented myself before Mr. Trabb , the tailor , who was having his breakfast in the parlor behind his shop , and who did not think it worth his while to come out to me , but called me into him . 
`` Well ! '' 
said Mr. Trabb , in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way . 
`` How are you , and what can I do for you ? '' 
Mr. Trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather-beds , and was slipping butter in between the blankets , and covering it up . 
He was a prosperous old bachelor , and his open window looked into a prosperous little garden and orchard , and there was a prosperous iron safe let into the wall at the side of his fireplace , and I did not doubt that heaps of his prosperity were put away in it in bags . 
`` Mr. Trabb , '' said I , `` it 's an unpleasant thing to have to mention , because it looks like boasting ; but I have come into a handsome property . '' 
A change passed over Mr. Trabb . 
He forgot the butter in bed , got up from the bedside , and wiped his fingers on the tablecloth , exclaiming , `` Lord bless my soul ! '' 
`` I am going up to my guardian in London , '' said I , casually drawing some guineas out of my pocket and looking at them ; `` and I want a fashionable suit of clothes to go in . 
I wish to pay for them , '' I added -- otherwise I thought he might only pretend to make them , `` with ready money . '' 
`` My dear sir , '' said Mr. Trabb , as he respectfully bent his body , opened his arms , and took the liberty of touching me on the outside of each elbow , `` do n't hurt me by mentioning that . 
May I venture to congratulate you ? 
Would you do me the favor of stepping into the shop ? '' 
Mr. Trabb 's boy was the most audacious boy in all that country-side . 
When I had entered he was sweeping the shop , and he had sweetened his labors by sweeping over me . 
He was still sweeping when I came out into the shop with Mr. Trabb , and he knocked the broom against all possible corners and obstacles , to express -LRB- as I understood it -RRB- equality with any blacksmith , alive or dead . 
`` Hold that noise , '' said Mr. Trabb , with the greatest sternness , `` or I 'll knock your head off ! 
-- Do me the favor to be seated , sir . 
Now , this , '' said Mr. Trabb , taking down a roll of cloth , and tiding it out in a flowing manner over the counter , preparatory to getting his hand under it to show the gloss , `` is a very sweet article . 
I can recommend it for your purpose , sir , because it really is extra super . 
But you shall see some others . 
Give me Number Four , you ! '' 
-LRB- To the boy , and with a dreadfully severe stare ; foreseeing the danger of that miscreant 's brushing me with it , or making some other sign of familiarity . -RRB- 
Mr. Trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he had deposited number four on the counter and was at a safe distance again . 
Then he commanded him to bring number five , and number eight . 
`` And let me have none of your tricks here , '' said Mr. Trabb , `` or you shall repent it , you young scoundrel , the longest day you have to live . '' 
Mr. Trabb then bent over number four , and in a sort of deferential confidence recommended it to me as a light article for summer wear , an article much in vogue among the nobility and gentry , an article that it would ever be an honor to him to reflect upon a distinguished fellow-townsman 's -LRB- if he might claim me for a fellow-townsman -RRB- having worn . 
`` Are you bringing numbers five and eight , you vagabond , '' said Mr. Trabb to the boy after that , `` or shall I kick you out of the shop and bring them myself ? '' 
I selected the materials for a suit , with the assistance of Mr. Trabb 's judgment , and re-entered the parlor to be measured . 
For although Mr. Trabb had my measure already , and had previously been quite contented with it , he said apologetically that it `` would n't do under existing circumstances , sir , -- would n't do at all . '' 
So , Mr. Trabb measured and calculated me in the parlor , as if I were an estate and he the finest species of surveyor , and gave himself such a world of trouble that I felt that no suit of clothes could possibly remunerate him for his pains . 
When he had at last done and had appointed to send the articles to Mr. Pumblechook 's on the Thursday evening , he said , with his hand upon the parlor lock , `` I know , sir , that London gentlemen can not be expected to patronize local work , as a rule ; but if you would give me a turn now and then in the quality of a townsman , I should greatly esteem it . 
Good morning , sir , much obliged . 
-- Door ! '' 
The last word was flung at the boy , who had not the least notion what it meant . 
But I saw him collapse as his master rubbed me out with his hands , and my first decided experience of the stupendous power of money was , that it had morally laid upon his back Trabb 's boy . 
After this memorable event , I went to the hatter 's , and the bootmaker 's , and the hosier 's , and felt rather like Mother Hubbard 's dog whose outfit required the services of so many trades . 
I also went to the coach-office and took my place for seven o'clock on Saturday morning . 
It was not necessary to explain everywhere that I had come into a handsome property ; but whenever I said anything to that effect , it followed that the officiating tradesman ceased to have his attention diverted through the window by the High Street , and concentrated his mind upon me . 
When I had ordered everything I wanted , I directed my steps towards Pumblechook 's , and , as I approached that gentleman 's place of business , I saw him standing at his door . 
He was waiting for me with great impatience . 
He had been out early with the chaise-cart , and had called at the forge and heard the news . 
He had prepared a collation for me in the Barnwell parlor , and he too ordered his shopman to `` come out of the gangway '' as my sacred person passed . 
`` My dear friend , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , taking me by both hands , when he and I and the collation were alone , `` I give you joy of your good fortune . 
Well deserved , well deserved ! '' 
This was coming to the point , and I thought it a sensible way of expressing himself . 
`` To think , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , after snorting admiration at me for some moments , `` that I should have been the humble instrument of leading up to this , is a proud reward . '' 
I begged Mr. Pumblechook to remember that nothing was to be ever said or hinted , on that point . 
`` My dear young friend , '' said Mr. Pumblechook ; `` if you will allow me to call you so -- '' I murmured `` Certainly , '' and Mr. Pumblechook took me by both hands again , and communicated a movement to his waistcoat , which had an emotional appearance , though it was rather low down , `` My dear young friend , rely upon my doing my little all in your absence , by keeping the fact before the mind of Joseph . 
-- Joseph ! '' 
said Mr. Pumblechook , in the way of a compassionate adjuration . 
`` Joseph !! 
Joseph !!! '' 
Thereupon he shook his head and tapped it , expressing his sense of deficiency in Joseph . 
`` But my dear young friend , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , `` you must be hungry , you must be exhausted . 
Be seated . 
Here is a chicken had round from the Boar , here is a tongue had round from the Boar , here 's one or two little things had round from the Boar , that I hope you may not despise . 
But do I , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , getting up again the moment after he had sat down , `` see afore me , him as I ever sported with in his times of happy infancy ? 
And may I -- may I -- ? '' 
This May I , meant might he shake hands ? 
I consented , and he was fervent , and then sat down again . 
`` Here is wine , '' said Mr. Pumblechook . 
`` Let us drink , Thanks to Fortune , and may she ever pick out her favorites with equal judgment ! 
And yet I can not , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , getting up again , `` see afore me One -- and likewise drink to One -- without again expressing -- May I -- may I -- ? '' 
I said he might , and he shook hands with me again , and emptied his glass and turned it upside down . 
I did the same ; and if I had turned myself upside down before drinking , the wine could not have gone more direct to my head . 
Mr. Pumblechook helped me to the liver wing , and to the best slice of tongue -LRB- none of those out-of-the-way No Thoroughfares of Pork now -RRB- , and took , comparatively speaking , no care of himself at all . 
`` Ah ! 
poultry , poultry ! 
You little thought , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , apostrophizing the fowl in the dish , `` when you was a young fledgling , what was in store for you . 
You little thought you was to be refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as -- Call it a weakness , if you will , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , getting up again , `` but may I ? 
may I -- ? '' 
It began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might , so he did it at once . 
How he ever did it so often without wounding himself with my knife , I do n't know . 
`` And your sister , '' he resumed , after a little steady eating , `` which had the honor of bringing you up by hand ! 
It 's a sad picter , to reflect that she 's no longer equal to fully understanding the honor . 
May -- '' I saw he was about to come at me again , and I stopped him . 
`` We 'll drink her health , '' said I. `` Ah ! '' 
cried Mr. Pumblechook , leaning back in his chair , quite flaccid with admiration , `` that 's the way you know 'em , sir ! '' 
-LRB- I do n't know who Sir was , but he certainly was not I , and there was no third person present -RRB- ; `` that 's the way you know the noble-minded , sir ! 
Ever forgiving and ever affable . 
It might , '' said the servile Pumblechook , putting down his untasted glass in a hurry and getting up again , `` to a common person , have the appearance of repeating -- but may I -- ? '' 
When he had done it , he resumed his seat and drank to my sister . 
`` Let us never be blind , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , `` to her faults of temper , but it is to be hoped she meant well . '' 
At about this time , I began to observe that he was getting flushed in the face ; as to myself , I felt all face , steeped in wine and smarting . 
I mentioned to Mr. Pumblechook that I wished to have my new clothes sent to his house , and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him . 
I mentioned my reason for desiring to avoid observation in the village , and he lauded it to the skies . 
There was nobody but himself , he intimated , worthy of my confidence , and -- in short , might he ? 
Then he asked me tenderly if I remembered our boyish games at sums , and how we had gone together to have me bound apprentice , and , in effect , how he had ever been my favorite fancy and my chosen friend ? 
If I had taken ten times as many glasses of wine as I had , I should have known that he never had stood in that relation towards me , and should in my heart of hearts have repudiated the idea . 
Yet for all that , I remember feeling convinced that I had been much mistaken in him , and that he was a sensible , practical , good-hearted prime fellow . 
By degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me , as to ask my advice in reference to his own affairs . 
He mentioned that there was an opportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seed trade on those premises , if enlarged , such as had never occurred before in that or any other neighborhood . 
What alone was wanting to the realization of a vast fortune , he considered to be More Capital . 
Those were the two little words , more capital . 
Now it appeared to him -LRB- Pumblechook -RRB- that if that capital were got into the business , through a sleeping partner , sir , -- which sleeping partner would have nothing to do but walk in , by self or deputy , whenever he pleased , and examine the books , -- and walk in twice a year and take his profits away in his pocket , to the tune of fifty per cent , -- it appeared to him that that might be an opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property , which would be worthy of his attention . 
But what did I think ? 
He had great confidence in my opinion , and what did I think ? 
I gave it as my opinion . 
`` Wait a bit ! '' 
The united vastness and distinctness of this view so struck him , that he no longer asked if he might shake hands with me , but said he really must , -- and did . 
We drank all the wine , and Mr. Pumblechook pledged himself over and over again to keep Joseph up to the mark -LRB- I do n't know what mark -RRB- , and to render me efficient and constant service -LRB- I do n't know what service -RRB- . 
He also made known to me for the first time in my life , and certainly after having kept his secret wonderfully well , that he had always said of me , `` That boy is no common boy , and mark me , his fortun ' will be no common fortun ' . '' 
He said with a tearful smile that it was a singular thing to think of now , and I said so too . 
Finally , I went out into the air , with a dim perception that there was something unwonted in the conduct of the sunshine , and found that I had slumberously got to the turnpike without having taken any account of the road . 
There , I was roused by Mr. Pumblechook 's hailing me . 
He was a long way down the sunny street , and was making expressive gestures for me to stop . 
I stopped , and he came up breathless . 
`` No , my dear friend , '' said he , when he had recovered wind for speech . 
