Was he not Arabella 's ? 
He was unable to go on further , and retraced his steps towards Christminster . 
Every tread of his feet seemed to say to him that he must on no account stand in the schoolmaster 's way with Sue . 
Phillotson was perhaps twenty years her senior , but many a happy marriage had been made in such conditions of age . 
The ironical clinch to his sorrow was given by the thought that the intimacy between his cousin and the schoolmaster had been brought about entirely by himself . 
Jude 's old and embittered aunt lay unwell at Marygreen , and on the following Sunday he went to see her -- a visit which was the result of a victorious struggle against his inclination to turn aside to the village of Lumsdon and obtain a miserable interview with his cousin , in which the word nearest his heart could not be spoken , and the sight which had tortured him could not be revealed . 
His aunt was now unable to leave her bed , and a great part of Jude 's short day was occupied in making arrangements for her comfort . 
The little bakery business had been sold to a neighbour , and with the proceeds of this and her savings she was comfortably supplied with necessaries and more , a widow of the same village living with her and ministering to her wants . 
It was not till the time had nearly come for him to leave that he obtained a quiet talk with her , and his words tended insensibly towards his cousin . 
`` Was Sue born here ? '' 
`` She was -- in this room . 
They were living here at that time . 
What made ` ee ask that ? '' 
`` Oh -- I wanted to know . '' 
`` Now you 've been seeing her ! '' 
said the harsh old woman . 
`` And what did I tell ` ee ? '' 
`` Well -- that I was not to see her . '' 
`` Have you gossiped with her ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Then do n't keep it up . 
She was brought up by her father to hate her mother 's family ; and she 'll look with no favour upon a working chap like you -- a townish girl as she 's become by now . 
I never cared much about her . 
A pert little thing , that 's what she was too often , with her tight-strained nerves . 
Many 's the time I 've smacked her for her impertinence . 
Why , one day when she was walking into the pond with her shoes and stockings off , and her petticoats pulled above her knees , afore I could cry out for shame , she said : ` Move on , Aunty ! 
This is no sight for modest eyes ! ' '' 
`` She was a little child then . '' 
`` She was twelve if a day . '' 
`` Well -- of course . 
But now she 's older she 's of a thoughtful , quivering , tender nature , and as sensitive as -- '' `` Jude ! '' 
cried his aunt , springing up in bed . 
`` Do n't you be a fool about her ! '' 
`` No , no , of course not . '' 
`` Your marrying that woman Arabella was about as bad a thing as a man could possibly do for himself by trying hard . 
But she 's gone to the other side of the world , and med never trouble you again . 
And there 'll be a worse thing if you , tied and bound as you be , should have a fancy for Sue . 
If your cousin is civil to you , take her civility for what it is worth . 
But anything more than a relation 's good wishes it is stark madness for ` ee to give her . 
If she 's townish and wanton it med bring ` ee to ruin . '' 
`` Do n't say anything against her , Aunt ! 
Do n't , please ! '' 
A relief was afforded to him by the entry of the companion and nurse of his aunt , who must have been listening to the conversation , for she began a commentary on past years , introducing Sue Bridehead as a character in her recollections . 
She described what an odd little maid Sue had been when a pupil at the village school across the green opposite , before her father went to London -- how , when the vicar arranged readings and recitations , she appeared on the platform , the smallest of them all , `` in her little white frock , and shoes , and pink sash '' ; how she recited `` Excelsior , '' `` There was a sound of revelry by night , '' and `` The Raven '' ; how during the delivery she would knit her little brows and glare round tragically , and say to the empty air , as if some real creature stood there -- `` Ghastly , grim , and ancient Raven , wandering from the Nightly shore , Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night 's Plutonian shore ! '' 
`` She 'd bring up the nasty carrion bird that clear , '' corroborated the sick woman reluctantly , `` as she stood there in her little sash and things , that you could see un a ` most before your very eyes . 
You too , Jude , had the same trick as a child of seeming to see things in the air . '' 
The neighbour told also of Sue 's accomplishments in other kinds : `` She was not exactly a tomboy , you know ; but she could do things that only boys do , as a rule . 
I 've seen her hit in and steer down the long slide on yonder pond , with her little curls blowing , one of a file of twenty moving along against the sky like shapes painted on glass , and up the back slide without stopping . 
All boys except herself ; and then they 'd cheer her , and then she 'd say , ` Do n't be saucy , boys , ' and suddenly run indoors . 
They 'd try to coax her out again . 
But ' a would n't come . '' 
These retrospective visions of Sue only made Jude the more miserable that he was unable to woo her , and he left the cottage of his aunt that day with a heavy heart . 
He would fain have glanced into the school to see the room in which Sue 's little figure had so glorified itself ; but he checked his desire and went on . 
It being Sunday evening some villagers who had known him during his residence here were standing in a group in their best clothes . 
Jude was startled by a salute from one of them : `` Ye 've got there right enough , then ! '' 
Jude showed that he did not understand . 
`` Why , to the seat of l'arning -- the ` City of Light ' you used to talk to us about as a little boy ! 
Is it all you expected of it ? '' 
`` Yes ; more ! '' 
cried Jude . 
`` When I was there once for an hour I did n't see much in it for my part ; auld crumbling buildings , half church , half almshouse , and not much going on at that . '' 
`` You are wrong , John ; there is more going on than meets the eye of a man walking through the streets . 
It is a unique centre of thought and religion -- the intellectual and spiritual granary of this country . 
All that silence and absence of goings-on is the stillness of infinite motion -- the sleep of the spinning-top , to borrow the simile of a well-known writer . '' 
`` Oh , well , it med be all that , or it med not . 
As I say , I did n't see nothing of it the hour or two I was there ; so I went in and had a pot o ' beer , and a penny loaf , and a ha ` porth o ' cheese , and waited till it was time to come along home . 
You 've j' ined a college by this time , I suppose ? '' 
`` Ah , no ! '' 
said Jude . 
`` I am almost as far off that as ever . '' 
`` How so ? '' 
Jude slapped his pocket . 
`` Just what we thought ! 
Such places be not for such as you -- only for them with plenty o ' money . '' 
`` There you are wrong , '' said Jude , with some bitterness . 
`` They are for such ones ! '' 
Still , the remark was sufficient to withdraw Jude 's attention from the imaginative world he had lately inhabited , in which an abstract figure , more or less himself , was steeping his mind in a sublimation of the arts and sciences , and making his calling and election sure to a seat in the paradise of the learned . 
He was set regarding his prospects in a cold northern light . 
He had lately felt that he could not quite satisfy himself in his Greek -- in the Greek of the dramatists particularly . 
So fatigued was he sometimes after his day 's work that he could not maintain the critical attention necessary for thorough application . 
He felt that he wanted a coach -- a friend at his elbow to tell him in a moment what sometimes would occupy him a weary month in extracting from unanticipative , clumsy books . 
It was decidedly necessary to consider facts a little more closely than he had done of late . 
What was the good , after all , of using up his spare hours in a vague labour called `` private study '' without giving an outlook on practicabilities ? 
`` I ought to have thought of this before , '' he said , as he journeyed back . 
`` It would have been better never to have embarked in the scheme at all than to do it without seeing clearly where I am going , or what I am aiming at ... This hovering outside the walls of the colleges , as if expecting some arm to be stretched out from them to lift me inside , wo n't do ! 
I must get special information . '' 
The next week accordingly he sought it . 
What at first seemed an opportunity occurred one afternoon when he saw an elderly gentleman , who had been pointed out as the head of a particular college , walking in the public path of a parklike enclosure near the spot at which Jude chanced to be sitting . 
The gentleman came nearer , and Jude looked anxiously at his face . 
It seemed benign , considerate , yet rather reserved . 
On second thoughts Jude felt that he could not go up and address him ; but he was sufficiently influenced by the incident to think what a wise thing it would be for him to state his difficulties by letter to some of the best and most judicious of these old masters , and obtain their advice . 
During the next week or two he accordingly placed himself in such positions about the city as would afford him glimpses of several of the most distinguished among the provosts , wardens , and other heads of houses ; and from those he ultimately selected five whose physiognomies seemed to say to him that they were appreciative and far-seeing men . 
To these five he addressed letters , briefly stating his difficulties , and asking their opinion on his stranded situation . 
When the letters were posted Jude mentally began to criticize them ; he wished they had not been sent . 
`` It is just one of those intrusive , vulgar , pushing , applications which are so common in these days , '' he thought . 
`` Why could n't I know better than address utter strangers in such a way ? 
I may be an impostor , an idle scamp , a man with a bad character , for all that they know to the contrary ... Perhaps that 's what I am ! '' 
Nevertheless , he found himself clinging to the hope of some reply as to his one last chance of redemption . 
He waited day after day , saying that it was perfectly absurd to expect , yet expecting . 
While he waited he was suddenly stirred by news about Phillotson . 
Phillotson was giving up the school near Christminster , for a larger one further south , in Mid-Wessex . 
What this meant ; how it would affect his cousin ; whether , as seemed possible , it was a practical move of the schoolmaster 's towards a larger income , in view of a provision for two instead of one , he would not allow himself to say . 
And the tender relations between Phillotson and the young girl of whom Jude was passionately enamoured effectually made it repugnant to Jude 's tastes to apply to Phillotson for advice on his own scheme . 
Meanwhile the academic dignitaries to whom Jude had written vouchsafed no answer , and the young man was thus thrown back entirely on himself , as formerly , with the added gloom of a weakened hope . 
By indirect inquiries he soon perceived clearly what he had long uneasily suspected , that to qualify himself for certain open scholarships and exhibitions was the only brilliant course . 
But to do this a good deal of coaching would be necessary , and much natural ability . 
It was next to impossible that a man reading on his own system , however widely and thoroughly , even over the prolonged period of ten years , should be able to compete with those who had passed their lives under trained teachers and had worked to ordained lines . 
The other course , that of buying himself in , so to speak , seemed the only one really open to men like him , the difficulty being simply of a material kind . 
With the help of his information he began to reckon the extent of this material obstacle , and ascertained , to his dismay , that , at the rate at which , with the best of fortune , he would be able to save money , fifteen years must elapse before he could be in a position to forward testimonials to the head of a college and advance to a matriculation examination . 
The undertaking was hopeless . 
He saw what a curious and cunning glamour the neighbourhood of the place had exercised over him . 
To get there and live there , to move among the churches and halls and become imbued with the genius loci , had seemed to his dreaming youth , as the spot shaped its charms to him from its halo on the horizon , the obvious and ideal thing to do . 
`` Let me only get there , '' he had said with the fatuousness of Crusoe over his big boat , `` and the rest is but a matter of time and energy . '' 
It would have been far better for him in every way if he had never come within sight and sound of the delusive precincts , had gone to some busy commercial town with the sole object of making money by his wits , and thence surveyed his plan in true perspective . 
Well , all that was clear to him amounted to this , that the whole scheme had burst up , like an iridescent soap-bubble , under the touch of a reasoned inquiry . 
He looked back at himself along the vista of his past years , and his thought was akin to Heine 's : Above the youth 's inspired and flashing eyes I see the motley mocking fool 's - cap rise ! 
Fortunately he had not been allowed to bring his disappointment into his dear Sue 's life by involving her in this collapse . 
And the painful details of his awakening to a sense of his limitations should now be spared her as far as possible . 
After all , she had only known a little part of the miserable struggle in which he had been engaged thus unequipped , poor , and unforeseeing . 
He always remembered the appearance of the afternoon on which he awoke from his dream . 
Not quite knowing what to do with himself , he went up to an octagonal chamber in the lantern of a singularly built theatre that was set amidst this quaint and singular city . 
It had windows all round , from which an outlook over the whole town and its edifices could be gained . 
Jude 's eyes swept all the views in succession , meditatively , mournfully , yet sturdily . 
Those buildings and their associations and privileges were not for him . 
From the looming roof of the great library , into which he hardly ever had time to enter , his gaze travelled on to the varied spires , halls , gables , streets , chapels , gardens , quadrangles , which composed the ensemble of this unrivalled panorama . 
He saw that his destiny lay not with these , but among the manual toilers in the shabby purlieu which he himself occupied , unrecognized as part of the city at all by its visitors and panegyrists , yet without whose denizens the hard readers could not read nor the high thinkers live . 
He looked over the town into the country beyond , to the trees which screened her whose presence had at first been the support of his heart , and whose loss was now a maddening torture . 
But for this blow he might have borne with his fate . 
With Sue as companion he could have renounced his ambitions with a smile . 
Without her it was inevitable that the reaction from the long strain to which he had subjected himself should affect him disastrously . 
Phillotson had no doubt passed through a similar intellectual disappointment to that which now enveloped him . 
But the schoolmaster had been since blest with the consolation of sweet Sue , while for him there was no consoler . 
Descending to the streets , he went listlessly along till he arrived at an inn , and entered it . 
Here he drank several glasses of beer in rapid succession , and when he came out it was night . 
By the light of the flickering lamps he rambled home to supper , and had not long been sitting at table when his landlady brought up a letter that had just arrived for him . 
She laid it down as if impressed with a sense of its possible importance , and on looking at it Jude perceived that it bore the embossed stamp of one of the colleges whose heads he had addressed . 
`` ONE -- at last ! '' 
cried Jude . 
The communication was brief , and not exactly what he had expected ; though it really was from the master in person . 
It ran thus : BIBLIOLL COLLEGE . 
SIR , -- I have read your letter with interest ; and , judging from your description of yourself as a working-man , I venture to think that you will have a much better chance of success in life by remaining in your own sphere and sticking to your trade than by adopting any other course . 
That , therefore , is what I advise you to do . 
Yours faithfully , T. TETUPHENAY . 
To Mr. J. FAWLEY , Stone-mason . 
This terribly sensible advice exasperated Jude . 
He had known all that before . 
He knew it was true . 
Yet it seemed a hard slap after ten years of labour , and its effect upon him just now was to make him rise recklessly from the table , and , instead of reading as usual , to go downstairs and into the street . 
He stood at a bar and tossed off two or three glasses , then unconsciously sauntered along till he came to a spot called The Fourways in the middle of the city , gazing abstractedly at the groups of people like one in a trance , till , coming to himself , he began talking to the policeman fixed there . 
That officer yawned , stretched out his elbows , elevated himself an inch and a half on the balls of his toes , smiled , and looking humorously at Jude , said , `` You 've had a wet , young man . '' 
`` No ; I 've only begun , '' he replied cynically . 
Whatever his wetness , his brains were dry enough . 
He only heard in part the policeman 's further remarks , having fallen into thought on what struggling people like himself had stood at that crossway , whom nobody ever thought of now . 
It had more history than the oldest college in the city . 
It was literally teeming , stratified , with the shades of human groups , who had met there for tragedy , comedy , farce ; real enactments of the intensest kind . 
At Fourways men had stood and talked of Napoleon , the loss of America , the execution of King Charles , the burning of the Martyrs , the Crusades , the Norman Conquest , possibly of the arrival of Caesar . 
Here the two sexes had met for loving , hating , coupling , parting ; had waited , had suffered , for each other ; had triumphed over each other ; cursed each other in jealousy , blessed each other in forgiveness . 
He began to see that the town life was a book of humanity infinitely more palpitating , varied , and compendious than the gown life . 
These struggling men and women before him were the reality of Christminster , though they knew little of Christ or Minster . 
That was one of the humours of things . 
The floating population of students and teachers , who did know both in a way , were not Christminster in a local sense at all . 
He looked at his watch , and , in pursuit of this idea , he went on till he came to a public hall , where a promenade concert was in progress . 
Jude entered , and found the room full of shop youths and girls , soldiers , apprentices , boys of eleven smoking cigarettes , and light women of the more respectable and amateur class . 
He had tapped the real Christminster life . 
A band was playing , and the crowd walked about and jostled each other , and every now and then a man got upon a platform and sang a comic song . 
The spirit of Sue seemed to hover round him and prevent his flirting and drinking with the frolicsome girls who made advances -- wistful to gain a little joy . 
At ten o'clock he came away , choosing a circuitous route homeward to pass the gates of the college whose head had just sent him the note . 
The gates were shut , and , by an impulse , he took from his pocket the lump of chalk which as a workman he usually carried there , and wrote along the wall : '' I have understanding as well as you ; I am not inferior to you : yea , who knoweth not such things as these ? '' 
-- Job xii . 
3 . 
The stroke of scorn relieved his mind , and the next morning he laughed at his self-conceit . 
But the laugh was not a healthy one . 
He re-read the letter from the master , and the wisdom in its lines , which had at first exasperated him , chilled and depressed him now . 
He saw himself as a fool indeed . 
Deprived of the objects of both intellect and emotion , he could not proceed to his work . 
Whenever he felt reconciled to his fate as a student , there came to disturb his calm his hopeless relations with Sue . 
That the one affined soul he had ever met was lost to him through his marriage returned upon him with cruel persistency , till , unable to bear it longer , he again rushed for distraction to the real Christminster life . 
He now sought it out in an obscure and low-ceiled tavern up a court which was well known to certain worthies of the place , and in brighter times would have interested him simply by its quaintness . 
Here he sat more or less all the day , convinced that he was at bottom a vicious character , of whom it was hopeless to expect anything . 
In the evening the frequenters of the house dropped in one by one , Jude still retaining his seat in the corner , though his money was all spent , and he had not eaten anything the whole day except a biscuit . 
He surveyed his gathering companions with all the equanimity and philosophy of a man who has been drinking long and slowly , and made friends with several : to wit , Tinker Taylor , a decayed church-ironmonger who appeared to have been of a religious turn in earlier years , but was somewhat blasphemous now ; also a red-nosed auctioneer ; also two Gothic masons like himself , called Uncle Jim and Uncle Joe . 
There were present , too , some clerks , and a gown - and surplice-maker 's assistant ; two ladies who sported moral characters of various depths of shade , according to their company , nicknamed `` Bower o ' Bliss '' and `` Freckles '' ; some horsey men `` in the know '' of betting circles ; a travelling actor from the theatre , and two devil-may-care young men who proved to be gownless undergraduates ; they had slipped in by stealth to meet a man about bull-pups , and stayed to drink and smoke short pipes with the racing gents aforesaid , looking at their watches every now and then . 
The conversation waxed general . 
Christminster society was criticized , the dons , magistrates , and other people in authority being sincerely pitied for their shortcomings , while opinions on how they ought to conduct themselves and their affairs to be properly respected , were exchanged in a large-minded and disinterested manner . 
Jude Fawley , with the self-conceit , effrontery , and aplomb of a strong-brained fellow in liquor , threw in his remarks somewhat peremptorily ; and his aims having been what they were for so many years , everything the others said turned upon his tongue , by a sort of mechanical craze , to the subject of scholarship and study , the extent of his own learning being dwelt upon with an insistence that would have appeared pitiable to himself in his sane hours . 
`` I do n't care a damn , '' he was saying , `` for any provost , warden , principal , fellow , or cursed master of arts in the university ! 
What I know is that I 'd lick 'em on their own ground if they 'd give me a chance , and show 'em a few things they are not up to yet ! '' 
`` Hear , hear ! '' 
said the undergraduates from the corner , where they were talking privately about the pups . 
`` You always was fond o ' books , I 've heard , '' said Tinker Taylor , `` and I do n't doubt what you state . 
Now with me 't was different . 
I always saw there was more to be learnt outside a book than in ; and I took my steps accordingly , or I should n't have been the man I am . '' 
`` You aim at the Church , I believe ? '' 
said Uncle Joe . 
`` If you are such a scholar as to pitch yer hopes so high as that , why not give us a specimen of your scholarship ? 
Canst say the Creed in Latin , man ? 
That was how they once put it to a chap down in my country . '' 
`` I should think so ! '' 
said Jude haughtily . 
`` Not he ! 
Like his conceit ! '' 
screamed one of the ladies . 
`` Just you shut up , Bower o ' Bliss ! '' 
said one of the undergraduates . 
`` Silence ! '' 
He drank off the spirits in his tumbler , rapped with it on the counter , and announced , `` The gentleman in the corner is going to rehearse the Articles of his Belief , in the Latin tongue , for the edification of the company . '' 
`` I wo n't ! '' 
said Jude . 
`` Yes -- have a try ! '' 
said the surplice-maker . 
`` You ca n't ! '' 
said Uncle Joe . 
`` Yes , he can ! '' 
said Tinker Taylor . 
`` I 'll swear I can ! '' 
said Jude . 
`` Well , come now , stand me a small Scotch cold , and I 'll do it straight off . '' 
`` That 's a fair offer , '' said the undergraduate , throwing down the money for the whisky . 
The barmaid concocted the mixture with the bearing of a person compelled to live amongst animals of an inferior species , and the glass was handed across to Jude , who , having drunk the contents , stood up and began rhetorically , without hesitation : '' Credo in unum Deum , Patrem omnipotentem , Factorem coeli et terrae , visibilium omnium et invisibilium . '' 
`` Good ! 
Excellent Latin ! '' 
cried one of the undergraduates , who , however , had not the slightest conception of a single word . 
A silence reigned among the rest in the bar , and the maid stood still , Jude 's voice echoing sonorously into the inner parlour , where the landlord was dozing , and bringing him out to see what was going on . 
Jude had declaimed steadily ahead , and was continuing : '' Crucifixus etiam pro nobis : sub Pontio Pilato passus , et sepultus est. . 
Et resurrexit tertia die , secundum Scripturas . '' 
`` That 's the Nicene , '' sneered the second undergraduate . 
`` And we wanted the Apostles ' ! '' 
`` You did n't say so ! 
And every fool knows , except you , that the Nicene is the most historic creed ! '' 
`` Let un go on , let un go on ! '' 
said the auctioneer . 
But Jude 's mind seemed to grow confused soon , and he could not get on . 
He put his hand to his forehead , and his face assumed an expression of pain . 
`` Give him another glass -- then he 'll fetch up and get through it , '' said Tinker Taylor . 
Somebody threw down threepence , the glass was handed , Jude stretched out his arm for it without looking , and having swallowed the liquor , went on in a moment in a revived voice , raising it as he neared the end with the manner of a priest leading a congregation : '' Et in Spiritum Sanctum , Dominum et vivificantem , qui ex Patre Filioque procedit . 
Qui cum Patre et Filio simul adoratur et conglorificatur . 
Qui locutus est per prophetas . 
`` Et unam Catholicam et Apostolicam Ecclesiam . 
Confiteor unum Baptisma in remissionem peccatorum . 
Et exspecto Resurrectionem mortuorum . 
Et vitam venturi saeculi . 
Amen . '' 
`` Well done ! '' 
said several , enjoying the last word , as being the first and only one they had recognized . 
Then Jude seemed to shake the fumes from his brain , as he stared round upon them . 
`` You pack of fools ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Which one of you knows whether I have said it or no ? 
It might have been the Ratcatcher 's Daughter in double Dutch for all that your besotted heads can tell ! 
See what I have brought myself to -- the crew I have come among ! '' 
The landlord , who had already had his license endorsed for harbouring queer characters , feared a riot , and came outside the counter ; but Jude , in his sudden flash of reason , had turned in disgust and left the scene , the door slamming with a dull thud behind him . 
He hastened down the lane and round into the straight broad street , which he followed till it merged in the highway , and all sound of his late companions had been left behind . 
Onward he still went , under the influence of a childlike yearning for the one being in the world to whom it seemed possible to fly -- an unreasoning desire , whose ill judgement was not apparent to him now . 
In the course of an hour , when it was between ten and eleven o'clock , he entered the village of Lumsdon , and reaching the cottage , saw that a light was burning in a downstairs room , which he assumed , rightly as it happened , to be hers . 
Jude stepped close to the wall , and tapped with his finger on the pane , saying impatiently , `` Sue , Sue ! '' 
She must have recognized his voice , for the light disappeared from the apartment , and in a second or two the door was unlocked and opened , and Sue appeared with a candle in her hand . 
`` Is it Jude ? 
Yes , it is ! 
My dear , dear cousin , what 's the matter ? '' 
`` Oh , I am -- I could n't help coming , Sue ! '' 
said he , sinking down upon the doorstep . 
`` I am so wicked , Sue -- my heart is nearly broken , and I could not bear my life as it was ! 
So I have been drinking , and blaspheming , or next door to it , and saying holy things in disreputable quarters -- repeating in idle bravado words which ought never to be uttered but reverently ! 
Oh , do anything with me , Sue -- kill me -- I do n't care ! 
Only do n't hate me and despise me like all the rest of the world ! '' 
`` You are ill , poor dear ! 
No , I wo n't despise you ; of course I wo n't ! 
Come in and rest , and let me see what I can do for you . 
Now lean on me , and do n't mind . '' 
With one hand holding the candle and the other supporting him , she led him indoors , and placed him in the only easy chair the meagrely furnished house afforded , stretching his feet upon another , and pulling off his boots . 
Jude , now getting towards his sober senses , could only say , `` Dear , dear Sue ! '' 
in a voice broken by grief and contrition . 
She asked him if he wanted anything to eat , but he shook his head . 
Then telling him to go to sleep , and that she would come down early in the morning and get him some breakfast , she bade him good-night and ascended the stairs . 
Almost immediately he fell into a heavy slumber , and did not wake till dawn . 
At first he did not know where he was , but by degrees his situation cleared to him , and he beheld it in all the ghastliness of a right mind . 
She knew the worst of him -- the very worst . 
How could he face her now ? 
She would soon be coming down to see about breakfast , as she had said , and there would he be in all his shame confronting her . 
He could not bear the thought , and softly drawing on his boots , and taking his hat from the nail on which she had hung it , he slipped noiselessly out of the house . 
His fixed idea was to get away to some obscure spot and hide , and perhaps pray ; and the only spot which occurred to him was Marygreen . 
He called at his lodging in Christminster , where he found awaiting him a note of dismissal from his employer ; and having packed up he turned his back upon the city that had been such a thorn in his side , and struck southward into Wessex . 
He had no money left in his pocket , his small savings , deposited at one of the banks in Christminster , having fortunately been left untouched . 
To get to Marygreen , therefore , his only course was walking ; and the distance being nearly twenty miles , he had ample time to complete on the way the sobering process begun in him . 
At some hour of the evening he reached Alfredston . 
Here he pawned his waistcoat , and having gone out of the town a mile or two , slept under a rick that night . 
At dawn he rose , shook off the hayseeds and stems from his clothes , and started again , breasting the long white road up the hill to the downs , which had been visible to him a long way off , and passing the milestone at the top , whereon he had carved his hopes years ago . 
He reached the ancient hamlet while the people were at breakfast . 
Weary and mud-bespattered , but quite possessed of his ordinary clearness of brain , he sat down by the well , thinking as he did so what a poor Christ he made . 
Seeing a trough of water near he bathed his face , and went on to the cottage of his great-aunt , whom he found breakfasting in bed , attended by the woman who lived with her . 
`` What -- out o ' work ? '' 
asked his relative , regarding him through eyes sunken deep , under lids heavy as pot-covers , no other cause for his tumbled appearance suggesting itself to one whose whole life had been a struggle with material things . 
`` Yes , '' said Jude heavily . 
`` I think I must have a little rest . '' 
Refreshed by some breakfast , he went up to his old room and lay down in his shirt-sleeves , after the manner of the artizan . 
He fell asleep for a short while , and when he awoke it was as if he had awakened in hell . 
It WAS hell -- `` the hell of conscious failure , '' both in ambition and in love . 
He thought of that previous abyss into which he had fallen before leaving this part of the country ; the deepest deep he had supposed it then ; but it was not so deep as this . 
That had been the breaking in of the outer bulwarks of his hope : this was of his second line . 
If he had been a woman he must have screamed under the nervous tension which he was now undergoing . 
But that relief being denied to his virility , he clenched his teeth in misery , bringing lines about his mouth like those in the Laocoön , and corrugations between his brows . 
A mournful wind blew through the trees , and sounded in the chimney like the pedal notes of an organ . 
Each ivy leaf overgrowing the wall of the churchless church-yard hard by , now abandoned , pecked its neighbour smartly , and the vane on the new Victorian-Gothic church in the new spot had already begun to creak . 
Yet apparently it was not always the outdoor wind that made the deep murmurs ; it was a voice . 
He guessed its origin in a moment or two ; the curate was praying with his aunt in the adjoining room . 
He remembered her speaking of him . 
Presently the sounds ceased , and a step seemed to cross the landing . 
Jude sat up , and shouted `` Hoi ! '' 
The step made for his door , which was open , and a man looked in . 
It was a young clergyman . 
`` I think you are Mr. Highridge , '' said Jude . 
`` My aunt has mentioned you more than once . 
Well , here I am , just come home ; a fellow gone to the bad ; though I had the best intentions in the world at one time . 
Now I am melancholy mad , what with drinking and one thing and another . '' 
Slowly Jude unfolded to the curate his late plans and movements , by an unconscious bias dwelling less upon the intellectual and ambitious side of his dream , and more upon the theological , though this had , up till now , been merely a portion of the general plan of advancement . 
`` Now I know I have been a fool , and that folly is with me , '' added Jude in conclusion . 
`` And I do n't regret the collapse of my university hopes one jot . 
I would n't begin again if I were sure to succeed . 
I do n't care for social success any more at all . 
But I do feel I should like to do some good thing ; and I bitterly regret the Church , and the loss of my chance of being her ordained minister . '' 
The curate , who was a new man to this neighbourhood , had grown deeply interested , and at last he said : `` If you feel a real call to the ministry , and I wo n't say from your conversation that you do not , for it is that of a thoughtful and educated man , you might enter the Church as a licentiate . 
Only you must make up your mind to avoid strong drink . '' 
`` I could avoid that easily enough , if I had any kind of hope to support me ! '' 
`` For there was no other girl , O bridegroom , like her ! '' 
-- SAPPHO -LRB- H. T. Wharton -RRB- . 
It was a new idea -- the ecclesiastical and altruistic life as distinct from the intellectual and emulative life . 
A man could preach and do good to his fellow-creatures without taking double-firsts in the schools of Christminster , or having anything but ordinary knowledge . 
The old fancy which had led on to the culminating vision of the bishopric had not been an ethical or theological enthusiasm at all , but a mundane ambition masquerading in a surplice . 
He feared that his whole scheme had degenerated to , even though it might not have originated in , a social unrest which had no foundation in the nobler instincts ; which was purely an artificial product of civilization . 
There were thousands of young men on the same self-seeking track at the present moment . 
The sensual hind who ate , drank , and lived carelessly with his wife through the days of his vanity was a more likable being than he . 
But to enter the Church in such an unscholarly way that he could not in any probability rise to a higher grade through all his career than that of the humble curate wearing his life out in an obscure village or city slum -- that might have a touch of goodness and greatness in it ; that might be true religion , and a purgatorial course worthy of being followed by a remorseful man . 
The favourable light in which this new thought showed itself by contrast with his foregone intentions cheered Jude , as he sat there , shabby and lonely ; and it may be said to have given , during the next few days , the coup de grâce to his intellectual career -- a career which had extended over the greater part of a dozen years . 
He did nothing , however , for some long stagnant time to advance his new desire , occupying himself with little local jobs in putting up and lettering headstones about the neighbouring villages , and submitting to be regarded as a social failure , a returned purchase , by the half-dozen or so of farmers and other country-people who condescended to nod to him . 
The human interest of the new intention -- and a human interest is indispensable to the most spiritual and self-sacrificing -- was created by a letter from Sue , bearing a fresh postmark . 
She evidently wrote with anxiety , and told very little about her own doings , more than that she had passed some sort of examination for a Queen 's Scholarship , and was going to enter a training college at Melchester to complete herself for the vocation she had chosen , partly by his influence . 
There was a theological college at Melchester ; Melchester was a quiet and soothing place , almost entirely ecclesiastical in its tone ; a spot where worldly learning and intellectual smartness had no establishment ; where the altruistic feeling that he did possess would perhaps be more highly estimated than a brilliancy which he did not . 
As it would be necessary that he should continue for a time to work at his trade while reading up Divinity , which he had neglected at Christminster for the ordinary classical grind , what better course for him than to get employment at the further city , and pursue this plan of reading ? 
That his excessive human interest in the new place was entirely of Sue 's making , while at the same time Sue was to be regarded even less than formerly as proper to create it , had an ethical contradictoriness to which he was not blind . 
But that much he conceded to human frailty , and hoped to learn to love her only as a friend and kinswoman . 
He considered that he might so mark out his coming years as to begin his ministry at the age of thirty -- an age which much attracted him as being that of his exemplar when he first began to teach in Galilee . 
This would allow him plenty of time for deliberate study , and for acquiring capital by his trade to help his aftercourse of keeping the necessary terms at a theological college . 
Christmas had come and passed , and Sue had gone to the Melchester Normal School . 
The time was just the worst in the year for Jude to get into new employment , and he had written suggesting to her that he should postpone his arrival for a month or so , till the days had lengthened . 
She had acquiesced so readily that he wished he had not proposed it -- she evidently did not much care about him , though she had never once reproached him for his strange conduct in coming to her that night , and his silent disappearance . 
Neither had she ever said a word about her relations with Mr. Phillotson . 
Suddenly , however , quite a passionate letter arrived from Sue . 
She was quite lonely and miserable , she told him . 
She hated the place she was in ; it was worse than the ecclesiastical designer 's ; worse than anywhere . 
She felt utterly friendless ; could he come immediately ? 
-- though when he did come she would only be able to see him at limited times , the rules of the establishment she found herself in being strict to a degree . 
It was Mr. Phillotson who had advised her to come there , and she wished she had never listened to him . 
Phillotson 's suit was not exactly prospering , evidently ; and Jude felt unreasonably glad . 
He packed up his things and went to Melchester with a lighter heart than he had known for months . 
This being the turning over a new leaf he duly looked about for a temperance hotel , and found a little establishment of that description in the street leading from the station . 
When he had had something to eat he walked out into the dull winter light over the town bridge , and turned the corner towards the Close . 
The day was foggy , and standing under the walls of the most graceful architectural pile in England he paused and looked up . 
The lofty building was visible as far as the roofridge ; above , the dwindling spire rose more and more remotely , till its apex was quite lost in the mist drifting across it . 
The lamps now began to be lighted , and turning to the west front he walked round . 
He took it as a good omen that numerous blocks of stone were lying about , which signified that the cathedral was undergoing restoration or repair to a considerable extent . 
It seemed to him , full of the superstitions of his beliefs , that this was an exercise of forethought on the part of a ruling Power , that he might find plenty to do in the art he practised while waiting for a call to higher labours . 
Then a wave of warmth came over him as he thought how near he now stood to the bright-eyed vivacious girl with the broad forehead and pile of dark hair above it ; the girl with the kindling glance , daringly soft at times -- something like that of the girls he had seen in engravings from paintings of the Spanish school . 
She was here -- actually in this Close -- in one of the houses confronting this very west façade . 
He went down the broad gravel path towards the building . 
It was an ancient edifice of the fifteenth century , once a palace , now a training-school , with mullioned and transomed windows , and a courtyard in front shut in from the road by a wall . 
Jude opened the gate and went up to the door through which , on inquiring for his cousin , he was gingerly admitted to a waiting-room , and in a few minutes she came . 
Though she had been here such a short while , she was not as he had seen her last . 
All her bounding manner was gone ; her curves of motion had become subdued lines . 
The screens and subtleties of convention had likewise disappeared . 
Yet neither was she quite the woman who had written the letter that summoned him . 
That had plainly been dashed off in an impulse which second thoughts had somewhat regretted ; thoughts that were possibly of his recent self-disgrace . 
Jude was quite overcome with emotion . 
`` You do n't -- think me a demoralized wretch -- for coming to you as I was -- and going so shamefully , Sue ? '' 
`` Oh , I have tried not to ! 
You said enough to let me know what had caused it . 
I hope I shall never have any doubt of your worthiness , my poor Jude ! 
And I am glad you have come ! '' 
She wore a murrey-coloured gown with a little lace collar . 
It was made quite plain , and hung about her slight figure with clinging gracefulness . 
Her hair , which formerly she had worn according to the custom of the day was now twisted up tightly , and she had altogether the air of a woman clipped and pruned by severe discipline , an under-brightness shining through from the depths which that discipline had not yet been able to reach . 
She had come forward prettily , but Jude felt that she had hardly expected him to kiss her , as he was burning to do , under other colours than those of cousinship . 
He could not perceive the least sign that Sue regarded him as a lover , or ever would do so , now that she knew the worst of him , even if he had the right to behave as one ; and this helped on his growing resolve to tell her of his matrimonial entanglement , which he had put off doing from time to time in sheer dread of losing the bliss of her company . 
Sue came out into the town with him , and they walked and talked with tongues centred only on the passing moments . 
Jude said he would like to buy her a little present of some sort , and then she confessed , with something of shame , that she was dreadfully hungry . 
They were kept on very short allowances in the college , and a dinner , tea , and supper all in one was the present she most desired in the world . 
Jude thereupon took her to an inn and ordered whatever the house afforded , which was not much . 
The place , however , gave them a delightful opportunity for a tête-à-tête , nobody else being in the room , and they talked freely . 
She told him about the school as it was at that date , and the rough living , and the mixed character of her fellow-students , gathered together from all parts of the diocese , and how she had to get up and work by gas-light in the early morning , with all the bitterness of a young person to whom restraint was new . 
To all this he listened ; but it was not what he wanted especially to know -- her relations with Phillotson . 
That was what she did not tell . 
When they had sat and eaten , Jude impulsively placed his hand upon hers ; she looked up and smiled , and took his quite freely into her own little soft one , dividing his fingers and coolly examining them , as if they were the fingers of a glove she was purchasing . 
`` Your hands are rather rough , Jude , are n't they ? '' 
she said . 
`` Yes . 
So would yours be if they held a mallet and chisel all day . '' 
`` I do n't dislike it , you know . 
I think it is noble to see a man 's hands subdued to what he works in ... Well , I 'm rather glad I came to this training-school , after all . 
See how independent I shall be after the two years ' training ! 
I shall pass pretty high , I expect , and Mr. Phillotson will use his influence to get me a big school . '' 
She had touched the subject at last . 
