At last a packet did indeed arrive at the village , and he saw from the ends of it that it contained two thin books . 
He took it away into a lonely place , and sat down on a felled elm to open it . 
Ever since his first ecstasy or vision of Christminster and its possibilities , Jude had meditated much and curiously on the probable sort of process that was involved in turning the expressions of one language into those of another . 
He concluded that a grammar of the required tongue would contain , primarily , a rule , prescription , or clue of the nature of a secret cipher , which , once known , would enable him , by merely applying it , to change at will all words of his own speech into those of the foreign one . 
His childish idea was , in fact , a pushing to the extremity of mathematical precision what is everywhere known as Grimm 's Law -- an aggrandizement of rough rules to ideal completeness . 
Thus he assumed that the words of the required language were always to be found somewhere latent in the words of the given language by those who had the art to uncover them , such art being furnished by the books aforesaid . 
When , therefore , having noted that the packet bore the postmark of Christminster , he cut the string , opened the volumes , and turned to the Latin grammar , which chanced to come uppermost , he could scarcely believe his eyes . 
The book was an old one -- thirty years old , soiled , scribbled wantonly over with a strange name in every variety of enmity to the letterpress , and marked at random with dates twenty years earlier than his own day . 
But this was not the cause of Jude 's amazement . 
He learnt for the first time that there was no law of transmutation , as in his innocence he had supposed -LRB- there was , in some degree , but the grammarian did not recognize it -RRB- , but that every word in both Latin and Greek was to be individually committed to memory at the cost of years of plodding . 
Jude flung down the books , lay backward along the broad trunk of the elm , and was an utterly miserable boy for the space of a quarter of an hour . 
As he had often done before , he pulled his hat over his face and watched the sun peering insidiously at him through the interstices of the straw . 
This was Latin and Greek , then , was it this grand delusion ! 
The charm he had supposed in store for him was really a labour like that of Israel in Egypt . 
What brains they must have in Christminster and the great schools , he presently thought , to learn words one by one up to tens of thousands ! 
There were no brains in his head equal to this business ; and as the little sun-rays continued to stream in through his hat at him , he wished he had never seen a book , that he might never see another , that he had never been born . 
Somebody might have come along that way who would have asked him his trouble , and might have cheered him by saying that his notions were further advanced than those of his grammarian . 
But nobody did come , because nobody does ; and under the crushing recognition of his gigantic error Jude continued to wish himself out of the world . 
During the three or four succeeding years a quaint and singular vehicle might have been discerned moving along the lanes and by-roads near Marygreen , driven in a quaint and singular way . 
In the course of a month or two after the receipt of the books Jude had grown callous to the shabby trick played him by the dead languages . 
In fact , his disappointment at the nature of those tongues had , after a while , been the means of still further glorifying the erudition of Christminster . 
To acquire languages , departed or living in spite of such obstinacies as he now knew them inherently to possess , was a herculean performance which gradually led him on to a greater interest in it than in the presupposed patent process . 
The mountain-weight of material under which the ideas lay in those dusty volumes called the classics piqued him into a dogged , mouselike subtlety of attempt to move it piecemeal . 
He had endeavoured to make his presence tolerable to his crusty maiden aunt by assisting her to the best of his ability , and the business of the little cottage bakery had grown in consequence . 
An aged horse with a hanging head had been purchased for eight pounds at a sale , a creaking cart with a whity-brown tilt obtained for a few pounds more , and in this turn-out it became Jude 's business thrice a week to carry loaves of bread to the villagers and solitary cotters immediately round Marygreen . 
The singularity aforesaid lay , after all , less in the conveyance itself than in Jude 's manner of conducting it along its route . 
Its interior was the scene of most of Jude 's education by `` private study . '' 
As soon as the horse had learnt the road and the houses at which he was to pause awhile , the boy , seated in front , would slip the reins over his arm , ingeniously fix open , by means of a strap attached to the tilt , the volume he was reading , spread the dictionary on his knees , and plunge into the simpler passages from Caesar , Virgil , or Horace , as the case might be , in his purblind stumbling way , and with an expenditure of labour that would have made a tender-hearted pedagogue shed tears ; yet somehow getting at the meaning of what he read , and divining rather than beholding the spirit of the original , which often to his mind was something else than that which he was taught to look for . 
The only copies he had been able to lay hands on were old Delphin editions , because they were superseded , and therefore cheap . 
But , bad for idle schoolboys , it did so happen that they were passably good for him . 
The hampered and lonely itinerant conscientiously covered up the marginal readings , and used them merely on points of construction , as he would have used a comrade or tutor who should have happened to be passing by . 
And though Jude may have had little chance of becoming a scholar by these rough and ready means , he was in the way of getting into the groove he wished to follow . 
While he was busied with these ancient pages , which had already been thumbed by hands possibly in the grave , digging out the thoughts of these minds so remote yet so near , the bony old horse pursued his rounds , and Jude would be aroused from the woes of Dido by the stoppage of his cart and the voice of some old woman crying , `` Two to-day , baker , and I return this stale one . '' 
He was frequently met in the lanes by pedestrians and others without his seeing them , and by degrees the people of the neighbourhood began to talk about his method of combining work and play -LRB- such they considered his reading to be -RRB- , which , though probably convenient enough to himself , was not altogether a safe proceeding for other travellers along the same roads . 
There were murmurs . 
Then a private resident of an adjoining place informed the local policeman that the baker 's boy should not be allowed to read while driving , and insisted that it was the constable 's duty to catch him in the act , and take him to the police court at Alfredston , and get him fined for dangerous practices on the highway . 
The policeman thereupon lay in wait for Jude , and one day accosted him and cautioned him . 
As Jude had to get up at three o'clock in the morning to heat the oven , and mix and set in the bread that he distributed later in the day , he was obliged to go to bed at night immediately after laying the sponge ; so that if he could not read his classics on the highways he could hardly study at all . 
The only thing to be done was , therefore , to keep a sharp eye ahead and around him as well as he could in the circumstances , and slip away his books as soon as anybody loomed in the distance , the policeman in particular . 
To do that official justice , he did not put himself much in the way of Jude 's bread-cart , considering that in such a lonely district the chief danger was to Jude himself , and often on seeing the white tilt over the hedges he would move in another direction . 
On a day when Fawley was getting quite advanced , being now about sixteen , and had been stumbling through the `` Carmen Sæculare , '' on his way home , he found himself to be passing over the high edge of the plateau by the Brown House . 
The light had changed , and it was the sense of this which had caused him to look up . 
The sun was going down , and the full moon was rising simultaneously behind the woods in the opposite quarter . 
His mind had become so impregnated with the poem that , in a moment of the same impulsive emotion which years before had caused him to kneel on the ladder , he stopped the horse , alighted , and glancing round to see that nobody was in sight , knelt down on the roadside bank with open book . 
He turned first to the shiny goddess , who seemed to look so softly and critically at his doings , then to the disappearing luminary on the other hand , as he began : `` Phoebe silvarumque potens Diana ! '' 
The horse stood still till he had finished the hymn , which Jude repeated under the sway of a polytheistic fancy that he would never have thought of humouring in broad daylight . 
Reaching home , he mused over his curious superstition , innate or acquired , in doing this , and the strange forgetfulness which had led to such a lapse from common sense and custom in one who wished , next to being a scholar , to be a Christian divine . 
It had all come of reading heathen works exclusively . 
The more he thought of it the more convinced he was of his inconsistency . 
He began to wonder whether he could be reading quite the right books for his object in life . 
Certainly there seemed little harmony between this pagan literature and the mediæval colleges at Christminster , that ecclesiastical romance in stone . 
Ultimately he decided that in his sheer love of reading he had taken up a wrong emotion for a Christian young man . 
He had dabbled in Clarke 's Homer , but had never yet worked much at the New Testament in the Greek , though he possessed a copy , obtained by post from a second-hand bookseller . 
He abandoned the now familiar Ionic for a new dialect , and for a long time onward limited his reading almost entirely to the Gospels and Epistles in Griesbach 's text . 
Moreover , on going into Alfredston one day , he was introduced to patristic literature by finding at the bookseller 's some volumes of the Fathers which had been left behind by an insolvent clergyman of the neighbourhood . 
As another outcome of this change of groove he visited on Sundays all the churches within a walk , and deciphered the Latin inscriptions on fifteenth-century brasses and tombs . 
On one of these pilgrimages he met with a hunch-backed old woman of great intelligence , who read everything she could lay her hands on , and she told him more yet of the romantic charms of the city of light and lore . 
Thither he resolved as firmly as ever to go . 
But how live in that city ? 
At present he had no income at all . 
He had no trade or calling of any dignity or stability whatever on which he could subsist while carrying out an intellectual labour which might spread over many years . 
What was most required by citizens ? 
Food , clothing , and shelter . 
An income from any work in preparing the first would be too meagre ; for making the second he felt a distaste ; the preparation of the third requisite he inclined to . 
They built in a city ; therefore he would learn to build . 
He thought of his unknown uncle , his cousin Susanna 's father , an ecclesiastical worker in metal , and somehow mediæval art in any material was a trade for which he had rather a fancy . 
He could not go far wrong in following his uncle 's footsteps , and engaging himself awhile with the carcases that contained the scholar souls . 
As a preliminary he obtained some small blocks of freestone , metal not being available , and suspending his studies awhile , occupied his spare half-hours in copying the heads and capitals in his parish church . 
There was a stone-mason of a humble kind in Alfredston , and as soon as he had found a substitute for himself in his aunt 's little business , he offered his services to this man for a trifling wage . 
Here Jude had the opportunity of learning at least the rudiments of freestone-working . 
Some time later he went to a church-builder in the same place , and under the architect 's direction became handy at restoring the dilapidated masonries of several village churches round about . 
Not forgetting that he was only following up this handicraft as a prop to lean on while he prepared those greater engines which he flattered himself would be better fitted for him , he yet was interested in his pursuit on its own account . 
He now had lodgings during the week in the little town , whence he returned to Marygreen village every Saturday evening . 
And thus he reached and passed his nineteenth year . 
At this memorable date of his life he was , one Saturday , returning from Alfredston to Marygreen about three o'clock in the afternoon . 
It was fine , warm , and soft summer weather , and he walked with his tools at his back , his little chisels clinking faintly against the larger ones in his basket . 
It being the end of the week he had left work early , and had come out of the town by a round-about route which he did not usually frequent , having promised to call at a flour-mill near Cresscombe to execute a commission for his aunt . 
He was in an enthusiastic mood . 
He seemed to see his way to living comfortably in Christminster in the course of a year or two , and knocking at the doors of one of those strongholds of learning of which he had dreamed so much . 
He might , of course , have gone there now , in some capacity or other , but he preferred to enter the city with a little more assurance as to means than he could be said to feel at present . 
A warm self-content suffused him when he considered what he had already done . 
Now and then as he went along he turned to face the peeps of country on either side of him . 
But he hardly saw them ; the act was an automatic repetition of what he had been accustomed to do when less occupied ; and the one matter which really engaged him was the mental estimate of his progress thus far . 
`` I have acquired quite an average student 's power to read the common ancient classics , Latin in particular . '' 
This was true , Jude possessing a facility in that language which enabled him with great ease to himself to beguile his lonely walks by imaginary conversations therein . 
`` I have read two books of the Iliad , besides being pretty familiar with passages such as the speech of Phoenix in the ninth book , the fight of Hector and Ajax in the fourteenth , the appearance of Achilles unarmed and his heavenly armour in the eighteenth , and the funeral games in the twenty-third . 
I have also done some Hesiod , a little scrap of Thucydides , and a lot of the Greek Testament ... I wish there was only one dialect all the same . 
`` I have done some mathematics , including the first six and the eleventh and twelfth books of Euclid ; and algebra as far as simple equations . 
`` I know something of the Fathers , and something of Roman and English history . 
`` These things are only a beginning . 
But I shall not make much farther advance here , from the difficulty of getting books . 
Hence I must next concentrate all my energies on settling in Christminster . 
Once there I shall so advance , with the assistance I shall there get , that my present knowledge will appear to me but as childish ignorance . 
I must save money , and I will ; and one of those colleges shall open its doors to me -- shall welcome whom now it would spurn , if I wait twenty years for the welcome . 
`` I 'll be D.D. before I have done ! '' 
And then he continued to dream , and thought he might become even a bishop by leading a pure , energetic , wise , Christian life . 
And what an example he would set ! 
If his income were # 5000 a year , he would give away # 4500 in one form and another , and live sumptuously -LRB- for him -RRB- on the remainder . 
Well , on second thoughts , a bishop was absurd . 
He would draw the line at an archdeacon . 
Perhaps a man could be as good and as learned and as useful in the capacity of archdeacon as in that of bishop . 
Yet he thought of the bishop again . 
`` Meanwhile I will read , as soon as I am settled in Christminster , the books I have not been able to get hold of here : Livy , Tacitus , Herodotus , Æschylus , Sophocles , Aristophanes -- '' `` Ha , ha , ha ! 
Hoity-toity ! '' 
The sounds were expressed in light voices on the other side of the hedge , but he did not notice them . 
His thoughts went on : '' -- Euripides , Plato , Aristotle , Lucretius , Epictetus , Seneca , Antoninus . 
Then I must master other things : the Fathers thoroughly ; Bede and ecclesiastical history generally ; a smattering of Hebrew -- I only know the letters as yet -- '' `` Hoity-toity ! '' '' 
-- but I can work hard . 
I have staying power in abundance , thank God ! 
and it is that which tells ... . 
Yes , Christminster shall be my Alma Mater ; and I 'll be her beloved son , in whom she shall be well pleased . '' 
In his deep concentration on these transactions of the future Jude 's walk had slackened , and he was now standing quite still , looking at the ground as though the future were thrown thereon by a magic lantern . 
On a sudden something smacked him sharply in the ear , and he became aware that a soft cold substance had been flung at him , and had fallen at his feet . 
A glance told him what it was -- a piece of flesh , the characteristic part of a barrow-pig , which the countrymen used for greasing their boots , as it was useless for any other purpose . 
Pigs were rather plentiful hereabout , being bred and fattened in large numbers in certain parts of North Wessex . 
On the other side of the hedge was a stream , whence , as he now for the first time realized , had come the slight sounds of voices and laughter that had mingled with his dreams . 
He mounted the bank and looked over the fence . 
On the further side of the stream stood a small homestead , having a garden and pig-sties attached ; in front of it , beside the brook , three young women were kneeling , with buckets and platters beside them containing heaps of pigs ' chitterlings , which they were washing in the running water . 
One or two pairs of eyes slyly glanced up , and perceiving that his attention had at last been attracted , and that he was watching them , they braced themselves for inspection by putting their mouths demurely into shape and recommencing their rinsing operations with assiduity . 
`` Thank you ! '' 
said Jude severely . 
`` I DID N'T throw it , I tell you ! '' 
asserted one girl to her neighbour , as if unconscious of the young man 's presence . 
`` Nor I , '' the second answered . 
`` Oh , Anny , how can you ! '' 
said the third . 
`` If I had thrown anything at all , it should n't have been THAT ! '' 
`` Pooh ! 
I do n't care for him ! '' 
And they laughed and continued their work , without looking up , still ostentatiously accusing each other . 
Jude grew sarcastic as he wiped his face , and caught their remarks . 
`` YOU did n't do it -- oh no ! '' 
he said to the up-stream one of the three . 
She whom he addressed was a fine dark-eyed girl , not exactly handsome , but capable of passing as such at a little distance , despite some coarseness of skin and fibre . 
She had a round and prominent bosom , full lips , perfect teeth , and the rich complexion of a Cochin hen 's egg . 
She was a complete and substantial female animal -- no more , no less ; and Jude was almost certain that to her was attributable the enterprise of attracting his attention from dreams of the humaner letters to what was simmering in the minds around him . 
`` That you 'll never be told , '' said she deedily . 
`` Whoever did it was wasteful of other people 's property . '' 
`` Oh , that 's nothing . '' 
`` But you want to speak to me , I suppose ? '' 
`` Oh yes ; if you like to . '' 
`` Shall I clamber across , or will you come to the plank above here ? '' 
Perhaps she foresaw an opportunity ; for somehow or other the eyes of the brown girl rested in his own when he had said the words , and there was a momentary flash of intelligence , a dumb announcement of affinity in posse between herself and him , which , so far as Jude Fawley was concerned , had no sort of premeditation in it . 
She saw that he had singled her out from the three , as a woman is singled out in such cases , for no reasoned purpose of further acquaintance , but in commonplace obedience to conjunctive orders from headquarters , unconsciously received by unfortunate men when the last intention of their lives is to be occupied with the feminine . 
Springing to her feet , she said : `` Bring back what is lying there . '' 
Jude was now aware that no message on any matter connected with her father 's business had prompted her signal to him . 
He set down his basket of tools , picked up the scrap of offal , beat a pathway for himself with his stick , and got over the hedge . 
They walked in parallel lines , one on each bank of the stream , towards the small plank bridge . 
As the girl drew nearer to it , she gave without Jude perceiving it , an adroit little suck to the interior of each of her cheeks in succession , by which curious and original manoeuvre she brought as by magic upon its smooth and rotund surface a perfect dimple , which she was able to retain there as long as she continued to smile . 
This production of dimples at will was a not unknown operation , which many attempted , but only a few succeeded in accomplishing . 
They met in the middle of the plank , and Jude , tossing back her missile , seemed to expect her to explain why she had audaciously stopped him by this novel artillery instead of by hailing him . 
But she , slyly looking in another direction , swayed herself backwards and forwards on her hand as it clutched the rail of the bridge ; till , moved by amatory curiosity , she turned her eyes critically upon him . 
`` You do n't think I would shy things at you ? '' 
`` Oh no . '' 
`` We are doing this for my father , who naturally does n't want anything thrown away . 
He makes that into dubbin . '' 
She nodded towards the fragment on the grass . 
`` What made either of the others throw it , I wonder ? '' 
Jude asked , politely accepting her assertion , though he had very large doubts as to its truth . 
`` Impudence . 
Do n't tell folk it was I , mind ! '' 
`` How can I ? 
I do n't know your name . '' 
`` Ah , no . 
Shall I tell it to you ? '' 
`` Do ! '' 
`` Arabella Donn . 
I 'm living here . '' 
`` I must have known it if I had often come this way . 
But I mostly go straight along the high-road . '' 
`` My father is a pig-breeder , and these girls are helping me wash the innerds for black-puddings and such like . '' 
They talked a little more and a little more , as they stood regarding each other and leaning against the hand-rail of the bridge . 
The unvoiced call of woman to man , which was uttered very distinctly by Arabella 's personality , held Jude to the spot against his intention -- almost against his will , and in a way new to his experience . 
It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that till this moment Jude had never looked at a woman to consider her as such , but had vaguely regarded the sex as beings outside his life and purposes . 
He gazed from her eyes to her mouth , thence to her bosom , and to her full round naked arms , wet , mottled with the chill of the water , and firm as marble . 
`` What a nice-looking girl you are ! '' 
he murmured , though the words had not been necessary to express his sense of her magnetism . 
`` Ah , you should see me Sundays ! '' 
she said piquantly . 
`` I do n't suppose I could ? '' 
he answered `` That 's for you to think on . 
There 's nobody after me just now , though there med be in a week or two . '' 
She had spoken this without a smile , and the dimples disappeared . 
Jude felt himself drifting strangely , but could not help it . 
`` Will you let me ? '' 
`` I do n't mind . '' 
By this time she had managed to get back one dimple by turning her face aside for a moment and repeating the odd little sucking operation before mentioned , Jude being still unconscious of more than a general impression of her appearance . 
`` Next Sunday ? '' 
he hazarded . 
`` To-morrow , that is ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Shall I call ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
She brightened with a little glow of triumph , swept him almost tenderly with her eyes in turning , and retracing her steps down the brookside grass rejoined her companions . 
Jude Fawley shouldered his tool-basket and resumed his lonely way , filled with an ardour at which he mentally stood at gaze . 
He had just inhaled a single breath from a new atmosphere , which had evidently been hanging round him everywhere he went , for he knew not how long , but had somehow been divided from his actual breathing as by a sheet of glass . 
The intentions as to reading , working , and learning , which he had so precisely formulated only a few minutes earlier , were suffering a curious collapse into a corner , he knew not how . 
`` Well , it 's only a bit of fun , '' he said to himself , faintly conscious that to common sense there was something lacking , and still more obviously something redundant in the nature of this girl who had drawn him to her which made it necessary that he should assert mere sportiveness on his part as his reason in seeking her -- something in her quite antipathetic to that side of him which had been occupied with literary study and the magnificent Christminster dream . 
It had been no vestal who chose THAT missile for opening her attack on him . 
He saw this with his intellectual eye , just for a short fleeting while , as by the light of a falling lamp one might momentarily see an inscription on a wall before being enshrouded in darkness . 
And then this passing discriminative power was withdrawn , and Jude was lost to all conditions of things in the advent of a fresh and wild pleasure , that of having found a new channel for emotional interest hitherto unsuspected , though it had lain close beside him . 
He was to meet this enkindling one of the other sex on the following Sunday . 
Meanwhile the girl had joined her companions , and she silently resumed her flicking and sousing of the chitterlings in the pellucid stream . 
`` Catched un , my dear ? '' 
laconically asked the girl called Anny . 
`` I do n't know . 
I wish I had thrown something else than that ! '' 
regretfully murmured Arabella . 
`` Lord ! 
he 's nobody , though you med think so . 
He used to drive old Drusilla Fawley 's bread-cart out at Marygreen , till he ` prenticed himself at Alfredston . 
Since then he 's been very stuck up , and always reading . 
He wants to be a scholar , they say . '' 
`` Oh , I do n't care what he is , or anything about ` n. Do n't you think it , my child ! '' 
`` Oh , do n't ye ! 
You need n't try to deceive us ! 
What did you stay talking to him for , if you did n't want un ? 
Whether you do or whether you do n't , he 's as simple as a child . 
I could see it as you courted on the bridge , when he looked at ` ee as if he had never seen a woman before in his born days . 
Well , he 's to be had by any woman who can get him to care for her a bit , if she likes to set herself to catch him the right way . '' 
The next day Jude Fawley was pausing in his bedroom with the sloping ceiling , looking at the books on the table , and then at the black mark on the plaster above them , made by the smoke of his lamp in past months . 
It was Sunday afternoon , four-and-twenty hours after his meeting with Arabella Donn . 
During the whole bygone week he had been resolving to set this afternoon apart for a special purpose , -- the re-reading of his Greek Testament -- his new one , with better type than his old copy , following Griesbach 's text as amended by numerous correctors , and with variorum readings in the margin . 
He was proud of the book , having obtained it by boldly writing to its London publisher , a thing he had never done before . 
He had anticipated much pleasure in this afternoon 's reading , under the quiet roof of his great-aunt 's house as formerly , where he now slept only two nights a week . 
But a new thing , a great hitch , had happened yesterday in the gliding and noiseless current of his life , and he felt as a snake must feel who has sloughed off its winter skin , and can not understand the brightness and sensitiveness of its new one . 
He would not go out to meet her , after all . 
He sat down , opened the book , and with his elbows firmly planted on the table , and his hands to his temples , began at the beginning : HÊ KAINÊ DIATHÊKÊ Had he promised to call for her ? 
Surely he had ! 
She would wait indoors , poor girl , and waste all her afternoon on account of him . 
There was a something in her , too , which was very winning , apart from promises . 
He ought not to break faith with her . 
Even though he had only Sundays and week-day evenings for reading he could afford one afternoon , seeing that other young men afforded so many . 
After to-day he would never probably see her again . 
Indeed , it would be impossible , considering what his plans were . 
In short , as if materially , a compelling arm of extraordinary muscular power seized hold of him -- something which had nothing in common with the spirits and influences that had moved him hitherto . 
This seemed to care little for his reason and his will , nothing for his so-called elevated intentions , and moved him along , as a violent schoolmaster a schoolboy he has seized by the collar , in a direction which tended towards the embrace of a woman for whom he had no respect , and whose life had nothing in common with his own except locality . 
HÊ KAINÊ DIATHÊKÊ was no more heeded , and the predestinate Jude sprang up and across the room . 
Foreseeing such an event he had already arrayed himself in his best clothes . 
In three minutes he was out of the house and descending by the path across the wide vacant hollow of corn-ground which lay between the village and the isolated house of Arabella in the dip beyond the upland . 
As he walked he looked at his watch . 
He could be back in two hours , easily , and a good long time would still remain to him for reading after tea . 
Passing the few unhealthy fir-trees and cottage where the path joined the highway he hastened along , and struck away to the left , descending the steep side of the country to the west of the Brown House . 
Here at the base of the chalk formation he neared the brook that oozed from it , and followed the stream till he reached her dwelling . 
A smell of piggeries came from the back , and the grunting of the originators of that smell . 
He entered the garden , and knocked at the door with the knob of his stick . 
Somebody had seen him through the window , for a male voice on the inside said : `` Arabella ! 
Here 's your young man come coorting ! 
Mizzle , my girl ! '' 
Jude winced at the words . 
Courting in such a businesslike aspect as it evidently wore to the speaker was the last thing he was thinking of . 
He was going to walk with her , perhaps kiss her ; but `` courting '' was too coolly purposeful to be anything but repugnant to his ideas . 
The door was opened and he entered , just as Arabella came downstairs in radiant walking attire . 
`` Take a chair , Mr. What 's - your-name ? '' 
said her father , an energetic , black-whiskered man , in the same businesslike tones Jude had heard from outside . 
`` I 'd rather go out at once , would n't you ? '' 
she whispered to Jude . 
`` Yes , '' said he . 
`` We 'll walk up to the Brown House and back , we can do it in half an hour . '' 
Arabella looked so handsome amid her untidy surroundings that he felt glad he had come , and all the misgivings vanished that had hitherto haunted him . 
First they clambered to the top of the great down , during which ascent he had occasionally to take her hand to assist her . 
Then they bore off to the left along the crest into the ridgeway , which they followed till it intersected the high-road at the Brown House aforesaid , the spot of his former fervid desires to behold Christminster . 
But he forgot them now . 
He talked the commonest local twaddle to Arabella with greater zest than he would have felt in discussing all the philosophies with all the Dons in the recently adored university , and passed the spot where he had knelt to Diana and Phoebus without remembering that there were any such people in the mythology , or that the sun was anything else than a useful lamp for illuminating Arabella 's face . 
An indescribable lightness of heel served to lift him along ; and Jude , the incipient scholar , prospective D.D. , professor , bishop , or what not , felt himself honoured and glorified by the condescension of this handsome country wench in agreeing to take a walk with him in her Sunday frock and ribbons . 
They reached the Brown House barn -- the point at which he had planned to turn back . 
While looking over the vast northern landscape from this spot they were struck by the rising of a dense volume of smoke from the neighbourhood of the little town which lay beneath them at a distance of a couple of miles . 
`` It is a fire , '' said Arabella . 
`` Let 's run and see it -- do ! 
It is not far ! '' 
The tenderness which had grown up in Jude 's bosom left him no will to thwart her inclination now -- which pleased him in affording him excuse for a longer time with her . 
They started off down the hill almost at a trot ; but on gaining level ground at the bottom , and walking a mile , they found that the spot of the fire was much further off than it had seemed . 
Having begun their journey , however , they pushed on ; but it was not till five o'clock that they found themselves on the scene , -- the distance being altogether about half-a-dozen miles from Marygreen , and three from Arabella 's . 
The conflagration had been got under by the time they reached it , and after a short inspection of the melancholy ruins they retraced their steps -- their course lying through the town of Alfredston . 
Arabella said she would like some tea , and they entered an inn of an inferior class , and gave their order . 
As it was not for beer they had a long time to wait . 
The maid-servant recognized Jude , and whispered her surprise to her mistress in the background , that he , the student `` who kept hisself up so particular , '' should have suddenly descended so low as to keep company with Arabella . 
The latter guessed what was being said , and laughed as she met the serious and tender gaze of her lover -- the low and triumphant laugh of a careless woman who sees she is winning her game . 
They sat and looked round the room , and at the picture of Samson and Delilah which hung on the wall , and at the circular beer-stains on the table , and at the spittoons underfoot filled with sawdust . 
The whole aspect of the scene had that depressing effect on Jude which few places can produce like a tap-room on a Sunday evening when the setting sun is slanting in , and no liquor is going , and the unfortunate wayfarer finds himself with no other haven of rest . 
It began to grow dusk . 
They could not wait longer , really , for the tea , they said . 
`` Yet what else can we do ? '' 
asked Jude . 
`` It is a three-mile walk for you . '' 
`` I suppose we can have some beer , '' said Arabella . 
`` Beer , oh yes . 
I had forgotten that . 
Somehow it seems odd to come to a public-house for beer on a Sunday evening . '' 
`` But we did n't . '' 
`` No , we did n't . '' 
Jude by this time wished he was out of such an uncongenial atmosphere ; but he ordered the beer , which was promptly brought . 
Arabella tasted it . 
`` Ugh ! '' 
she said . 
Jude tasted . 
`` What 's the matter with it ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I do n't understand beer very much now , it is true . 
I like it well enough , but it is bad to read on , and I find coffee better . 
But this seems all right . '' 
`` Adulterated -- I ca n't touch it ! '' 
She mentioned three or four ingredients that she detected in the liquor beyond malt and hops , much to Jude 's surprise . 
`` How much you know ! '' 
he said good-humouredly . 
Nevertheless she returned to the beer and drank her share , and they went on their way . 
It was now nearly dark , and as soon as they had withdrawn from the lights of the town they walked closer together , till they touched each other . 
She wondered why he did not put his arm round her waist , but he did not ; he merely said what to himself seemed a quite bold enough thing : `` Take my arm . '' 
She took it , thoroughly , up to the shoulder . 
He felt the warmth of her body against his , and putting his stick under his other arm held with his right hand her right as it rested in its place . 
`` Now we are well together , dear , are n't we ? '' 
he observed . 
`` Yes , '' said she ; adding to herself : `` Rather mild ! '' 
`` How fast I have become ! '' 
he was thinking . 
Thus they walked till they reached the foot of the upland , where they could see the white highway ascending before them in the gloom . 
From this point the only way of getting to Arabella 's was by going up the incline , and dipping again into her valley on the right . 
Before they had climbed far they were nearly run into by two men who had been walking on the grass unseen . 
`` These lovers -- you find 'em out o ' doors in all seasons and weathers -- lovers and homeless dogs only , '' said one of the men as they vanished down the hill . 
Arabella tittered lightly . 
`` Are we lovers ? '' 
asked Jude . 
`` You know best . '' 
`` But you can tell me ? '' 
For answer she inclined her head upon his shoulder . 
Jude took the hint , and encircling her waist with his arm , pulled her to him and kissed her . 
They walked now no longer arm in arm but , as she had desired , clasped together . 
After all , what did it matter since it was dark , said Jude to himself . 
When they were half-way up the long hill they paused as by arrangement , and he kissed her again . 
They reached the top , and he kissed her once more . 
`` You can keep your arm there , if you would like to , '' she said gently . 
He did so , thinking how trusting she was . 
Thus they slowly went towards her home . 
He had left his cottage at half-past three , intending to be sitting down again to the New Testament by half-past five . 
It was nine o'clock when , with another embrace , he stood to deliver her up at her father 's door . 
She asked him to come in , if only for a minute , as it would seem so odd otherwise , and as if she had been out alone in the dark . 
He gave way , and followed her in . 
Immediately that the door was opened he found , in addition to her parents , several neighbours sitting round . 
They all spoke in a congratulatory manner , and took him seriously as Arabella 's intended partner . 
They did not belong to his set or circle , and he felt out of place and embarrassed . 
He had not meant this : a mere afternoon of pleasant walking with Arabella , that was all he had meant . 
He did not stay longer than to speak to her stepmother , a simple , quiet woman without features or character ; and bidding them all good night plunged with a sense of relief into the track over the down . 
But that sense was only temporary : Arabella soon re-asserted her sway in his soul . 
He walked as if he felt himself to be another man from the Jude of yesterday . 
What were his books to him ? 
what were his intentions , hitherto adhered to so strictly , as to not wasting a single minute of time day by day ? 
`` Wasting ! '' 
It depended on your point of view to define that : he was just living for the first time : not wasting life . 
It was better to love a woman than to be a graduate , or a parson ; ay , or a pope ! 
When he got back to the house his aunt had gone to bed , and a general consciousness of his neglect seemed written on the face of all things confronting him . 
He went upstairs without a light , and the dim interior of his room accosted him with sad inquiry . 
There lay his book open , just as he had left it , and the capital letters on the title-page regarded him with fixed reproach in the grey starlight , like the unclosed eyes of a dead man : HÊ KAINÊ DIATHÊKÊ * * * * * * Jude had to leave early next morning for his usual week of absence at lodgings ; and it was with a sense of futility that he threw into his basket upon his tools and other necessaries the unread book he had brought with him . 
He kept his impassioned doings a secret almost from himself . 
Arabella , on the contrary , made them public among all her friends and acquaintances . 
Retracing by the light of dawn the road he had followed a few hours earlier under cover of darkness , with his sweetheart by his side , he reached the bottom of the hill , where he walked slowly , and stood still . 
He was on the spot where he had given her the first kiss . 
As the sun had only just risen it was possible that nobody had passed there since . 
Jude looked on the ground and sighed . 
He looked closely , and could just discern in the damp dust the imprints of their feet as they had stood locked in each other 's arms . 
She was not there now , and `` the embroidery of imagination upon the stuff of nature '' so depicted her past presence that a void was in his heart which nothing could fill . 
A pollard willow stood close to the place , and that willow was different from all other willows in the world . 
Utter annihilation of the six days which must elapse before he could see her again as he had promised would have been his intensest wish if he had had only the week to live . 
An hour and a half later Arabella came along the same way with her two companions of the Saturday . 
She passed unheedingly the scene of the kiss , and the willow that marked it , though chattering freely on the subject to the other two . 
`` And what did he tell ` ee next ? '' 
`` Then he said -- '' And she related almost word for word some of his tenderest speeches . 
If Jude had been behind the fence he would have felt not a little surprised at learning how very few of his sayings and doings on the previous evening were private . 
`` You 've got him to care for ` ee a bit , ` nation if you ha n't ! '' 
murmured Anny judicially . 
`` It 's well to be you ! '' 
In a few moments Arabella replied in a curiously low , hungry tone of latent sensuousness : `` I 've got him to care for me : yes ! 
But I want him to more than care for me ; I want him to have me -- to marry me ! 
I must have him . 
I ca n't do without him . 
He 's the sort of man I long for . 
I shall go mad if I ca n't give myself to him altogether ! 
I felt I should when I first saw him ! '' 
`` As he is a romancing , straightfor ` ard , honest chap , he 's to be had , and as a husband , if you set about catching him in the right way . '' 
Arabella remained thinking awhile . 
`` What med be the right way ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Oh you do n't know -- you do n't ! '' 
said Sarah , the third girl . 
`` On my word I do n't ! 
-- No further , that is , than by plain courting , and taking care he do n't go too far ! '' 
The third girl looked at the second . 
`` She DO N'T know ! '' '' 
'T is clear she do n't ! '' 
said Anny . 
`` And having lived in a town , too , as one may say ! 
Well , we can teach ` ee som ` at then , as well as you us . '' 
`` Yes . 
And how do you mean -- a sure way to gain a man ? 
Take me for an innocent , and have done wi ' it ! '' 
`` As a husband . '' 
`` As a husband . '' 
`` A countryman that 's honourable and serious-minded such as he ; God forbid that I should say a sojer , or sailor , or commercial gent from the towns , or any of them that be slippery with poor women ! 
I 'd do no friend that harm ! '' 
`` Well , such as he , of course ! '' 
Arabella 's companions looked at each other , and turning up their eyes in drollery began smirking . 
