`` Oh , rescue her ! 
I am her brother now , And you her father . 
Every gentle maid Should have a guardian in each gentleman . '' 
It was wonderful to Sir James Chettam how well he continued to like going to the Grange after he had once encountered the difficulty of seeing Dorothea for the first time in the light of a woman who was engaged to another man . 
Of course the forked lightning seemed to pass through him when he first approached her , and he remained conscious throughout the interview of hiding uneasiness ; but , good as he was , it must be owned that his uneasiness was less than it would have been if he had thought his rival a brilliant and desirable match . 
He had no sense of being eclipsed by Mr. Casaubon ; he was only shocked that Dorothea was under a melancholy illusion , and his mortification lost some of its bitterness by being mingled with compassion . 
Nevertheless , while Sir James said to himself that he had completely resigned her , since with the perversity of a Desdemona she had not affected a proposed match that was clearly suitable and according to nature ; he could not yet be quite passive under the idea of her engagement to Mr. Casaubon . 
On the day when he first saw them together in the light of his present knowledge , it seemed to him that he had not taken the affair seriously enough . 
Brooke was really culpable ; he ought to have hindered it . 
Who could speak to him ? 
Something might be done perhaps even now , at least to defer the marriage . 
On his way home he turned into the Rectory and asked for Mr. Cadwallader . 
Happily , the Rector was at home , and his visitor was shown into the study , where all the fishing tackle hung . 
But he himself was in a little room adjoining , at work with his turning apparatus , and he called to the baronet to join him there . 
The two were better friends than any other landholder and clergyman in the county -- a significant fact which was in agreement with the amiable expression of their faces . 
Mr. Cadwallader was a large man , with full lips and a sweet smile ; very plain and rough in his exterior , but with that solid imperturbable ease and good-humor which is infectious , and like great grassy hills in the sunshine , quiets even an irritated egoism , and makes it rather ashamed of itself . 
`` Well , how are you ? '' 
he said , showing a hand not quite fit to be grasped . 
`` Sorry I missed you before . 
Is there anything particular ? 
You look vexed . '' 
Sir James 's brow had a little crease in it , a little depression of the eyebrow , which he seemed purposely to exaggerate as he answered . 
`` It is only this conduct of Brooke 's . 
I really think somebody should speak to him . '' 
`` What ? 
meaning to stand ? '' 
said Mr. Cadwallader , going on with the arrangement of the reels which he had just been turning . 
`` I hardly think he means it . 
But where 's the harm , if he likes it ? 
Any one who objects to Whiggery should be glad when the Whigs do n't put up the strongest fellow . 
They wo n't overturn the Constitution with our friend Brooke 's head for a battering ram . '' 
`` Oh , I do n't mean that , '' said Sir James , who , after putting down his hat and throwing himself into a chair , had begun to nurse his leg and examine the sole of his boot with much bitterness . 
`` I mean this marriage . 
I mean his letting that blooming young girl marry Casaubon . '' 
`` What is the matter with Casaubon ? 
I see no harm in him -- if the girl likes him . '' 
`` She is too young to know what she likes . 
Her guardian ought to interfere . 
He ought not to allow the thing to be done in this headlong manner . 
I wonder a man like you , Cadwallader -- a man with daughters , can look at the affair with indifference : and with such a heart as yours ! 
Do think seriously about it . '' 
`` I am not joking ; I am as serious as possible , '' said the Rector , with a provoking little inward laugh . 
`` You are as bad as Elinor . 
She has been wanting me to go and lecture Brooke ; and I have reminded her that her friends had a very poor opinion of the match she made when she married me . '' 
`` But look at Casaubon , '' said Sir James , indignantly . 
`` He must be fifty , and I do n't believe he could ever have been much more than the shadow of a man . 
Look at his legs ! '' 
`` Confound you handsome young fellows ! 
you think of having it all your own way in the world . 
You do n't under stand women . 
They do n't admire you half so much as you admire yourselves . 
Elinor used to tell her sisters that she married me for my ugliness -- it was so various and amusing that it had quite conquered her prudence . '' 
`` You ! 
it was easy enough for a woman to love you . 
But this is no question of beauty . 
I do n't like Casaubon . '' 
This was Sir James 's strongest way of implying that he thought ill of a man 's character . 
`` Why ? 
what do you know against him ? '' 
said the Rector laying down his reels , and putting his thumbs into his armholes with an air of attention . 
Sir James paused . 
He did not usually find it easy to give his reasons : it seemed to him strange that people should not know them without being told , since he only felt what was reasonable . 
At last he said -- `` Now , Cadwallader , has he got any heart ? '' 
`` Well , yes . 
I do n't mean of the melting sort , but a sound kernel , that you may be sure of . 
He is very good to his poor relations : pensions several of the women , and is educating a young fellow at a good deal of expense . 
Casaubon acts up to his sense of justice . 
His mother 's sister made a bad match -- a Pole , I think -- lost herself -- at any rate was disowned by her family . 
If it had not been for that , Casaubon would not have had so much money by half . 
I believe he went himself to find out his cousins , and see what he could do for them . 
Every man would not ring so well as that , if you tried his metal . 
You would , Chettam ; but not every man . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' said Sir James , coloring . 
`` I am not so sure of myself . '' 
He paused a moment , and then added , `` That was a right thing for Casaubon to do . 
But a man may wish to do what is right , and yet be a sort of parchment code . 
A woman may not be happy with him . 
And I think when a girl is so young as Miss Brooke is , her friends ought to interfere a little to hinder her from doing anything foolish . 
You laugh , because you fancy I have some feeling on my own account . 
But upon my honor , it is not that . 
I should feel just the same if I were Miss Brooke 's brother or uncle . '' 
`` Well , but what should you do ? '' 
`` I should say that the marriage must not be decided on until she was of age . 
And depend upon it , in that case , it would never come off . 
I wish you saw it as I do -- I wish you would talk to Brooke about it . '' 
Sir James rose as he was finishing his sentence , for he saw Mrs. Cadwallader entering from the study . 
She held by the hand her youngest girl , about five years old , who immediately ran to papa , and was made comfortable on his knee . 
`` I hear what you are talking about , '' said the wife . 
`` But you will make no impression on Humphrey . 
As long as the fish rise to his bait , everybody is what he ought to be . 
Bless you , Casaubon has got a trout-stream , and does not care about fishing in it himself : could there be a better fellow ? '' 
`` Well , there is something in that , '' said the Rector , with his quiet , inward laugh . 
`` It is a very good quality in a man to have a trout-stream . '' 
`` But seriously , '' said Sir James , whose vexation had not yet spent itself , `` do n't you think the Rector might do some good by speaking ? '' 
`` Oh , I told you beforehand what he would say , '' answered Mrs. Cadwallader , lifting up her eyebrows . 
`` I have done what I could : I wash my hands of the marriage . '' 
`` In the first place , '' said the Rector , looking rather grave , `` it would be nonsensical to expect that I could convince Brooke , and make him act accordingly . 
Brooke is a very good fellow , but pulpy ; he will run into any mould , but he wo n't keep shape . '' 
`` He might keep shape long enough to defer the marriage , '' said Sir James . 
`` But , my dear Chettam , why should I use my influence to Casaubon 's disadvantage , unless I were much surer than I am that I should be acting for the advantage of Miss Brooke ? 
I know no harm of Casaubon . 
I do n't care about his Xisuthrus and Fee-fo-fum and the rest ; but then he does n't care about my fishing-tackle . 
As to the line he took on the Catholic Question , that was unexpected ; but he has always been civil to me , and I do n't see why I should spoil his sport . 
For anything I can tell , Miss Brooke may be happier with him than she would be with any other man . '' 
`` Humphrey ! 
I have no patience with you . 
You know you would rather dine under the hedge than with Casaubon alone . 
You have nothing to say to each other . '' 
`` What has that to do with Miss Brooke 's marrying him ? 
She does not do it for my amusement . '' 
`` He has got no good red blood in his body , '' said Sir James . 
`` No . 
Somebody put a drop under a magnifying-glass and it was all semicolons and parentheses , '' said Mrs. Cadwallader . 
`` Why does he not bring out his book , instead of marrying , '' said Sir James , with a disgust which he held warranted by the sound feeling of an English layman . 
`` Oh , he dreams footnotes , and they run away with all his brains . 
They say , when he was a little boy , he made an abstract of ` Hop o ' my Thumb , ' and he has been making abstracts ever since . 
Ugh ! 
And that is the man Humphrey goes on saying that a woman may be happy with . '' 
`` Well , he is what Miss Brooke likes , '' said the Rector . 
`` I do n't profess to understand every young lady 's taste . '' 
`` But if she were your own daughter ? '' 
said Sir James . 
`` That would be a different affair . 
She is not my daughter , and I do n't feel called upon to interfere . 
Casaubon is as good as most of us . 
He is a scholarly clergyman , and creditable to the cloth . 
Some Radical fellow speechifying at Middlemarch said Casaubon was the learned straw-chopping incumbent , and Freke was the brick-and-mortar incumbent , and I was the angling incumbent . 
And upon my word , I do n't see that one is worse or better than the other . '' 
The Rector ended with his silent laugh . 
He always saw the joke of any satire against himself . 
His conscience was large and easy , like the rest of him : it did only what it could do without any trouble . 
Clearly , there would be no interference with Miss Brooke 's marriage through Mr. Cadwallader ; and Sir James felt with some sadness that she was to have perfect liberty of misjudgment . 
It was a sign of his good disposition that he did not slacken at all in his intention of carrying out Dorothea 's design of the cottages . 
Doubtless this persistence was the best course for his own dignity : but pride only helps us to be generous ; it never makes us so , any more than vanity makes us witty . 
She was now enough aware of Sir James 's position with regard to her , to appreciate the rectitude of his perseverance in a landlord 's duty , to which he had at first been urged by a lover 's complaisance , and her pleasure in it was great enough to count for something even in her present happiness . 
Perhaps she gave to Sir James Chettam 's cottages all the interest she could spare from Mr. Casaubon , or rather from the symphony of hopeful dreams , admiring trust , and passionate self devotion which that learned gentleman had set playing in her soul . 
Hence it happened that in the good baronet 's succeeding visits , while he was beginning to pay small attentions to Celia , he found himself talking with more and more pleasure to Dorothea . 
She was perfectly unconstrained and without irritation towards him now , and he was gradually discovering the delight there is in frank kindness and companionship between a man and a woman who have no passion to hide or confess . 
1st Gent . 
An ancient land in ancient oracles Is called `` law-thirsty '' : all the struggle there Was after order and a perfect rule . 
Pray , where lie such lands now ? 
... 2d Gent . 
Why , where they lay of old -- in human souls . 
Mr. Casaubon 's behavior about settlements was highly satisfactory to Mr. Brooke , and the preliminaries of marriage rolled smoothly along , shortening the weeks of courtship . 
The betrothed bride must see her future home , and dictate any changes that she would like to have made there . 
A woman dictates before marriage in order that she may have an appetite for submission afterwards . 
And certainly , the mistakes that we male and female mortals make when we have our own way might fairly raise some wonder that we are so fond of it . 
On a gray but dry November morning Dorothea drove to Lowick in company with her uncle and Celia . 
Mr. Casaubon 's home was the manor-house . 
Close by , visible from some parts of the garden , was the little church , with the old parsonage opposite . 
In the beginning of his career , Mr. Casaubon had only held the living , but the death of his brother had put him in possession of the manor also . 
It had a small park , with a fine old oak here and there , and an avenue of limes towards the southwest front , with a sunk fence between park and pleasure-ground , so that from the drawing-room windows the glance swept uninterruptedly along a slope of greensward till the limes ended in a level of corn and pastures , which often seemed to melt into a lake under the setting sun . 
This was the happy side of the house , for the south and east looked rather melancholy even under the brightest morning . 
The grounds here were more confined , the flower-beds showed no very careful tendance , and large clumps of trees , chiefly of sombre yews , had risen high , not ten yards from the windows . 
The building , of greenish stone , was in the old English style , not ugly , but small-windowed and melancholy-looking : the sort of house that must have children , many flowers , open windows , and little vistas of bright things , to make it seem a joyous home . 
In this latter end of autumn , with a sparse remnant of yellow leaves falling slowly athwart the dark evergreens in a stillness without sunshine , the house too had an air of autumnal decline , and Mr. Casaubon , when he presented himself , had no bloom that could be thrown into relief by that background . 
`` Oh dear ! '' 
Celia said to herself , `` I am sure Freshitt Hall would have been pleasanter than this . '' 
She thought of the white freestone , the pillared portico , and the terrace full of flowers , Sir James smiling above them like a prince issuing from his enchantment in a rose-bush , with a handkerchief swiftly metamorphosed from the most delicately odorous petals -- Sir James , who talked so agreeably , always about things which had common-sense in them , and not about learning ! 
Celia had those light young feminine tastes which grave and weatherworn gentlemen sometimes prefer in a wife ; but happily Mr. Casaubon 's bias had been different , for he would have had no chance with Celia . 
Dorothea , on the contrary , found the house and grounds all that she could wish : the dark book-shelves in the long library , the carpets and curtains with colors subdued by time , the curious old maps and bird 's - eye views on the walls of the corridor , with here and there an old vase below , had no oppression for her , and seemed more cheerful than the easts and pictures at the Grange , which her uncle had long ago brought home from his travels -- they being probably among the ideas he had taken in at one time . 
To poor Dorothea these severe classical nudities and smirking Renaissance-Correggiosities were painfully inexplicable , staring into the midst of her Puritanic conceptions : she had never been taught how she could bring them into any sort of relevance with her life . 
But the owners of Lowick apparently had not been travellers , and Mr. Casaubon 's studies of the past were not carried on by means of such aids . 
Dorothea walked about the house with delightful emotion . 
Everything seemed hallowed to her : this was to be the home of her wifehood , and she looked up with eyes full of confidence to Mr. Casaubon when he drew her attention specially to some actual arrangement and asked her if she would like an alteration . 
All appeals to her taste she met gratefully , but saw nothing to alter . 
His efforts at exact courtesy and formal tenderness had no defect for her . 
She filled up all blanks with unmanifested perfections , interpreting him as she interpreted the works of Providence , and accounting for seeming discords by her own deafness to the higher harmonies . 
And there are many blanks left in the weeks of courtship which a loving faith fills with happy assurance . 
`` Now , my dear Dorothea , I wish you to favor me by pointing out which room you would like to have as your boudoir , '' said Mr. Casaubon , showing that his views of the womanly nature were sufficiently large to include that requirement . 
`` It is very kind of you to think of that , '' said Dorothea , `` but I assure you I would rather have all those matters decided for me . 
I shall be much happier to take everything as it is -- just as you have been used to have it , or as you will yourself choose it to be . 
I have no motive for wishing anything else . '' 
`` Oh , Dodo , '' said Celia , `` will you not have the bow-windowed room up-stairs ? '' 
Mr. Casaubon led the way thither . 
The bow-window looked down the avenue of limes ; the furniture was all of a faded blue , and there were miniatures of ladies and gentlemen with powdered hair hanging in a group . 
A piece of tapestry over a door also showed a blue-green world with a pale stag in it . 
The chairs and tables were thin-legged and easy to upset . 
It was a room where one might fancy the ghost of a tight-laced lady revisiting the scene of her embroidery . 
A light bookcase contained duodecimo volumes of polite literature in calf , completing the furniture . 
`` Yes , '' said Mr. Brooke , `` this would be a pretty room with some new hangings , sofas , and that sort of thing . 
A little bare now . '' 
`` No , uncle , '' said Dorothea , eagerly . 
`` Pray do not speak of altering anything . 
There are so many other things in the world that want altering -- I like to take these things as they are . 
And you like them as they are , do n't you ? '' 
she added , looking at Mr. Casaubon . 
`` Perhaps this was your mother 's room when she was young . '' 
`` It was , '' he said , with his slow bend of the head . 
`` This is your mother , '' said Dorothea , who had turned to examine the group of miniatures . 
`` It is like the tiny one you brought me ; only , I should think , a better portrait . 
And this one opposite , who is this ? '' 
`` Her elder sister . 
They were , like you and your sister , the only two children of their parents , who hang above them , you see . '' 
`` The sister is pretty , '' said Celia , implying that she thought less favorably of Mr. Casaubon 's mother . 
It was a new opening to Celia 's imagination , that he came of a family who had all been young in their time -- the ladies wearing necklaces . 
`` It is a peculiar face , '' said Dorothea , looking closely . 
`` Those deep gray eyes rather near together -- and the delicate irregular nose with a sort of ripple in it -- and all the powdered curls hanging backward . 
Altogether it seems to me peculiar rather than pretty . 
There is not even a family likeness between her and your mother . '' 
`` No . 
And they were not alike in their lot . '' 
`` You did not mention her to me , '' said Dorothea . 
`` My aunt made an unfortunate marriage . 
I never saw her . '' 
Dorothea wondered a little , but felt that it would be indelicate just then to ask for any information which Mr. Casaubon did not proffer , and she turned to the window to admire the view . 
The sun had lately pierced the gray , and the avenue of limes cast shadows . 
`` Shall we not walk in the garden now ? '' 
said Dorothea . 
`` And you would like to see the church , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke . 
`` It is a droll little church . 
And the village . 
It all lies in a nut-shell . 
By the way , it will suit you , Dorothea ; for the cottages are like a row of alms-houses -- little gardens , gilly-flowers , that sort of thing . '' 
`` Yes , please , '' said Dorothea , looking at Mr. Casaubon , `` I should like to see all that . '' 
She had got nothing from him more graphic about the Lowick cottages than that they were `` not bad . '' 
They were soon on a gravel walk which led chiefly between grassy borders and clumps of trees , this being the nearest way to the church , Mr. Casaubon said . 
At the little gate leading into the churchyard there was a pause while Mr. Casaubon went to the parsonage close by to fetch a key . 
Celia , who had been hanging a little in the rear , came up presently , when she saw that Mr. Casaubon was gone away , and said in her easy staccato , which always seemed to contradict the suspicion of any malicious intent -- `` Do you know , Dorothea , I saw some one quite young coming up one of the walks . '' 
`` Is that astonishing , Celia ? '' 
`` There may be a young gardener , you know -- why not ? '' 
said Mr. Brooke . 
`` I told Casaubon he should change his gardener . '' 
`` No , not a gardener , '' said Celia ; `` a gentleman with a sketch-book . 
He had light-brown curls . 
I only saw his back . 
But he was quite young . '' 
`` The curate 's son , perhaps , '' said Mr. Brooke . 
`` Ah , there is Casaubon again , and Tucker with him . 
He is going to introduce Tucker . 
You do n't know Tucker yet . '' 
Mr. Tucker was the middle-aged curate , one of the `` inferior clergy , '' who are usually not wanting in sons . 
But after the introduction , the conversation did not lead to any question about his family , and the startling apparition of youthfulness was forgotten by every one but Celia . 
She inwardly declined to believe that the light-brown curls and slim figure could have any relationship to Mr. Tucker , who was just as old and musty-looking as she would have expected Mr. Casaubon 's curate to be ; doubtless an excellent man who would go to heaven -LRB- for Celia wished not to be unprincipled -RRB- , but the corners of his mouth were so unpleasant . 
Celia thought with some dismalness of the time she should have to spend as bridesmaid at Lowick , while the curate had probably no pretty little children whom she could like , irrespective of principle . 
Mr. Tucker was invaluable in their walk ; and perhaps Mr. Casaubon had not been without foresight on this head , the curate being able to answer all Dorothea 's questions about the villagers and the other parishioners . 
Everybody , he assured her , was well off in Lowick : not a cottager in those double cottages at a low rent but kept a pig , and the strips of garden at the back were well tended . 
The small boys wore excellent corduroy , the girls went out as tidy servants , or did a little straw-plaiting at home : no looms here , no Dissent ; and though the public disposition was rather towards laying by money than towards spirituality , there was not much vice . 
The speckled fowls were so numerous that Mr. Brooke observed , `` Your farmers leave some barley for the women to glean , I see . 
The poor folks here might have a fowl in their pot , as the good French king used to wish for all his people . 
The French eat a good many fowls -- skinny fowls , you know . '' 
`` I think it was a very cheap wish of his , '' said Dorothea , indignantly . 
`` Are kings such monsters that a wish like that must be reckoned a royal virtue ? '' 
`` And if he wished them a skinny fowl , '' said Celia , `` that would not be nice . 
But perhaps he wished them to have fat fowls . '' 
`` Yes , but the word has dropped out of the text , or perhaps was subauditum ; that is , present in the king 's mind , but not uttered , '' said Mr. Casaubon , smiling and bending his head towards Celia , who immediately dropped backward a little , because she could not bear Mr. Casaubon to blink at her . 
Dorothea sank into silence on the way back to the house . 
She felt some disappointment , of which she was yet ashamed , that there was nothing for her to do in Lowick ; and in the next few minutes her mind had glanced over the possibility , which she would have preferred , of finding that her home would be in a parish which had a larger share of the world 's misery , so that she might have had more active duties in it . 
Then , recurring to the future actually before her , she made a picture of more complete devotion to Mr. Casaubon 's aims in which she would await new duties . 
Many such might reveal themselves to the higher knowledge gained by her in that companionship . 
Mr. Tucker soon left them , having some clerical work which would not allow him to lunch at the Hall ; and as they were re-entering the garden through the little gate , Mr. Casaubon said -- `` You seem a little sad , Dorothea . 
I trust you are pleased with what you have seen . '' 
`` I am feeling something which is perhaps foolish and wrong , '' answered Dorothea , with her usual openness -- `` almost wishing that the people wanted more to be done for them here . 
I have known so few ways of making my life good for anything . 
Of course , my notions of usefulness must be narrow . 
I must learn new ways of helping people . '' 
`` Doubtless , '' said Mr. Casaubon . 
`` Each position has its corresponding duties . 
Yours , I trust , as the mistress of Lowick , will not leave any yearning unfulfilled . '' 
`` Indeed , I believe that , '' said Dorothea , earnestly . 
`` Do not suppose that I am sad . '' 
`` That is well . 
But , if you are not tired , we will take another way to the house than that by which we came . '' 
Dorothea was not at all tired , and a little circuit was made towards a fine yew-tree , the chief hereditary glory of the grounds on this side of the house . 
As they approached it , a figure , conspicuous on a dark background of evergreens , was seated on a bench , sketching the old tree . 
Mr. Brooke , who was walking in front with Celia , turned his head , and said -- `` Who is that youngster , Casaubon ? '' 
They had come very near when Mr. Casaubon answered -- `` That is a young relative of mine , a second cousin : the grandson , in fact , '' he added , looking at Dorothea , `` of the lady whose portrait you have been noticing , my aunt Julia . '' 
The young man had laid down his sketch-book and risen . 
His bushy light-brown curls , as well as his youthfulness , identified him at once with Celia 's apparition . 
`` Dorothea , let me introduce to you my cousin , Mr. Ladislaw . 
Will , this is Miss Brooke . '' 
The cousin was so close now , that , when he lifted his hat , Dorothea could see a pair of gray eyes rather near together , a delicate irregular nose with a little ripple in it , and hair falling backward ; but there was a mouth and chin of a more prominent , threatening aspect than belonged to the type of the grandmother 's miniature . 
Young Ladislaw did not feel it necessary to smile , as if he were charmed with this introduction to his future second cousin and her relatives ; but wore rather a pouting air of discontent . 
`` You are an artist , I see , '' said Mr. Brooke , taking up the sketch-book and turning it over in his unceremonious fashion . 
`` No , I only sketch a little . 
There is nothing fit to be seen there , '' said young Ladislaw , coloring , perhaps with temper rather than modesty . 
`` Oh , come , this is a nice bit , now . 
I did a little in this way myself at one time , you know . 
Look here , now ; this is what I call a nice thing , done with what we used to call brio . '' 
Mr. Brooke held out towards the two girls a large colored sketch of stony ground and trees , with a pool . 
`` I am no judge of these things , '' said Dorothea , not coldly , but with an eager deprecation of the appeal to her . 
`` You know , uncle , I never see the beauty of those pictures which you say are so much praised . 
They are a language I do not understand . 
I suppose there is some relation between pictures and nature which I am too ignorant to feel -- just as you see what a Greek sentence stands for which means nothing to me . '' 
Dorothea looked up at Mr. Casaubon , who bowed his head towards her , while Mr. Brooke said , smiling nonchalantly -- `` Bless me , now , how different people are ! 
But you had a bad style of teaching , you know -- else this is just the thing for girls -- sketching , fine art and so on . 
But you took to drawing plans ; you do n't understand morbidezza , and that kind of thing . 
You will come to my house , I hope , and I will show you what I did in this way , '' he continued , turning to young Ladislaw , who had to be recalled from his preoccupation in observing Dorothea . 
Ladislaw had made up his mind that she must be an unpleasant girl , since she was going to marry Casaubon , and what she said of her stupidity about pictures would have confirmed that opinion even if he had believed her . 
As it was , he took her words for a covert judgment , and was certain that she thought his sketch detestable . 
There was too much cleverness in her apology : she was laughing both at her uncle and himself . 
But what a voice ! 
It was like the voice of a soul that had once lived in an Aeolian harp . 
This must be one of Nature 's inconsistencies . 
There could be no sort of passion in a girl who would marry Casaubon . 
But he turned from her , and bowed his thanks for Mr. Brooke 's invitation . 
`` We will turn over my Italian engravings together , '' continued that good-natured man . 
`` I have no end of those things , that I have laid by for years . 
One gets rusty in this part of the country , you know . 
Not you , Casaubon ; you stick to your studies ; but my best ideas get undermost -- out of use , you know . 
You clever young men must guard against indolence . 
I was too indolent , you know : else I might have been anywhere at one time . '' 
`` That is a seasonable admonition , '' said Mr. Casaubon ; `` but now we will pass on to the house , lest the young ladies should be tired of standing . '' 
When their backs were turned , young Ladislaw sat down to go on with his sketching , and as he did so his face broke into an expression of amusement which increased as he went on drawing , till at last he threw back his head and laughed aloud . 
Partly it was the reception of his own artistic production that tickled him ; partly the notion of his grave cousin as the lover of that girl ; and partly Mr. Brooke 's definition of the place he might have held but for the impediment of indolence . 
Mr. Will Ladislaw 's sense of the ludicrous lit up his features very agreeably : it was the pure enjoyment of comicality , and had no mixture of sneering and self-exaltation . 
`` What is your nephew going to do with himself , Casaubon ? '' 
said Mr. Brooke , as they went on . 
`` My cousin , you mean -- not my nephew . '' 
`` Yes , yes , cousin . 
But in the way of a career , you know . '' 
`` The answer to that question is painfully doubtful . 
On leaving Rugby he declined to go to an English university , where I would gladly have placed him , and chose what I must consider the anomalous course of studying at Heidelberg . 
And now he wants to go abroad again , without any special object , save the vague purpose of what he calls culture , preparation for he knows not what . 
He declines to choose a profession . '' 
`` He has no means but what you furnish , I suppose . '' 
`` I have always given him and his friends reason to understand that I would furnish in moderation what was necessary for providing him with a scholarly education , and launching him respectably . 
I am-therefore bound to fulfil the expectation so raised , '' said Mr. Casaubon , putting his conduct in the light of mere rectitude : a trait of delicacy which Dorothea noticed with admiration . 
`` He has a thirst for travelling ; perhaps he may turn out a Bruce or a Mungo Park , '' said Mr. Brooke . 
`` I had a notion of that myself at one time . '' 
`` No , he has no bent towards exploration , or the enlargement of our geognosis : that would be a special purpose which I could recognize with some approbation , though without felicitating him on a career which so often ends in premature and violent death . 
But so far is he from having any desire for a more accurate knowledge of the earth 's surface , that he said he should prefer not to know the sources of the Nile , and that there should be some unknown regions preserved as hunting grounds for the poetic imagination . '' 
`` Well , there is something in that , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke , who had certainly an impartial mind . 
`` It is , I fear , nothing more than a part of his general inaccuracy and indisposition to thoroughness of all kinds , which would be a bad augury for him in any profession , civil or sacred , even were he so far submissive to ordinary rule as to choose one . '' 
`` Perhaps he has conscientious scruples founded on his own unfitness , '' said Dorothea , who was interesting herself in finding a favorable explanation . 
`` Because the law and medicine should be very serious professions to undertake , should they not ? 
People 's lives and fortunes depend on them . '' 
`` Doubtless ; but I fear that my young relative Will Ladislaw is chiefly determined in his aversion to these callings by a dislike to steady application , and to that kind of acquirement which is needful instrumentally , but is not charming or immediately inviting to self-indulgent taste . 
I have insisted to him on what Aristotle has stated with admirable brevity , that for the achievement of any work regarded as an end there must be a prior exercise of many energies or acquired facilities of a secondary order , demanding patience . 
I have pointed to my own manuscript volumes , which represent the toil of years preparatory to a work not yet accomplished . 
But in vain . 
To careful reasoning of this kind he replies by calling himself Pegasus , and every form of prescribed work ` harness . ' '' 
Celia laughed . 
She was surprised to find that Mr. Casaubon could say something quite amusing . 
`` Well , you know , he may turn out a Byron , a Chatterton , a Churchill -- that sort of thing -- there 's no telling , '' said Mr. Brooke . 
`` Shall you let him go to Italy , or wherever else he wants to go ? '' 
`` Yes ; I have agreed to furnish him with moderate supplies for a year or so ; he asks no more . 
I shall let him be tried by the test of freedom . '' 
`` That is very kind of you , '' said Dorothea , looking up at Mr. Casaubon with delight . 
`` It is noble . 
After all , people may really have in them some vocation which is not quite plain to themselves , may they not ? 
They may seem idle and weak because they are growing . 
We should be very patient with each other , I think . '' 
`` I suppose it is being engaged to be married that has made you think patience good , '' said Celia , as soon as she and Dorothea were alone together , taking off their wrappings . 
`` You mean that I am very impatient , Celia . '' 
`` Yes ; when people do n't do and say just what you like . '' 
Celia had become less afraid of `` saying things '' to Dorothea since this engagement : cleverness seemed to her more pitiable than ever . 
`` He had catched a great cold , had he had no other clothes to wear than the skin of a bear not yet killed . '' 
-- FULLER . 
Young Ladislaw did not pay that visit to which Mr. Brooke had invited him , and only six days afterwards Mr. Casaubon mentioned that his young relative had started for the Continent , seeming by this cold vagueness to waive inquiry . 
Indeed , Will had declined to fix on any more precise destination than the entire area of Europe . 
Genius , he held , is necessarily intolerant of fetters : on the one hand it must have the utmost play for its spontaneity ; on the other , it may confidently await those messages from the universe which summon it to its peculiar work , only placing itself in an attitude of receptivity towards all sublime chances . 
The attitudes of receptivity are various , and Will had sincerely tried many of them . 
He was not excessively fond of wine , but he had several times taken too much , simply as an experiment in that form of ecstasy ; he had fasted till he was faint , and then supped on lobster ; he had made himself ill with doses of opium . 
Nothing greatly original had resulted from these measures ; and the effects of the opium had convinced him that there was an entire dissimilarity between his constitution and De Quincey 's . 
The superadded circumstance which would evolve the genius had not yet come ; the universe had not yet beckoned . 
Even Caesar 's fortune at one time was , but a grand presentiment . 
We know what a masquerade all development is , and what effective shapes may be disguised in helpless embryos . 
-- In fact , the world is full of hopeful analogies and handsome dubious eggs called possibilities . 
Will saw clearly enough the pitiable instances of long incubation producing no chick , and but for gratitude would have laughed at Casaubon , whose plodding application , rows of note-books , and small taper of learned theory exploring the tossed ruins of the world , seemed to enforce a moral entirely encouraging to Will 's generous reliance on the intentions of the universe with regard to himself . 
He held that reliance to be a mark of genius ; and certainly it is no mark to the contrary ; genius consisting neither in self-conceit nor in humility , but in a power to make or do , not anything in general , but something in particular . 
Let him start for the Continent , then , without our pronouncing on his future . 
Among all forms of mistake , prophecy is the most gratuitous . 
But at present this caution against a too hasty judgment interests me more in relation to Mr. Casaubon than to his young cousin . 
If to Dorothea Mr. Casaubon had been the mere occasion which had set alight the fine inflammable material of her youthful illusions , does it follow that he was fairly represented in the minds of those less impassioned personages who have hitherto delivered their judgments concerning him ? 
I protest against any absolute conclusion , any prejudice derived from Mrs. Cadwallader 's contempt for a neighboring clergyman 's alleged greatness of soul , or Sir James Chettam 's poor opinion of his rival 's legs , -- from Mr. Brooke 's failure to elicit a companion 's ideas , or from Celia 's criticism of a middle-aged scholar 's personal appearance . 
I am not sure that the greatest man of his age , if ever that solitary superlative existed , could escape these unfavorable reflections of himself in various small mirrors ; and even Milton , looking for his portrait in a spoon , must submit to have the facial angle of a bumpkin . 
Moreover , if Mr. Casaubon , speaking for himself , has rather a chilling rhetoric , it is not therefore certain that there is no good work or fine feeling in him . 
Did not an immortal physicist and interpreter of hieroglyphs write detestable verses ? 
Has the theory of the solar system been advanced by graceful manners and conversational tact ? 
Suppose we turn from outside estimates of a man , to wonder , with keener interest , what is the report of his own consciousness about his doings or capacity : with what hindrances he is carrying on his daily labors ; what fading of hopes , or what deeper fixity of self-delusion the years are marking off within him ; and with what spirit he wrestles against universal pressure , which will one day be too heavy for him , and bring his heart to its final pause . 
Doubtless his lot is important in his own eyes ; and the chief reason that we think he asks too large a place in our consideration must be our want of room for him , since we refer him to the Divine regard with perfect confidence ; nay , it is even held sublime for our neighbor to expect the utmost there , however little he may have got from us . 
Mr. Casaubon , too , was the centre of his own world ; if he was liable to think that others were providentially made for him , and especially to consider them in the light of their fitness for the author of a `` Key to all Mythologies , '' this trait is not quite alien to us , and , like the other mendicant hopes of mortals , claims some of our pity . 
Certainly this affair of his marriage with Miss Brooke touched him more nearly than it did any one of the persons who have hitherto shown their disapproval of it , and in the present stage of things I feel more tenderly towards his experience of success than towards the disappointment of the amiable Sir James . 
For in truth , as the day fixed for his marriage came nearer , Mr. Casaubon did not find his spirits rising ; nor did the contemplation of that matrimonial garden scene , where , as all experience showed , the path was to be bordered with flowers , prove persistently more enchanting to him than the accustomed vaults where he walked taper in hand . 
He did not confess to himself , still less could he have breathed to another , his surprise that though he had won a lovely and noble-hearted girl he had not won delight , -- which he had also regarded as an object to be found by search . 
It is true that he knew all the classical passages implying the contrary ; but knowing classical passages , we find , is a mode of motion , which explains why they leave so little extra force for their personal application . 
Poor Mr. Casaubon had imagined that his long studious bachelorhood had stored up for him a compound interest of enjoyment , and that large drafts on his affections would not fail to be honored ; for we all of us , grave or light , get our thoughts entangled in metaphors , and act fatally on the strength of them . 
And now he was in danger of being saddened by the very conviction that his circumstances were unusually happy : there was nothing external by which he could account for a certain blankness of sensibility which came over him just when his expectant gladness should have been most lively , just when he exchanged the accustomed dulness of his Lowick library for his visits to the Grange . 
Here was a weary experience in which he was as utterly condemned to loneliness as in the despair which sometimes threatened him while toiling in the morass of authorship without seeming nearer to the goal . 
And his was that worst loneliness which would shrink from sympathy . 
He could not but wish that Dorothea should think him not less happy than the world would expect her successful suitor to be ; and in relation to his authorship he leaned on her young trust and veneration , he liked to draw forth her fresh interest in listening , as a means of encouragement to himself : in talking to her he presented all his performance and intention with the reflected confidence of the pedagogue , and rid himself for the time of that chilling ideal audience which crowded his laborious uncreative hours with the vaporous pressure of Tartarean shades . 
For to Dorothea , after that toy-box history of the world adapted to young ladies which had made the chief part of her education , Mr. Casaubon 's talk about his great book was full of new vistas ; and this sense of revelation , this surprise of a nearer introduction to Stoics and Alexandrians , as people who had ideas not totally unlike her own , kept in abeyance for the time her usual eagerness for a binding theory which could bring her own life and doctrine into strict connection with that amazing past , and give the remotest sources of knowledge some bearing on her actions . 
That more complete teaching would come -- Mr. Casaubon would tell her all that : she was looking forward to higher initiation in ideas , as she was looking forward to marriage , and blending her dim conceptions of both . 
It would be a great mistake to suppose that Dorothea would have cared about any share in Mr. Casaubon 's learning as mere accomplishment ; for though opinion in the neighborhood of Freshitt and Tipton had pronounced her clever , that epithet would not have described her to circles in whose more precise vocabulary cleverness implies mere aptitude for knowing and doing , apart from character . 
All her eagerness for acquirement lay within that full current of sympathetic motive in which her ideas and impulses were habitually swept along . 
She did not want to deck herself with knowledge -- to wear it loose from the nerves and blood that fed her action ; and if she had written a book she must have done it as Saint Theresa did , under the command of an authority that constrained her conscience . 
But something she yearned for by which her life might be filled with action at once rational and ardent ; and since the time was gone by for guiding visions and spiritual directors , since prayer heightened yearning but not instruction , what lamp was there but knowledge ? 
Surely learned men kept the only oil ; and who more learned than Mr. Casaubon ? 
Thus in these brief weeks Dorothea 's joyous grateful expectation was unbroken , and however her lover might occasionally be conscious of flatness , he could never refer it to any slackening of her affectionate interest . 
The season was mild enough to encourage the project of extending the wedding journey as far as Rome , and Mr. Casaubon was anxious for this because he wished to inspect some manuscripts in the Vatican . 
`` I still regret that your sister is not to accompany us , '' he said one morning , some time after it had been ascertained that Celia objected to go , and that Dorothea did not wish for her companionship . 
`` You will have many lonely hours , Dorothea , for I shall be constrained to make the utmost use of my time during our stay in Rome , and I should feel more at liberty if you had a companion . '' 
The words `` I should feel more at liberty '' grated on Dorothea . 
For the first time in speaking to Mr. Casaubon she colored from annoyance . 
`` You must have misunderstood me very much , '' she said , `` if you think I should not enter into the value of your time -- if you think that I should not willingly give up whatever interfered with your using it to the best purpose . '' 
`` That is very amiable in you , my dear Dorothea , '' said Mr. Casaubon , not in the least noticing that she was hurt ; `` but if you had a lady as your companion , I could put you both under the care of a cicerone , and we could thus achieve two purposes in the same space of time . '' 
`` I beg you will not refer to this again , '' said Dorothea , rather haughtily . 
But immediately she feared that she was wrong , and turning towards him she laid her hand on his , adding in a different tone , `` Pray do not be anxious about me . 
I shall have so much to think of when I am alone . 
