Dorothea had never been tired of listening to old Monsieur Liret when Celia 's feet were as cold as possible , and when it had really become dreadful to see the skin of his bald head moving about . 
Why then should her enthusiasm not extend to Mr. Casaubon simply in the same way as to Monsieur Liret ? 
And it seemed probable that all learned men had a sort of schoolmaster 's view of young people . 
But now Celia was really startled at the suspicion which had darted into her mind . 
She was seldom taken by surprise in this way , her marvellous quickness in observing a certain order of signs generally preparing her to expect such outward events as she had an interest in . 
Not that she now imagined Mr. Casaubon to be already an accepted lover : she had only begun to feel disgust at the possibility that anything in Dorothea 's mind could tend towards such an issue . 
Here was something really to vex her about Dodo : it was all very well not to accept Sir James Chettam , but the idea of marrying Mr. Casaubon ! 
Celia felt a sort of shame mingled with a sense of the ludicrous . 
But perhaps Dodo , if she were really bordering on such an extravagance , might be turned away from it : experience had often shown that her impressibility might be calculated on . 
The day was damp , and they were not going to walk out , so they both went up to their sitting-room ; and there Celia observed that Dorothea , instead of settling down with her usual diligent interest to some occupation , simply leaned her elbow on an open book and looked out of the window at the great cedar silvered with the damp . 
She herself had taken up the making of a toy for the curate 's children , and was not going to enter on any subject too precipitately . 
Dorothea was in fact thinking that it was desirable for Celia to know of the momentous change in Mr. Casaubon 's position since he had last been in the house : it did not seem fair to leave her in ignorance of what would necessarily affect her attitude towards him ; but it was impossible not to shrink from telling her . 
Dorothea accused herself of some meanness in this timidity : it was always odious to her to have any small fears or contrivances about her actions , but at this moment she was seeking the highest aid possible that she might not dread the corrosiveness of Celia 's pretty carnally minded prose . 
Her reverie was broken , and the difficulty of decision banished , by Celia 's small and rather guttural voice speaking in its usual tone , of a remark aside or a `` by the bye . '' 
`` Is any one else coming to dine besides Mr. Casaubon ? '' 
`` Not that I know of . '' 
`` I hope there is some one else . 
Then I shall not hear him eat his soup so . '' 
`` What is there remarkable about his soup-eating ? '' 
`` Really , Dodo , ca n't you hear how he scrapes his spoon ? 
And he always blinks before he speaks . 
I do n't know whether Locke blinked , but I 'm sure I am sorry for those who sat opposite to him if he did . '' 
`` Celia , '' said Dorothea , with emphatic gravity , `` pray do n't make any more observations of that kind . '' 
`` Why not ? 
They are quite true , '' returned Celia , who had her reasons for persevering , though she was beginning to be a little afraid . 
`` Many things are true which only the commonest minds observe . '' 
`` Then I think the commonest minds must be rather useful . 
I think it is a pity Mr. Casaubon 's mother had not a commoner mind : she might have taught him better . '' 
Celia was inwardly frightened , and ready to run away , now she had hurled this light javelin . 
Dorothea 's feelings had gathered to an avalanche , and there could be no further preparation . 
`` It is right to tell you , Celia , that I am engaged to marry Mr. Casaubon . '' 
Perhaps Celia had never turned so pale before . 
The paper man she was making would have had his leg injured , but for her habitual care of whatever she held in her hands . 
She laid the fragile figure down at once , and sat perfectly still for a few moments . 
When she spoke there was a tear gathering . 
`` Oh , Dodo , I hope you will be happy . '' 
Her sisterly tenderness could not but surmount other feelings at this moment , and her fears were the fears of affection . 
Dorothea was still hurt and agitated . 
`` It is quite decided , then ? '' 
said Celia , in an awed under tone . 
`` And uncle knows ? '' 
`` I have accepted Mr. Casaubon 's offer . 
My uncle brought me the letter that contained it ; he knew about it beforehand . '' 
`` I beg your pardon , if I have said anything to hurt you , Dodo , '' said Celia , with a slight sob . 
She never could have thought that she should feel as she did . 
There was something funereal in the whole affair , and Mr. Casaubon seemed to be the officiating clergyman , about whom it would be indecent to make remarks . 
`` Never mind , Kitty , do not grieve . 
We should never admire the same people . 
I often offend in something of the same way ; I am apt to speak too strongly of those who do n't please me . '' 
In spite of this magnanimity Dorothea was still smarting : perhaps as much from Celia 's subdued astonishment as from her small criticisms . 
Of course all the world round Tipton would be out of sympathy with this marriage . 
Dorothea knew of no one who thought as she did about life and its best objects . 
Nevertheless before the evening was at an end she was very happy . 
In an hour 's tete-a-tete with Mr. Casaubon she talked to him with more freedom than she had ever felt before , even pouring out her joy at the thought of devoting herself to him , and of learning how she might best share and further all his great ends . 
Mr. Casaubon was touched with an unknown delight -LRB- what man would not have been ? -RRB- 
at this childlike unrestrained ardor : he was not surprised -LRB- what lover would have been ? -RRB- 
that he should be the object of it . 
`` My dear young lady -- Miss Brooke -- Dorothea ! '' 
he said , pressing her hand between his hands , `` this is a happiness greater than I had ever imagined to be in reserve for me . 
That I should ever meet with a mind and person so rich in the mingled graces which could render marriage desirable , was far indeed from my conception . 
You have all -- nay , more than all -- those qualities which I have ever regarded as the characteristic excellences of womanhood . 
The great charm of your sex is its capability of an ardent self-sacrificing affection , and herein we see its fitness to round and complete the existence of our own . 
Hitherto I have known few pleasures save of the severer kind : my satisfactions have been those of the solitary student . 
I have been little disposed to gather flowers that would wither in my hand , but now I shall pluck them with eagerness , to place them in your bosom . '' 
No speech could have been more thoroughly honest in its intention : the frigid rhetoric at the end was as sincere as the bark of a dog , or the cawing of an amorous rook . 
Would it not be rash to conclude that there was no passion behind those sonnets to Delia which strike us as the thin music of a mandolin ? 
Dorothea 's faith supplied all that Mr. Casaubon 's words seemed to leave unsaid : what believer sees a disturbing omission or infelicity ? 
The text , whether of prophet or of poet , expands for whatever we can put into it , and even his bad grammar is sublime . 
`` I am very ignorant -- you will quite wonder at my ignorance , '' said Dorothea . 
`` I have so many thoughts that may be quite mistaken ; and now I shall be able to tell them all to you , and ask you about them . 
But , '' she added , with rapid imagination of Mr. Casaubon 's probable feeling , `` I will not trouble you too much ; only when you are inclined to listen to me . 
You must often be weary with the pursuit of subjects in your own track . 
I shall gain enough if you will take me with you there . '' 
`` How should I be able now to persevere in any path without your companionship ? '' 
said Mr. Casaubon , kissing her candid brow , and feeling that heaven had vouchsafed him a blessing in every way suited to his peculiar wants . 
He was being unconsciously wrought upon by the charms of a nature which was entirely without hidden calculations either for immediate effects or for remoter ends . 
It was this which made Dorothea so childlike , and , according to some judges , so stupid , with all her reputed cleverness ; as , for example , in the present case of throwing herself , metaphorically speaking , at Mr. Casaubon 's feet , and kissing his unfashionable shoe-ties as if he were a Protestant Pope . 
She was not in the least teaching Mr. Casaubon to ask if he were good enough for her , but merely asking herself anxiously how she could be good enough for Mr. Casaubon . 
Before he left the next day it had been decided that the marriage should take place within six weeks . 
Why not ? 
Mr. Casaubon 's house was ready . 
It was not a parsonage , but a considerable mansion , with much land attached to it . 
The parsonage was inhabited by the curate , who did all the duty except preaching the morning sermon . 
My lady 's tongue is like the meadow blades , That cut you stroking them with idle hand . 
Nice cutting is her function : she divides With spiritual edge the millet-seed , And makes intangible savings . 
As Mr. Casaubon 's carriage was passing out of the gateway , it arrested the entrance of a pony phaeton driven by a lady with a servant seated behind . 
It was doubtful whether the recognition had been mutual , for Mr. Casaubon was looking absently before him ; but the lady was quick-eyed , and threw a nod and a `` How do you do ? '' 
in the nick of time . 
In spite of her shabby bonnet and very old Indian shawl , it was plain that the lodge-keeper regarded her as an important personage , from the low curtsy which was dropped on the entrance of the small phaeton . 
`` Well , Mrs. Fitchett , how are your fowls laying now ? '' 
said the high-colored , dark-eyed lady , with the clearest chiselled utterance . 
`` Pretty well for laying , madam , but they 've ta'en to eating their eggs : I 've no peace o ' mind with 'em at all . '' 
`` Oh , the cannibals ! 
Better sell them cheap at once . 
What will you sell them a couple ? 
One ca n't eat fowls of a bad character at a high price . '' 
`` Well , madam , half-a-crown : I could n't let 'em go , not under . '' 
`` Half-a-crown , these times ! 
Come now -- for the Rector 's chicken-broth on a Sunday . 
He has consumed all ours that I can spare . 
You are half paid with the sermon , Mrs. Fitchett , remember that . 
Take a pair of tumbler-pigeons for them -- little beauties . 
You must come and see them . 
You have no tumblers among your pigeons . '' 
`` Well , madam , Master Fitchett shall go and see 'em after work . 
He 's very hot on new sorts ; to oblige you . '' 
`` Oblige me ! 
It will be the best bargain he ever made . 
A pair of church pigeons for a couple of wicked Spanish fowls that eat their own eggs ! 
Do n't you and Fitchett boast too much , that is all ! '' 
The phaeton was driven onwards with the last words , leaving Mrs. Fitchett laughing and shaking her head slowly , with an interjectional `` Sure ly , sure ly ! '' 
-- from which it might be inferred that she would have found the country-side somewhat duller if the Rector 's lady had been less free-spoken and less of a skinflint . 
Indeed , both the farmers and laborers in the parishes of Freshitt and Tipton would have felt a sad lack of conversation but for the stories about what Mrs. Cadwallader said and did : a lady of immeasurably high birth , descended , as it were , from unknown earls , dim as the crowd of heroic shades -- who pleaded poverty , pared down prices , and cut jokes in the most companionable manner , though with a turn of tongue that let you know who she was . 
Such a lady gave a neighborliness to both rank and religion , and mitigated the bitterness of uncommuted tithe . 
A much more exemplary character with an infusion of sour dignity would not have furthered their comprehension of the Thirty-nine Articles , and would have been less socially uniting . 
Mr. Brooke , seeing Mrs. Cadwallader 's merits from a different point of view , winced a little when her name was announced in the library , where he was sitting alone . 
`` I see you have had our Lowick Cicero here , '' she said , seating herself comfortably , throwing back her wraps , and showing a thin but well-built figure . 
`` I suspect you and he are brewing some bad polities , else you would not be seeing so much of the lively man . 
I shall inform against you : remember you are both suspicious characters since you took Peel 's side about the Catholic Bill . 
I shall tell everybody that you are going to put up for Middlemarch on the Whig side when old Pinkerton resigns , and that Casaubon is going to help you in an underhand manner : going to bribe the voters with pamphlets , and throw open the public-houses to distribute them . 
Come , confess ! '' 
`` Nothing of the sort , '' said Mr. Brooke , smiling and rubbing his eye-glasses , but really blushing a little at the impeachment . 
`` Casaubon and I do n't talk politics much . 
He does n't care much about the philanthropic side of things ; punishments , and that kind of thing . 
He only cares about Church questions . 
That is not my line of action , you know . '' 
`` Ra-a-ther too much , my friend . 
I have heard of your doings . 
Who was it that sold his bit of land to the Papists at Middlemarch ? 
I believe you bought it on purpose . 
You are a perfect Guy Faux . 
See if you are not burnt in effigy this 5th of November coming . 
Humphrey would not come to quarrel with you about it , so I am come . '' 
`` Very good . 
I was prepared to be persecuted for not persecuting -- not persecuting , you know . '' 
`` There you go ! 
That is a piece of clap-trap you have got ready for the hustings . 
Now , do not let them lure you to the hustings , my dear Mr. Brooke . 
A man always makes a fool of himself , speechifying : there 's no excuse but being on the right side , so that you can ask a blessing on your humming and hawing . 
You will lose yourself , I forewarn you . 
You will make a Saturday pie of all parties ' opinions , and be pelted by everybody . '' 
`` That is what I expect , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke , not wishing to betray how little he enjoyed this prophetic sketch -- `` what I expect as an independent man . 
As to the Whigs , a man who goes with the thinkers is not likely to be hooked on by any party . 
He may go with them up to a certain point -- up to a certain point , you know . 
But that is what you ladies never understand . '' 
`` Where your certain point is ? 
No . 
I should like to be told how a man can have any certain point when he belongs to no party -- leading a roving life , and never letting his friends know his address . 
` Nobody knows where Brooke will be -- there 's no counting on Brooke ' -- that is what people say of you , to be quite frank . 
Now , do turn respectable . 
How will you like going to Sessions with everybody looking shy on you , and you with a bad conscience and an empty pocket ? '' 
`` I do n't pretend to argue with a lady on politics , '' said Mr. Brooke , with an air of smiling indifference , but feeling rather unpleasantly conscious that this attack of Mrs. Cadwallader 's had opened the defensive campaign to which certain rash steps had exposed him . 
`` Your sex are not thinkers , you know -- varium et mutabile semper -- that kind of thing . 
You do n't know Virgil . 
I knew '' -- Mr. Brooke reflected in time that he had not had the personal acquaintance of the Augustan poet -- `` I was going to say , poor Stoddart , you know . 
That was what he said . 
You ladies are always against an independent attitude -- a man 's caring for nothing but truth , and that sort of thing . 
And there is no part of the county where opinion is narrower than it is here -- I do n't mean to throw stones , you know , but somebody is wanted to take the independent line ; and if I do n't take it , who will ? '' 
`` Who ? 
Why , any upstart who has got neither blood nor position . 
People of standing should consume their independent nonsense at home , not hawk it about . 
And you ! 
who are going to marry your niece , as good as your daughter , to one of our best men . 
Sir James would be cruelly annoyed : it will be too hard on him if you turn round now and make yourself a Whig sign-board . '' 
Mr. Brooke again winced inwardly , for Dorothea 's engagement had no sooner been decided , than he had thought of Mrs. Cadwallader 's prospective taunts . 
It might have been easy for ignorant observers to say , `` Quarrel with Mrs. Cadwallader ; '' but where is a country gentleman to go who quarrels with his oldest neighbors ? 
Who could taste the fine flavor in the name of Brooke if it were delivered casually , like wine without a seal ? 
Certainly a man can only be cosmopolitan up to a certain point . 
`` I hope Chettam and I shall always be good friends ; but I am sorry to say there is no prospect of his marrying my niece , '' said Mr. Brooke , much relieved to see through the window that Celia was coming in . 
`` Why not ? '' 
said Mrs. Cadwallader , with a sharp note of surprise . 
`` It is hardly a fortnight since you and I were talking about it . '' 
`` My niece has chosen another suitor -- has chosen him , you know . 
I have had nothing to do with it . 
I should have preferred Chettam ; and I should have said Chettam was the man any girl would have chosen . 
But there is no accounting for these things . 
Your sex is capricious , you know . '' 
`` Why , whom do you mean to say that you are going to let her marry ? '' 
Mrs. Cadwallader 's mind was rapidly surveying the possibilities of choice for Dorothea . 
But here Celia entered , blooming from a walk in the garden , and the greeting with her delivered Mr. Brooke from the necessity of answering immediately . 
He got up hastily , and saying , `` By the way , I must speak to Wright about the horses , '' shuffled quickly out of the room . 
`` My dear child , what is this ? 
-- this about your sister 's engagement ? '' 
said Mrs. Cadwallader . 
`` She is engaged to marry Mr. Casaubon , '' said Celia , resorting , as usual , to the simplest statement of fact , and enjoying this opportunity of speaking to the Rector 's wife alone . 
`` This is frightful . 
How long has it been going on ? '' 
`` I only knew of it yesterday . 
They are to be married in six weeks . '' 
`` Well , my dear , I wish you joy of your brother-in-law . '' 
`` I am so sorry for Dorothea . '' 
`` Sorry ! 
It is her doing , I suppose . '' 
`` Yes ; she says Mr. Casaubon has a great soul . '' 
`` With all my heart . '' 
`` Oh , Mrs. Cadwallader , I do n't think it can be nice to marry a man with a great soul . '' 
`` Well , my dear , take warning . 
You know the look of one now ; when the next comes and wants to marry you , do n't you accept him . '' 
`` I 'm sure I never should . '' 
`` No ; one such in a family is enough . 
So your sister never cared about Sir James Chettam ? 
What would you have said to him for a brother-in-law ? '' 
`` I should have liked that very much . 
I am sure he would have been a good husband . 
Only , '' Celia added , with a slight blush -LRB- she sometimes seemed to blush as she breathed -RRB- , `` I do n't think he would have suited Dorothea . '' 
`` Not high-flown enough ? '' 
`` Dodo is very strict . 
She thinks so much about everything , and is so particular about what one says . 
Sir James never seemed to please her . '' 
`` She must have encouraged him , I am sure . 
That is not very creditable . '' 
`` Please do n't be angry with Dodo ; she does not see things . 
She thought so much about the cottages , and she was rude to Sir James sometimes ; but he is so kind , he never noticed it . '' 
`` Well , '' said Mrs. Cadwallader , putting on her shawl , and rising , as if in haste , `` I must go straight to Sir James and break this to him . 
He will have brought his mother back by this time , and I must call . 
Your uncle will never tell him . 
We are all disappointed , my dear . 
Young people should think of their families in marrying . 
I set a bad example -- married a poor clergyman , and made myself a pitiable object among the De Bracys -- obliged to get my coals by stratagem , and pray to heaven for my salad oil . 
However , Casaubon has money enough ; I must do him that justice . 
As to his blood , I suppose the family quarterings are three cuttle-fish sable , and a commentator rampant . 
By the bye , before I go , my dear , I must speak to your Mrs. Carter about pastry . 
I want to send my young cook to learn of her . 
Poor people with four children , like us , you know , ca n't afford to keep a good cook . 
I have no doubt Mrs. Carter will oblige me . 
Sir James 's cook is a perfect dragon . '' 
In less than an hour , Mrs. Cadwallader had circumvented Mrs. Carter and driven to Freshitt Hall , which was not far from her own parsonage , her husband being resident in Freshitt and keeping a curate in Tipton . 
Sir James Chettam had returned from the short journey which had kept him absent for a couple of days , and had changed his dress , intending to ride over to Tipton Grange . 
His horse was standing at the door when Mrs. Cadwallader drove up , and he immediately appeared there himself , whip in hand . 
Lady Chettam had not yet returned , but Mrs. Cadwallader 's errand could not be despatched in the presence of grooms , so she asked to be taken into the conservatory close by , to look at the new plants ; and on coming to a contemplative stand , she said -- `` I have a great shock for you ; I hope you are not so far gone in love as you pretended to be . '' 
It was of no use protesting , against Mrs. Cadwallader 's way of putting things . 
But Sir James 's countenance changed a little . 
He felt a vague alarm . 
`` I do believe Brooke is going to expose himself after all . 
I accused him of meaning to stand for Middlemarch on the Liberal side , and he looked silly and never denied it -- talked about the independent line , and the usual nonsense . '' 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said Sir James , much relieved . 
`` Why , '' rejoined Mrs. Cadwallader , with a sharper note , `` you do n't mean to say that you would like him to turn public man in that way -- making a sort of political Cheap Jack of himself ? '' 
`` He might be dissuaded , I should think . 
He would not like the expense . '' 
`` That is what I told him . 
He is vulnerable to reason there -- always a few grains of common-sense in an ounce of miserliness . 
Miserliness is a capital quality to run in families ; it 's the safe side for madness to dip on . 
And there must be a little crack in the Brooke family , else we should not see what we are to see . '' 
`` What ? 
Brooke standing for Middlemarch ? '' 
`` Worse than that . 
I really feel a little responsible . 
I always told you Miss Brooke would be such a fine match . 
I knew there was a great deal of nonsense in her -- a flighty sort of Methodistical stuff . 
But these things wear out of girls . 
However , I am taken by surprise for once . '' 
`` What do you mean , Mrs. Cadwallader ? '' 
said Sir James . 
His fear lest Miss Brooke should have run away to join the Moravian Brethren , or some preposterous sect unknown to good society , was a little allayed by the knowledge that Mrs. Cadwallader always made the worst of things . 
`` What has happened to Miss Brooke ? 
Pray speak out . '' 
`` Very well . 
She is engaged to be married . '' 
Mrs. Cadwallader paused a few moments , observing the deeply hurt expression in her friend 's face , which he was trying to conceal by a nervous smile , while he whipped his boot ; but she soon added , `` Engaged to Casaubon . '' 
Sir James let his whip fall and stooped to pick it up . 
Perhaps his face had never before gathered so much concentrated disgust as when he turned to Mrs. Cadwallader and repeated , `` Casaubon ? '' 
`` Even so . 
You know my errand now . '' 
`` Good God ! 
It is horrible ! 
He is no better than a mummy ! '' 
-LRB- The point of view has to be allowed for , as that of a blooming and disappointed rival . -RRB- 
`` She says , he is a great soul . 
-- A great bladder for dried peas to rattle in ! '' 
said Mrs. Cadwallader . 
`` What business has an old bachelor like that to marry ? '' 
said Sir James . 
`` He has one foot in the grave . '' 
`` He means to draw it out again , I suppose . '' 
`` Brooke ought not to allow it : he should insist on its being put off till she is of age . 
She would think better of it then . 
What is a guardian for ? '' 
`` As if you could ever squeeze a resolution out of Brooke ! '' 
`` Cadwallader might talk to him . '' 
`` Not he ! 
Humphrey finds everybody charming . 
I never can get him to abuse Casaubon . 
He will even speak well of the bishop , though I tell him it is unnatural in a beneficed clergyman ; what can one do with a husband who attends so little to the decencies ? 
I hide it as well as I can by abusing everybody myself . 
Come , come , cheer up ! 
you are well rid of Miss Brooke , a girl who would have been requiring you to see the stars by daylight . 
Between ourselves , little Celia is worth two of her , and likely after all to be the better match . 
For this marriage to Casaubon is as good as going to a nunnery . '' 
`` Oh , on my own account -- it is for Miss Brooke 's sake I think her friends should try to use their influence . '' 
`` Well , Humphrey does n't know yet . 
But when I tell him , you may depend on it he will say , ` Why not ? 
Casaubon is a good fellow -- and young -- young enough . ' 
These charitable people never know vinegar from wine till they have swallowed it and got the colic . 
However , if I were a man I should prefer Celia , especially when Dorothea was gone . 
The truth is , you have been courting one and have won the other . 
I can see that she admires you almost as much as a man expects to be admired . 
If it were any one but me who said so , you might think it exaggeration . 
Good-by ! '' 
Sir James handed Mrs. Cadwallader to the phaeton , and then jumped on his horse . 
He was not going to renounce his ride because of his friend 's unpleasant news -- only to ride the faster in some other direction than that of Tipton Grange . 
Now , why on earth should Mrs. Cadwallader have been at all busy about Miss Brooke 's marriage ; and why , when one match that she liked to think she had a hand in was frustrated , should she have straightway contrived the preliminaries of another ? 
Was there any ingenious plot , any hide-and-seek course of action , which might be detected by a careful telescopic watch ? 
Not at all : a telescope might have swept the parishes of Tipton and Freshitt , the whole area visited by Mrs. Cadwallader in her phaeton , without witnessing any interview that could excite suspicion , or any scene from which she did not return with the same unperturbed keenness of eye and the same high natural color . 
In fact , if that convenient vehicle had existed in the days of the Seven Sages , one of them would doubtless have remarked , that you can know little of women by following them about in their pony-phaetons . 
Even with a microscope directed on a water-drop we find ourselves making interpretations which turn out to be rather coarse ; for whereas under a weak lens you may seem to see a creature exhibiting an active voracity into which other smaller creatures actively play as if they were so many animated tax-pennies , a stronger lens reveals to you certain tiniest hairlets which make vortices for these victims while the swallower waits passively at his receipt of custom . 
In this way , metaphorically speaking , a strong lens applied to Mrs. Cadwallader 's match-making will show a play of minute causes producing what may be called thought and speech vortices to bring her the sort of food she needed . 
Her life was rurally simple , quite free from secrets either foul , dangerous , or otherwise important , and not consciously affected by the great affairs of the world . 
All the more did the affairs of the great world interest her , when communicated in the letters of high-born relations : the way in which fascinating younger sons had gone to the dogs by marrying their mistresses ; the fine old-blooded idiocy of young Lord Tapir , and the furious gouty humors of old Lord Megatherium ; the exact crossing of genealogies which had brought a coronet into a new branch and widened the relations of scandal , -- these were topics of which she retained details with the utmost accuracy , and reproduced them in an excellent pickle of epigrams , which she herself enjoyed the more because she believed as unquestionably in birth and no-birth as she did in game and vermin . 
She would never have disowned any one on the ground of poverty : a De Bracy reduced to take his dinner in a basin would have seemed to her an example of pathos worth exaggerating , and I fear his aristocratic vices would not have horrified her . 
But her feeling towards the vulgar rich was a sort of religious hatred : they had probably made all their money out of high retail prices , and Mrs. Cadwallader detested high prices for everything that was not paid in kind at the Rectory : such people were no part of God 's design in making the world ; and their accent was an affliction to the ears . 
A town where such monsters abounded was hardly more than a sort of low comedy , which could not be taken account of in a well-bred scheme of the universe . 
Let any lady who is inclined to be hard on Mrs. Cadwallader inquire into the comprehensiveness of her own beautiful views , and be quite sure that they afford accommodation for all the lives which have the honor to coexist with hers . 
With such a mind , active as phosphorus , biting everything that came near into the form that suited it , how could Mrs. Cadwallader feel that the Miss Brookes and their matrimonial prospects were alien to her ? 
especially as it had been the habit of years for her to scold Mr. Brooke with the friendliest frankness , and let him know in confidence that she thought him a poor creature . 
From the first arrival of the young ladies in Tipton she had prearranged Dorothea 's marriage with Sir James , and if it had taken place would have been quite sure that it was her doing : that it should not take place after she had preconceived it , caused her an irritation which every thinker will sympathize with . 
She was the diplomatist of Tipton and Freshitt , and for anything to happen in spite of her was an offensive irregularity . 
As to freaks like this of Miss Brooke 's , Mrs. Cadwallader had no patience with them , and now saw that her opinion of this girl had been infected with some of her husband 's weak charitableness : those Methodistical whims , that air of being more religious than the rector and curate together , came from a deeper and more constitutional disease than she had been willing to believe . 
`` However , '' said Mrs. Cadwallader , first to herself and afterwards to her husband , `` I throw her over : there was a chance , if she had married Sir James , of her becoming a sane , sensible woman . 
He would never have contradicted her , and when a woman is not contradicted , she has no motive for obstinacy in her absurdities . 
But now I wish her joy of her hair shirt . '' 
It followed that Mrs. Cadwallader must decide on another match for Sir James , and having made up her mind that it was to be the younger Miss Brooke , there could not have been a more skilful move towards the success of her plan than her hint to the baronet that he had made an impression on Celia 's heart . 
For he was not one of those gentlemen who languish after the unattainable Sappho 's apple that laughs from the topmost bough -- the charms which `` Smile like the knot of cowslips on the cliff , Not to be come at by the willing hand . '' 
He had no sonnets to write , and it could not strike him agreeably that he was not an object of preference to the woman whom he had preferred . 
Already the knowledge that Dorothea had chosen Mr. Casaubon had bruised his attachment and relaxed its hold . 
Although Sir James was a sportsman , he had some other feelings towards women than towards grouse and foxes , and did not regard his future wife in the light of prey , valuable chiefly for the excitements of the chase . 
Neither was he so well acquainted with the habits of primitive races as to feel that an ideal combat for her , tomahawk in hand , so to speak , was necessary to the historical continuity of the marriage-tie . 
On the contrary , having the amiable vanity which knits us to those who are fond of us , and disinclines us to those who are indifferent , and also a good grateful nature , the mere idea that a woman had a kindness towards him spun little threads of tenderness from out his heart towards hers . 
Thus it happened , that after Sir James had ridden rather fast for half an hour in a direction away from Tipton Grange , he slackened his pace , and at last turned into a road which would lead him back by a shorter cut . 
Various feelings wrought in him the determination after all to go to the Grange to-day as if nothing new had happened . 
He could not help rejoicing that he had never made the offer and been rejected ; mere friendly politeness required that he should call to see Dorothea about the cottages , and now happily Mrs. Cadwallader had prepared him to offer his congratulations , if necessary , without showing too much awkwardness . 
He really did not like it : giving up Dorothea was very painful to him ; but there was something in the resolve to make this visit forthwith and conquer all show of feeling , which was a sort of file-biting and counter-irritant . 
And without his distinctly recognizing the impulse , there certainly was present in him the sense that Celia would be there , and that he should pay her more attention than he had done before . 
We mortals , men and women , devour many a disappointment between breakfast and dinner-time ; keep back the tears and look a little pale about the lips , and in answer to inquiries say , `` Oh , nothing ! '' 
Pride helps us ; and pride is not a bad thing when it only urges us to hide our own hurts -- not to hurt others . 
`` Piacer e popone Vuol la sua stagione . '' 
-- Italian Proverb . 
Mr. Casaubon , as might be expected , spent a great deal of his time at the Grange in these weeks , and the hindrance which courtship occasioned to the progress of his great work -- the Key to all Mythologies -- naturally made him look forward the more eagerly to the happy termination of courtship . 
But he had deliberately incurred the hindrance , having made up his mind that it was now time for him to adorn his life with the graces of female companionship , to irradiate the gloom which fatigue was apt to hang over the intervals of studious labor with the play of female fancy , and to secure in this , his culminating age , the solace of female tendance for his declining years . 
Hence he determined to abandon himself to the stream of feeling , and perhaps was surprised to find what an exceedingly shallow rill it was . 
As in droughty regions baptism by immersion could only be performed symbolically , Mr. Casaubon found that sprinkling was the utmost approach to a plunge which his stream would afford him ; and he concluded that the poets had much exaggerated the force of masculine passion . 
Nevertheless , he observed with pleasure that Miss Brooke showed an ardent submissive affection which promised to fulfil his most agreeable previsions of marriage . 
It had once or twice crossed his mind that possibly there was some deficiency in Dorothea to account for the moderation of his abandonment ; but he was unable to discern the deficiency , or to figure to himself a woman who would have pleased him better ; so that there was clearly no reason to fall back upon but the exaggerations of human tradition . 
`` Could I not be preparing myself now to be more useful ? '' 
said Dorothea to him , one morning , early in the time of courtship ; `` could I not learn to read Latin and Greek aloud to you , as Milton 's daughters did to their father , without understanding what they read ? '' 
`` I fear that would be wearisome to you , '' said Mr. Casaubon , smiling ; `` and , indeed , if I remember rightly , the young women you have mentioned regarded that exercise in unknown tongues as a ground for rebellion against the poet . '' 
`` Yes ; but in the first place they were very naughty girls , else they would have been proud to minister to such a father ; and in the second place they might have studied privately and taught themselves to understand what they read , and then it would have been interesting . 
I hope you do n't expect me to be naughty and stupid ? '' 
`` I expect you to be all that an exquisite young lady can be in every possible relation of life . 
Certainly it might be a great advantage if you were able to copy the Greek character , and to that end it were well to begin with a little reading . '' 
Dorothea seized this as a precious permission . 
She would not have asked Mr. Casaubon at once to teach her the languages , dreading of all things to be tiresome instead of helpful ; but it was not entirely out of devotion to her future husband that she wished to know Latin and Greek . 
Those provinces of masculine knowledge seemed to her a standing-ground from which all truth could be seen more truly . 
As it was , she constantly doubted her own conclusions , because she felt her own ignorance : how could she be confident that one-roomed cottages were not for the glory of God , when men who knew the classics appeared to conciliate indifference to the cottages with zeal for the glory ? 
Perhaps even Hebrew might be necessary -- at least the alphabet and a few roots -- in order to arrive at the core of things , and judge soundly on the social duties of the Christian . 
And she had not reached that point of renunciation at which she would have been satisfied with having a wise husband : she wished , poor child , to be wise herself . 
Miss Brooke was certainly very naive with all her alleged cleverness . 
Celia , whose mind had never been thought too powerful , saw the emptiness of other people 's pretensions much more readily . 
To have in general but little feeling , seems to be the only security against feeling too much on any particular occasion . 
However , Mr. Casaubon consented to listen and teach for an hour together , like a schoolmaster of little boys , or rather like a lover , to whom a mistress 's elementary ignorance and difficulties have a touching fitness . 
Few scholars would have disliked teaching the alphabet under such circumstances . 
But Dorothea herself was a little shocked and discouraged at her own stupidity , and the answers she got to some timid questions about the value of the Greek accents gave her a painful suspicion that here indeed there might be secrets not capable of explanation to a woman 's reason . 
Mr. Brooke had no doubt on that point , and expressed himself with his usual strength upon it one day that he came into the library while the reading was going forward . 
`` Well , but now , Casaubon , such deep studies , classics , mathematics , that kind of thing , are too taxing for a woman -- too taxing , you know . '' 
`` Dorothea is learning to read the characters simply , '' said Mr. Casaubon , evading the question . 
`` She had the very considerate thought of saving my eyes . '' 
`` Ah , well , without understanding , you know -- that may not be so bad . 
But there is a lightness about the feminine mind -- a touch and go -- music , the fine arts , that kind of thing -- they should study those up to a certain point , women should ; but in a light way , you know . 
A woman should be able to sit down and play you or sing you a good old English tune . 
That is what I like ; though I have heard most things -- been at the opera in Vienna : Gluck , Mozart , everything of that sort . 
But I 'm a conservative in music -- it 's not like ideas , you know . 
I stick to the good old tunes . '' 
`` Mr. Casaubon is not fond of the piano , and I am very glad he is not , '' said Dorothea , whose slight regard for domestic music and feminine fine art must be forgiven her , considering the small tinkling and smearing in which they chiefly consisted at that dark period . 
She smiled and looked up at her betrothed with grateful eyes . 
If he had always been asking her to play the `` Last Rose of Summer , '' she would have required much resignation . 
`` He says there is only an old harpsichord at Lowick , and it is covered with books . '' 
`` Ah , there you are behind Celia , my dear . 
Celia , now , plays very prettily , and is always ready to play . 
However , since Casaubon does not like it , you are all right . 
But it 's a pity you should not have little recreations of that sort , Casaubon : the bow always strung -- that kind of thing , you know -- will not do . '' 
`` I never could look on it in the light of a recreation to have my ears teased with measured noises , '' said Mr. Casaubon . 
`` A tune much iterated has the ridiculous effect of making the words in my mind perform a sort of minuet to keep time -- an effect hardly tolerable , I imagine , after boyhood . 
As to the grander forms of music , worthy to accompany solemn celebrations , and even to serve as an educating influence according to the ancient conception , I say nothing , for with these we are not immediately concerned . '' 
`` No ; but music of that sort I should enjoy , '' said Dorothea . 
`` When we were coming home from Lausanne my uncle took us to hear the great organ at Freiberg , and it made me sob . '' 
`` That kind of thing is not healthy , my dear , '' said Mr. Brooke . 
`` Casaubon , she will be in your hands now : you must teach my niece to take things more quietly , eh , Dorothea ? '' 
He ended with a smile , not wishing to hurt his niece , but really thinking that it was perhaps better for her to be early married to so sober a fellow as Casaubon , since she would not hear of Chettam . 
`` It is wonderful , though , '' he said to himself as he shuffled out of the room -- `` it is wonderful that she should have liked him . 
However , the match is good . 
I should have been travelling out of my brief to have hindered it , let Mrs. Cadwallader say what she will . 
He is pretty certain to be a bishop , is Casaubon . 
That was a very seasonable pamphlet of his on the Catholic Question : -- a deanery at least . 
They owe him a deanery . '' 
And here I must vindicate a claim to philosophical reflectiveness , by remarking that Mr. Brooke on this occasion little thought of the Radical speech which , at a later period , he was led to make on the incomes of the bishops . 
What elegant historian would neglect a striking opportunity for pointing out that his heroes did not foresee the history of the world , or even their own actions ? 
-- For example , that Henry of Navarre , when a Protestant baby , little thought of being a Catholic monarch ; or that Alfred the Great , when he measured his laborious nights with burning candles , had no idea of future gentlemen measuring their idle days with watches . 
Here is a mine of truth , which , however vigorously it may be worked , is likely to outlast our coal . 
But of Mr. Brooke I make a further remark perhaps less warranted by precedent -- namely , that if he had foreknown his speech , it might not have made any great difference . 
To think with pleasure of his niece 's husband having a large ecclesiastical income was one thing -- to make a Liberal speech was another thing ; and it is a narrow mind which can not look at a subject from various points of view . 
