The story of their coming to be shapen after the average and fit to be packed by the gross , is hardly ever told even in their consciousness ; for perhaps their ardor in generous unpaid toil cooled as imperceptibly as the ardor of other youthful loves , till one day their earlier self walked like a ghost in its old home and made the new furniture ghastly . 
Nothing in the world more subtle than the process of their gradual change ! 
In the beginning they inhaled it unknowingly : you and I may have sent some of our breath towards infecting them , when we uttered our conforming falsities or drew our silly conclusions : or perhaps it came with the vibrations from a woman 's glance . 
Lydgate did not mean to be one of those failures , and there was the better hope of him because his scientific interest soon took the form of a professional enthusiasm : he had a youthful belief in his bread-winning work , not to be stifled by that initiation in makeshift called his ` prentice days ; and he carried to his studies in London , Edinburgh , and Paris , the conviction that the medical profession as it might be was the finest in the world ; presenting the most perfect interchange between science and art ; offering the most direct alliance between intellectual conquest and the social good . 
Lydgate 's nature demanded this combination : he was an emotional creature , with a flesh-and-blood sense of fellowship which withstood all the abstractions of special study . 
He cared not only for `` cases , '' but for John and Elizabeth , especially Elizabeth . 
There was another attraction in his profession : it wanted reform , and gave a man an opportunity for some indignant resolve to reject its venal decorations and other humbug , and to be the possessor of genuine though undemanded qualifications . 
He went to study in Paris with the determination that when he came home again he would settle in some provincial town as a general practitioner , and resist the irrational severance between medical and surgical knowledge in the interest of his own scientific pursuits , as well as of the general advance : he would keep away from the range of London intrigues , jealousies , and social truckling , and win celebrity , however slowly , as Jenner had done , by the independent value of his work . 
For it must be remembered that this was a dark period ; and in spite of venerable colleges which used great efforts to secure purity of knowledge by making it scarce , and to exclude error by a rigid exclusiveness in relation to fees and appointments , it happened that very ignorant young gentlemen were promoted in town , and many more got a legal right to practise over large areas in the country . 
Also , the high standard held up to the public mind by the College of Physicians , which gave its peculiar sanction to the expensive and highly rarefied medical instruction obtained by graduates of Oxford and Cambridge , did not hinder quackery from having an excellent time of it ; for since professional practice chiefly consisted in giving a great many drugs , the public inferred that it might be better off with more drugs still , if they could only be got cheaply , and hence swallowed large cubic measures of physic prescribed by unscrupulous ignorance which had taken no degrees . 
Considering that statistics had not yet embraced a calculation as to the number of ignorant or canting doctors which absolutely must exist in the teeth of all changes , it seemed to Lydgate that a change in the units was the most direct mode of changing the numbers . 
He meant to be a unit who would make a certain amount of difference towards that spreading change which would one day tell appreciably upon the averages , and in the mean time have the pleasure of making an advantageous difference to the viscera of his own patients . 
But he did not simply aim at a more genuine kind of practice than was common . 
He was ambitious of a wider effect : he was fired with the possibility that he might work out the proof of an anatomical conception and make a link in the chain of discovery . 
Does it seem incongruous to you that a Middlemarch surgeon should dream of himself as a discoverer ? 
Most of us , indeed , know little of the great originators until they have been lifted up among the constellations and already rule our fates . 
But that Herschel , for example , who `` broke the barriers of the heavens '' -- did he not once play a provincial church-organ , and give music-lessons to stumbling pianists ? 
Each of those Shining Ones had to walk on the earth among neighbors who perhaps thought much more of his gait and his garments than of anything which was to give him a title to everlasting fame : each of them had his little local personal history sprinkled with small temptations and sordid cares , which made the retarding friction of his course towards final companionship with the immortals . 
Lydgate was not blind to the dangers of such friction , but he had plenty of confidence in his resolution to avoid it as far as possible : being seven-and-twenty , he felt himself experienced . 
And he was not going to have his vanities provoked by contact with the showy worldly successes of the capital , but to live among people who could hold no rivalry with that pursuit of a great idea which was to be a twin object with the assiduous practice of his profession . 
There was fascination in the hope that the two purposes would illuminate each other : the careful observation and inference which was his daily work , the use of the lens to further his judgment in special cases , would further his thought as an instrument of larger inquiry . 
Was not this the typical pre-eminence of his profession ? 
He would be a good Middlemarch doctor , and by that very means keep himself in the track of far-reaching investigation . 
On one point he may fairly claim approval at this particular stage of his career : he did not mean to imitate those philanthropic models who make a profit out of poisonous pickles to support themselves while they are exposing adulteration , or hold shares in a gambling-hell that they may have leisure to represent the cause of public morality . 
He intended to begin in his own case some particular reforms which were quite certainly within his reach , and much less of a problem than the demonstrating of an anatomical conception . 
One of these reforms was to act stoutly on the strength of a recent legal decision , and simply prescribe , without dispensing drugs or taking percentage from druggists . 
This was an innovation for one who had chosen to adopt the style of general practitioner in a country town , and would be felt as offensive criticism by his professional brethren . 
But Lydgate meant to innovate in his treatment also , and he was wise enough to see that the best security for his practising honestly according to his belief was to get rid of systematic temptations to the contrary . 
Perhaps that was a more cheerful time for observers and theorizers than the present ; we are apt to think it the finest era of the world when America was beginning to be discovered , when a bold sailor , even if he were wrecked , might alight on a new kingdom ; and about 1829 the dark territories of Pathology were a fine America for a spirited young adventurer . 
Lydgate was ambitious above all to contribute towards enlarging the scientific , rational basis of his profession . 
The more he became interested in special questions of disease , such as the nature of fever or fevers , the more keenly he felt the need for that fundamental knowledge of structure which just at the beginning of the century had been illuminated by the brief and glorious career of Bichat , who died when he was only one-and-thirty , but , like another Alexander , left a realm large enough for many heirs . 
That great Frenchman first carried out the conception that living bodies , fundamentally considered , are not associations of organs which can be understood by studying them first apart , and then as it were federally ; but must be regarded as consisting of certain primary webs or tissues , out of which the various organs -- brain , heart , lungs , and so on -- are compacted , as the various accommodations of a house are built up in various proportions of wood , iron , stone , brick , zinc , and the rest , each material having its peculiar composition and proportions . 
No man , one sees , can understand and estimate the entire structure or its parts -- what are its frailties and what its repairs , without knowing the nature of the materials . 
And the conception wrought out by Bichat , with his detailed study of the different tissues , acted necessarily on medical questions as the turning of gas-light would act on a dim , oil-lit street , showing new connections and hitherto hidden facts of structure which must be taken into account in considering the symptoms of maladies and the action of medicaments . 
But results which depend on human conscience and intelligence work slowly , and now at the end of 1829 , most medical practice was still strutting or shambling along the old paths , and there was still scientific work to be done which might have seemed to be a direct sequence of Bichat 's . 
This great seer did not go beyond the consideration of the tissues as ultimate facts in the living organism , marking the limit of anatomical analysis ; but it was open to another mind to say , have not these structures some common basis from which they have all started , as your sarsnet , gauze , net , satin , and velvet from the raw cocoon ? 
Here would be another light , as of oxy-hydrogen , showing the very grain of things , and revising all former explanations . 
Of this sequence to Bichat 's work , already vibrating along many currents of the European mind , Lydgate was enamoured ; he longed to demonstrate the more intimate relations of living structure , and help to define men 's thought more accurately after the true order . 
The work had not yet been done , but only prepared for those who knew how to use the preparation . 
What was the primitive tissue ? 
In that way Lydgate put the question -- not quite in the way required by the awaiting answer ; but such missing of the right word befalls many seekers . 
And he counted on quiet intervals to be watchfully seized , for taking up the threads of investigation -- on many hints to be won from diligent application , not only of the scalpel , but of the microscope , which research had begun to use again with new enthusiasm of reliance . 
Such was Lydgate 's plan of his future : to do good small work for Middlemarch , and great work for the world . 
He was certainly a happy fellow at this time : to be seven-and-twenty , without any fixed vices , with a generous resolution that his action should be beneficent , and with ideas in his brain that made life interesting quite apart from the cultus of horseflesh and other mystic rites of costly observance , which the eight hundred pounds left him after buying his practice would certainly not have gone far in paying for . 
He was at a starting-point which makes many a man 's career a fine subject for betting , if there were any gentlemen given to that amusement who could appreciate the complicated probabilities of an arduous purpose , with all the possible thwartings and furtherings of circumstance , all the niceties of inward balance , by which a man swims and makes his point or else is carried headlong . 
The risk would remain even with close knowledge of Lydgate 's character ; for character too is a process and an unfolding . 
The man was still in the making , as much as the Middlemarch doctor and immortal discoverer , and there were both virtues and faults capable of shrinking or expanding . 
The faults will not , I hope , be a reason for the withdrawal of your interest in him . 
Among our valued friends is there not some one or other who is a little too self-confident and disdainful ; whose distinguished mind is a little spotted with commonness ; who is a little pinched here and protuberant there with native prejudices ; or whose better energies are liable to lapse down the wrong channel under the influence of transient solicitations ? 
All these things might be alleged against Lydgate , but then , they are the periphrases of a polite preacher , who talks of Adam , and would not like to mention anything painful to the pew-renters . 
The particular faults from which these delicate generalities are distilled have distinguishable physiognomies , diction , accent , and grimaces ; filling up parts in very various dramas . 
Our vanities differ as our noses do : all conceit is not the same conceit , but varies in correspondence with the minutiae of mental make in which one of us differs from another . 
Lydgate 's conceit was of the arrogant sort , never simpering , never impertinent , but massive in its claims and benevolently contemptuous . 
He would do a great deal for noodles , being sorry for them , and feeling quite sure that they could have no power over him : he had thought of joining the Saint Simonians when he was in Paris , in order to turn them against some of their own doctrines . 
All his faults were marked by kindred traits , and were those of a man who had a fine baritone , whose clothes hung well upon him , and who even in his ordinary gestures had an air of inbred distinction . 
Where then lay the spots of commonness ? 
says a young lady enamoured of that careless grace . 
How could there be any commonness in a man so well-bred , so ambitious of social distinction , so generous and unusual in his views of social duty ? 
As easily as there may be stupidity in a man of genius if you take him unawares on the wrong subject , or as many a man who has the best will to advance the social millennium might be ill-inspired in imagining its lighter pleasures ; unable to go beyond Offenbach 's music , or the brilliant punning in the last burlesque . 
Lydgate 's spots of commonness lay in the complexion of his prejudices , which , in spite of noble intention and sympathy , were half of them such as are found in ordinary men of the world : that distinction of mind which belonged to his intellectual ardor , did not penetrate his feeling and judgment about furniture , or women , or the desirability of its being known -LRB- without his telling -RRB- that he was better born than other country surgeons . 
He did not mean to think of furniture at present ; but whenever he did so it was to be feared that neither biology nor schemes of reform would lift him above the vulgarity of feeling that there would be an incompatibility in his furniture not being of the best . 
As to women , he had once already been drawn headlong by impetuous folly , which he meant to be final , since marriage at some distant period would of course not be impetuous . 
For those who want to be acquainted with Lydgate it will be good to know what was that case of impetuous folly , for it may stand as an example of the fitful swerving of passion to which he was prone , together with the chivalrous kindness which helped to make him morally lovable . 
The story can be told without many words . 
It happened when he was studying in Paris , and just at the time when , over and above his other work , he was occupied with some galvanic experiments . 
One evening , tired with his experimenting , and not being able to elicit the facts he needed , he left his frogs and rabbits to some repose under their trying and mysterious dispensation of unexplained shocks , and went to finish his evening at the theatre of the Porte Saint Martin , where there was a melodrama which he had already seen several times ; attracted , not by the ingenious work of the collaborating authors , but by an actress whose part it was to stab her lover , mistaking him for the evil-designing duke of the piece . 
Lydgate was in love with this actress , as a man is in love with a woman whom he never expects to speak to . 
She was a Provencale , with dark eyes , a Greek profile , and rounded majestic form , having that sort of beauty which carries a sweet matronliness even in youth , and her voice was a soft cooing . 
She had but lately come to Paris , and bore a virtuous reputation , her husband acting with her as the unfortunate lover . 
It was her acting which was `` no better than it should be , '' but the public was satisfied . 
Lydgate 's only relaxation now was to go and look at this woman , just as he might have thrown himself under the breath of the sweet south on a bank of violets for a while , without prejudice to his galvanism , to which he would presently return . 
But this evening the old drama had a new catastrophe . 
At the moment when the heroine was to act the stabbing of her lover , and he was to fall gracefully , the wife veritably stabbed her husband , who fell as death willed . 
A wild shriek pierced the house , and the Provencale fell swooning : a shriek and a swoon were demanded by the play , but the swooning too was real this time . 
Lydgate leaped and climbed , he hardly knew how , on to the stage , and was active in help , making the acquaintance of his heroine by finding a contusion on her head and lifting her gently in his arms . 
Paris rang with the story of this death : -- was it a murder ? 
Some of the actress 's warmest admirers were inclined to believe in her guilt , and liked her the better for it -LRB- such was the taste of those times -RRB- ; but Lydgate was not one of these . 
He vehemently contended for her innocence , and the remote impersonal passion for her beauty which he had felt before , had passed now into personal devotion , and tender thought of her lot . 
The notion of murder was absurd : no motive was discoverable , the young couple being understood to dote on each other ; and it was not unprecedented that an accidental slip of the foot should have brought these grave consequences . 
The legal investigation ended in Madame Laure 's release . 
Lydgate by this time had had many interviews with her , and found her more and more adorable . 
She talked little ; but that was an additional charm . 
She was melancholy , and seemed grateful ; her presence was enough , like that of the evening light . 
Lydgate was madly anxious about her affection , and jealous lest any other man than himself should win it and ask her to marry him . 
But instead of reopening her engagement at the Porte Saint Martin , where she would have been all the more popular for the fatal episode , she left Paris without warning , forsaking her little court of admirers . 
Perhaps no one carried inquiry far except Lydgate , who felt that all science had come to a stand-still while he imagined the unhappy Laure , stricken by ever-wandering sorrow , herself wandering , and finding no faithful comforter . 
Hidden actresses , however , are not so difficult to find as some other hidden facts , and it was not long before Lydgate gathered indications that Laure had taken the route to Lyons . 
He found her at last acting with great success at Avignon under the same name , looking more majestic than ever as a forsaken wife carrying her child in her arms . 
He spoke to her after the play , was received with the usual quietude which seemed to him beautiful as clear depths of water , and obtained leave to visit her the next day ; when he was bent on telling her that he adored her , and on asking her to marry him . 
He knew that this was like the sudden impulse of a madman -- incongruous even with his habitual foibles . 
No matter ! 
It was the one thing which he was resolved to do . 
He had two selves within him apparently , and they must learn to accommodate each other and bear reciprocal impediments . 
Strange , that some of us , with quick alternate vision , see beyond our infatuations , and even while we rave on the heights , behold the wide plain where our persistent self pauses and awaits us . 
To have approached Laure with any suit that was not reverentially tender would have been simply a contradiction of his whole feeling towards her . 
`` You have come all the way from Paris to find me ? '' 
she said to him the next day , sitting before him with folded arms , and looking at him with eyes that seemed to wonder as an untamed ruminating animal wonders . 
`` Are all Englishmen like that ? '' 
`` I came because I could not live without trying to see you . 
You are lonely ; I love you ; I want you to consent to be my wife ; I will wait , but I want you to promise that you will marry me -- no one else . '' 
Laure looked at him in silence with a melancholy radiance from under her grand eyelids , until he was full of rapturous certainty , and knelt close to her knees . 
`` I will tell you something , '' she said , in her cooing way , keeping her arms folded . 
`` My foot really slipped . '' 
`` I know , I know , '' said Lydgate , deprecatingly . 
`` It was a fatal accident -- a dreadful stroke of calamity that bound me to you the more . '' 
Again Laure paused a little and then said , slowly , '' I meant to do it . '' 
Lydgate , strong man as he was , turned pale and trembled : moments seemed to pass before he rose and stood at a distance from her . 
`` There was a secret , then , '' he said at last , even vehemently . 
`` He was brutal to you : you hated him . '' 
`` No ! 
he wearied me ; he was too fond : he would live in Paris , and not in my country ; that was not agreeable to me . '' 
`` Great God ! '' 
said Lydgate , in a groan of horror . 
`` And you planned to murder him ? '' 
`` I did not plan : it came to me in the play -- I meant to do it . '' 
Lydgate stood mute , and unconsciously pressed his hat on while he looked at her . 
He saw this woman -- the first to whom he had given his young adoration -- amid the throng of stupid criminals . 
`` You are a good young man , '' she said . 
`` But I do not like husbands . 
I will never have another . '' 
Three days afterwards Lydgate was at his galvanism again in his Paris chambers , believing that illusions were at an end for him . 
He was saved from hardening effects by the abundant kindness of his heart and his belief that human life might be made better . 
But he had more reason than ever for trusting his judgment , now that it was so experienced ; and henceforth he would take a strictly scientific view of woman , entertaining no expectations but such as were justified beforehand . 
No one in Middlemarch was likely to have such a notion of Lydgate 's past as has here been faintly shadowed , and indeed the respectable townsfolk there were not more given than mortals generally to any eager attempt at exactness in the representation to themselves of what did not come under their own senses . 
Not only young virgins of that town , but gray-bearded men also , were often in haste to conjecture how a new acquaintance might be wrought into their purposes , contented with very vague knowledge as to the way in which life had been shaping him for that instrumentality . 
Middlemarch , in fact , counted on swallowing Lydgate and assimilating him very comfortably . 
`` All that in woman is adored In thy fair self I find -- For the whole sex can but afford The handsome and the kind . '' 
-- SIR CHARLES SEDLEY . 
The question whether Mr. Tyke should be appointed as salaried chaplain to the hospital was an exciting topic to the Middlemarchers ; and Lydgate heard it discussed in a way that threw much light on the power exercised in the town by Mr. Bulstrode . 
The banker was evidently a ruler , but there was an opposition party , and even among his supporters there were some who allowed it to be seen that their support was a compromise , and who frankly stated their impression that the general scheme of things , and especially the casualties of trade , required you to hold a candle to the devil . 
Mr. Bulstrode 's power was not due simply to his being a country banker , who knew the financial secrets of most traders in the town and could touch the springs of their credit ; it was fortified by a beneficence that was at once ready and severe -- ready to confer obligations , and severe in watching the result . 
He had gathered , as an industrious man always at his post , a chief share in administering the town charities , and his private charities were both minute and abundant . 
He would take a great deal of pains about apprenticing Tegg the shoemaker 's son , and he would watch over Tegg 's church-going ; he would defend Mrs. Strype the washerwoman against Stubbs 's unjust exaction on the score of her drying-ground , and he would himself scrutinize a calumny against Mrs. Strype . 
His private minor loans were numerous , but he would inquire strictly into the circumstances both before and after . 
In this way a man gathers a domain in his neighbors ' hope and fear as well as gratitude ; and power , when once it has got into that subtle region , propagates itself , spreading out of all proportion to its external means . 
It was a principle with Mr. Bulstrode to gain as much power as possible , that he might use it for the glory of God . 
He went through a great deal of spiritual conflict and inward argument in order to adjust his motives , and make clear to himself what God 's glory required . 
But , as we have seen , his motives were not always rightly appreciated . 
There were many crass minds in Middlemarch whose reflective scales could only weigh things in the lump ; and they had a strong suspicion that since Mr. Bulstrode could not enjoy life in their fashion , eating and drinking so little as he did , and worreting himself about everything , he must have a sort of vampire 's feast in the sense of mastery . 
The subject of the chaplaincy came up at Mr. Vincy 's table when Lydgate was dining there , and the family connection with Mr. Bulstrode did not , he observed , prevent some freedom of remark even on the part of the host himself , though his reasons against the proposed arrangement turned entirely on his objection to Mr. Tyke 's sermons , which were all doctrine , and his preference for Mr. Farebrother , whose sermons were free from that taint . 
Mr. Vincy liked well enough the notion of the chaplain 's having a salary , supposing it were given to Farebrother , who was as good a little fellow as ever breathed , and the best preacher anywhere , and companionable too . 
`` What line shall you take , then ? '' 
said Mr. Chichely , the coroner , a great coursing comrade of Mr. Vincy 's . 
`` Oh , I 'm precious glad I 'm not one of the Directors now . 
I shall vote for referring the matter to the Directors and the Medical Board together . 
I shall roll some of my responsibility on your shoulders , Doctor , '' said Mr. Vincy , glancing first at Dr. Sprague , the senior physician of the town , and then at Lydgate who sat opposite . 
`` You medical gentlemen must consult which sort of black draught you will prescribe , eh , Mr. Lydgate ? '' 
`` I know little of either , '' said Lydgate ; `` but in general , appointments are apt to be made too much a question of personal liking . 
The fittest man for a particular post is not always the best fellow or the most agreeable . 
Sometimes , if you wanted to get a reform , your only way would be to pension off the good fellows whom everybody is fond of , and put them out of the question . '' 
Dr. Sprague , who was considered the physician of most `` weight , '' though Dr. Minchin was usually said to have more `` penetration , '' divested his large heavy face of all expression , and looked at his wine-glass while Lydgate was speaking . 
Whatever was not problematical and suspected about this young man -- for example , a certain showiness as to foreign ideas , and a disposition to unsettle what had been settled and forgotten by his elders -- was positively unwelcome to a physician whose standing had been fixed thirty years before by a treatise on Meningitis , of which at least one copy marked `` own '' was bound in calf . 
For my part I have some fellow-feeling with Dr. Sprague : one 's self-satisfaction is an untaxed kind of property which it is very unpleasant to find deprecated . 
Lydgate 's remark , however , did not meet the sense of the company . 
Mr. Vincy said , that if he could have his way , he would not put disagreeable fellows anywhere . 
`` Hang your reforms ! '' 
said Mr. Chichely . 
`` There 's no greater humbug in the world . 
You never hear of a reform , but it means some trick to put in new men . 
I hope you are not one of the ` Lancet 's ' men , Mr. Lydgate -- wanting to take the coronership out of the hands of the legal profession : your words appear to point that way . '' 
`` I disapprove of Wakley , '' interposed Dr. Sprague , `` no man more : he is an ill-intentioned fellow , who would sacrifice the respectability of the profession , which everybody knows depends on the London Colleges , for the sake of getting some notoriety for himself . 
There are men who do n't mind about being kicked blue if they can only get talked about . 
But Wakley is right sometimes , '' the Doctor added , judicially . 
`` I could mention one or two points in which Wakley is in the right . '' 
`` Oh , well , '' said Mr. Chichely , `` I blame no man for standing up in favor of his own cloth ; but , coming to argument , I should like to know how a coroner is to judge of evidence if he has not had a legal training ? '' 
`` In my opinion , '' said Lydgate , `` legal training only makes a man more incompetent in questions that require knowledge a of another kind . 
People talk about evidence as if it could really be weighed in scales by a blind Justice . 
No man can judge what is good evidence on any particular subject , unless he knows that subject well . 
A lawyer is no better than an old woman at a post-mortem examination . 
How is he to know the action of a poison ? 
You might as well say that scanning verse will teach you to scan the potato crops . '' 
`` You are aware , I suppose , that it is not the coroner 's business to conduct the post-mortem , but only to take the evidence of the medical witness ? '' 
said Mr. Chichely , with some scorn . 
`` Who is often almost as ignorant as the coroner himself , '' said Lydgate . 
`` Questions of medical jurisprudence ought not to be left to the chance of decent knowledge in a medical witness , and the coroner ought not to be a man who will believe that strychnine will destroy the coats of the stomach if an ignorant practitioner happens to tell him so . '' 
Lydgate had really lost sight of the fact that Mr. Chichely was his Majesty 's coroner , and ended innocently with the question , `` Do n't you agree with me , Dr. Sprague ? '' 
`` To a certain extent -- with regard to populous districts , and in the metropolis , '' said the Doctor . 
`` But I hope it will be long before this part of the country loses the services of my friend Chichely , even though it might get the best man in our profession to succeed him . 
I am sure Vincy will agree with me . '' 
`` Yes , yes , give me a coroner who is a good coursing man , '' said Mr. Vincy , jovially . 
`` And in my opinion , you 're safest with a lawyer . 
Nobody can know everything . 
Most things are ` visitation of God . ' 
And as to poisoning , why , what you want to know is the law . 
Come , shall we join the ladies ? '' 
Lydgate 's private opinion was that Mr. Chichely might be the very coroner without bias as to the coats of the stomach , but he had not meant to be personal . 
This was one of the difficulties of moving in good Middlemarch society : it was dangerous to insist on knowledge as a qualification for any salaried office . 
Fred Vincy had called Lydgate a prig , and now Mr. Chichely was inclined to call him prick-eared ; especially when , in the drawing-room , he seemed to be making himself eminently agreeable to Rosamond , whom he had easily monopolized in a tete-a-tete , since Mrs. Vincy herself sat at the tea-table . 
She resigned no domestic function to her daughter ; and the matron 's blooming good-natured face , with the two volatile pink strings floating from her fine throat , and her cheery manners to husband and children , was certainly among the great attractions of the Vincy house -- attractions which made it all the easier to fall in love with the daughter . 
The tinge of unpretentious , inoffensive vulgarity in Mrs. Vincy gave more effect to Rosamond 's refinement , which was beyond what Lydgate had expected . 
Certainly , small feet and perfectly turned shoulders aid the impression of refined manners , and the right thing said seems quite astonishingly right when it is accompanied with exquisite curves of lip and eyelid . 
And Rosamond could say the right thing ; for she was clever with that sort of cleverness which catches every tone except the humorous . 
Happily she never attempted to joke , and this perhaps was the most decisive mark of her cleverness . 
She and Lydgate readily got into conversation . 
He regretted that he had not heard her sing the other day at Stone Court . 
The only pleasure he allowed himself during the latter part of his stay in Paris was to go and hear music . 
`` You have studied music , probably ? '' 
said Rosamond . 
`` No , I know the notes of many birds , and I know many melodies by ear ; but the music that I do n't know at all , and have no notion about , delights me -- affects me . 
How stupid the world is that it does not make more use of such a pleasure within its reach ! '' 
`` Yes , and you will find Middlemarch very tuneless . 
There are hardly any good musicians . 
I only know two gentlemen who sing at all well . '' 
`` I suppose it is the fashion to sing comic songs in a rhythmic way , leaving you to fancy the tune -- very much as if it were tapped on a drum ? '' 
`` Ah , you have heard Mr. Bowyer , '' said Rosamond , with one of her rare smiles . 
`` But we are speaking very ill of our neighbors . '' 
Lydgate was almost forgetting that he must carry on the conversation , in thinking how lovely this creature was , her garment seeming to be made out of the faintest blue sky , herself so immaculately blond , as if the petals of some gigantic flower had just opened and disclosed her ; and yet with this infantine blondness showing so much ready , self-possessed grace . 
Since he had had the memory of Laure , Lydgate had lost all taste for large-eyed silence : the divine cow no longer attracted him , and Rosamond was her very opposite . 
But he recalled himself . 
`` You will let me hear some music to-night , I hope . '' 
`` I will let you hear my attempts , if you like , '' said Rosamond . 
`` Papa is sure to insist on my singing . 
But I shall tremble before you , who have heard the best singers in Paris . 
I have heard very little : I have only once been to London . 
But our organist at St. Peter 's is a good musician , and I go on studying with him . '' 
`` Tell me what you saw in London . '' 
`` Very little . '' 
-LRB- A more naive girl would have said , `` Oh , everything ! '' 
But Rosamond knew better . -RRB- 
`` A few of the ordinary sights , such as raw country girls are always taken to . '' 
`` Do you call yourself a raw country girl ? '' 
said Lydgate , looking at her with an involuntary emphasis of admiration , which made Rosamond blush with pleasure . 
But she remained simply serious , turned her long neck a little , and put up her hand to touch her wondrous hair-plaits -- an habitual gesture with her as pretty as any movements of a kitten 's paw . 
Not that Rosamond was in the least like a kitten : she was a sylph caught young and educated at Mrs. Lemon 's . 
`` I assure you my mind is raw , '' she said immediately ; `` I pass at Middlemarch . 
I am not afraid of talking to our old neighbors . 
But I am really afraid of you . '' 
`` An accomplished woman almost always knows more than we men , though her knowledge is of a different sort . 
I am sure you could teach me a thousand things -- as an exquisite bird could teach a bear if there were any common language between them . 
Happily , there is a common language between women and men , and so the bears can get taught . '' 
`` Ah , there is Fred beginning to strum ! 
I must go and hinder him from jarring all your nerves , '' said Rosamond , moving to the other side of the room , where Fred having opened the piano , at his father 's desire , that Rosamond might give them some music , was parenthetically performing `` Cherry Ripe ! '' 
with one hand . 
Able men who have passed their examinations will do these things sometimes , not less than the plucked Fred . 
`` Fred , pray defer your practising till to-morrow ; you will make Mr. Lydgate ill , '' said Rosamond . 
`` He has an ear . '' 
Fred laughed , and went on with his tune to the end . 
Rosamond turned to Lydgate , smiling gently , and said , `` You perceive , the bears will not always be taught . '' 
`` Now then , Rosy ! '' 
said Fred , springing from the stool and twisting it upward for her , with a hearty expectation of enjoyment . 
`` Some good rousing tunes first . '' 
Rosamond played admirably . 
Her master at Mrs. Lemon 's school -LRB- close to a county town with a memorable history that had its relics in church and castle -RRB- was one of those excellent musicians here and there to be found in our provinces , worthy to compare with many a noted Kapellmeister in a country which offers more plentiful conditions of musical celebrity . 
Rosamond , with the executant 's instinct , had seized his manner of playing , and gave forth his large rendering of noble music with the precision of an echo . 
It was almost startling , heard for the first time . 
A hidden soul seemed to be flowing forth from Rosamond 's fingers ; and so indeed it was , since souls live on in perpetual echoes , and to all fine expression there goes somewhere an originating activity , if it be only that of an interpreter . 
Lydgate was taken possession of , and began to believe in her as something exceptional . 
After all , he thought , one need not be surprised to find the rare conjunctions of nature under circumstances apparently unfavorable : come where they may , they always depend on conditions that are not obvious . 
He sat looking at her , and did not rise to pay her any compliments , leaving that to others , now that his admiration was deepened . 
Her singing was less remarkable , but also well trained , and sweet to hear as a chime perfectly in tune . 
It is true she sang `` Meet me by moonlight , '' and `` I 've been roaming '' ; for mortals must share the fashions of their time , and none but the ancients can be always classical . 
But Rosamond could also sing `` Black-eyed Susan '' with effect , or Haydn 's canzonets , or `` Voi , che sapete , '' or `` Batti , batti '' -- she only wanted to know what her audience liked . 
Her father looked round at the company , delighting in their admiration . 
Her mother sat , like a Niobe before her troubles , with her youngest little girl on her lap , softly beating the child 's hand up and down in time to the music . 
And Fred , notwithstanding his general scepticism about Rosy , listened to her music with perfect allegiance , wishing he could do the same thing on his flute . 
It was the pleasantest family party that Lydgate had seen since he came to Middlemarch . 
The Vincys had the readiness to enjoy , the rejection of all anxiety , and the belief in life as a merry lot , which made a house exceptional in most county towns at that time , when Evangelicalism had cast a certain suspicion as of plague-infection over the few amusements which survived in the provinces . 
At the Vincys ' there was always whist , and the card-tables stood ready now , making some of the company secretly impatient of the music . 
Before it ceased Mr. Farebrother came in -- a handsome , broad-chested but otherwise small man , about forty , whose black was very threadbare : the brilliancy was all in his quick gray eyes . 
He came like a pleasant change in the light , arresting little Louisa with fatherly nonsense as she was being led out of the room by Miss Morgan , greeting everybody with some special word , and seeming to condense more talk into ten minutes than had been held all through the evening . 
He claimed from Lydgate the fulfilment of a promise to come and see him . 
`` I ca n't let you off , you know , because I have some beetles to show you . 
We collectors feel an interest in every new man till he has seen all we have to show him . '' 
But soon he swerved to the whist-table , rubbing his hands and saying , `` Come now , let us be serious ! 
Mr. Lydgate ? 
not play ? 
Ah ! 
you are too young and light for this kind of thing . '' 
Lydgate said to himself that the clergyman whose abilities were so painful to Mr. Bulstrode , appeared to have found an agreeable resort in this certainly not erudite household . 
He could half understand it : the good-humor , the good looks of elder and younger , and the provision for passing the time without any labor of intelligence , might make the house beguiling to people who had no particular use for their odd hours . 
Everything looked blooming and joyous except Miss Morgan , who was brown , dull , and resigned , and altogether , as Mrs. Vincy often said , just the sort of person for a governess . 
Lydgate did not mean to pay many such visits himself . 
They were a wretched waste of the evenings ; and now , when he had talked a little more to Rosamond , he meant to excuse himself and go . 
`` You will not like us at Middlemarch , I feel sure , '' she said , when the whist-players were settled . 
`` We are very stupid , and you have been used to something quite different . '' 
`` I suppose all country towns are pretty much alike , '' said Lydgate . 
`` But I have noticed that one always believes one 's own town to be more stupid than any other . 
I have made up my mind to take Middlemarch as it comes , and shall be much obliged if the town will take me in the same way . 
I have certainly found some charms in it which are much greater than I had expected . '' 
`` You mean the rides towards Tipton and Lowick ; every one is pleased with those , '' said Rosamond , with simplicity . 
`` No , I mean something much nearer to me . '' 
Rosamond rose and reached her netting , and then said , `` Do you care about dancing at all ? 
I am not quite sure whether clever men ever dance . '' 
`` I would dance with you if you would allow me . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Rosamond , with a slight deprecatory laugh . 
`` I was only going to say that we sometimes have dancing , and I wanted to know whether you would feel insulted if you were asked to come . '' 
`` Not on the condition I mentioned . '' 
After this chat Lydgate thought that he was going , but on moving towards the whist-tables , he got interested in watching Mr. Farebrother 's play , which was masterly , and also his face , which was a striking mixture of the shrewd and the mild . 
At ten o'clock supper was brought in -LRB- such were the customs of Middlemarch -RRB- and there was punch-drinking ; but Mr. Farebrother had only a glass of water . 
He was winning , but there seemed to be no reason why the renewal of rubbers should end , and Lydgate at last took his leave . 
But as it was not eleven o'clock , he chose to walk in the brisk air towards the tower of St. Botolph 's , Mr. Farebrother 's church , which stood out dark , square , and massive against the starlight . 
It was the oldest church in Middlemarch ; the living , however , was but a vicarage worth barely four hundred a-year . 
Lydgate had heard that , and he wondered now whether Mr. Farebrother cared about the money he won at cards ; thinking , `` He seems a very pleasant fellow , but Bulstrode may have his good reasons . '' 
Many things would be easier to Lydgate if it should turn out that Mr. Bulstrode was generally justifiable . 
`` What is his religious doctrine to me , if he carries some good notions along with it ? 
One must use such brains as are to be found . '' 
These were actually Lydgate 's first meditations as he walked away from Mr. Vincy 's , and on this ground I fear that many ladies will consider him hardly worthy of their attention . 
He thought of Rosamond and her music only in the second place ; and though , when her turn came , he dwelt on the image of her for the rest of his walk , he felt no agitation , and had no sense that any new current had set into his life . 
He could not marry yet ; he wished not to marry for several years ; and therefore he was not ready to entertain the notion of being in love with a girl whom he happened to admire . 
He did admire Rosamond exceedingly ; but that madness which had once beset him about Laure was not , he thought , likely to recur in relation to any other woman . 
Certainly , if falling in love had been at all in question , it would have been quite safe with a creature like this Miss Vincy , who had just the kind of intelligence one would desire in a woman -- polished , refined , docile , lending itself to finish in all the delicacies of life , and enshrined in a body which expressed this with a force of demonstration that excluded the need for other evidence . 
Lydgate felt sure that if ever he married , his wife would have that feminine radiance , that distinctive womanhood which must be classed with flowers and music , that sort of beauty which by its very nature was virtuous , being moulded only for pure and delicate joys . 
But since he did not mean to marry for the next five years -- his more pressing business was to look into Louis ' new book on Fever , which he was specially interested in , because he had known Louis in Paris , and had followed many anatomical demonstrations in order to ascertain the specific differences of typhus and typhoid . 
He went home and read far into the smallest hour , bringing a much more testing vision of details and relations into this pathological study than he had ever thought it necessary to apply to the complexities of love and marriage , these being subjects on which he felt himself amply informed by literature , and that traditional wisdom which is handed down in the genial conversation of men . 
Whereas Fever had obscure conditions , and gave him that delightful labor of the imagination which is not mere arbitrariness , but the exercise of disciplined power -- combining and constructing with the clearest eye for probabilities and the fullest obedience to knowledge ; and then , in yet more energetic alliance with impartial Nature , standing aloof to invent tests by which to try its own work . 
Many men have been praised as vividly imaginative on the strength of their profuseness in indifferent drawing or cheap narration : -- reports of very poor talk going on in distant orbs ; or portraits of Lucifer coming down on his bad errands as a large ugly man with bat 's wings and spurts of phosphorescence ; or exaggerations of wantonness that seem to reflect life in a diseased dream . 
But these kinds of inspiration Lydgate regarded as rather vulgar and vinous compared with the imagination that reveals subtle actions inaccessible by any sort of lens , but tracked in that outer darkness through long pathways of necessary sequence by the inward light which is the last refinement of Energy , capable of bathing even the ethereal atoms in its ideally illuminated space . 
He for his part had tossed away all cheap inventions where ignorance finds itself able and at ease : he was enamoured of that arduous invention which is the very eye of research , provisionally framing its object and correcting it to more and more exactness of relation ; he wanted to pierce the obscurity of those minute processes which prepare human misery and joy , those invisible thoroughfares which are the first lurking-places of anguish , mania , and crime , that delicate poise and transition which determine the growth of happy or unhappy consciousness . 
As he threw down his book , stretched his legs towards the embers in the grate , and clasped his hands at the back of his head , in that agreeable afterglow of excitement when thought lapses from examination of a specific object into a suffusive sense of its connections with all the rest of our existence -- seems , as it were , to throw itself on its back after vigorous swimming and float with the repose of unexhausted strength -- Lydgate felt a triumphant delight in his studies , and something like pity for those less lucky men who were not of his profession . 
`` If I had not taken that turn when I was a lad , '' he thought , `` I might have got into some stupid draught-horse work or other , and lived always in blinkers . 
I should never have been happy in any profession that did not call forth the highest intellectual strain , and yet keep me in good warm contact with my neighbors . 
There is nothing like the medical profession for that : one can have the exclusive scientific life that touches the distance and befriend the old fogies in the parish too . 
It is rather harder for a clergyman : Farebrother seems to be an anomaly . '' 
This last thought brought back the Vincys and all the pictures of the evening . 
They floated in his mind agreeably enough , and as he took up his bed-candle his lips were curled with that incipient smile which is apt to accompany agreeable recollections . 
He was an ardent fellow , but at present his ardor was absorbed in love of his work and in the ambition of making his life recognized as a factor in the better life of mankind -- like other heroes of science who had nothing but an obscure country practice to begin with . 
Poor Lydgate ! 
or shall I say , Poor Rosamond ! 
Each lived in a world of which the other knew nothing . 
It had not occurred to Lydgate that he had been a subject of eager meditation to Rosamond , who had neither any reason for throwing her marriage into distant perspective , nor any pathological studies to divert her mind from that ruminating habit , that inward repetition of looks , words , and phrases , which makes a large part in the lives of most girls . 
He had not meant to look at her or speak to her with more than the inevitable amount of admiration and compliment which a man must give to a beautiful girl ; indeed , it seemed to him that his enjoyment of her music had remained almost silent , for he feared falling into the rudeness of telling her his great surprise at her possession of such accomplishment . 
But Rosamond had registered every look and word , and estimated them as the opening incidents of a preconceived romance -- incidents which gather value from the foreseen development and climax . 
In Rosamond 's romance it was not necessary to imagine much about the inward life of the hero , or of his serious business in the world : of course , he had a profession and was clever , as well as sufficiently handsome ; but the piquant fact about Lydgate was his good birth , which distinguished him from all Middlemarch admirers , and presented marriage as a prospect of rising in rank and getting a little nearer to that celestial condition on earth in which she would have nothing to do with vulgar people , and perhaps at last associate with relatives quite equal to the county people who looked down on the Middlemarchers . 
It was part of Rosamond 's cleverness to discern very subtly the faintest aroma of rank , and once when she had seen the Miss Brookes accompanying their uncle at the county assizes , and seated among the aristocracy , she had envied them , notwithstanding their plain dress . 
If you think it incredible that to imagine Lydgate as a man of family could cause thrills of satisfaction which had anything to do with the sense that she was in love with him , I will ask you to use your power of comparison a little more effectively , and consider whether red cloth and epaulets have never had an influence of that sort . 
Our passions do not live apart in locked chambers , but , dressed in their small wardrobe of notions , bring their provisions to a common table and mess together , feeding out of the common store according to their appetite . 
Rosamond , in fact , was entirely occupied not exactly with Tertius Lydgate as he was in himself , but with his relation to her ; and it was excusable in a girl who was accustomed to hear that all young men might , could , would be , or actually were in love with her , to believe at once that Lydgate could be no exception . 
His looks and words meant more to her than other men 's , because she cared more for them : she thought of them diligently , and diligently attended to that perfection of appearance , behavior , sentiments , and all other elegancies , which would find in Lydgate a more adequate admirer than she had yet been conscious of . 
For Rosamond , though she would never do anything that was disagreeable to her , was industrious ; and now more than ever she was active in sketching her landscapes and market-carts and portraits of friends , in practising her music , and in being from morning till night her own standard of a perfect lady , having always an audience in her own consciousness , with sometimes the not unwelcome addition of a more variable external audience in the numerous visitors of the house . 
She found time also to read the best novels , and even the second best , and she knew much poetry by heart . 
Her favorite poem was `` Lalla Rookh . '' 
`` The best girl in the world ! 
He will be a happy fellow who gets her ! '' 
was the sentiment of the elderly gentlemen who visited the Vincys ; and the rejected young men thought of trying again , as is the fashion in country towns where the horizon is not thick with coming rivals . 
But Mrs. Plymdale thought that Rosamond had been educated to a ridiculous pitch , for what was the use of accomplishments which would be all laid aside as soon as she was married ? 
While her aunt Bulstrode , who had a sisterly faithfulness towards her brother 's family , had two sincere wishes for Rosamond -- that she might show a more serious turn of mind , and that she might meet with a husband whose wealth corresponded to her habits . 
`` The clerkly person smiled and said Promise was a pretty maid , But being poor she died unwed . '' 
The Rev. Camden Farebrother , whom Lydgate went to see the next evening , lived in an old parsonage , built of stone , venerable enough to match the church which it looked out upon . 
All the furniture too in the house was old , but with another grade of age -- that of Mr. Farebrother 's father and grandfather . 
There were painted white chairs , with gilding and wreaths on them , and some lingering red silk damask with slits in it . 
There were engraved portraits of Lord Chancellors and other celebrated lawyers of the last century ; and there were old pier-glasses to reflect them , as well as the little satin-wood tables and the sofas resembling a prolongation of uneasy chairs , all standing in relief against the dark wainscot . 
This was the physiognomy of the drawing-room into which Lydgate was shown ; and there were three ladies to receive him , who were also old-fashioned , and of a faded but genuine respectability : Mrs. Farebrother , the Vicar 's white-haired mother , befrilled and kerchiefed with dainty cleanliness , upright , quick-eyed , and still under seventy ; Miss Noble , her sister , a tiny old lady of meeker aspect , with frills and kerchief decidedly more worn and mended ; and Miss Winifred Farebrother , the Vicar 's elder sister , well-looking like himself , but nipped and subdued as single women are apt to be who spend their lives in uninterrupted subjection to their elders . 
Lydgate had not expected to see so quaint a group : knowing simply that Mr. Farebrother was a bachelor , he had thought of being ushered into a snuggery where the chief furniture would probably be books and collections of natural objects . 
The Vicar himself seemed to wear rather a changed aspect , as most men do when acquaintances made elsewhere see them for the first time in their own homes ; some indeed showing like an actor of genial parts disadvantageously cast for the curmudgeon in a new piece . 
This was not the case with Mr. Farebrother : he seemed a trifle milder and more silent , the chief talker being his mother , while he only put in a good-humored moderating remark here and there . 
The old lady was evidently accustomed to tell her company what they ought to think , and to regard no subject as quite safe without her steering . 
She was afforded leisure for this function by having all her little wants attended to by Miss Winifred . 
Meanwhile tiny Miss Noble carried on her arm a small basket , into which she diverted a bit of sugar , which she had first dropped in her saucer as if by mistake ; looking round furtively afterwards , and reverting to her teacup with a small innocent noise as of a tiny timid quadruped . 
Pray think no ill of Miss Noble . 
That basket held small savings from her more portable food , destined for the children of her poor friends among whom she trotted on fine mornings ; fostering and petting all needy creatures being so spontaneous a delight to her , that she regarded it much as if it had been a pleasant vice that she was addicted to . 
Perhaps she was conscious of being tempted to steal from those who had much that she might give to those who had nothing , and carried in her conscience the guilt of that repressed desire . 
One must be poor to know the luxury of giving ! 
Mrs. Farebrother welcomed the guest with a lively formality and precision . 
She presently informed him that they were not often in want of medical aid in that house . 
She had brought up her children to wear flannel and not to over-eat themselves , which last habit she considered the chief reason why people needed doctors . 
Lydgate pleaded for those whose fathers and mothers had over-eaten themselves , but Mrs. Farebrother held that view of things dangerous : Nature was more just than that ; it would be easy for any felon to say that his ancestors ought to have been hanged instead of him . 
If those who had bad fathers and mothers were bad themselves , they were hanged for that . 
There was no need to go back on what you could n't see . 
`` My mother is like old George the Third , '' said the Vicar , `` she objects to metaphysics . '' 
`` I object to what is wrong , Camden . 
I say , keep hold of a few plain truths , and make everything square with them . 
When I was young , Mr. Lydgate , there never was any question about right and wrong . 
We knew our catechism , and that was enough ; we learned our creed and our duty . 
Every respectable Church person had the same opinions . 
But now , if you speak out of the Prayer-book itself , you are liable to be contradicted . '' 
`` That makes rather a pleasant time of it for those who like to maintain their own point , '' said Lydgate . 
`` But my mother always gives way , '' said the Vicar , slyly . 
`` No , no , Camden , you must not lead Mr. Lydgate into a mistake about me . 
I shall never show that disrespect to my parents , to give up what they taught me . 
Any one may see what comes of turning . 
If you change once , why not twenty times ? '' 
`` A man might see good arguments for changing once , and not see them for changing again , '' said Lydgate , amused with the decisive old lady . 
`` Excuse me there . 
If you go upon arguments , they are never wanting , when a man has no constancy of mind . 
My father never changed , and he preached plain moral sermons without arguments , and was a good man -- few better . 
When you get me a good man made out of arguments , I will get you a good dinner with reading you the cookery-book . 
That 's my opinion , and I think anybody 's stomach will bear me out . '' 
`` About the dinner certainly , mother , '' said Mr. Farebrother . 
`` It is the same thing , the dinner or the man . 
I am nearly seventy , Mr. Lydgate , and I go upon experience . 
I am not likely to follow new lights , though there are plenty of them here as elsewhere . 
I say , they came in with the mixed stuffs that will neither wash nor wear . 
It was not so in my youth : a Churchman was a Churchman , and a clergyman , you might be pretty sure , was a gentleman , if nothing else . 
But now he may be no better than a Dissenter , and want to push aside my son on pretence of doctrine . 
But whoever may wish to push him aside , I am proud to say , Mr. Lydgate , that he will compare with any preacher in this kingdom , not to speak of this town , which is but a low standard to go by ; at least , to my thinking , for I was born and bred at Exeter . '' 
`` A mother is never partial , '' said Mr. Farebrother , smiling . 
`` What do you think Tyke 's mother says about him ? '' 
`` Ah , poor creature ! 
what indeed ? '' 
said Mrs. Farebrother , her sharpness blunted for the moment by her confidence in maternal judgments . 
`` She says the truth to herself , depend upon it . '' 
`` And what is the truth ? '' 
said Lydgate . 
`` I am curious to know . '' 
`` Oh , nothing bad at all , '' said Mr. Farebrother . 
`` He is a zealous fellow : not very learned , and not very wise , I think -- because I do n't agree with him . '' 
`` Why , Camden ! '' 
said Miss Winifred , `` Griffin and his wife told me only to-day , that Mr. Tyke said they should have no more coals if they came to hear you preach . '' 
Mrs. Farebrother laid down her knitting , which she had resumed after her small allowance of tea and toast , and looked at her son as if to say `` You hear that ? '' 
