I do n't feel sure about doing good in any way now : everything seems like going on a mission to a people whose language I do n't know ; -- unless it were building good cottages -- there can be no doubt about that . 
Oh , I hope I should be able to get the people well housed in Lowick ! 
I will draw plenty of plans while I have time . '' 
Dorothea checked herself suddenly with self-rebuke for the presumptuous way in which she was reckoning on uncertain events , but she was spared any inward effort to change the direction of her thoughts by the appearance of a cantering horseman round a turning of the road . 
The well-groomed chestnut horse and two beautiful setters could leave no doubt that the rider was Sir James Chettam . 
He discerned Dorothea , jumped off his horse at once , and , having delivered it to his groom , advanced towards her with something white on his arm , at which the two setters were barking in an excited manner . 
`` How delightful to meet you , Miss Brooke , '' he said , raising his hat and showing his sleekly waving blond hair . 
`` It has hastened the pleasure I was looking forward to . '' 
Miss Brooke was annoyed at the interruption . 
This amiable baronet , really a suitable husband for Celia , exaggerated the necessity of making himself agreeable to the elder sister . 
Even a prospective brother-in-law may be an oppression if he will always be presupposing too good an understanding with you , and agreeing with you even when you contradict him . 
The thought that he had made the mistake of paying his addresses to herself could not take shape : all her mental activity was used up in persuasions of another kind . 
But he was positively obtrusive at this moment , and his dimpled hands were quite disagreeable . 
Her roused temper made her color deeply , as she returned his greeting with some haughtiness . 
Sir James interpreted the heightened color in the way most gratifying to himself , and thought he never saw Miss Brooke looking so handsome . 
`` I have brought a little petitioner , '' he said , `` or rather , I have brought him to see if he will be approved before his petition is offered . '' 
He showed the white object under his arm , which was a tiny Maltese puppy , one of nature 's most naive toys . 
`` It is painful to me to see these creatures that are bred merely as pets , '' said Dorothea , whose opinion was forming itself that very moment -LRB- as opinions will -RRB- under the heat of irritation . 
`` Oh , why ? '' 
said Sir James , as they walked forward . 
`` I believe all the petting that is given them does not make them happy . 
They are too helpless : their lives are too frail . 
A weasel or a mouse that gets its own living is more interesting . 
I like to think that the animals about us have souls something like our own , and either carry on their own little affairs or can be companions to us , like Monk here . 
Those creatures are parasitic . '' 
`` I am so glad I know that you do not like them , '' said good Sir James . 
`` I should never keep them for myself , but ladies usually are fond of these Maltese dogs . 
Here , John , take this dog , will you ? '' 
The objectionable puppy , whose nose and eyes were equally black and expressive , was thus got rid of , since Miss Brooke decided that it had better not have been born . 
But she felt it necessary to explain . 
`` You must not judge of Celia 's feeling from mine . 
I think she likes these small pets . 
She had a tiny terrier once , which she was very fond of . 
It made me unhappy , because I was afraid of treading on it . 
I am rather short-sighted . '' 
`` You have your own opinion about everything , Miss Brooke , and it is always a good opinion . '' 
What answer was possible to such stupid complimenting ? 
`` Do you know , I envy you that , '' Sir James said , as they continued walking at the rather brisk pace set by Dorothea . 
`` I do n't quite understand what you mean . '' 
`` Your power of forming an opinion . 
I can form an opinion of persons . 
I know when I like people . 
But about other matters , do you know , I have often a difficulty in deciding . 
One hears very sensible things said on opposite sides . '' 
`` Or that seem sensible . 
Perhaps we do n't always discriminate between sense and nonsense . '' 
Dorothea felt that she was rather rude . 
`` Exactly , '' said Sir James . 
`` But you seem to have the power of discrimination . '' 
`` On the contrary , I am often unable to decide . 
But that is from ignorance . 
The right conclusion is there all the same , though I am unable to see it . '' 
`` I think there are few who would see it more readily . 
Do you know , Lovegood was telling me yesterday that you had the best notion in the world of a plan for cottages -- quite wonderful for a young lady , he thought . 
You had a real genus , to use his expression . 
He said you wanted Mr. Brooke to build a new set of cottages , but he seemed to think it hardly probable that your uncle would consent . 
Do you know , that is one of the things I wish to do -- I mean , on my own estate . 
I should be so glad to carry out that plan of yours , if you would let me see it . 
Of course , it is sinking money ; that is why people object to it . 
Laborers can never pay rent to make it answer . 
But , after all , it is worth doing . '' 
`` Worth doing ! 
yes , indeed , '' said Dorothea , energetically , forgetting her previous small vexations . 
`` I think we deserve to be beaten out of our beautiful houses with a scourge of small cords -- all of us who let tenants live in such sties as we see round us . 
Life in cottages might be happier than ours , if they were real houses fit for human beings from whom we expect duties and affections . '' 
`` Will you show me your plan ? '' 
`` Yes , certainly . 
I dare say it is very faulty . 
But I have been examining all the plans for cottages in Loudon 's book , and picked out what seem the best things . 
Oh what a happiness it would be to set the pattern about here ! 
I think instead of Lazarus at the gate , we should put the pigsty cottages outside the park-gate . '' 
Dorothea was in the best temper now . 
Sir James , as brother in-law , building model cottages on his estate , and then , perhaps , others being built at Lowick , and more and more elsewhere in imitation -- it would be as if the spirit of Oberlin had passed over the parishes to make the life of poverty beautiful ! 
Sir James saw all the plans , and took one away to consult upon with Lovegood . 
He also took away a complacent sense that he was making great progress in Miss Brooke 's good opinion . 
The Maltese puppy was not offered to Celia ; an omission which Dorothea afterwards thought of with surprise ; but she blamed herself for it . 
She had been engrossing Sir James . 
After all , it was a relief that there was no puppy to tread upon . 
Celia was present while the plans were being examined , and observed Sir James 's illusion . 
`` He thinks that Dodo cares about him , and she only cares about her plans . 
Yet I am not certain that she would refuse him if she thought he would let her manage everything and carry out all her notions . 
And how very uncomfortable Sir James would be ! 
I can not bear notions . '' 
It was Celia 's private luxury to indulge in this dislike . 
She dared not confess it to her sister in any direct statement , for that would be laying herself open to a demonstration that she was somehow or other at war with all goodness . 
But on safe opportunities , she had an indirect mode of making her negative wisdom tell upon Dorothea , and calling her down from her rhapsodic mood by reminding her that people were staring , not listening . 
Celia was not impulsive : what she had to say could wait , and came from her always with the same quiet staccato evenness . 
When people talked with energy and emphasis she watched their faces and features merely . 
She never could understand how well-bred persons consented to sing and open their mouths in the ridiculous manner requisite for that vocal exercise . 
It was not many days before Mr. Casaubon paid a morning visit , on which he was invited again for the following week to dine and stay the night . 
Thus Dorothea had three more conversations with him , and was convinced that her first impressions had been just . 
He was all she had at first imagined him to be : almost everything he had said seemed like a specimen from a mine , or the inscription on the door of a museum which might open on the treasures of past ages ; and this trust in his mental wealth was all the deeper and more effective on her inclination because it was now obvious that his visits were made for her sake . 
This accomplished man condescended to think of a young girl , and take the pains to talk to her , not with absurd compliment , but with an appeal to her understanding , and sometimes with instructive correction . 
What delightful companionship ! 
Mr. Casaubon seemed even unconscious that trivialities existed , and never handed round that small-talk of heavy men which is as acceptable as stale bride-cake brought forth with an odor of cupboard . 
He talked of what he was interested in , or else he was silent and bowed with sad civility . 
To Dorothea this was adorable genuineness , and religious abstinence from that artificiality which uses up the soul in the efforts of pretence . 
For she looked as reverently at Mr. Casaubon 's religious elevation above herself as she did at his intellect and learning . 
He assented to her expressions of devout feeling , and usually with an appropriate quotation ; he allowed himself to say that he had gone through some spiritual conflicts in his youth ; in short , Dorothea saw that here she might reckon on understanding , sympathy , and guidance . 
On one -- only one -- of her favorite themes she was disappointed . 
Mr. Casaubon apparently did not care about building cottages , and diverted the talk to the extremely narrow accommodation which was to be had in the dwellings of the ancient Egyptians , as if to check a too high standard . 
After he was gone , Dorothea dwelt with some agitation on this indifference of his ; and her mind was much exercised with arguments drawn from the varying conditions of climate which modify human needs , and from the admitted wickedness of pagan despots . 
Should she not urge these arguments on Mr. Casaubon when he came again ? 
But further reflection told her that she was presumptuous in demanding his attention to such a subject ; he would not disapprove of her occupying herself with it in leisure moments , as other women expected to occupy themselves with their dress and embroidery -- would not forbid it when -- Dorothea felt rather ashamed as she detected herself in these speculations . 
But her uncle had been invited to go to Lowick to stay a couple of days : was it reasonable to suppose that Mr. Casaubon delighted in Mr. Brooke 's society for its own sake , either with or without documents ? 
Meanwhile that little disappointment made her delight the more in Sir James Chettam 's readiness to set on foot the desired improvements . 
He came much oftener than Mr. Casaubon , and Dorothea ceased to find him disagreeable since he showed himself so entirely in earnest ; for he had already entered with much practical ability into Lovegood 's estimates , and was charmingly docile . 
She proposed to build a couple of cottages , and transfer two families from their old cabins , which could then be pulled down , so that new ones could be built on the old sites . 
Sir James said `` Exactly , '' and she bore the word remarkably well . 
Certainly these men who had so few spontaneous ideas might be very useful members of society under good feminine direction , if they were fortunate in choosing their sisters-in-law ! 
It is difficult to say whether there was or was not a little wilfulness in her continuing blind to the possibility that another sort of choice was in question in relation to her . 
But her life was just now full of hope and action : she was not only thinking of her plans , but getting down learned books from the library and reading many things hastily -LRB- that she might be a little less ignorant in talking to Mr. Casaubon -RRB- , all the while being visited with conscientious questionings whether she were not exalting these poor doings above measure and contemplating them with that self-satisfaction which was the last doom of ignorance and folly . 
1st Gent . 
Our deeds are fetters that we forge ourselves . 
2d Gent . 
Ay , truly : but I think it is the world That brings the iron . 
`` Sir James seems determined to do everything you wish , '' said Celia , as they were driving home from an inspection of the new building-site . 
`` He is a good creature , and more sensible than any one would imagine , '' said Dorothea , inconsiderately . 
`` You mean that he appears silly . '' 
`` No , no , '' said Dorothea , recollecting herself , and laying her hand on her sister 's a moment , `` but he does not talk equally well on all subjects . '' 
`` I should think none but disagreeable people do , '' said Celia , in her usual purring way . 
`` They must be very dreadful to live with . 
Only think ! 
at breakfast , and always . '' 
Dorothea laughed . 
`` O Kitty , you are a wonderful creature ! '' 
She pinched Celia 's chin , being in the mood now to think her very winning and lovely -- fit hereafter to be an eternal cherub , and if it were not doctrinally wrong to say so , hardly more in need of salvation than a squirrel . 
`` Of course people need not be always talking well . 
Only one tells the quality of their minds when they try to talk well . '' 
`` You mean that Sir James tries and fails . '' 
`` I was speaking generally . 
Why do you catechise me about Sir James ? 
It is not the object of his life to please me . '' 
`` Now , Dodo , can you really believe that ? '' 
`` Certainly . 
He thinks of me as a future sister -- that is all . '' 
Dorothea had never hinted this before , waiting , from a certain shyness on such subjects which was mutual between the sisters , until it should be introduced by some decisive event . 
Celia blushed , but said at once -- `` Pray do not make that mistake any longer , Dodo . 
When Tantripp was brushing my hair the other day , she said that Sir James 's man knew from Mrs. Cadwallader 's maid that Sir James was to marry the eldest Miss Brooke . '' 
`` How can you let Tantripp talk such gossip to you , Celia ? '' 
said Dorothea , indignantly , not the less angry because details asleep in her memory were now awakened to confirm the unwelcome revelation . 
`` You must have asked her questions . 
It is degrading . '' 
`` I see no harm at all in Tantripp 's talking to me . 
It is better to hear what people say . 
You see what mistakes you make by taking up notions . 
I am quite sure that Sir James means to make you an offer ; and he believes that you will accept him , especially since you have been so pleased with him about the plans . 
And uncle too -- I know he expects it . 
Every one can see that Sir James is very much in love with you . '' 
The revulsion was so strong and painful in Dorothea 's mind that the tears welled up and flowed abundantly . 
All her dear plans were embittered , and she thought with disgust of Sir James 's conceiving that she recognized him as her lover . 
There was vexation too on account of Celia . 
`` How could he expect it ? '' 
she burst forth in her most impetuous manner . 
`` I have never agreed with him about anything but the cottages : I was barely polite to him before . '' 
`` But you have been so pleased with him since then ; he has begun to feel quite sure that you are fond of him . '' 
`` Fond of him , Celia ! 
How can you choose such odious expressions ? '' 
said Dorothea , passionately . 
`` Dear me , Dorothea , I suppose it would be right for you to be fond of a man whom you accepted for a husband . '' 
`` It is offensive to me to say that Sir James could think I was fond of him . 
Besides , it is not the right word for the feeling I must have towards the man I would accept as a husband . '' 
`` Well , I am sorry for Sir James . 
I thought it right to tell you , because you went on as you always do , never looking just where you are , and treading in the wrong place . 
You always see what nobody else sees ; it is impossible to satisfy you ; yet you never see what is quite plain . 
That 's your way , Dodo . '' 
Something certainly gave Celia unusual courage ; and she was not sparing the sister of whom she was occasionally in awe . 
Who can tell what just criticisms Murr the Cat may be passing on us beings of wider speculation ? 
`` It is very painful , '' said Dorothea , feeling scourged . 
`` I can have no more to do with the cottages . 
I must be uncivil to him . 
I must tell him I will have nothing to do with them . 
It is very painful . '' 
Her eyes filled again with tears . 
`` Wait a little . 
Think about it . 
You know he is going away for a day or two to see his sister . 
There will be nobody besides Lovegood . '' 
Celia could not help relenting . 
`` Poor Dodo , '' she went on , in an amiable staccato . 
`` It is very hard : it is your favorite fad to draw plans . '' '' 
Fad to draw plans ! 
Do you think I only care about my fellow-creatures ' houses in that childish way ? 
I may well make mistakes . 
How can one ever do anything nobly Christian , living among people with such petty thoughts ? '' 
No more was said ; Dorothea was too much jarred to recover her temper and behave so as to show that she admitted any error in herself . 
She was disposed rather to accuse the intolerable narrowness and the purblind conscience of the society around her : and Celia was no longer the eternal cherub , but a thorn in her spirit , a pink-and-white nullifidian , worse than any discouraging presence in the `` Pilgrim 's Progress . '' 
The fad of drawing plans ! 
What was life worth -- what great faith was possible when the whole effect of one 's actions could be withered up into such parched rubbish as that ? 
When she got out of the carriage , her cheeks were pale and her eyelids red . 
She was an image of sorrow , and her uncle who met her in the hall would have been alarmed , if Celia had not been close to her looking so pretty and composed , that he at once concluded Dorothea 's tears to have their origin in her excessive religiousness . 
He had returned , during their absence , from a journey to the county town , about a petition for the pardon of some criminal . 
`` Well , my dears , '' he said , kindly , as they went up to kiss him , `` I hope nothing disagreeable has happened while I have been away . '' 
`` No , uncle , '' said Celia , `` we have been to Freshitt to look at the cottages . 
We thought you would have been at home to lunch . '' 
`` I came by Lowick to lunch -- you did n't know I came by Lowick . 
And I have brought a couple of pamphlets for you , Dorothea -- in the library , you know ; they lie on the table in the library . '' 
It seemed as if an electric stream went through Dorothea , thrilling her from despair into expectation . 
They were pamphlets about the early Church . 
The oppression of Celia , Tantripp , and Sir James was shaken off , and she walked straight to the library . 
Celia went up-stairs . 
Mr. Brooke was detained by a message , but when he re-entered the library , he found Dorothea seated and already deep in one of the pamphlets which had some marginal manuscript of Mr. Casaubon 's , -- taking it in as eagerly as she might have taken in the scent of a fresh bouquet after a dry , hot , dreary walk . 
She was getting away from Tipton and Freshitt , and her own sad liability to tread in the wrong places on her way to the New Jerusalem . 
Mr. Brooke sat down in his arm-chair , stretched his legs towards the wood-fire , which had fallen into a wondrous mass of glowing dice between the dogs , and rubbed his hands gently , looking very mildly towards Dorothea , but with a neutral leisurely air , as if he had nothing particular to say . 
Dorothea closed her pamphlet , as soon as she was aware of her uncle 's presence , and rose as if to go . 
Usually she would have been interested about her uncle 's merciful errand on behalf of the criminal , but her late agitation had made her absent-minded . 
`` I came back by Lowick , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke , not as if with any intention to arrest her departure , but apparently from his usual tendency to say what he had said before . 
This fundamental principle of human speech was markedly exhibited in Mr. Brooke . 
`` I lunched there and saw Casaubon 's library , and that kind of thing . 
There 's a sharp air , driving . 
Wo n't you sit down , my dear ? 
You look cold . '' 
Dorothea felt quite inclined to accept the invitation . 
Some times , when her uncle 's easy way of taking things did not happen to be exasperating , it was rather soothing . 
She threw off her mantle and bonnet , and sat down opposite to him , enjoying the glow , but lifting up her beautiful hands for a screen . 
They were not thin hands , or small hands ; but powerful , feminine , maternal hands . 
She seemed to be holding them up in propitiation for her passionate desire to know and to think , which in the unfriendly mediums of Tipton and Freshitt had issued in crying and red eyelids . 
She bethought herself now of the condemned criminal . 
`` What news have you brought about the sheep-stealer , uncle ? '' 
`` What , poor Bunch ? 
-- well , it seems we ca n't get him off -- he is to be hanged . '' 
Dorothea 's brow took an expression of reprobation and pity . 
`` Hanged , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke , with a quiet nod . 
`` Poor Romilly ! 
he would have helped us . 
I knew Romilly . 
Casaubon did n't know Romilly . 
He is a little buried in books , you know , Casaubon is . '' 
`` When a man has great studies and is writing a great work , he must of course give up seeing much of the world . 
How can he go about making acquaintances ? '' 
`` That 's true . 
But a man mopes , you know . 
I have always been a bachelor too , but I have that sort of disposition that I never moped ; it was my way to go about everywhere and take in everything . 
I never moped : but I can see that Casaubon does , you know . 
He wants a companion -- a companion , you know . '' 
`` It would be a great honor to any one to be his companion , '' said Dorothea , energetically . 
`` You like him , eh ? '' 
said Mr. Brooke , without showing any surprise , or other emotion . 
`` Well , now , I 've known Casaubon ten years , ever since he came to Lowick . 
But I never got anything out of him -- any ideas , you know . 
However , he is a tiptop man and may be a bishop -- that kind of thing , you know , if Peel stays in . 
And he has a very high opinion of you , my dear . '' 
Dorothea could not speak . 
`` The fact is , he has a very high opinion indeed of you . 
And he speaks uncommonly well -- does Casaubon . 
He has deferred to me , you not being of age . 
In short , I have promised to speak to you , though I told him I thought there was not much chance . 
I was bound to tell him that . 
I said , my niece is very young , and that kind of thing . 
But I did n't think it necessary to go into everything . 
However , the long and the short of it is , that he has asked my permission to make you an offer of marriage -- of marriage , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke , with his explanatory nod . 
`` I thought it better to tell you , my dear . '' 
No one could have detected any anxiety in Mr. Brooke 's manner , but he did really wish to know something of his niece 's mind , that , if there were any need for advice , he might give it in time . 
What feeling he , as a magistrate who had taken in so many ideas , could make room for , was unmixedly kind . 
Since Dorothea did not speak immediately , he repeated , `` I thought it better to tell you , my dear . '' 
`` Thank you , uncle , '' said Dorothea , in a clear unwavering tone . 
`` I am very grateful to Mr. Casaubon . 
If he makes me an offer , I shall accept him . 
I admire and honor him more than any man I ever saw . '' 
Mr. Brooke paused a little , and then said in a lingering low tone , `` Ah ? 
... Well ! 
He is a good match in some respects . 
But now , Chettam is a good match . 
And our land lies together . 
I shall never interfere against your wishes , my dear . 
People should have their own way in marriage , and that sort of thing -- up to a certain point , you know . 
I have always said that , up to a certain point . 
I wish you to marry well ; and I have good reason to believe that Chettam wishes to marry you . 
I mention it , you know . '' 
`` It is impossible that I should ever marry Sir James Chettam , '' said Dorothea . 
`` If he thinks of marrying me , he has made a great mistake . '' 
`` That is it , you see . 
One never knows . 
I should have thought Chettam was just the sort of man a woman would like , now . '' 
`` Pray do not mention him in that light again , uncle , '' said Dorothea , feeling some of her late irritation revive . 
Mr. Brooke wondered , and felt that women were an inexhaustible subject of study , since even he at his age was not in a perfect state of scientific prediction about them . 
Here was a fellow like Chettam with no chance at all . 
`` Well , but Casaubon , now . 
There is no hurry -- I mean for you . 
It 's true , every year will tell upon him . 
He is over five-and-forty , you know . 
I should say a good seven-and-twenty years older than you . 
To be sure , -- if you like learning and standing , and that sort of thing , we ca n't have everything . 
And his income is good -- he has a handsome property independent of the Church -- his income is good . 
Still he is not young , and I must not conceal from you , my dear , that I think his health is not over-strong . 
I know nothing else against him . '' 
`` I should not wish to have a husband very near my own age , '' said Dorothea , with grave decision . 
`` I should wish to have a husband who was above me in judgment and in all knowledge . '' 
Mr. Brooke repeated his subdued , `` Ah ? 
-- I thought you had more of your own opinion than most girls . 
I thought you liked your own opinion -- liked it , you know . '' 
`` I can not imagine myself living without some opinions , but I should wish to have good reasons for them , and a wise man could help me to see which opinions had the best foundation , and would help me to live according to them . '' 
`` Very true . 
You could n't put the thing better -- could n't put it better , beforehand , you know . 
But there are oddities in things , '' continued Mr. Brooke , whose conscience was really roused to do the best he could for his niece on this occasion . 
`` Life is n't cast in a mould -- not cut out by rule and line , and that sort of thing . 
I never married myself , and it will be the better for you and yours . 
The fact is , I never loved any one well enough to put myself into a noose for them . 
It is a noose , you know . 
Temper , now . 
There is temper . 
And a husband likes to be master . '' 
`` I know that I must expect trials , uncle . 
Marriage is a state of higher duties . 
I never thought of it as mere personal ease , '' said poor Dorothea . 
`` Well , you are not fond of show , a great establishment , balls , dinners , that kind of thing . 
I can see that Casaubon 's ways might suit you better than Chettam 's . 
And you shall do as you like , my dear . 
I would not hinder Casaubon ; I said so at once ; for there is no knowing how anything may turn out . 
You have not the same tastes as every young lady ; and a clergyman and scholar -- who may be a bishop -- that kind of thing -- may suit you better than Chettam . 
Chettam is a good fellow , a good sound-hearted fellow , you know ; but he does n't go much into ideas . 
I did , when I was his age . 
But Casaubon 's eyes , now . 
I think he has hurt them a little with too much reading . '' 
`` I should be all the happier , uncle , the more room there was for me to help him , '' said Dorothea , ardently . 
`` You have quite made up your mind , I see . 
Well , my dear , the fact is , I have a letter for you in my pocket . '' 
Mr. Brooke handed the letter to Dorothea , but as she rose to go away , he added , `` There is not too much hurry , my dear . 
Think about it , you know . '' 
When Dorothea had left him , he reflected that he had certainly spoken strongly : he had put the risks of marriage before her in a striking manner . 
It was his duty to do so . 
But as to pretending to be wise for young people , -- no uncle , however much he had travelled in his youth , absorbed the new ideas , and dined with celebrities now deceased , could pretend to judge what sort of marriage would turn out well for a young girl who preferred Casaubon to Chettam . 
In short , woman was a problem which , since Mr. Brooke 's mind felt blank before it , could be hardly less complicated than the revolutions of an irregular solid . 
`` Hard students are commonly troubled with gowts , catarrhs , rheums , cachexia , bradypepsia , bad eyes , stone , and collick , crudities , oppilations , vertigo , winds , consumptions , and all such diseases as come by over-much sitting : they are most part lean , dry , ill-colored ... and all through immoderate pains and extraordinary studies . 
If you will not believe the truth of this , look upon great Tostatus and Thomas Aquainas ' works ; and tell me whether those men took pains . '' 
-- BURTON 'S Anatomy of Melancholy , P. I , s. 2 . 
This was Mr. Casaubon 's letter . 
MY DEAR MISS BROOKE , -- I have your guardian 's permission to address you on a subject than which I have none more at heart . 
I am not , I trust , mistaken in the recognition of some deeper correspondence than that of date in the fact that a consciousness of need in my own life had arisen contemporaneously with the possibility of my becoming acquainted with you . 
For in the first hour of meeting you , I had an impression of your eminent and perhaps exclusive fitness to supply that need -LRB- connected , I may say , with such activity of the affections as even the preoccupations of a work too special to be abdicated could not uninterruptedly dissimulate -RRB- ; and each succeeding opportunity for observation has given the impression an added depth by convincing me more emphatically of that fitness which I had preconceived , and thus evoking more decisively those affections to which I have but now referred . 
Our conversations have , I think , made sufficiently clear to you the tenor of my life and purposes : a tenor unsuited , I am aware , to the commoner order of minds . 
But I have discerned in you an elevation of thought and a capability of devotedness , which I had hitherto not conceived to be compatible either with the early bloom of youth or with those graces of sex that may be said at once to win and to confer distinction when combined , as they notably are in you , with the mental qualities above indicated . 
It was , I confess , beyond my hope to meet with this rare combination of elements both solid and attractive , adapted to supply aid in graver labors and to cast a charm over vacant hours ; and but for the event of my introduction to you -LRB- which , let me again say , I trust not to be superficially coincident with foreshadowing needs , but providentially related thereto as stages towards the completion of a life 's plan -RRB- , I should presumably have gone on to the last without any attempt to lighten my solitariness by a matrimonial union . 
Such , my dear Miss Brooke , is the accurate statement of my feelings ; and I rely on your kind indulgence in venturing now to ask you how far your own are of a nature to confirm my happy presentiment . 
To be accepted by you as your husband and the earthly guardian of your welfare , I should regard as the highest of providential gifts . 
In return I can at least offer you an affection hitherto unwasted , and the faithful consecration of a life which , however short in the sequel , has no backward pages whereon , if you choose to turn them , you will find records such as might justly cause you either bitterness or shame . 
I await the expression of your sentiments with an anxiety which it would be the part of wisdom -LRB- were it possible -RRB- to divert by a more arduous labor than usual . 
But in this order of experience I am still young , and in looking forward to an unfavorable possibility I can not but feel that resignation to solitude will be more difficult after the temporary illumination of hope . 
In any case , I shall remain , Yours with sincere devotion , EDWARD CASAUBON . 
Dorothea trembled while she read this letter ; then she fell on her knees , buried her face , and sobbed . 
She could not pray : under the rush of solemn emotion in which thoughts became vague and images floated uncertainly , she could but cast herself , with a childlike sense of reclining , in the lap of a divine consciousness which sustained her own . 
She remained in that attitude till it was time to dress for dinner . 
How could it occur to her to examine the letter , to look at it critically as a profession of love ? 
Her whole soul was possessed by the fact that a fuller life was opening before her : she was a neophyte about to enter on a higher grade of initiation . 
She was going to have room for the energies which stirred uneasily under the dimness and pressure of her own ignorance and the petty peremptoriness of the world 's habits . 
Now she would be able to devote herself to large yet definite duties ; now she would be allowed to live continually in the light of a mind that she could reverence . 
This hope was not unmixed with the glow of proud delight -- the joyous maiden surprise that she was chosen by the man whom her admiration had chosen . 
All Dorothea 's passion was transfused through a mind struggling towards an ideal life ; the radiance of her transfigured girlhood fell on the first object that came within its level . 
The impetus with which inclination became resolution was heightened by those little events of the day which had roused her discontent with the actual conditions of her life . 
After dinner , when Celia was playing an `` air , with variations , '' a small kind of tinkling which symbolized the aesthetic part of the young ladies ' education , Dorothea went up to her room to answer Mr. Casaubon 's letter . 
Why should she defer the answer ? 
She wrote it over three times , not because she wished to change the wording , but because her hand was unusually uncertain , and she could not bear that Mr. Casaubon should think her handwriting bad and illegible . 
She piqued herself on writing a hand in which each letter was distinguishable without any large range of conjecture , and she meant to make much use of this accomplishment , to save Mr. Casaubon 's eyes . 
Three times she wrote . 
MY DEAR MR. CASAUBON , -- I am very grateful to you for loving me , and thinking me worthy to be your wife . 
I can look forward to no better happiness than that which would be one with yours . 
If I said more , it would only be the same thing written out at greater length , for I can not now dwell on any other thought than that I may be through life Yours devotedly , DOROTHEA BROOKE . 
Later in the evening she followed her uncle into the library to give him the letter , that he might send it in the morning . 
He was surprised , but his surprise only issued in a few moments ' silence , during which he pushed about various objects on his writing-table , and finally stood with his back to the fire , his glasses on his nose , looking at the address of Dorothea 's letter . 
`` Have you thought enough about this , my dear ? '' 
he said at last . 
`` There was no need to think long , uncle . 
I know of nothing to make me vacillate . 
If I changed my mind , it must be because of something important and entirely new to me . '' 
`` Ah ! 
-- then you have accepted him ? 
Then Chettam has no chance ? 
Has Chettam offended you -- offended you , you know ? 
What is it you do n't like in Chettam ? '' 
`` There is nothing that I like in him , '' said Dorothea , rather impetuously . 
Mr. Brooke threw his head and shoulders backward as if some one had thrown a light missile at him . 
Dorothea immediately felt some self-rebuke , and said -- `` I mean in the light of a husband . 
He is very kind , I think -- really very good about the cottages . 
A well-meaning man . '' 
`` But you must have a scholar , and that sort of thing ? 
Well , it lies a little in our family . 
I had it myself -- that love of knowledge , and going into everything -- a little too much -- it took me too far ; though that sort of thing does n't often run in the female-line ; or it runs underground like the rivers in Greece , you know -- it comes out in the sons . 
Clever sons , clever mothers . 
I went a good deal into that , at one time . 
However , my dear , I have always said that people should do as they like in these things , up to a certain point . 
I could n't , as your guardian , have consented to a bad match . 
But Casaubon stands well : his position is good . 
I am afraid Chettam will be hurt , though , and Mrs. Cadwallader will blame me . '' 
That evening , of course , Celia knew nothing of what had happened . 
She attributed Dorothea 's abstracted manner , and the evidence of further crying since they had got home , to the temper she had been in about Sir James Chettam and the buildings , and was careful not to give further offence : having once said what she wanted to say , Celia had no disposition to recur to disagreeable subjects . 
It had been her nature when a child never to quarrel with any one -- only to observe with wonder that they quarrelled with her , and looked like turkey-cocks ; whereupon she was ready to play at cat 's cradle with them whenever they recovered themselves . 
And as to Dorothea , it had always been her way to find something wrong in her sister 's words , though Celia inwardly protested that she always said just how things were , and nothing else : she never did and never could put words together out of her own head . 
But the best of Dodo was , that she did not keep angry for long together . 
Now , though they had hardly spoken to each other all the evening , yet when Celia put by her work , intending to go to bed , a proceeding in which she was always much the earlier , Dorothea , who was seated on a low stool , unable to occupy herself except in meditation , said , with the musical intonation which in moments of deep but quiet feeling made her speech like a fine bit of recitative -- `` Celia , dear , come and kiss me , '' holding her arms open as she spoke . 
Celia knelt down to get the right level and gave her little butterfly kiss , while Dorothea encircled her with gentle arms and pressed her lips gravely on each cheek in turn . 
`` Do n't sit up , Dodo , you are so pale to-night : go to bed soon , '' said Celia , in a comfortable way , without any touch of pathos . 
`` No , dear , I am very , very happy , '' said Dorothea , fervently . 
`` So much the better , '' thought Celia . 
`` But how strangely Dodo goes from one extreme to the other . '' 
The next day , at luncheon , the butler , handing something to Mr. Brooke , said , `` Jonas is come back , sir , and has brought this letter . '' 
Mr. Brooke read the letter , and then , nodding toward Dorothea , said , `` Casaubon , my dear : he will be here to dinner ; he did n't wait to write more -- did n't wait , you know . '' 
It could not seem remarkable to Celia that a dinner guest should be announced to her sister beforehand , but , her eyes following the same direction as her uncle 's , she was struck with the peculiar effect of the announcement on Dorothea . 
It seemed as if something like the reflection of a white sunlit wing had passed across her features , ending in one of her rare blushes . 
For the first time it entered into Celia 's mind that there might be something more between Mr. Casaubon and her sister than his delight in bookish talk and her delight in listening . 
Hitherto she had classed the admiration for this `` ugly '' and learned acquaintance with the admiration for Monsieur Liret at Lausanne , also ugly and learned . 
