It had altered already , and would alter more . 
Its gold would wither into grey . 
Its red and white roses would die . 
For every sin that he committed , a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness . 
But he would not sin . 
The picture , changed or unchanged , would be to him the visible emblem of conscience . 
He would resist temptation . 
He would not see Lord Henry any more -- would not , at any rate , listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward 's garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things . 
He would go back to Sibyl Vane , make her amends , marry her , try to love her again . 
Yes , it was his duty to do so . 
She must have suffered more than he had . 
Poor child ! 
He had been selfish and cruel to her . 
The fascination that she had exercised over him would return . 
They would be happy together . 
His life with her would be beautiful and pure . 
He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the portrait , shuddering as he glanced at it . 
`` How horrible ! '' 
he murmured to himself , and he walked across to the window and opened it . 
When he stepped out on to the grass , he drew a deep breath . 
The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions . 
He thought only of Sibyl . 
A faint echo of his love came back to him . 
He repeated her name over and over again . 
The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her . 
It was long past noon when he awoke . 
His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring , and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late . 
Finally his bell sounded , and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea , and a pile of letters , on a small tray of old Sevres china , and drew back the olive-satin curtains , with their shimmering blue lining , that hung in front of the three tall windows . 
`` Monsieur has well slept this morning , '' he said , smiling . 
`` What o'clock is it , Victor ? '' 
asked Dorian Gray drowsily . 
`` One hour and a quarter , Monsieur . '' 
How late it was ! 
He sat up , and having sipped some tea , turned over his letters . 
One of them was from Lord Henry , and had been brought by hand that morning . 
He hesitated for a moment , and then put it aside . 
The others he opened listlessly . 
They contained the usual collection of cards , invitations to dinner , tickets for private views , programmes of charity concerts , and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season . 
There was a rather heavy bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians , who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities ; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment 's notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest . 
After about ten minutes he got up , and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool , passed into the onyx-paved bathroom . 
The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep . 
He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through . 
A dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice , but there was the unreality of a dream about it . 
As soon as he was dressed , he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window . 
It was an exquisite day . 
The warm air seemed laden with spices . 
A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that , filled with sulphur-yellow roses , stood before him . 
He felt perfectly happy . 
Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the portrait , and he started . 
`` Too cold for Monsieur ? '' 
asked his valet , putting an omelette on the table . 
`` I shut the window ? '' 
Dorian shook his head . 
`` I am not cold , '' he murmured . 
Was it all true ? 
Had the portrait really changed ? 
Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy ? 
Surely a painted canvas could not alter ? 
The thing was absurd . 
It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day . 
It would make him smile . 
And , yet , how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing ! 
First in the dim twilight , and then in the bright dawn , he had seen the touch of cruelty round the warped lips . 
He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room . 
He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait . 
He was afraid of certainty . 
When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go , he felt a wild desire to tell him to remain . 
As the door was closing behind him , he called him back . 
The man stood waiting for his orders . 
Dorian looked at him for a moment . 
`` I am not at home to any one , Victor , '' he said with a sigh . 
The man bowed and retired . 
Then he rose from the table , lit a cigarette , and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen . 
The screen was an old one , of gilt Spanish leather , stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern . 
He scanned it curiously , wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man 's life . 
Should he move it aside , after all ? 
Why not let it stay there ? 
What was the use of knowing ? 
If the thing was true , it was terrible . 
If it was not true , why trouble about it ? 
But what if , by some fate or deadlier chance , eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change ? 
What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own picture ? 
Basil would be sure to do that . 
No ; the thing had to be examined , and at once . 
Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt . 
He got up and locked both doors . 
At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame . 
Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face . 
It was perfectly true . 
The portrait had altered . 
As he often remembered afterwards , and always with no small wonder , he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest . 
That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him . 
And yet it was a fact . 
Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him ? 
Could it be that what that soul thought , they realized ? 
-- that what it dreamed , they made true ? 
Or was there some other , more terrible reason ? 
He shuddered , and felt afraid , and , going back to the couch , lay there , gazing at the picture in sickened horror . 
One thing , however , he felt that it had done for him . 
It had made him conscious how unjust , how cruel , he had been to Sibyl Vane . 
It was not too late to make reparation for that . 
She could still be his wife . 
His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence , would be transformed into some nobler passion , and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life , would be to him what holiness is to some , and conscience to others , and the fear of God to us all . 
There were opiates for remorse , drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep . 
But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin . 
Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls . 
Three o'clock struck , and four , and the half-hour rang its double chime , but Dorian Gray did not stir . 
He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern ; to find his way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering . 
He did not know what to do , or what to think . 
Finally , he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved , imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness . 
He covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain . 
There is a luxury in self-reproach . 
When we blame ourselves , we feel that no one else has a right to blame us . 
It is the confession , not the priest , that gives us absolution . 
When Dorian had finished the letter , he felt that he had been forgiven . 
Suddenly there came a knock to the door , and he heard Lord Henry 's voice outside . 
`` My dear boy , I must see you . 
Let me in at once . 
I ca n't bear your shutting yourself up like this . '' 
He made no answer at first , but remained quite still . 
The knocking still continued and grew louder . 
Yes , it was better to let Lord Henry in , and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead , to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel , to part if parting was inevitable . 
He jumped up , drew the screen hastily across the picture , and unlocked the door . 
`` I am so sorry for it all , Dorian , '' said Lord Henry as he entered . 
`` But you must not think too much about it . '' 
`` Do you mean about Sibyl Vane ? '' 
asked the lad . 
`` Yes , of course , '' answered Lord Henry , sinking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves . 
`` It is dreadful , from one point of view , but it was not your fault . 
Tell me , did you go behind and see her , after the play was over ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I felt sure you had . 
Did you make a scene with her ? '' 
`` I was brutal , Harry -- perfectly brutal . 
But it is all right now . 
I am not sorry for anything that has happened . 
It has taught me to know myself better . '' 
`` Ah , Dorian , I am so glad you take it in that way ! 
I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours . '' 
`` I have got through all that , '' said Dorian , shaking his head and smiling . 
`` I am perfectly happy now . 
I know what conscience is , to begin with . 
It is not what you told me it was . 
It is the divinest thing in us . 
Do n't sneer at it , Harry , any more -- at least not before me . 
I want to be good . 
I ca n't bear the idea of my soul being hideous . '' 
`` A very charming artistic basis for ethics , Dorian ! 
I congratulate you on it . 
But how are you going to begin ? '' 
`` By marrying Sibyl Vane . '' 
`` Marrying Sibyl Vane ! '' 
cried Lord Henry , standing up and looking at him in perplexed amazement . 
`` But , my dear Dorian -- '' `` Yes , Harry , I know what you are going to say . 
Something dreadful about marriage . 
Do n't say it . 
Do n't ever say things of that kind to me again . 
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me . 
I am not going to break my word to her . 
She is to be my wife . '' 
`` Your wife ! 
Dorian ! 
... Did n't you get my letter ? 
I wrote to you this morning , and sent the note down by my own man . '' 
`` Your letter ? 
Oh , yes , I remember . 
I have not read it yet , Harry . 
I was afraid there might be something in it that I would n't like . 
You cut life to pieces with your epigrams . '' 
`` You know nothing then ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
Lord Henry walked across the room , and sitting down by Dorian Gray , took both his hands in his own and held them tightly . 
`` Dorian , '' he said , `` my letter -- do n't be frightened -- was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead . '' 
A cry of pain broke from the lad 's lips , and he leaped to his feet , tearing his hands away from Lord Henry 's grasp . 
`` Dead ! 
Sibyl dead ! 
It is not true ! 
It is a horrible lie ! 
How dare you say it ? '' 
`` It is quite true , Dorian , '' said Lord Henry , gravely . 
`` It is in all the morning papers . 
I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I came . 
There will have to be an inquest , of course , and you must not be mixed up in it . 
Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris . 
But in London people are so prejudiced . 
Here , one should never make one 's debut with a scandal . 
One should reserve that to give an interest to one 's old age . 
I suppose they do n't know your name at the theatre ? 
If they do n't , it is all right . 
Did any one see you going round to her room ? 
That is an important point . '' 
Dorian did not answer for a few moments . 
He was dazed with horror . 
Finally he stammered , in a stifled voice , `` Harry , did you say an inquest ? 
What did you mean by that ? 
Did Sibyl -- ? 
Oh , Harry , I ca n't bear it ! 
But be quick . 
Tell me everything at once . '' 
`` I have no doubt it was not an accident , Dorian , though it must be put in that way to the public . 
It seems that as she was leaving the theatre with her mother , about half-past twelve or so , she said she had forgotten something upstairs . 
They waited some time for her , but she did not come down again . 
They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room . 
She had swallowed something by mistake , some dreadful thing they use at theatres . 
I do n't know what it was , but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it . 
I should fancy it was prussic acid , as she seems to have died instantaneously . '' 
`` Harry , Harry , it is terrible ! '' 
cried the lad . 
`` Yes ; it is very tragic , of course , but you must not get yourself mixed up in it . 
I see by The Standard that she was seventeen . 
I should have thought she was almost younger than that . 
She looked such a child , and seemed to know so little about acting . 
Dorian , you must n't let this thing get on your nerves . 
You must come and dine with me , and afterwards we will look in at the opera . 
It is a Patti night , and everybody will be there . 
You can come to my sister 's box . 
She has got some smart women with her . '' 
`` So I have murdered Sibyl Vane , '' said Dorian Gray , half to himself , `` murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife . 
Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that . 
The birds sing just as happily in my garden . 
And to-night I am to dine with you , and then go on to the opera , and sup somewhere , I suppose , afterwards . 
How extraordinarily dramatic life is ! 
If I had read all this in a book , Harry , I think I would have wept over it . 
Somehow , now that it has happened actually , and to me , it seems far too wonderful for tears . 
Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my life . 
Strange , that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead girl . 
Can they feel , I wonder , those white silent people we call the dead ? 
Sibyl ! 
Can she feel , or know , or listen ? 
Oh , Harry , how I loved her once ! 
It seems years ago to me now . 
She was everything to me . 
Then came that dreadful night -- was it really only last night ? 
-- when she played so badly , and my heart almost broke . 
She explained it all to me . 
It was terribly pathetic . 
But I was not moved a bit . 
I thought her shallow . 
Suddenly something happened that made me afraid . 
I ca n't tell you what it was , but it was terrible . 
I said I would go back to her . 
I felt I had done wrong . 
And now she is dead . 
My God ! 
My God ! 
Harry , what shall I do ? 
You do n't know the danger I am in , and there is nothing to keep me straight . 
She would have done that for me . 
She had no right to kill herself . 
It was selfish of her . '' 
`` My dear Dorian , '' answered Lord Henry , taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox , `` the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible interest in life . 
If you had married this girl , you would have been wretched . 
Of course , you would have treated her kindly . 
One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing . 
But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her . 
And when a woman finds that out about her husband , she either becomes dreadfully dowdy , or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman 's husband has to pay for . 
I say nothing about the social mistake , which would have been abject -- which , of course , I would not have allowed -- but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure . '' 
`` I suppose it would , '' muttered the lad , walking up and down the room and looking horribly pale . 
`` But I thought it was my duty . 
It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right . 
I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions -- that they are always made too late . 
Mine certainly were . '' 
`` Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws . 
Their origin is pure vanity . 
Their result is absolutely nil . 
They give us , now and then , some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak . 
That is all that can be said for them . 
They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account . '' 
`` Harry , '' cried Dorian Gray , coming over and sitting down beside him , `` why is it that I can not feel this tragedy as much as I want to ? 
I do n't think I am heartless . 
Do you ? '' 
`` You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name , Dorian , '' answered Lord Henry with his sweet melancholy smile . 
The lad frowned . 
`` I do n't like that explanation , Harry , '' he rejoined , `` but I am glad you do n't think I am heartless . 
I am nothing of the kind . 
I know I am not . 
And yet I must admit that this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should . 
It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play . 
It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy , a tragedy in which I took a great part , but by which I have not been wounded . '' 
`` It is an interesting question , '' said Lord Henry , who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad 's unconscious egotism , `` an extremely interesting question . 
I fancy that the true explanation is this : It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence , their absolute incoherence , their absurd want of meaning , their entire lack of style . 
They affect us just as vulgarity affects us . 
They give us an impression of sheer brute force , and we revolt against that . 
Sometimes , however , a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives . 
If these elements of beauty are real , the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect . 
Suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors , but the spectators of the play . 
Or rather we are both . 
We watch ourselves , and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us . 
In the present case , what is it that has really happened ? 
Some one has killed herself for love of you . 
I wish that I had ever had such an experience . 
It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life . 
The people who have adored me -- there have not been very many , but there have been some -- have always insisted on living on , long after I had ceased to care for them , or they to care for me . 
They have become stout and tedious , and when I meet them , they go in at once for reminiscences . 
That awful memory of woman ! 
What a fearful thing it is ! 
And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals ! 
One should absorb the colour of life , but one should never remember its details . 
Details are always vulgar . '' 
`` I must sow poppies in my garden , '' sighed Dorian . 
`` There is no necessity , '' rejoined his companion . 
`` Life has always poppies in her hands . 
Of course , now and then things linger . 
I once wore nothing but violets all through one season , as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die . 
Ultimately , however , it did die . 
I forget what killed it . 
I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me . 
That is always a dreadful moment . 
It fills one with the terror of eternity . 
Well -- would you believe it ? 
-- a week ago , at Lady Hampshire 's , I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question , and she insisted on going over the whole thing again , and digging up the past , and raking up the future . 
I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel . 
She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life . 
I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner , so I did not feel any anxiety . 
But what a lack of taste she showed ! 
The one charm of the past is that it is the past . 
But women never know when the curtain has fallen . 
They always want a sixth act , and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over , they propose to continue it . 
If they were allowed their own way , every comedy would have a tragic ending , and every tragedy would culminate in a farce . 
They are charmingly artificial , but they have no sense of art . 
You are more fortunate than I am . 
I assure you , Dorian , that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you . 
Ordinary women always console themselves . 
Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours . 
Never trust a woman who wears mauve , whatever her age may be , or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons . 
It always means that they have a history . 
Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands . 
They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one 's face , as if it were the most fascinating of sins . 
Religion consoles some . 
Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation , a woman once told me , and I can quite understand it . 
Besides , nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner . 
Conscience makes egotists of us all . 
Yes ; there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern life . 
Indeed , I have not mentioned the most important one . '' 
`` What is that , Harry ? '' 
said the lad listlessly . 
`` Oh , the obvious consolation . 
Taking some one else 's admirer when one loses one 's own . 
In good society that always whitewashes a woman . 
But really , Dorian , how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets ! 
There is something to me quite beautiful about her death . 
I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen . 
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with , such as romance , passion , and love . '' 
`` I was terribly cruel to her . 
You forget that . '' 
`` I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty , downright cruelty , more than anything else . 
They have wonderfully primitive instincts . 
We have emancipated them , but they remain slaves looking for their masters , all the same . 
They love being dominated . 
I am sure you were splendid . 
I have never seen you really and absolutely angry , but I can fancy how delightful you looked . 
And , after all , you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful , but that I see now was absolutely true , and it holds the key to everything . '' 
`` What was that , Harry ? '' 
`` You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance -- that she was Desdemona one night , and Ophelia the other ; that if she died as Juliet , she came to life as Imogen . '' 
`` She will never come to life again now , '' muttered the lad , burying his face in his hands . 
`` No , she will never come to life . 
She has played her last part . 
But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy , as a wonderful scene from Webster , or Ford , or Cyril Tourneur . 
The girl never really lived , and so she has never really died . 
To you at least she was always a dream , a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare 's plays and left them lovelier for its presence , a reed through which Shakespeare 's music sounded richer and more full of joy . 
The moment she touched actual life , she marred it , and it marred her , and so she passed away . 
Mourn for Ophelia , if you like . 
Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled . 
Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died . 
But do n't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane . 
She was less real than they are . '' 
There was a silence . 
The evening darkened in the room . 
Noiselessly , and with silver feet , the shadows crept in from the garden . 
The colours faded wearily out of things . 
After some time Dorian Gray looked up . 
`` You have explained me to myself , Harry , '' he murmured with something of a sigh of relief . 
`` I felt all that you have said , but somehow I was afraid of it , and I could not express it to myself . 
How well you know me ! 
But we will not talk again of what has happened . 
It has been a marvellous experience . 
That is all . 
I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous . '' 
`` Life has everything in store for you , Dorian . 
There is nothing that you , with your extraordinary good looks , will not be able to do . '' 
`` But suppose , Harry , I became haggard , and old , and wrinkled ? 
What then ? '' 
`` Ah , then , '' said Lord Henry , rising to go , `` then , my dear Dorian , you would have to fight for your victories . 
As it is , they are brought to you . 
No , you must keep your good looks . 
We live in an age that reads too much to be wise , and that thinks too much to be beautiful . 
We can not spare you . 
And now you had better dress and drive down to the club . 
We are rather late , as it is . '' 
`` I think I shall join you at the opera , Harry . 
I feel too tired to eat anything . 
What is the number of your sister 's box ? '' 
`` Twenty-seven , I believe . 
It is on the grand tier . 
You will see her name on the door . 
But I am sorry you wo n't come and dine . '' 
`` I do n't feel up to it , '' said Dorian listlessly . 
`` But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me . 
You are certainly my best friend . 
No one has ever understood me as you have . '' 
