Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure . 
How different he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward 's studio ! 
His nature had developed like a flower , had borne blossoms of scarlet flame . 
Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul , and desire had come to meet it on the way . 
`` And what do you propose to do ? '' 
said Lord Henry at last . 
`` I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act . 
I have not the slightest fear of the result . 
You are certain to acknowledge her genius . 
Then we must get her out of the Jew 's hands . 
She is bound to him for three years -- at least for two years and eight months -- from the present time . 
I shall have to pay him something , of course . 
When all that is settled , I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly . 
She will make the world as mad as she has made me . '' 
`` That would be impossible , my dear boy . '' 
`` Yes , she will . 
She has not merely art , consummate art-instinct , in her , but she has personality also ; and you have often told me that it is personalities , not principles , that move the age . '' 
`` Well , what night shall we go ? '' 
`` Let me see . 
To-day is Tuesday . 
Let us fix to-morrow . 
She plays Juliet to-morrow . '' 
`` All right . 
The Bristol at eight o'clock ; and I will get Basil . '' 
`` Not eight , Harry , please . 
Half-past six . 
We must be there before the curtain rises . 
You must see her in the first act , where she meets Romeo . '' 
`` Half-past six ! 
What an hour ! 
It will be like having a meat-tea , or reading an English novel . 
It must be seven . 
No gentleman dines before seven . 
Shall you see Basil between this and then ? 
Or shall I write to him ? '' 
`` Dear Basil ! 
I have not laid eyes on him for a week . 
It is rather horrid of me , as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame , specially designed by himself , and , though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am , I must admit that I delight in it . 
Perhaps you had better write to him . 
I do n't want to see him alone . 
He says things that annoy me . 
He gives me good advice . '' 
Lord Henry smiled . 
`` People are very fond of giving away what they need most themselves . 
It is what I call the depth of generosity . '' 
`` Oh , Basil is the best of fellows , but he seems to me to be just a bit of a Philistine . 
Since I have known you , Harry , I have discovered that . '' 
`` Basil , my dear boy , puts everything that is charming in him into his work . 
The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices , his principles , and his common sense . 
The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists . 
Good artists exist simply in what they make , and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are . 
A great poet , a really great poet , is the most unpoetical of all creatures . 
But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating . 
The worse their rhymes are , the more picturesque they look . 
The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible . 
He lives the poetry that he can not write . 
The others write the poetry that they dare not realize . '' 
`` I wonder is that really so , Harry ? '' 
said Dorian Gray , putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large , gold-topped bottle that stood on the table . 
`` It must be , if you say it . 
And now I am off . 
Imogen is waiting for me . 
Do n't forget about to-morrow . 
Good-bye . '' 
As he left the room , Lord Henry 's heavy eyelids drooped , and he began to think . 
Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray , and yet the lad 's mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy . 
He was pleased by it . 
It made him a more interesting study . 
He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science , but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import . 
And so he had begun by vivisecting himself , as he had ended by vivisecting others . 
Human life -- that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating . 
Compared to it there was nothing else of any value . 
It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure , one could not wear over one 's face a mask of glass , nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams . 
There were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them . 
There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature . 
And , yet , what a great reward one received ! 
How wonderful the whole world became to one ! 
To note the curious hard logic of passion , and the emotional coloured life of the intellect -- to observe where they met , and where they separated , at what point they were in unison , and at what point they were at discord -- there was a delight in that ! 
What matter what the cost was ? 
One could never pay too high a price for any sensation . 
He was conscious -- and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes -- that it was through certain words of his , musical words said with musical utterance , that Dorian Gray 's soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her . 
To a large extent the lad was his own creation . 
He had made him premature . 
That was something . 
Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its secrets , but to the few , to the elect , the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away . 
Sometimes this was the effect of art , and chiefly of the art of literature , which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect . 
But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art , was indeed , in its way , a real work of art , life having its elaborate masterpieces , just as poetry has , or sculpture , or painting . 
Yes , the lad was premature . 
He was gathering his harvest while it was yet spring . 
The pulse and passion of youth were in him , but he was becoming self-conscious . 
It was delightful to watch him . 
With his beautiful face , and his beautiful soul , he was a thing to wonder at . 
It was no matter how it all ended , or was destined to end . 
He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play , whose joys seem to be remote from one , but whose sorrows stir one 's sense of beauty , and whose wounds are like red roses . 
Soul and body , body and soul -- how mysterious they were ! 
There was animalism in the soul , and the body had its moments of spirituality . 
The senses could refine , and the intellect could degrade . 
Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased , or the psychical impulse began ? 
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists ! 
And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools ! 
Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin ? 
Or was the body really in the soul , as Giordano Bruno thought ? 
The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery , and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also . 
He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us . 
As it was , we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others . 
Experience was of no ethical value . 
It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes . 
Moralists had , as a rule , regarded it as a mode of warning , had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character , had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid . 
But there was no motive power in experience . 
It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself . 
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past , and that the sin we had done once , and with loathing , we would do many times , and with joy . 
It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions ; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand , and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results . 
His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest . 
There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it , curiosity and the desire for new experiences , yet it was not a simple , but rather a very complex passion . 
What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination , changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense , and was for that very reason all the more dangerous . 
It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us . 
Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious . 
It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves . 
While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things , a knock came to the door , and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner . 
He got up and looked out into the street . 
The sunset had smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite . 
The panes glowed like plates of heated metal . 
The sky above was like a faded rose . 
He thought of his friend 's young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end . 
When he arrived home , about half-past twelve o'clock , he saw a telegram lying on the hall table . 
He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray . 
It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane . 
`` Mother , Mother , I am so happy ! '' 
whispered the girl , burying her face in the lap of the faded , tired-looking woman who , with back turned to the shrill intrusive light , was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained . 
`` I am so happy ! '' 
she repeated , `` and you must be happy , too ! '' 
Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin , bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter 's head . 
`` Happy ! '' 
she echoed , `` I am only happy , Sibyl , when I see you act . 
You must not think of anything but your acting . 
Mr. Isaacs has been very good to us , and we owe him money . '' 
The girl looked up and pouted . 
`` Money , Mother ? '' 
she cried , `` what does money matter ? 
Love is more than money . '' 
`` Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James . 
You must not forget that , Sibyl . 
Fifty pounds is a very large sum . 
Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate . '' 
`` He is not a gentleman , Mother , and I hate the way he talks to me , '' said the girl , rising to her feet and going over to the window . 
`` I do n't know how we could manage without him , '' answered the elder woman querulously . 
Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed . 
`` We do n't want him any more , Mother . 
Prince Charming rules life for us now . '' 
Then she paused . 
A rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks . 
Quick breath parted the petals of her lips . 
They trembled . 
Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress . 
`` I love him , '' she said simply . 
`` Foolish child ! 
foolish child ! '' 
was the parrot-phrase flung in answer . 
The waving of crooked , false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the words . 
The girl laughed again . 
The joy of a caged bird was in her voice . 
Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance , then closed for a moment , as though to hide their secret . 
When they opened , the mist of a dream had passed across them . 
Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair , hinted at prudence , quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense . 
She did not listen . 
She was free in her prison of passion . 
Her prince , Prince Charming , was with her . 
She had called on memory to remake him . 
She had sent her soul to search for him , and it had brought him back . 
His kiss burned again upon her mouth . 
Her eyelids were warm with his breath . 
Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery . 
This young man might be rich . 
If so , marriage should be thought of . 
Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning . 
The arrows of craft shot by her . 
She saw the thin lips moving , and smiled . 
Suddenly she felt the need to speak . 
The wordy silence troubled her . 
`` Mother , Mother , '' she cried , `` why does he love me so much ? 
I know why I love him . 
I love him because he is like what love himself should be . 
But what does he see in me ? 
I am not worthy of him . 
And yet -- why , I can not tell -- though I feel so much beneath him , I do n't feel humble . 
I feel proud , terribly proud . 
Mother , did you love my father as I love Prince Charming ? '' 
The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks , and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain . 
Sybil rushed to her , flung her arms round her neck , and kissed her . 
`` Forgive me , Mother . 
I know it pains you to talk about our father . 
But it only pains you because you loved him so much . 
Do n't look so sad . 
I am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago . 
Ah ! 
let me be happy for ever ! '' 
`` My child , you are far too young to think of falling in love . 
Besides , what do you know of this young man ? 
You do n't even know his name . 
The whole thing is most inconvenient , and really , when James is going away to Australia , and I have so much to think of , I must say that you should have shown more consideration . 
However , as I said before , if he is rich ... '' `` Ah ! 
Mother , Mother , let me be happy ! '' 
Mrs. Vane glanced at her , and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player , clasped her in her arms . 
At this moment , the door opened and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room . 
He was thick-set of figure , and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement . 
He was not so finely bred as his sister . 
One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them . 
Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile . 
She mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience . 
She felt sure that the tableau was interesting . 
`` You might keep some of your kisses for me , Sibyl , I think , '' said the lad with a good-natured grumble . 
`` Ah ! 
but you do n't like being kissed , Jim , '' she cried . 
`` You are a dreadful old bear . '' 
And she ran across the room and hugged him . 
James Vane looked into his sister 's face with tenderness . 
`` I want you to come out with me for a walk , Sibyl . 
I do n't suppose I shall ever see this horrid London again . 
I am sure I do n't want to . '' 
`` My son , do n't say such dreadful things , '' murmured Mrs. Vane , taking up a tawdry theatrical dress , with a sigh , and beginning to patch it . 
She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group . 
It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation . 
`` Why not , Mother ? 
I mean it . '' 
`` You pain me , my son . 
I trust you will return from Australia in a position of affluence . 
I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies -- nothing that I would call society -- so when you have made your fortune , you must come back and assert yourself in London . '' 
`` Society ! '' 
muttered the lad . 
`` I do n't want to know anything about that . 
I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage . 
I hate it . '' 
`` Oh , Jim ! '' 
said Sibyl , laughing , `` how unkind of you ! 
But are you really going for a walk with me ? 
That will be nice ! 
I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends -- to Tom Hardy , who gave you that hideous pipe , or Ned Langton , who makes fun of you for smoking it . 
It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon . 
Where shall we go ? 
Let us go to the park . '' 
`` I am too shabby , '' he answered , frowning . 
`` Only swell people go to the park . '' 
`` Nonsense , Jim , '' she whispered , stroking the sleeve of his coat . 
He hesitated for a moment . 
`` Very well , '' he said at last , `` but do n't be too long dressing . '' 
She danced out of the door . 
One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs . 
Her little feet pattered overhead . 
He walked up and down the room two or three times . 
Then he turned to the still figure in the chair . 
`` Mother , are my things ready ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Quite ready , James , '' she answered , keeping her eyes on her work . 
For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers . 
Her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met . 
She used to wonder if he suspected anything . 
The silence , for he made no other observation , became intolerable to her . 
She began to complain . 
Women defend themselves by attacking , just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders . 
`` I hope you will be contented , James , with your sea-faring life , '' she said . 
`` You must remember that it is your own choice . 
You might have entered a solicitor 's office . 
Solicitors are a very respectable class , and in the country often dine with the best families . '' 
`` I hate offices , and I hate clerks , '' he replied . 
`` But you are quite right . 
I have chosen my own life . 
All I say is , watch over Sibyl . 
Do n't let her come to any harm . 
Mother , you must watch over her . '' 
`` James , you really talk very strangely . 
Of course I watch over Sibyl . '' 
`` I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to talk to her . 
Is that right ? 
What about that ? '' 
`` You are speaking about things you do n't understand , James . 
In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention . 
I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time . 
That was when acting was really understood . 
As for Sibyl , I do not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not . 
But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman . 
He is always most polite to me . 
Besides , he has the appearance of being rich , and the flowers he sends are lovely . '' 
`` You do n't know his name , though , '' said the lad harshly . 
`` No , '' answered his mother with a placid expression in her face . 
`` He has not yet revealed his real name . 
I think it is quite romantic of him . 
He is probably a member of the aristocracy . '' 
James Vane bit his lip . 
`` Watch over Sibyl , Mother , '' he cried , `` watch over her . '' 
`` My son , you distress me very much . 
Sibyl is always under my special care . 
Of course , if this gentleman is wealthy , there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him . 
I trust he is one of the aristocracy . 
He has all the appearance of it , I must say . 
It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl . 
They would make a charming couple . 
His good looks are really quite remarkable ; everybody notices them . '' 
The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his coarse fingers . 
He had just turned round to say something when the door opened and Sibyl ran in . 
`` How serious you both are ! '' 
she cried . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' he answered . 
`` I suppose one must be serious sometimes . 
Good-bye , Mother ; I will have my dinner at five o'clock . 
Everything is packed , except my shirts , so you need not trouble . '' 
`` Good-bye , my son , '' she answered with a bow of strained stateliness . 
She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her , and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid . 
`` Kiss me , Mother , '' said the girl . 
Her flowerlike lips touched the withered cheek and warmed its frost . 
`` My child ! 
my child ! '' 
cried Mrs. Vane , looking up to the ceiling in search of an imaginary gallery . 
`` Come , Sibyl , '' said her brother impatiently . 
He hated his mother 's affectations . 
They went out into the flickering , wind-blown sunlight and strolled down the dreary Euston Road . 
The passersby glanced in wonder at the sullen heavy youth who , in coarse , ill-fitting clothes , was in the company of such a graceful , refined-looking girl . 
He was like a common gardener walking with a rose . 
Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of some stranger . 
He had that dislike of being stared at , which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace . 
Sibyl , however , was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing . 
Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips . 
She was thinking of Prince Charming , and , that she might think of him all the more , she did not talk of him , but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail , about the gold he was certain to find , about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked , red-shirted bushrangers . 
For he was not to remain a sailor , or a supercargo , or whatever he was going to be . 
Oh , no ! 
A sailor 's existence was dreadful . 
Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship , with the hoarse , hump-backed waves trying to get in , and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands ! 
He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne , bid a polite good-bye to the captain , and go off at once to the gold-fields . 
Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold , the largest nugget that had ever been discovered , and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen . 
The bushrangers were to attack them three times , and be defeated with immense slaughter . 
Or , no . 
He was not to go to the gold-fields at all . 
They were horrid places , where men got intoxicated , and shot each other in bar-rooms , and used bad language . 
He was to be a nice sheep-farmer , and one evening , as he was riding home , he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse , and give chase , and rescue her . 
Of course , she would fall in love with him , and he with her , and they would get married , and come home , and live in an immense house in London . 
Yes , there were delightful things in store for him . 
But he must be very good , and not lose his temper , or spend his money foolishly . 
She was only a year older than he was , but she knew so much more of life . 
He must be sure , also , to write to her by every mail , and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep . 
God was very good , and would watch over him . 
She would pray for him , too , and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy . 
The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer . 
He was heart-sick at leaving home . 
Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose . 
Inexperienced though he was , he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl 's position . 
This young dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good . 
He was a gentleman , and he hated him for that , hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account , and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him . 
He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother 's nature , and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl 's happiness . 
Children begin by loving their parents ; as they grow older they judge them ; sometimes they forgive them . 
His mother ! 
He had something on his mind to ask of her , something that he had brooded on for many months of silence . 
A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre , a whispered sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at the stage-door , had set loose a train of horrible thoughts . 
He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face . 
His brows knit together into a wedge-like furrow , and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip . 
`` You are not listening to a word I am saying , Jim , '' cried Sibyl , `` and I am making the most delightful plans for your future . 
Do say something . '' 
`` What do you want me to say ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
that you will be a good boy and not forget us , '' she answered , smiling at him . 
He shrugged his shoulders . 
`` You are more likely to forget me than I am to forget you , Sibyl . '' 
She flushed . 
`` What do you mean , Jim ? '' 
she asked . 
`` You have a new friend , I hear . 
Who is he ? 
Why have you not told me about him ? 
He means you no good . '' 
`` Stop , Jim ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` You must not say anything against him . 
I love him . '' 
`` Why , you do n't even know his name , '' answered the lad . 
`` Who is he ? 
I have a right to know . '' 
`` He is called Prince Charming . 
Do n't you like the name . 
Oh ! 
you silly boy ! 
you should never forget it . 
If you only saw him , you would think him the most wonderful person in the world . 
Some day you will meet him -- when you come back from Australia . 
You will like him so much . 
Everybody likes him , and I ... love him . 
I wish you could come to the theatre to-night . 
He is going to be there , and I am to play Juliet . 
Oh ! 
how I shall play it ! 
Fancy , Jim , to be in love and play Juliet ! 
To have him sitting there ! 
To play for his delight ! 
I am afraid I may frighten the company , frighten or enthrall them . 
To be in love is to surpass one 's self . 
Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting ` genius ' to his loafers at the bar . 
He has preached me as a dogma ; to-night he will announce me as a revelation . 
I feel it . 
And it is all his , his only , Prince Charming , my wonderful lover , my god of graces . 
But I am poor beside him . 
Poor ? 
What does that matter ? 
