Mr. Fogg , on reaching shore , proceeded to find out at what hour the first train left for New York , and learned that this was at six o'clock p.m. ; he had , therefore , an entire day to spend in the Californian capital . 
Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars , he and Aouda entered it , while Passepartout mounted the box beside the driver , and they set out for the International Hotel . 
From his exalted position Passepartout observed with much curiosity the wide streets , the low , evenly ranged houses , the Anglo-Saxon Gothic churches , the great docks , the palatial wooden and brick warehouses , the numerous conveyances , omnibuses , horse-cars , and upon the side-walks , not only Americans and Europeans , but Chinese and Indians . 
Passepartout was surprised at all he saw . 
San Francisco was no longer the legendary city of 1849 -- a city of banditti , assassins , and incendiaries , who had flocked hither in crowds in pursuit of plunder ; a paradise of outlaws , where they gambled with gold-dust , a revolver in one hand and a bowie-knife in the other : it was now a great commercial emporium . 
The lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama of the streets and avenues , which cut each other at right-angles , and in the midst of which appeared pleasant , verdant squares , while beyond appeared the Chinese quarter , seemingly imported from the Celestial Empire in a toy-box . 
Sombreros and red shirts and plumed Indians were rarely to be seen ; but there were silk hats and black coats everywhere worn by a multitude of nervously active , gentlemanly-looking men . 
Some of the streets -- especially Montgomery Street , which is to San Francisco what Regent Street is to London , the Boulevard des Italiens to Paris , and Broadway to New York -- were lined with splendid and spacious stores , which exposed in their windows the products of the entire world . 
When Passepartout reached the International Hotel , it did not seem to him as if he had left England at all . 
The ground floor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar , a sort of restaurant freely open to all passers-by , who might partake of dried beef , oyster soup , biscuits , and cheese , without taking out their purses . 
