A real machine ; well , I do n't mind serving a machine . '' 
IN WHICH A CONVERSATION TAKES PLACE WHICH SEEMS LIKELY TO COST PHILEAS FOGG DEAR Phileas Fogg , having shut the door of his house at half-past eleven , and having put his right foot before his left five hundred and seventy-five times , and his left foot before his right five hundred and seventy-six times , reached the Reform Club , an imposing edifice in Pall Mall , which could not have cost less than three millions . 
He repaired at once to the dining-room , the nine windows of which open upon a tasteful garden , where the trees were already gilded with an autumn colouring ; and took his place at the habitual table , the cover of which had already been laid for him . 
His breakfast consisted of a side-dish , a broiled fish with Reading sauce , a scarlet slice of roast beef garnished with mushrooms , a rhubarb and gooseberry tart , and a morsel of Cheshire cheese , the whole being washed down with several cups of tea , for which the Reform is famous . 
He rose at thirteen minutes to one , and directed his steps towards the large hall , a sumptuous apartment adorned with lavishly-framed paintings . 
A flunkey handed him an uncut Times , which he proceeded to cut with a skill which betrayed familiarity with this delicate operation . 
The perusal of this paper absorbed Phileas Fogg until a quarter before four , whilst the Standard , his next task , occupied him till the dinner hour . 
Dinner passed as breakfast had done , and Mr. Fogg re-appeared in the reading-room and sat down to the Pall Mall at twenty minutes before six . 
Half an hour later several members of the Reform came in and drew up to the fireplace , where a coal fire was steadily burning . 
They were Mr. Fogg 's usual partners at whist : Andrew Stuart , an engineer ; John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin , bankers ; Thomas Flanagan , a brewer ; and Gauthier Ralph , one of the Directors of the Bank of England -- all rich and highly respectable personages , even in a club which comprises the princes of English trade and finance . 
