It might be thought that , in his anxiety , he would be constantly watching the changes of the wind , the disorderly raging of the billows -- every chance , in short , which might force the Mongolia to slacken her speed , and thus interrupt his journey . 
But , if he thought of these possibilities , he did not betray the fact by any outward sign . 
Always the same impassible member of the Reform Club , whom no incident could surprise , as unvarying as the ship 's chronometers , and seldom having the curiosity even to go upon the deck , he passed through the memorable scenes of the Red Sea with cold indifference ; did not care to recognise the historic towns and villages which , along its borders , raised their picturesque outlines against the sky ; and betrayed no fear of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf , which the old historians always spoke of with horror , and upon which the ancient navigators never ventured without propitiating the gods by ample sacrifices . 
How did this eccentric personage pass his time on the Mongolia ? 
He made his four hearty meals every day , regardless of the most persistent rolling and pitching on the part of the steamer ; and he played whist indefatigably , for he had found partners as enthusiastic in the game as himself . 
A tax-collector , on the way to his post at Goa ; the Rev. Decimus Smith , returning to his parish at Bombay ; and a brigadier-general of the English army , who was about to rejoin his brigade at Benares , made up the party , and , with Mr. Fogg , played whist by the hour together in absorbing silence . 
As for Passepartout , he , too , had escaped sea-sickness , and took his meals conscientiously in the forward cabin . 
He rather enjoyed the voyage , for he was well fed and well lodged , took a great interest in the scenes through which they were passing , and consoled himself with the delusion that his master 's whim would end at Bombay . 
He was pleased , on the day after leaving Suez , to find on deck the obliging person with whom he had walked and chatted on the quays . 
`` If I am not mistaken , '' said he , approaching this person , with his most amiable smile , `` you are the gentleman who so kindly volunteered to guide me at Suez ? '' 
