This railway does not run in a direct line across India . 
The distance between Bombay and Calcutta , as the bird flies , is only from one thousand to eleven hundred miles ; but the deflections of the road increase this distance by more than a third . 
The general route of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway is as follows : Leaving Bombay , it passes through Salcette , crossing to the continent opposite Tannah , goes over the chain of the Western Ghauts , runs thence north-east as far as Burhampoor , skirts the nearly independent territory of Bundelcund , ascends to Allahabad , turns thence eastwardly , meeting the Ganges at Benares , then departs from the river a little , and , descending south-eastward by Burdivan and the French town of Chandernagor , has its terminus at Calcutta . 
The passengers of the Mongolia went ashore at half-past four p.m. ; at exactly eight the train would start for Calcutta . 
Mr. Fogg , after bidding good-bye to his whist partners , left the steamer , gave his servant several errands to do , urged it upon him to be at the station promptly at eight , and , with his regular step , which beat to the second , like an astronomical clock , directed his steps to the passport office . 
As for the wonders of Bombay its famous city hall , its splendid library , its forts and docks , its bazaars , mosques , synagogues , its Armenian churches , and the noble pagoda on Malabar Hill , with its two polygonal towers -- he cared not a straw to see them . 
He would not deign to examine even the masterpieces of Elephanta , or the mysterious hypogea , concealed south-east from the docks , or those fine remains of Buddhist architecture , the Kanherian grottoes of the island of Salcette . 
Having transacted his business at the passport office , Phileas Fogg repaired quietly to the railway station , where he ordered dinner . 
Among the dishes served up to him , the landlord especially recommended a certain giblet of `` native rabbit , '' on which he prided himself . 
Mr. Fogg accordingly tasted the dish , but , despite its spiced sauce , found it far from palatable . 
