End of the trees , beginning of the roofs ; end of the grass , beginning of the pavements ; end of the furrows , beginning of the shops , end of the wheel-ruts , beginning of the passions ; end of the divine murmur , beginning of the human uproar ; hence an extraordinary interest . 
Hence , in these not very attractive places , indelibly stamped by the passing stroller with the epithet : melancholy , the apparently objectless promenades of the dreamer . 
He who writes these lines has long been a prowler about the barriers of Paris , and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs . 
That close-shaven turf , those pebbly paths , that chalk , those pools , those harsh monotonies of waste and fallow lands , the plants of early market-garden suddenly springing into sight in a bottom , that mixture of the savage and the citizen , those vast desert nooks where the garrison drums practise noisily , and produce a sort of lisping of battle , those hermits by day and cut-throats by night , that clumsy mill which turns in the wind , the hoisting-wheels of the quarries , the tea-gardens at the corners of the cemeteries ; the mysterious charm of great , sombre walls squarely intersecting immense , vague stretches of land inundated with sunshine and full of butterflies , -- all this attracted him . 
There is hardly any one on earth who is not acquainted with those singular spots , the Glaciere , the Cunette , the hideous wall of Grenelle all speckled with balls , Mont-Parnasse , the Fosse-aux-Loups , Aubiers on the bank of the Marne , Mont-Souris , the Tombe-Issoire , the Pierre-Plate de Chatillon , where there is an old , exhausted quarry which no longer serves any purpose except to raise mushrooms , and which is closed , on a level with the ground , by a trap-door of rotten planks . 
The campagna of Rome is one idea , the banlieue of Paris is another ; to behold nothing but fields , houses , or trees in what a stretch of country offers us , is to remain on the surface ; all aspects of things are thoughts of God . 
The spot where a plain effects its junction with a city is always stamped with a certain piercing melancholy . 
Nature and humanity both appeal to you at the same time there . 
Local originalities there make their appearance . 
Any one who , like ourselves , has wandered about in these solitudes contiguous to our faubourgs , which may be designated as the limbos of Paris , has seen here and there , in the most desert spot , at the most unexpected moment , behind a meagre hedge , or in the corner of a lugubrious wall , children grouped tumultuously , fetid , muddy , dusty , ragged , dishevelled , playing hide-and-seek , and crowned with corn-flowers . 
