All the four-footed furniture comported itself as though it had but three legs -- the whitewashed walls had for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup : -- Elle etonne a dix pas , elle epouvente a deux , Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux ; On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche Et qu'un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche . 
-LSB- 48 -RSB- -LSB- 48 -RSB- She astounds at ten paces , she frightens at two , a wart inhabits her hazardous nose ; you tremble every instant lest she should blow it at you , and lest , some fine day , her nose should tumble into her mouth . 
This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall . 
Mame Hucheloup , a good likeness , went and came from morning till night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity . 
Two serving-maids , named Matelote and Gibelotte , -LSB- 49 -RSB- and who had never been known by any other names , helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine , and the various broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls . 
Matelote , large , plump , redhaired , and noisy , the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup , was homelier than any mythological monster , be it what it may ; still , as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress , she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup . 
Gibelotte , tall , delicate , white with a lymphatic pallor , with circles round her eyes , and drooping lids , always languid and weary , afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude , the first up in the house and the last in bed , waited on every one , even the other maid , silently and gently , smiling through her fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile . 
-LSB- 49 -RSB- Matelote : a culinary preparation of various fishes . 
Gibelotte : stewed rabbits . 
Before entering the restaurant room , the visitor read on the door the following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac : -- Regale si tu peux et mange si tu l'oses . 
