He has no shirt on his body , no shoes on his feet , no roof over his head ; he is like the flies of heaven , who have none of these things . 
He is from seven to thirteen years of age , he lives in bands , roams the streets , lodges in the open air , wears an old pair of trousers of his father 's , which descend below his heels , an old hat of some other father , which descends below his ears , a single suspender of yellow listing ; he runs , lies in wait , rummages about , wastes time , blackens pipes , swears like a convict , haunts the wine-shop , knows thieves , calls gay women thou , talks slang , sings obscene songs , and has no evil in his heart . 
This is because he has in his heart a pearl , innocence ; and pearls are not to be dissolved in mud . 
So long as man is in his childhood , God wills that he shall be innocent . 
If one were to ask that enormous city : `` What is this ? '' 
she would reply : `` It is my little one . '' 
SOME OF HIS PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS The gamin -- the street Arab -- of Paris is the dwarf of the giant . 
Let us not exaggerate , this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt , but , in that case , he owns but one ; he sometimes has shoes , but then they have no soles ; he sometimes has a lodging , and he loves it , for he finds his mother there ; but he prefers the street , because there he finds liberty . 
He has his own games , his own bits of mischief , whose foundation consists of hatred for the bourgeois ; his peculiar metaphors : to be dead is to eat dandelions by the root ; his own occupations , calling hackney-coaches , letting down carriage-steps , establishing means of transit between the two sides of a street in heavy rains , which he calls making the bridge of arts , crying discourses pronounced by the authorities in favor of the French people , cleaning out the cracks in the pavement ; he has his own coinage , which is composed of all the little morsels of worked copper which are found on the public streets . 
This curious money , which receives the name of loques -- rags -- has an invariable and well-regulated currency in this little Bohemia of children . 
