The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well , in that provincial tongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar , and which was formerly employed by all advocates , at Paris as well as at Romorantin or at Montbrison , and which to-day , having become classic , is no longer spoken except by the official orators of magistracy , to whom it is suited on account of its grave sonorousness and its majestic stride ; a tongue in which a husband is called a consort , and a woman a spouse ; Paris , the centre of art and civilization ; the king , the monarch ; Monseigneur the Bishop , a sainted pontiff ; the district-attorney , the eloquent interpreter of public prosecution ; the arguments , the accents which we have just listened to ; the age of Louis XIV. , the grand age ; a theatre , the temple of Melpomene ; the reigning family , the august blood of our kings ; a concert , a musical solemnity ; the General Commandant of the province , the illustrious warrior , who , etc. ; the pupils in the seminary , these tender levities ; errors imputed to newspapers , the imposture which distills its venom through the columns of those organs ; etc. . 
The lawyer had , accordingly , begun with an explanation as to the theft of the apples , -- an awkward matter couched in fine style ; but Benigne Bossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in the midst of a funeral oration , and he extricated himself from the situation in stately fashion . 
The lawyer established the fact that the theft of the apples had not been circumstantially proved . 
His client , whom he , in his character of counsel , persisted in calling Champmathieu , had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that branch by any one . 
He had been taken with that branch -LRB- which the lawyer preferred to call a bough -RRB- in his possession ; but he said that he had found it broken off and lying on the ground , and had picked it up . 
Where was there any proof to the contrary ? 
No doubt that branch had been broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall , then thrown away by the alarmed marauder ; there was no doubt that there had been a thief in the case . 
But what proof was there that that thief had been Champmathieu ? 
One thing only . 
His character as an ex-convict . 
