No one in all that throng paid any attention to him ; all glances were directed towards a single point , a wooden bench placed against a small door , in the stretch of wall on the President 's left ; on this bench , illuminated by several candles , sat a man between two gendarmes . 
This man was the man . 
He did not seek him ; he saw him ; his eyes went thither naturally , as though they had known beforehand where that figure was . 
He thought he was looking at himself , grown old ; not absolutely the same in face , of course , but exactly similar in attitude and aspect , with his bristling hair , with that wild and uneasy eye , with that blouse , just as it was on the day when he entered D -- , full of hatred , concealing his soul in that hideous mass of frightful thoughts which he had spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison . 
He said to himself with a shudder , `` Good God ! 
shall I become like that again ? '' 
This creature seemed to be at least sixty ; there was something indescribably coarse , stupid , and frightened about him . 
At the sound made by the opening door , people had drawn aside to make way for him ; the President had turned his head , and , understanding that the personage who had just entered was the mayor of M. sur M. , he had bowed to him ; the attorney-general , who had seen M. Madeleine at M. sur M. , whither the duties of his office had called him more than once , recognized him and saluted him also : he had hardly perceived it ; he was the victim of a sort of hallucination ; he was watching . 
Judges , clerks , gendarmes , a throng of cruelly curious heads , all these he had already beheld once , in days gone by , twenty-seven years before ; he had encountered those fatal things once more ; there they were ; they moved ; they existed ; it was no longer an effort of his memory , a mirage of his thought ; they were real gendarmes and real judges , a real crowd , and real men of flesh and blood : it was all over ; he beheld the monstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him , with all that there is formidable in reality . 
All this was yawning before him . 
