This rough , squat , heavy , hard , austere , almost misshapen , but assuredly majestic monument , stamped with a sort of magnificent and savage gravity , has disappeared , and left to reign in peace , a sort of gigantic stove , ornamented with its pipe , which has replaced the sombre fortress with its nine towers , very much as the bourgeoisie replaces the feudal classes . 
It is quite natural that a stove should be the symbol of an epoch in which a pot contains power . 
This epoch will pass away , people have already begun to understand that , if there can be force in a boiler , there can be no force except in the brain ; in other words , that which leads and drags on the world , is not locomotives , but ideas . 
Harness locomotives to ideas , -- that is well done ; but do not mistake the horse for the rider . 
At all events , to return to the Place de la Bastille , the architect of this elephant succeeded in making a grand thing out of plaster ; the architect of the stove has succeeded in making a pretty thing out of bronze . 
This stove-pipe , which has been baptized by a sonorous name , and called the column of July , this monument of a revolution that miscarried , was still enveloped in 1832 , in an immense shirt of woodwork , which we regret , for our part , and by a vast plank enclosure , which completed the task of isolating the elephant . 
It was towards this corner of the place , dimly lighted by the reflection of a distant street lamp , that the gamin guided his two `` brats . '' 
The reader must permit us to interrupt ourselves here and to remind him that we are dealing with simple reality , and that twenty years ago , the tribunals were called upon to judge , under the charge of vagabondage , and mutilation of a public monument , a child who had been caught asleep in this very elephant of the Bastille . 
This fact noted , we proceed . 
On arriving in the vicinity of the colossus , Gavroche comprehended the effect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitely small , and said : -- `` Do n't be scared , infants . '' 
