He was harsh for a time towards the former , because , holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes , the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape . 
His correspondence with the other brother , the ex-prefect , a fine , worthy man who lived in retirement at Paris , Rue Cassette , remained more affectionate . 
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit , his hour of bitterness , his cloud . 
The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things . 
Certainly , such a man would have done well not to entertain any political opinions . 
Let there be no mistake as to our meaning : we are not confounding what is called `` political opinions '' with the grand aspiration for progress , with the sublime faith , patriotic , democratic , humane , which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous intellect . 
Without going deeply into questions which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book , we will simply say this : It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist , and if his glance had never been , for a single instant , turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly discernible , above the fictions and the hatreds of this world , above the stormy vicissitudes of human things , the beaming of those three pure radiances , truth , justice , and charity . 
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur Welcome , we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right and liberty , his proud opposition , his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon . 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling . 
We only love the fray so long as there is danger , and in any case , the combatants of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last . 
