He caught a glimpse of something immense , and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment , on the score of Bonaparte as about all the rest ; each day he saw more distinctly ; and he set about mounting , slowly , step by step , almost regretfully in the beginning , then with intoxication and as though attracted by an irresistible fascination , first the sombre steps , then the vaguely illuminated steps , at last the luminous and splendid steps of enthusiasm . 
One night , he was alone in his little chamber near the roof . 
His candle was burning ; he was reading , with his elbows resting on his table close to the open window . 
All sorts of reveries reached him from space , and mingled with his thoughts . 
What a spectacle is the night ! 
One hears dull sounds , without knowing whence they proceed ; one beholds Jupiter , which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth , glowing like a firebrand , the azure is black , the stars shine ; it is formidable . 
He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army , those heroic strophes penned on the field of battle ; there , at intervals , he beheld his father 's name , always the name of the Emperor ; the whole of that great Empire presented itself to him ; he felt a flood swelling and rising within him ; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close to him like a breath , and whispered in his ear ; he gradually got into a singular state ; he thought that he heard drums , cannon , trumpets , the measured tread of battalions , the dull and distant gallop of the cavalry ; from time to time , his eyes were raised heavenward , and gazed upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless depths of space , then they fell upon his book once more , and there they beheld other colossal things moving confusedly . 
His heart contracted within him . 
He was in a transport , trembling , panting . 
All at once , without himself knowing what was in him , and what impulse he was obeying , he sprang to his feet , stretched both arms out of the window , gazed intently into the gloom , the silence , the infinite darkness , the eternal immensity , and exclaimed : `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
