It anchored near the Arsenal ; it was fully equipped , and repairs were begun . 
The hull had received no damage on the starboard , but some of the planks had been unnailed here and there , according to custom , to permit of air entering the hold . 
One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident . 
The crew was busy bending the sails ; the topman , who had to take the upper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard , lost his balance ; he was seen to waver ; the multitude thronging the Arsenal quay uttered a cry ; the man 's head overbalanced his body ; the man fell around the yard , with his hands outstretched towards the abyss ; on his way he seized the footrope , first with one hand , then with the other , and remained hanging from it : the sea lay below him at a dizzy depth ; the shock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swinging motion ; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope , like a stone in a sling . 
It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance ; not one of the sailors , all fishermen of the coast , recently levied for the service , dared to attempt it . 
In the meantime , the unfortunate topman was losing his strength ; his anguish could not be discerned on his face , but his exhaustion was visible in every limb ; his arms were contracted in horrible twitchings ; every effort which he made to re-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope ; he did not shout , for fear of exhausting his strength . 
All were awaiting the minute when he should release his hold on the rope , and , from instant to instant , heads were turned aside that his fall might not be seen . 
There are moments when a bit of rope , a pole , the branch of a tree , is life itself , and it is a terrible thing to see a living being detach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit . 
All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility of a tiger-cat ; this man was dressed in red ; he was a convict ; he wore a green cap ; he was a life convict . 
On arriving on a level with the top , a gust of wind carried away his cap , and allowed a perfectly white head to be seen : he was not a young man . 
