A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had , in fact , at the very first instant , hastened to the officer of the watch , and , in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew , while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back , he had asked the officer 's permission to risk his life to save the topman ; at an affirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted to his ankle with one blow of a hammer , then he had caught up a rope , and had dashed into the rigging : no one noticed , at the instant , with what ease that chain had been broken ; it was only later on that the incident was recalled . 
In a twinkling he was on the yard ; he paused for a few seconds and appeared to be measuring it with his eye ; these seconds , during which the breeze swayed the topman at the extremity of a thread , seemed centuries to those who were looking on . 
At last , the convict raised his eyes to heaven and advanced a step : the crowd drew a long breath . 
He was seen to run out along the yard : on arriving at the point , he fastened the rope which he had brought to it , and allowed the other end to hang down , then he began to descend the rope , hand over hand , and then , -- and the anguish was indescribable , -- instead of one man suspended over the gulf , there were two . 
One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly , only here the spider brought life , not death . 
Ten thousand glances were fastened on this group ; not a cry , not a word ; the same tremor contracted every brow ; all mouths held their breath as though they feared to add the slightest puff to the wind which was swaying the two unfortunate men . 
In the meantime , the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a position near the sailor . 
It was high time ; one minute more , and the exhausted and despairing man would have allowed himself to fall into the abyss . 
The convict had moored him securely with the cord to which he clung with one hand , while he was working with the other . 
At last , he was seen to climb back on the yard , and to drag the sailor up after him ; he held him there a moment to allow him to recover his strength , then he grasped him in his arms and carried him , walking on the yard himself to the cap , and from there to the main-top , where he left him in the hands of his comrades . 
