Les Miserables VOLUME I. FANTINE . 
PREFACE So long as there shall exist , by virtue of law and custom , decrees of damnation pronounced by society , artificially creating hells amid the civilization of earth , and adding the element of human fate to divine destiny ; so long as the three great problems of the century -- the degradation of man through pauperism , the corruption of woman through hunger , the crippling of children through lack of light -- are unsolved ; so long as social asphyxia is possible in any part of the world ; -- in other words , and with a still wider significance , so long as ignorance and poverty exist on earth , books of the nature of Les Miserables can not fail to be of use . 
HAUTEVILLE HOUSE , 1862 . 
FANTINE M. MYRIEL In 1815 , M. Charles-Francois-Bienvenu Myriel was Bishop of D -- He was an old man of about seventy-five years of age ; he had occupied the see of D -- since 1806 . 
Although this detail has no connection whatever with the real substance of what we are about to relate , it will not be superfluous , if merely for the sake of exactness in all points , to mention here the various rumors and remarks which had been in circulation about him from the very moment when he arrived in the diocese . 
True or false , that which is said of men often occupies as important a place in their lives , and above all in their destinies , as that which they do . 
M. Myriel was the son of a councillor of the Parliament of Aix ; hence he belonged to the nobility of the bar . 
It was said that his father , destining him to be the heir of his own post , had married him at a very early age , eighteen or twenty , in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalent in parliamentary families . 
In spite of this marriage , however , it was said that Charles Myriel created a great deal of talk . 
He was well formed , though rather short in stature , elegant , graceful , intelligent ; the whole of the first portion of his life had been devoted to the world and to gallantry . 
