At times , that stomach of civilization digested badly , the cess-pool flowed back into the throat of the city , and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth . 
These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points ; they were warnings ; very badly accepted , however ; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire , and did not admit that the filth should return . 
Drive it out better . 
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the age of eighty . 
The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires , where stands the statue of Louis XIV. ; it entered the Rue Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer , the Rue Pierre-a-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie , the Rue Popincourt , through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert , the Rue de la Roquette , through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe ; it covered the drain of the Rue des Champs-Elysees to the height of thirty-five centimetres ; and , to the South , through the vent of the Seine , performing its functions in inverse sense , it penetrated the Rue Mazarine , the Rue de l'Echaude , and the Rue des Marais , where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres , a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had lived , respecting , in the seventeenth century , the poet more than the King . 
It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre , where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the water-spout , and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin , where it spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length . 
At the beginning of this century , the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious place . 
Mud can never enjoy a good fame ; but in this case its evil renown reached the verge of the terrible . 
Paris knew , in a confused way , that she had under her a terrible cavern . 
People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length , and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub . 
