Agamemnon , king of the heroes , flings to earth Elatos , born in the rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnois . '' 
In our old poems of exploits , Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler 's shoulder-stick of fire , and the latter defends himself by stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots . 
Our ancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon , armed , emblazoned and crested in war-like guise , on horseback and approaching each other , their battle-axes in hand , masked with iron , gloved with iron , booted with iron , the one caparisoned in ermine , the other draped in azure : Bretagne with his lion between the two horns of his crown , Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor . 
But , in order to be superb , it is not necessary to wear , like Yvon , the ducal morion , to have in the fist , like Esplandian , a living flame , or , like Phyles , father of Polydamas , to have brought back from Ephyra a good suit of mail , a present from the king of men , Euphetes ; it suffices to give one 's life for a conviction or a loyalty . 
This ingenuous little soldier , yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin , who prowls with his clasp-knife by his side , around the children 's nurses in the Luxembourg garden , this pale young student bent over a piece of anatomy or a book , a blond youth who shaves his beard with scissors , -- take both of them , breathe upon them with a breath of duty , place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blind alley Planche-Mibray , and let the one fight for his flag , and the other for his ideal , and let both of them imagine that they are fighting for their country ; the struggle will be colossal ; and the shadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grand epic field where humanity is striving , will equal the shadow cast by Megaryon , King of Lycia , tiger-filled , crushing in his embrace the immense body of Ajax , equal to the gods . 
FOOT TO FOOT When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive , except Enjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade , the centre , which had so long sustained Courfeyrac , Joly , Bossuet , Feuilly and Combeferre , gave way . 
The cannon , though it had not effected a practicable breach , had made a rather large hollow in the middle of the redoubt ; there , the summit of the wall had disappeared before the balls , and had crumbled away ; and the rubbish which had fallen , now inside , now outside , had , as it accumulated , formed two piles in the nature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier , one on the inside , the other on the outside . 
The exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the attack . 
A final assault was there attempted , and this assault succeeded . 
The mass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run , came up with irresistible force , and the serried front of battle of the attacking column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the battlements . 
