Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop 's bedchamber . 
A glazed door opened on the garden ; opposite this was the bed , -- a hospital bed of iron , with a canopy of green serge ; in the shadow of the bed , behind a curtain , were the utensils of the toilet , which still betrayed the elegant habits of the man of the world : there were two doors , one near the chimney , opening into the oratory ; the other near the bookcase , opening into the dining-room . 
The bookcase was a large cupboard with glass doors filled with books ; the chimney was of wood painted to represent marble , and habitually without fire . 
In the chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron , ornamented above with two garlanded vases , and flutings which had formerly been silvered with silver leaf , which was a sort of episcopal luxury ; above the chimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper , with the silver worn off , fixed on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden frame from which the gilding had fallen ; near the glass door a large table with an inkstand , loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes ; before the table an arm-chair of straw ; in front of the bed a prie-Dieu , borrowed from the oratory . 
Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side of the bed . 
Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth at the side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented , one the Abbe of Chaliot , bishop of Saint Claude ; the other , the Abbe Tourteau , vicar-general of Agde , abbe of Grand-Champ , order of Citeaux , diocese of Chartres . 
When the Bishop succeeded to this apartment , after the hospital patients , he had found these portraits there , and had left them . 
They were priests , and probably donors -- two reasons for respecting them . 
All that he knew about these two persons was , that they had been appointed by the king , the one to his bishopric , the other to his benefice , on the same day , the 27th of April , 1785 . 
Madame Magloire having taken the pictures down to dust , the Bishop had discovered these particulars written in whitish ink on a little square of paper , yellowed by time , and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbe of Grand-Champ with four wafers . 
