Magnificent ! '' 
Between nine o'clock and half-past ten the whole army , incredible as it may appear , had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines , forming , to repeat the Emperor 's expression , `` the figure of six V 's . '' 
A few moments after the formation of the battle-array , in the midst of that profound silence , like that which heralds the beginning of a storm , which precedes engagements , the Emperor tapped Haxo on the shoulder , as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders , detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon , Reille , and Lobau , and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean , which was situated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads , and said to him , `` There are four and twenty handsome maids , General . '' 
Sure of the issue , he encouraged with a smile , as they passed before him , the company of sappers of the first corps , which he had appointed to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried . 
All this serenity had been traversed by but a single word of haughty pity ; perceiving on his left , at a spot where there now stands a large tomb , those admirable Scotch Grays , with their superb horses , massing themselves , he said , `` It is a pity . '' 
Then he mounted his horse , advanced beyond Rossomme , and selected for his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of the road from Genappe to Brussels , which was his second station during the battle . 
The third station , the one adopted at seven o'clock in the evening , between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte , is formidable ; it is a rather elevated knoll , which still exists , and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the plain . 
Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of the road , up to Napoleon himself . 
As at Brienne , he had over his head the shriek of the bullets and of the heavy artillery . 
Mouldy cannon-balls , old sword-blades , and shapeless projectiles , eaten up with rust , were picked up at the spot where his horse ' feet stood . 
