This man , as the reader already knows , was a vagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden with ripe apples , broken in the orchard of a neighbor , called the Pierron orchard . 
Who was this man ? 
an examination had been made ; witnesses had been heard , and they were unanimous ; light had abounded throughout the entire debate ; the accusation said : `` We have in our grasp not only a marauder , a stealer of fruit ; we have here , in our hands , a bandit , an old offender who has broken his ban , an ex-convict , a miscreant of the most dangerous description , a malefactor named Jean Valjean , whom justice has long been in search of , and who , eight years ago , on emerging from the galleys at Toulon , committed a highway robbery , accompanied by violence , on the person of a child , a Savoyard named Little Gervais ; a crime provided for by article 383 of the Penal Code , the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter , when his identity shall have been judicially established . 
He has just committed a fresh theft ; it is a case of a second offence ; condemn him for the fresh deed ; later on he will be judged for the old crime . '' 
In the face of this accusation , in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses , the accused appeared to be astonished more than anything else ; he made signs and gestures which were meant to convey No , or else he stared at the ceiling : he spoke with difficulty , replied with embarrassment , but his whole person , from head to foot , was a denial ; he was an idiot in the presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him , and like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fast upon him ; nevertheless , it was a question of the most menacing future for him ; the likeness increased every moment , and the entire crowd surveyed , with more anxiety than he did himself , that sentence freighted with calamity , which descended ever closer over his head ; there was even a glimpse of a possibility afforded ; besides the galleys , a possible death penalty , in case his identity were established , and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter in condemnation . 
Who was this man ? 
what was the nature of his apathy ? 
was it imbecility or craft ? 
Did he understand too well , or did he not understand at all ? 
these were questions which divided the crowd , and seemed to divide the jury ; there was something both terrible and puzzling in this case : the drama was not only melancholy ; it was also obscure . 
