The cavities of night , things grown haggard , taciturn profiles which vanish when one advances , obscure dishevelments , irritated tufts , livid pools , the lugubrious reflected in the funereal , the sepulchral immensity of silence , unknown but possible beings , bendings of mysterious branches , alarming torsos of trees , long handfuls of quivering plants , -- against all this one has no protection . 
There is no hardihood which does not shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish . 
One is conscious of something hideous , as though one 's soul were becoming amalgamated with the darkness . 
This penetration of the shadows is indescribably sinister in the case of a child . 
Forests are apocalypses , and the beating of the wings of a tiny soul produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault . 
Without understanding her sensations , Cosette was conscious that she was seized upon by that black enormity of nature ; it was no longer terror alone which was gaining possession of her ; it was something more terrible even than terror ; she shivered . 
There are no words to express the strangeness of that shiver which chilled her to the very bottom of her heart ; her eye grew wild ; she thought she felt that she should not be able to refrain from returning there at the same hour on the morrow . 
Then , by a sort of instinct , she began to count aloud , one , two , three , four , and so on up to ten , in order to escape from that singular state which she did not understand , but which terrified her , and , when she had finished , she began again ; this restored her to a true perception of the things about her . 
Her hands , which she had wet in drawing the water , felt cold ; she rose ; her terror , a natural and unconquerable terror , had returned : she had but one thought now , -- to flee at full speed through the forest , across the fields to the houses , to the windows , to the lighted candles . 
Her glance fell upon the water which stood before her ; such was the fright which the Thenardier inspired in her , that she dared not flee without that bucket of water : she seized the handle with both hands ; she could hardly lift the pail . 
