Precisely at that double number 50-52 with which the reader is acquainted -- at the Gorbeau hovel . 
At that epoch , the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternally decorated with the placard : `` Chambers to let , '' chanced to be , a rare thing , inhabited by numerous individuals who , however , as is always the case in Paris , had no connection with each other . 
All belonged to that indigent class which begins to separate from the lowest of petty bourgeoisie in straitened circumstances , and which extends from misery to misery into the lowest depths of society down to those two beings in whom all the material things of civilization end , the sewer-man who sweeps up the mud , and the ragpicker who collects scraps . 
The `` principal lodger '' of Jean Valjean 's day was dead and had been replaced by another exactly like her . 
I know not what philosopher has said : `` Old women are never lacking . '' 
This new old woman was named Madame Bourgon , and had nothing remarkable about her life except a dynasty of three paroquets , who had reigned in succession over her soul . 
The most miserable of those who inhabited the hovel were a family of four persons , consisting of father , mother , and two daughters , already well grown , all four of whom were lodged in the same attic , one of the cells which we have already mentioned . 
At first sight , this family presented no very special feature except its extreme destitution ; the father , when he hired the chamber , had stated that his name was Jondrette . 
Some time after his moving in , which had borne a singular resemblance to the entrance of nothing at all , to borrow the memorable expression of the principal tenant , this Jondrette had said to the woman , who , like her predecessor , was at the same time portress and stair-sweeper : `` Mother So-and-So , if any one should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian , or even a Spaniard , perchance , it is I. '' This family was that of the merry barefoot boy . 
He arrived there and found distress , and , what is still sadder , no smile ; a cold hearth and cold hearts . 
