He would gladly have said : Hombre , like the Spanish . 
He read everything , went to the theatres , attended the courses of public lecturers , learned the polarization of light from Arago , grew enthusiastic over a lesson in which Geoffrey Sainte-Hilaire explained the double function of the external carotid artery , and the internal , the one which makes the face , and the one which makes the brain ; he kept up with what was going on , followed science step by step , compared Saint-Simon with Fourier , deciphered hieroglyphics , broke the pebble which he found and reasoned on geology , drew from memory a silkworm moth , pointed out the faulty French in the Dictionary of the Academy , studied Puysegur and Deleuze , affirmed nothing , not even miracles ; denied nothing , not even ghosts ; turned over the files of the Moniteur , reflected . 
He declared that the future lies in the hand of the schoolmaster , and busied himself with educational questions . 
He desired that society should labor without relaxation at the elevation of the moral and intellectual level , at coining science , at putting ideas into circulation , at increasing the mind in youthful persons , and he feared lest the present poverty of method , the paltriness from a literary point of view confined to two or three centuries called classic , the tyrannical dogmatism of official pedants , scholastic prejudices and routines should end by converting our colleges into artificial oyster beds . 
He was learned , a purist , exact , a graduate of the Polytechnic , a close student , and at the same time , thoughtful `` even to chimaeras , '' so his friends said . 
He believed in all dreams , railroads , the suppression of suffering in chirurgical operations , the fixing of images in the dark chamber , the electric telegraph , the steering of balloons . 
Moreover , he was not much alarmed by the citadels erected against the human mind in every direction , by superstition , despotism , and prejudice . 
He was one of those who think that science will eventually turn the position . 
Enjolras was a chief , Combeferre was a guide . 
One would have liked to fight under the one and to march behind the other . 
