Beginning with this epoch , of which we shall shortly speak , the work was usefully and energetically resumed and prosecuted ; Napoleon built -- the figures are curious -- four thousand eight hundred and four metres ; Louis XVIII. , five thousand seven hundred and nine ; Charles X. , ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six ; Louis-Philippe , eighty-nine thousand and twenty ; the Republic of 1848 , twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one ; the present government , seventy thousand five hundred ; in all , at the present time , two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres ; sixty leagues of sewers ; the enormous entrails of Paris . 
An obscure ramification ever at work ; a construction which is immense and ignored . 
As the reader sees , the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day more than ten times what it was at the beginning of the century . 
It is difficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the efforts which have been required to bring this cess-pool to the point of relative perfection in which it now is . 
It was with great difficulty that the ancient monarchical provostship and , during the last ten years of the eighteenth century , the revolutionary mayoralty , had succeeded in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 1806 . 
All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation , some peculiar to the soil , others inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious population of Paris . 
Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to the pick , the hoe , the bore , and to human manipulation . 
There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than the geological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historical formation called Paris ; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begun and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium , subterranean resistances abound . 
There are liquid clays , springs , hard rocks , and those soft and deep quagmires which special science calls moutardes . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- The pick advances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with very slender threads of clay , and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells , the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans . 
