On the first encounter , and to one who saw him for the first time , he was nothing , in fact , but a fine man . 
But if one remained near him for a few hours , and beheld him in the least degree pensive , the fine man became gradually transfigured , and took on some imposing quality , I know not what ; his broad and serious brow , rendered august by his white locks , became august also by virtue of meditation ; majesty radiated from his goodness , though his goodness ceased not to be radiant ; one experienced something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling angel slowly unfold his wings , without ceasing to smile . 
Respect , an unutterable respect , penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart , and one felt that one had before him one of those strong , thoroughly tried , and indulgent souls where thought is so grand that it can no longer be anything but gentle . 
As we have seen , prayer , the celebration of the offices of religion , alms-giving , the consolation of the afflicted , the cultivation of a bit of land , fraternity , frugality , hospitality , renunciation , confidence , study , work , filled every day of his life . 
Filled is exactly the word ; certainly the Bishop 's day was quite full to the brim , of good words and good deeds . 
Nevertheless , it was not complete if cold or rainy weather prevented his passing an hour or two in his garden before going to bed , and after the two women had retired . 
It seemed to be a sort of rite with him , to prepare himself for slumber by meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens . 
Sometimes , if the two old women were not asleep , they heard him pacing slowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night . 
He was there alone , communing with himself , peaceful , adoring , comparing the serenity of his heart with the serenity of the ether , moved amid the darkness by the visible splendor of the constellations and the invisible splendor of God , opening his heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown . 
At such moments , while he offered his heart at the hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume , illuminated like a lamp amid the starry night , as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst of the universal radiance of creation , he could not have told himself , probably , what was passing in his spirit ; he felt something take its flight from him , and something descend into him . 
