In the evening , a dreamy vapor exhaled from the garden and enveloped it ; a shroud of mist , a calm and celestial sadness covered it ; the intoxicating perfume of the honeysuckles and convolvulus poured out from every part of it , like an exquisite and subtle poison ; the last appeals of the woodpeckers and the wagtails were audible as they dozed among the branches ; one felt the sacred intimacy of the birds and the trees ; by day the wings rejoice the leaves , by night the leaves protect the wings . 
-LSB- 34 -RSB- From April 19 to May 20 . 
In winter the thicket was black , dripping , bristling , shivering , and allowed some glimpse of the house . 
Instead of flowers on the branches and dew in the flowers , the long silvery tracks of the snails were visible on the cold , thick carpet of yellow leaves ; but in any fashion , under any aspect , at all seasons , spring , winter , summer , autumn , this tiny enclosure breathed forth melancholy , contemplation , solitude , liberty , the absence of man , the presence of God ; and the rusty old gate had the air of saying : `` This garden belongs to me . '' 
It was of no avail that the pavements of Paris were there on every side , the classic and splendid hotels of the Rue de Varennes a couple of paces away , the dome of the Invalides close at hand , the Chamber of Deputies not far off ; the carriages of the Rue de Bourgogne and of the Rue Saint-Dominique rumbled luxuriously , in vain , in the vicinity , in vain did the yellow , brown , white , and red omnibuses cross each other 's course at the neighboring cross-roads ; the Rue Plumet was the desert ; and the death of the former proprietors , the revolution which had passed over it , the crumbling away of ancient fortunes , absence , forgetfulness , forty years of abandonment and widowhood , had sufficed to restore to this privileged spot ferns , mulleins , hemlock , yarrow , tall weeds , great crimped plants , with large leaves of pale green cloth , lizards , beetles , uneasy and rapid insects ; to cause to spring forth from the depths of the earth and to reappear between those four walls a certain indescribable and savage grandeur ; and for nature , which disconcerts the petty arrangements of man , and which sheds herself always thoroughly where she diffuses herself at all , in the ant as well as in the eagle , to blossom out in a petty little Parisian garden with as much rude force and majesty as in a virgin forest of the New World . 
Nothing is small , in fact ; any one who is subject to the profound and penetrating influence of nature knows this . 
Although no absolute satisfaction is given to philosophy , either to circumscribe the cause or to limit the effect , the contemplator falls into those unfathomable ecstasies caused by these decompositions of force terminating in unity . 
Everything toils at everything . 
Algebra is applied to the clouds ; the radiation of the star profits the rose ; no thinker would venture to affirm that the perfume of the hawthorn is useless to the constellations . 
Who , then , can calculate the course of a molecule ? 
