That , in the first place , it is very rare for any one to die of hunger , literally ; and next , that , fortunately or unfortunately , man is so constituted that he can suffer long and much , both morally and physically , without dying ; that it is therefore necessary to have patience ; that that would even have been better for those poor little children ; that it had been an act of madness for him , a miserable , unfortunate wretch , to take society at large violently by the collar , and to imagine that one can escape from misery through theft ; that that is in any case a poor door through which to escape from misery through which infamy enters ; in short , that he was in the wrong . 
Then he asked himself -- Whether he had been the only one in fault in his fatal history . 
Whether it was not a serious thing , that he , a laborer , out of work , that he , an industrious man , should have lacked bread . 
And whether , the fault once committed and confessed , the chastisement had not been ferocious and disproportioned . 
Whether there had not been more abuse on the part of the law , in respect to the penalty , than there had been on the part of the culprit in respect to his fault . 
Whether there had not been an excess of weights in one balance of the scale , in the one which contains expiation . 
Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not equivalent to the annihilation of the crime , and did not result in reversing the situation , of replacing the fault of the delinquent by the fault of the repression , of converting the guilty man into the victim , and the debtor into the creditor , and of ranging the law definitely on the side of the man who had violated it . 
Whether this penalty , complicated by successive aggravations for attempts at escape , had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage perpetrated by the stronger upon the feebler , a crime of society against the individual , a crime which was being committed afresh every day , a crime which had lasted nineteen years . 
He asked himself whether human society could have the right to force its members to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack of foresight , and in the other case for its pitiless foresight ; and to seize a poor man forever between a defect and an excess , a default of work and an excess of punishment . 
Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those of its members who were the least well endowed in the division of goods made by chance , and consequently the most deserving of consideration . 
