Bulow had not moved , in fact . 
His vanguard was very feeble , and could accomplish nothing . 
He was obliged to wait for the body of the army corps , and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before entering into line ; but at five o'clock , perceiving Wellington 's peril , Blucher ordered Bulow to attack , and uttered these remarkable words : `` We must give air to the English army . '' 
A little later , the divisions of Losthin , Hiller , Hacke , and Ryssel deployed before Lobau 's corps , the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia debouched from the forest of Paris , Plancenoit was in flames , and the Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in reserve behind Napoleon . 
THE GUARD Every one knows the rest , -- the irruption of a third army ; the battle broken to pieces ; eighty-six months of fire thundering simultaneously ; Pirch the first coming up with Bulow ; Zieten 's cavalry led by Blucher in person , the French driven back ; Marcognet swept from the plateau of Ohain ; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte ; Donzelot and Quiot retreating ; Lobau caught on the flank ; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall ; the whole English line resuming the offensive and thrust forward ; the gigantic breach made in the French army ; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each other ; the extermination ; disaster in front ; disaster on the flank ; the Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all things . 
Conscious that they were about to die , they shouted , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in acclamations . 
The sky had been overcast all day long . 
All of a sudden , at that very moment , -- it was eight o'clock in the evening -- the clouds on the horizon parted , and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to pass through , athwart the elms on the Nivelles road . 
They had seen it rise at Austerlitz . 
