They were ultra . 
To be ultra ; this word , although what it represents may not have disappeared , has no longer any meaning at the present day . 
Let us explain it . 
To be ultra is to go beyond . 
It is to attack the sceptre in the name of the throne , and the mitre in the name of the attar ; it is to ill-treat the thing which one is dragging , it is to kick over the traces ; it is to cavil at the fagot on the score of the amount of cooking received by heretics ; it is to reproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry ; it is to insult through excess of respect ; it is to discover that the Pope is not sufficiently papish , that the King is not sufficiently royal , and that the night has too much light ; it is to be discontented with alabaster , with snow , with the swan and the lily in the name of whiteness ; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of becoming their enemy ; it is to be so strongly for , as to be against . 
The ultra spirit especially characterizes the first phase of the Restoration . 
Nothing in history resembles that quarter of an hour which begins in 1814 and terminates about 1820 , with the advent of M. de Villele , the practical man of the Right . 
These six years were an extraordinary moment ; at one and the same time brilliant and gloomy , smiling and sombre , illuminated as by the radiance of dawn and entirely covered , at the same time , with the shadows of the great catastrophes which still filled the horizon and were slowly sinking into the past . 
There existed in that light and that shadow , a complete little new and old world , comic and sad , juvenile and senile , which was rubbing its eyes ; nothing resembles an awakening like a return ; a group which regarded France with ill-temper , and which France regarded with irony ; good old owls of marquises by the streetful , who had returned , and of ghosts , the `` former '' subjects of amazement at everything , brave and noble gentlemen who smiled at being in France but wept also , delighted to behold their country once more , in despair at not finding their monarchy ; the nobility of the Crusades treating the nobility of the Empire , that is to say , the nobility of the sword , with scorn ; historic races who had lost the sense of history ; the sons of the companions of Charlemagne disdaining the companions of Napoleon . 
The swords , as we have just remarked , returned the insult ; the sword of Fontenoy was laughable and nothing but a scrap of rusty iron ; the sword of Marengo was odious and was only a sabre . 
