Her person seemed made of a shadow ; there was hardly sufficient body to provide for sex ; a little matter enclosing a light ; large eyes forever drooping ; -- a mere pretext for a soul 's remaining on the earth . 
Madame Magloire was a little , fat , white old woman , corpulent and bustling ; always out of breath , -- in the first place , because of her activity , and in the next , because of her asthma . 
On his arrival , M. Myriel was installed in the episcopal palace with the honors required by the Imperial decrees , which class a bishop immediately after a major-general . 
The mayor and the president paid the first call on him , and he , in turn , paid the first call on the general and the prefect . 
The installation over , the town waited to see its bishop at work . 
M. MYRIEL BECOMES M. WELCOME The episcopal palace of D -- adjoins the hospital . 
The episcopal palace was a huge and beautiful house , built of stone at the beginning of the last century by M. Henri Puget , Doctor of Theology of the Faculty of Paris , Abbe of Simore , who had been Bishop of D -- in 1712 . 
This palace was a genuine seignorial residence . 
Everything about it had a grand air , -- the apartments of the Bishop , the drawing-rooms , the chambers , the principal courtyard , which was very large , with walks encircling it under arcades in the old Florentine fashion , and gardens planted with magnificent trees . 
In the dining-room , a long and superb gallery which was situated on the ground-floor and opened on the gardens , M. Henri Puget had entertained in state , on July 29 , 1714 , My Lords Charles Brulart de Genlis , archbishop ; Prince d'Embrun ; Antoine de Mesgrigny , the capuchin , Bishop of Grasse ; Philippe de Vendome , Grand Prior of France , Abbe of Saint Honore de Lerins ; Francois de Berton de Crillon , bishop , Baron de Vence ; Cesar de Sabran de Forcalquier , bishop , Seignor of Glandeve ; and Jean Soanen , Priest of the Oratory , preacher in ordinary to the king , bishop , Seignor of Senez . 
