Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably exact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epoch near the Pointe Saint-Eustache , at the northeast angle of the Halles of Paris , where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau , have only to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and the Halles with its base , and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue de la Grande-Truanderie , and the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and whose transverse bar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The old Rue Mondetour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked angles . 
So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to form , on a space three fathoms square , between the Halles and the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand , and between the Rue du Cygne and the Rue des Precheurs on the other , seven islands of houses , oddly cut up , of varying sizes , placed crosswise and hap-hazard , and barely separated , like the blocks of stone in a dock , by narrow crannies . 
We say narrow crannies , and we can give no more just idea of those dark , contracted , many-angled alleys , lined with eight-story buildings . 
These buildings were so decrepit that , in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie , the fronts were shored up with beams running from one house to another . 
The street was narrow and the gutter broad , the pedestrian there walked on a pavement that was always wet , skirting little stalls resembling cellars , big posts encircled with iron hoops , excessive heaps of refuse , and gates armed with enormous , century-old gratings . 
The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that . 
The name of Mondetour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of that whole set of streets . 
A little further on , they are found still better expressed by the Rue Pirouette , which ran into the Rue Mondetour . 
The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue de la Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had entered an elongated funnel . 
