Of all this movement , Jean Valjean perceived nothing , except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenly wheeled round . 
Before taking his departure , the Sergeant , in order to acquit his policeman 's conscience , discharged his gun in the direction of Jean Valjean . 
The detonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt , like the rumbling of that titanic entrail . 
A bit of plaster which fell into the stream and splashed up the water a few paces away from Jean Valjean , warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head . 
Slow and measured steps resounded for some time on the timber work , gradually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance ; the group of black forms vanished , a glimmer of light oscillated and floated , communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter , then disappeared ; the silence became profound once more , the obscurity became complete , blindness and deafness resumed possession of the shadows ; and Jean Valjean , not daring to stir as yet , remained for a long time leaning with his back against the wall , with straining ears , and dilated pupils , watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol . 
THE `` SPUN '' MAN This justice must be rendered to the police of that period , that even in the most serious public junctures , it imperturbably fulfilled its duties connected with the sewers and surveillance . 
A revolt was , in its eyes , no pretext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their own mouths , and for neglecting society for the reason that the government was in peril . 
The ordinary service was performed correctly in company with the extraordinary service , and was not troubled by the latter . 
In the midst of an incalculable political event already begun , under the pressure of a possible revolution , a police agent , `` spun '' a thief without allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection and barricades . 
It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoon of the 6th of June on the banks of the Seine , on the slope of the right shore , a little beyond the Pont des Invalides . 
