Thus he shut himself up , he lived there , he was absolutely satisfied with it , leaving on one side the prodigious questions which attract and terrify , the fathomless perspectives of abstraction , the precipices of metaphysics -- all those profundities which converge , for the apostle in God , for the atheist in nothingness ; destiny , good and evil , the way of being against being , the conscience of man , the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal , the transformation in death , the recapitulation of existences which the tomb contains , the incomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent I , the essence , the substance , the Nile , and the Ens , the soul , nature , liberty , necessity ; perpendicular problems , sinister obscurities , where lean the gigantic archangels of the human mind ; formidable abysses , which Lucretius , Manou , Saint Paul , Dante , contemplate with eyes flashing lightning , which seems by its steady gaze on the infinite to cause stars to blaze forth there . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior of mysterious questions without scrutinizing them , and without troubling his own mind with them , and who cherished in his own soul a grave respect for darkness . 
THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING Early in the month of October , 1815 , about an hour before sunset , a man who was travelling on foot entered the little town of D -- The few inhabitants who were at their windows or on their thresholds at the moment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness . 
It was difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance . 
He was a man of medium stature , thickset and robust , in the prime of life . 
He might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old . 
A cap with a drooping leather visor partly concealed his face , burned and tanned by sun and wind , and dripping with perspiration . 
His shirt of coarse yellow linen , fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor , permitted a view of his hairy breast : he had a cravat twisted into a string ; trousers of blue drilling , worn and threadbare , white on one knee and torn on the other ; an old gray , tattered blouse , patched on one of the elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine ; a tightly packed soldier knapsack , well buckled and perfectly new , on his back ; an enormous , knotty stick in his hand ; iron-shod shoes on his stockingless feet ; a shaved head and a long beard . 
The sweat , the heat , the journey on foot , the dust , added I know not what sordid quality to this dilapidated whole . 
His hair was closely cut , yet bristling , for it had begun to grow a little , and did not seem to have been cut for some time . 
