The king had expressed a wish not to walk in the park until after cards in the evening . 
In the interval between supper and the promenade , cards and dice were introduced . 
The king won a thousand pistoles , and , having won them , put them in his pocket , and then rose , saying , `` And now , gentlemen , to the park . '' 
He found the ladies of the court were already there . 
The king , we have before observed , had won a thousand pistoles , and had put them in his pocket ; but M. Fouquet had somehow contrived to lose ten thousand , so that among the courtiers there was still left a hundred and ninety thousand francs ' profit to divide , a circumstance which made the countenances of the courtiers and the officers of the king 's household the most joyous countenances in the world . 
It was not the same , however , with the king 's face ; for , notwithstanding his success at play , to which he was by no means insensible , there still remained a slight shade of dissatisfaction . 
Colbert was waiting for or upon him at the corner of one of the avenues ; he was most probably waiting there in consequence of a rendezvous which had been given him by the king , as Louis XIV. , who had avoided him , or who had seemed to avoid him , suddenly made him a sign , and they then struck into the depths of the park together . 
But La Valliere , too , had observed the king 's gloomy aspect and kindling glances ; she had remarked this - and as nothing which lay hidden or smoldering in his heart was hidden from the gaze of her affection , she understood that this repressed wrath menaced some one ; she prepared to withstand the current of his vengeance , and intercede like an angel of mercy . 
Overcome by sadness , nervously agitated , deeply distressed at having been so long separated from her lover , disturbed at the sight of the emotion she had divined , she accordingly presented herself to the king with an embarrassed aspect , which in his then disposition of mind the king interpreted unfavorably . 
Then , as they were alone - nearly alone , inasmuch as Colbert , as soon as he perceived the young girl approaching , had stopped and drawn back a dozen paces - the king advanced towards La Valliere and took her by the hand . 
