If the Chateau de Vaux possessed a single fault with which it could be reproached , it was its grand , pretentious character . 
It is even at the present day proverbial to calculate the number of acres of roofing , the restoration of which would , in our age , be the ruin of fortunes cramped and narrowed as the epoch itself . 
Vaux-le-Vicomte , when its magnificent gates , supported by caryatides , have been passed through , has the principal front of the main building opening upon a vast , so-called , court of honor , inclosed by deep ditches , bordered by a magnificent stone balustrade . 
Nothing could be more noble in appearance than the central forecourt raised upon the flight of steps , like a king upon his throne , having around it four pavilions at the angles , the immense Ionic columns of which rose majestically to the whole height of the building . 
The friezes ornamented with arabesques , and the pediments which crowned the pilasters , conferred richness and grace on every part of the building , while the domes which surmounted the whole added proportion and majesty . 
This mansion , built by a subject , bore a far greater resemblance to those royal residences which Wolsey fancied he was called upon to construct , in order to present them to his master form the fear of rendering him jealous . 
But if magnificence and splendor were displayed in any one particular part of this palace more than another , - if anything could be preferred to the wonderful arrangement of the interior , to the sumptuousness of the gilding , and to the profusion of the paintings and statues , it would be the park and gardens of Vaux . 
The jets d'eau , which were regarded as wonderful in 1653 , are still so , even at the present time ; the cascades awakened the admiration of kings and princes ; and as for the famous grotto , the theme of so many poetical effusions , the residence of that illustrious nymph of Vaux , whom Pelisson made converse with La Fontaine , we must be spared the description of all its beauties . 
We will do as Despreaux did , - we will enter the park , the trees of which are of eight years ' growth only - that is to say , in their present position - and whose summits even yet , as they proudly tower aloft , blushingly unfold their leaves to the earliest rays of the rising sun . 
Lenotre had hastened the pleasure of the Maecenas of his period ; all the nursery - grounds had furnished trees whose growth had been accelerated by careful culture and the richest plant-food . 
