`` Let us inspect the boat , '' said Aramis , `` and satisfy ourselves at once what it will hold . '' 
`` Do not go too near with the light , '' said the patron Yves ; `` for as you desired me , monseigneur , I have placed under the bench of the poop , in the coffer you know of , the barrel of powder , and the musket-charges that you sent me from the fort . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Aramis ; and , taking the lantern himself , he examined minutely all parts of the canoe , with the precautions of a man who is neither timid nor ignorant in the face of danger . 
The canoe was long , light , drawing little water , thin of keel ; in short , one of those that have always been so aptly built at Belle-Isle ; a little high in its sides , solid upon the water , very manageable , furnished with planks which , in uncertain weather , formed a sort of deck over which the waves might glide , so as to protect the rowers . 
In two well-closed coffers , placed beneath the benches of the prow and the poop , Aramis found bread , biscuit , dried fruits , a quarter of bacon , a good provision of water in leathern bottles ; the whole forming rations sufficient for people who did not mean to quit the coast , and would be able to revictual , if necessity commanded . 
The arms , eight muskets , and as many horse-pistols , were in good condition , and all loaded . 
There were additional oars , in case of accident , and that little sail called trinquet , which assists the speed of the canoe at the same time the boatmen row , and is so useful when the breeze is slack . 
When Aramis had seen to all these things , and appeared satisfied with the result of his inspection , `` Let us consult Porthos , '' said he , `` to know if we must endeavor to get the boat out by the unknown extremity of the grotto , following the descent and the shade of the cavern , or whether it be better , in the open air , to make it slide upon its rollers through the bushes , leveling the road of the little beach , which is but twenty feet high , and gives , at high tide , three or four fathoms of good water upon a sound bottom . '' 
`` It must be as you please , monseigneur , '' replied the skipper Yves , respectfully ; `` but I do n't believe that by the slope of the cavern , and in the dark in which we shall be obliged to maneuver our boat , the road will be so convenient as the open air . 
I know the beach well , and can certify that it is as smooth as a grass-plot in a garden ; the interior of the grotto , on the contrary , is rough ; without reckoning , monseigneur , that at its extremity we shall come to the trench which leads into the sea , and perhaps the canoe will not pass down it . '' 
