The young queen , kind-hearted by nature and curious by disposition , praised Fouquet , ate with an exceedingly good appetite , and asked the names of the strange fruits as they were placed upon the table . 
Fouquet replied that he was not aware of their names . 
The fruits came from his own stores ; he had often cultivated them himself , having an intimate acquaintance with the cultivation of exotic fruits and plants . 
The king felt and appreciated the delicacy of the replies , but was only the more humiliated ; he thought the queen a little too familiar in her manners , and that Anne of Austria resembled Juno a little too much , in being too proud and haughty ; his chief anxiety , however , was himself , that he might remain cold and distant in his behavior , bordering lightly the limits of supreme disdain or simple admiration . 
But Fouquet had foreseen all this ; he was , in fact , one of those men who foresee everything . 
The king had expressly declared that , so long as he remained under Fouquet 's roof , he did not wish his own different repasts to be served in accordance with the usual etiquette , and that he would , consequently , dine with the rest of society ; but by the thoughtful attention of the surintendant , the king 's dinner was served up separately , if one may so express it , in the middle of the general table ; the dinner , wonderful in every respect , from the dishes of which was composed , comprised everything the king liked and generally preferred to anything else . 
Louis had no excuse - he , indeed , who had the keenest appetite in his kingdom - for saying that he was not hungry . 
Nay , M. Fouquet did even better still ; he certainly , in obedience to the king 's expressed desire , seated himself at the table , but as soon as the soups were served , he arose and personally waited on the king , while Madame Fouquet stood behind the queen-mother 's armchair . 
The disdain of Juno and the sulky fits of temper of Jupiter could not resist this excess of kindly feeling and polite attention . 
The queen ate a biscuit dipped in a glass of San-Lucar wine ; and the king ate of everything , saying to M. Fouquet : `` It is impossible , monsieur le surintendant , to dine better anywhere . '' 
