The large blazing stars which spangled the African sky glittered and gleamed without illuminating anything . 
A long silence ensued , which gave , for a moment , repose to the troubled imagination of Athos ; and as he felt that that which he saw was not terminated , he applied more attentively the eyes of his understanding on the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented . 
This spectacle was soon continued for him . 
A mild pale moon rose behind the declivities of the coast , streaking at first the undulating ripples of the sea , which appeared to have calmed after the roaring it had sent forth during the vision of Athos - the moon , we say , shed its diamonds and opals upon the briers and bushes of the hills . 
The gray rocks , so many silent and attentive phantoms , appeared to raise their heads to examine likewise the field of battle by the light of the moon , and Athos perceived that the field , empty during the combat , was now strewn with fallen bodies . 
An inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul as he recognized the white and blue uniforms of the soldiers of Picardy , with their long pikes and blue handles , and muskets marked with the fleur-de - lis on the butts . 
When he saw all the gaping wounds , looking up to the bright heavens as if to demand back of them the souls to which they had opened a passage , - when he saw the slaughtered horses , stiff , their tongues hanging out at one side of their mouths , sleeping in the shiny blood congealed around them , staining their furniture and their manes , - when he saw the white horse of M. de Beaufort , with his head beaten to pieces , in the first ranks of the dead , Athos passed a cold hand over his brow , which he was astonished not to find burning . 
He was convinced by this touch that he was present , as a spectator , without delirium 's dreadful aid , the day after the battle fought upon the shores of Gigelli by the army of the expedition , which he had seen leave the coast of France and disappear upon the dim horizon , and of which he had saluted with thought and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke as a signal of farewell to his country . 
Who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed , like a vigilant eye , these effigies of clay-cold soldiers , and examined them , one after the other , to see if Raoul slept among them ? 
Who can express the intoxication of joy with which Athos bowed before God , and thanked Him for not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead ? 
