The white horse was still galloping in the direction of the Loire , at the extremity of which , melting into the vapors of the water , a little sail appeared , wave-balanced like a water-butterfly . 
`` Oh ! '' 
cried the musketeer , `` only a man who wants to fly would go at that pace across plowed lands ; there is but one Fouquet , a financier , to ride thus in open day upon a white horse ; there is no one but the lord of Belle-Isle who would make his escape towards the sea , while there are such thick forests on land , and there is but one D'Artagnan in the world to catch M. Fouquet , who has half an hour 's start , and who will have gained his boat within an hour . '' 
This being said , the musketeer gave orders that the carriage with the iron trellis should be taken immediately to a thicket situated just outside the city . 
He selected his best horse , jumped upon his back , galloped along the Rue aux Herbes , taking , not the road Fouquet had taken , but the bank itself of the Loire , certain that he should gain ten minutes upon the total distance , and , at the intersection of the two lines , come up with the fugitive , who could have no suspicion of being pursued in that direction . 
In the rapidity of the pursuit , and with the impatience of the avenger , animating himself as in war , D'Artagnan , so mild , so kind towards Fouquet , was surprised to find himself become ferocious - almost sanguinary . 
For a long time he galloped without catching sight of the white horse . 
His rage assumed fury , he doubted himself , - he suspected that Fouquet had buried himself in some subterranean road , or that he had changed the white horse for one of those famous black ones , as swift as the wind , which D'Artagnan , at Saint - Mande , had so frequently admired and envied for their vigor and their fleetness . 
At such moments , when the wind cut his eyes so as to make the tears spring from them , when the saddle had become burning hot , when the galled and spurred horse reared with pain , and threw behind him a shower of dust and stones , D'Artagnan , raising himself in his stirrups , and seeing nothing on the waters , nothing beneath the trees , looked up into the air like a madman . 
He was losing his senses . 
