They were giant men , on colossal horses . 
There were six and twenty squadrons of them ; and they had behind them to support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's division , -- the one hundred and six picked gendarmes , the light cavalry of the Guard , eleven hundred and ninety-seven men , and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances . 
They wore casques without horse-tails , and cuirasses of beaten iron , with horse-pistols in their holsters , and long sabre-swords . 
That morning the whole army had admired them , when , at nine o'clock , with braying of trumpets and all the music playing `` Let us watch o'er the Safety of the Empire , '' they had come in a solid column , with one of their batteries on their flank , another in their centre , and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont , and taken up their position for battle in that powerful second line , so cleverly arranged by Napoleon , which , having on its extreme left Kellermann 's cuirassiers and on its extreme right Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had , so to speak , two wings of iron . 
Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor 's orders . 
Ney drew his sword and placed himself at their head . 
The enormous squadrons were set in motion . 
Then a formidable spectacle was seen . 
All their cavalry , with upraised swords , standards and trumpets flung to the breeze , formed in columns by divisions , descended , by a simultaneous movement and like one man , with the precision of a brazen battering-ram which is effecting a breach , the hill of La Belle Alliance , plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men had already fallen , disappeared there in the smoke , then emerging from that shadow , reappeared on the other side of the valley , still compact and in close ranks , mounting at a full trot , through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them , the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
They ascended , grave , threatening , imperturbable ; in the intervals between the musketry and the artillery , their colossal trampling was audible . 
