This platter , which is very curious , and which had , possibly , the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea , was still in existence in September , 1845 ; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais . 
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because , said she , the parlor is too gloomy . 
ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION However , this almost sepulchral parlor , of which we have sought to convey an idea , is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in other convents . 
At the convent of the Rue du Temple , in particular , which belonged , in truth , to another order , the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains , and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor , whose windows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames , a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face , painted bouquets , and even the head of a Turk . 
It is in that garden of the Temple convent , that stood that famous chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France , and which bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm . 
As we have said , this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration , Benedictines quite different from those who depended on Citeaux . 
This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years . 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart , in two churches in Paris , at Saint-Sulpice and at Saint-Jean en Greve , a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town in an uproar . 
M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy , in which the Pope 's Nuncio officiated . 
But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted women , Madame Courtin , Marquise de Boucs , and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux . 
