There was something indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress . 
She wore a gown of mauve barege , little reddish brown buskins , whose ribbons traced an X on her fine , white , open-worked stockings , and that sort of muslin spencer , a Marseilles invention , whose name , canezou , a corruption of the words quinze aout , pronounced after the fashion of the Canebiere , signifies fine weather , heat , and midday . 
The three others , less timid , as we have already said , wore low-necked dresses without disguise , which in summer , beneath flower-adorned hats , are very graceful and enticing ; but by the side of these audacious outfits , blond Fantine 's canezou , with its transparencies , its indiscretion , and its reticence , concealing and displaying at one and the same time , seemed an alluring godsend of decency , and the famous Court of Love , presided over by the Vicomtesse de Cette , with the sea-green eyes , would , perhaps , have awarded the prize for coquetry to this canezou , in the contest for the prize of modesty . 
The most ingenious is , at times , the wisest . 
This does happen . 
Brilliant of face , delicate of profile , with eyes of a deep blue , heavy lids , feet arched and small , wrists and ankles admirably formed , a white skin which , here and there allowed the azure branching of the veins to be seen , joy , a cheek that was young and fresh , the robust throat of the Juno of AEgina , a strong and supple nape of the neck , shoulders modelled as though by Coustou , with a voluptuous dimple in the middle , visible through the muslin ; a gayety cooled by dreaminess ; sculptural and exquisite -- such was Fantine ; and beneath these feminine adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue , and in that statue a soul . 
Fantine was beautiful , without being too conscious of it . 
Those rare dreamers , mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront everything with perfection , would have caught a glimpse in this little working-woman , through the transparency of her Parisian grace , of the ancient sacred euphony . 
This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred . 
She was beautiful in the two ways -- style and rhythm . 
