He succeeded in disappearing , sold the Bishop 's silver , reserving only the candlesticks as a souvenir , crept from town to town , traversed France , came to M. sur M. , conceived the idea which we have mentioned , accomplished what we have related , succeeded in rendering himself safe from seizure and inaccessible , and , thenceforth , established at M. sur M. , happy in feeling his conscience saddened by the past and the first half of his existence belied by the last , he lived in peace , reassured and hopeful , having henceforth only two thoughts , -- to conceal his name and to sanctify his life ; to escape men and to return to God . 
These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that they formed but a single one there ; both were equally absorbing and imperative and ruled his slightest actions . 
In general , they conspired to regulate the conduct of his life ; they turned him towards the gloom ; they rendered him kindly and simple ; they counselled him to the same things . 
Sometimes , however , they conflicted . 
In that case , as the reader will remember , the man whom all the country of M. sur M. called M. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second -- his security to his virtue . 
Thus , in spite of all his reserve and all his prudence , he had preserved the Bishop 's candlesticks , worn mourning for him , summoned and interrogated all the little Savoyards who passed that way , collected information regarding the families at Faverolles , and saved old Fauchelevent 's life , despite the disquieting insinuations of Javert . 
It seemed , as we have already remarked , as though he thought , following the example of all those who have been wise , holy , and just , that his first duty was not towards himself . 
At the same time , it must be confessed , nothing just like this had yet presented itself . 
Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferings we are narrating , engaged in so serious a struggle . 
He understood this confusedly but profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert , when the latter entered his study . 
