Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts through a vault that has been begun , and inundates the laborers ; or a layer of marl is laid bare , and rolls down with the fury of a cataract , breaking the stoutest supporting beams like glass . 
Quite recently , at Villette , when it became necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin canal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal , a fissure appeared in the basin of the canal , water suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel , which was beyond the power of the pumping engines ; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure which had been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin , and it was not without great difficulty that it was stopped up . 
Elsewhere near the Seine , and even at a considerable distance from the river , as for instance , at Belleville , Grand-Rue and Lumiere Passage , quicksands are encountered in which one sticks fast , and in which a man sinks visibly . 
Add suffocation by miasmas , burial by slides , and sudden crumbling of the earth . 
Add the typhus , with which the workmen become slowly impregnated . 
In our own day , after having excavated the gallery of Clichy , with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit of Ourcq , a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep ; after having , in the midst of land-slides , and with the aid of excavations often putrid , and of shoring up , vaulted the Bievre from the Boulevard de l'Hopital , as far as the Seine ; after having , in order to deliver Paris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to provide an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent , which crouched near the Barriere des Martyrs , after having , let us state , constructed the line of sewers from the Barriere Blanche to the road of Aubervilliers , in four months , working day and night , at a depth of eleven metres ; after having -- a thing heretofore unseen -- made a subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec , without a trench , six metres below the surface , the superintendent , Monnot , died . 
After having vaulted three thousand metres of sewer in all quarters of the city , from the Rue Traversiere-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l'Ourcine , after having freed the Carrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations of rain by means of the branch of the Arbalete , after having built the Saint-Georges sewer , on rock and concrete in the fluid sands , after having directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch , Duleau the engineer died . 
There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these , which are more useful , nevertheless , than the brutal slaughter of the field of battle . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- Mustards . 
The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day . 
