Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside the barricades , one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the second in the Rue des Precheurs , the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Then , the barricades having been built , the posts assigned , the guns loaded , the sentinels stationed , they waited , alone in those redoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer , surrounded by those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated , enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which was drawing on , in the midst of that silence through which something could be felt advancing , and which had about it something tragic and terrifying , isolated , armed , determined , and tranquil . 
WAITING During those hours of waiting , what did they do ? 
We must needs tell , since this is a matter of history . 
While the men made bullets and the women lint , while a large saucepan of melted brass and lead , destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a glowing brazier , while the sentinels watched , weapon in hand , on the barricade , while Enjolras , whom it was impossible to divert , kept an eye on the sentinels , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Feuilly , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and some others , sought each other out and united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their student life , and , in one corner of this wine-shop which had been converted into a casement , a couple of paces distant from the redoubt which they had built , with their carbines loaded and primed resting against the backs of their chairs , these fine young fellows , so close to a supreme hour , began to recite love verses . 
What verses ? 
These : -- Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie , Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux , Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux , Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age , Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans , Et que , dans notre humble et petit menage , Tout , meme l'hiver , nous etait printemps ? 
Beaux jours ! 
Manuel etait fier et sage , Paris s ` asseyait a de saints banquets , Foy lancait la foudre , et votre corsage Avait une epingle ou je me piquais . 
Tout vous contemplait . 
