That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light ; this arose from a certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes , and which always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time ; but to-day history and daylight have arrived . 
That light called history is pitiless ; it possesses this peculiar and divine quality , that , pure light as it is , and precisely because it is wholly light , it often casts a shadow in places where people had hitherto beheld rays ; from the same man it constructs two different phantoms , and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it , and the shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader . 
Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations . 
Babylon violated lessens Alexander , Rome enchained lessens Caesar , Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus , tyranny follows the tyrant . 
It is a misfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears his form . 
THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle ; a beginning which was troubled , uncertain , hesitating , menacing to both armies , but still more so for the English than for the French . 
It had rained all night , the earth had been cut up by the downpour , the water had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as if in casks ; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buried up to the axles , the circingles of the horses were dripping with liquid mud . 
If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort of transports on the march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a litter beneath the wheels , all movement , particularly in the valleys , in the direction of Papelotte would have been impossible . 
The affair began late . 
Napoleon , as we have already explained , was in the habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand , like a pistol , aiming it now at one point , now at another , of the battle ; and it had been his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallop freely . 
