Grave and obscure questions , to the last of which every physiologist would probably have responded no , and that without hesitation , had he beheld at Toulon , during the hours of repose , which were for Jean Valjean hours of revery , this gloomy galley-slave , seated with folded arms upon the bar of some capstan , with the end of his chain thrust into his pocket to prevent its dragging , serious , silent , and thoughtful , a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath , condemned by civilization , and regarding heaven with severity . 
Certainly , -- and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact , -- the observing physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery ; he would , perchance , have pitied this sick man , of the law 's making ; but he would not have even essayed any treatment ; he would have turned aside his gaze from the caverns of which he would have caught a glimpse within this soul , and , like Dante at the portals of hell , he would have effaced from this existence the word which the finger of God has , nevertheless , inscribed upon the brow of every man , -- hope . 
Was this state of his soul , which we have attempted to analyze , as perfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those who read us ? 
Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive , after their formation , and had he seen distinctly during the process of their formation , all the elements of which his moral misery was composed ? 
Had this rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception of the succession of ideas through which he had , by degrees , mounted and descended to the lugubrious aspects which had , for so many years , formed the inner horizon of his spirit ? 
Was he conscious of all that passed within him , and of all that was working there ? 
That is something which we do not presume to state ; it is something which we do not even believe . 
There was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean , even after his misfortune , to prevent much vagueness from still lingering there . 
At times he did not rightly know himself what he felt . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadows ; he suffered in the shadows ; he hated in the shadows ; one might have said that he hated in advance of himself . 
