Her figure was formed , her skin had grown white , her hair was lustrous , an unaccustomed splendor had been lighted in her blue eyes . 
The consciousness of her beauty burst upon her in an instant , like the sudden advent of daylight ; other people noticed it also , Toussaint had said so , it was evidently she of whom the passer-by had spoken , there could no longer be any doubt of that ; she descended to the garden again , thinking herself a queen , imagining that she heard the birds singing , though it was winter , seeing the sky gilded , the sun among the trees , flowers in the thickets , distracted , wild , in inexpressible delight . 
Jean Valjean , on his side , experienced a deep and undefinable oppression at heart . 
In fact , he had , for some time past , been contemplating with terror that beauty which seemed to grow more radiant every day on Cosette 's sweet face . 
The dawn that was smiling for all was gloomy for him . 
Cosette had been beautiful for a tolerably long time before she became aware of it herself . 
But , from the very first day , that unexpected light which was rising slowly and enveloping the whole of the young girl 's person , wounded Jean Valjean 's sombre eye . 
He felt that it was a change in a happy life , a life so happy that he did not dare to move for fear of disarranging something . 
This man , who had passed through all manner of distresses , who was still all bleeding from the bruises of fate , who had been almost wicked and who had become almost a saint , who , after having dragged the chain of the galleys , was now dragging the invisible but heavy chain of indefinite misery , this man whom the law had not released from its grasp and who could be seized at any moment and brought back from the obscurity of his virtue to the broad daylight of public opprobrium , this man accepted all , excused all , pardoned all , and merely asked of Providence , of man , of the law , of society , of nature , of the world , one thing , that Cosette might love him ! 
That Cosette might continue to love him ! 
