Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained permission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal street of the village , and a band of itinerant merchants , under protection of the same tolerance , had constructed their stalls on the Church Square , and even extended them into Boulanger Alley , where , as the reader will perhaps remember , the Thenardiers ' hostelry was situated . 
These people filled the inns and drinking-shops , and communicated to that tranquil little district a noisy and joyous life . 
In order to play the part of a faithful historian , we ought even to add that , among the curiosities displayed in the square , there was a menagerie , in which frightful clowns , clad in rags and coming no one knew whence , exhibited to the peasants of Montfermeil in 1823 one of those horrible Brazilian vultures , such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845 , and which have a tricolored cockade for an eye . 
I believe that naturalists call this bird Caracara Polyborus ; it belongs to the order of the Apicides , and to the family of the vultures . 
Some good old Bonapartist soldiers , who had retired to the village , went to see this creature with great devotion . 
The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored cockade was a unique phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie . 
On Christmas eve itself , a number of men , carters , and peddlers , were seated at table , drinking and smoking around four or five candles in the public room of Thenardier 's hostelry . 
This room resembled all drinking-shop rooms , -- tables , pewter jugs , bottles , drinkers , smokers ; but little light and a great deal of noise . 
The date of the year 1823 was indicated , nevertheless , by two objects which were then fashionable in the bourgeois class : to wit , a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed tin . 
The female Thenardier was attending to the supper , which was roasting in front of a clear fire ; her husband was drinking with his customers and talking politics . 
