In the fields , branches of trees broken by grape-shot , but not fallen , upheld by their bark , swayed gently in the breeze of night . 
A breath , almost a respiration , moved the shrubbery . 
Quivers which resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass . 
In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds of the English camp were audible . 
Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn , forming , one in the west , the other in the east , two great flames which were joined by the cordon of bivouac fires of the English , like a necklace of rubies with two carbuncles at the extremities , as they extended in an immense semicircle over the hills along the horizon . 
We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain . 
The heart is terrified at the thought of what that death must have been to so many brave men . 
If there is anything terrible , if there exists a reality which surpasses dreams , it is this : to live , to see the sun ; to be in full possession of virile force ; to possess health and joy ; to laugh valiantly ; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one ; to feel in one 's breast lungs which breathe , a heart which beats , a will which reasons ; to speak , think , hope , love ; to have a mother , to have a wife , to have children ; to have the light -- and all at once , in the space of a shout , in less than a minute , to sink into an abyss ; to fall , to roll , to crush , to be crushed ; to see ears of wheat , flowers , leaves , branches ; not to be able to catch hold of anything ; to feel one 's sword useless , men beneath one , horses on top of one ; to struggle in vain , since one 's bones have been broken by some kick in the darkness ; to feel a heel which makes one 's eyes start from their sockets ; to bite horses ' shoes in one 's rage ; to stifle , to yell , to writhe ; to be beneath , and to say to one 's self , `` But just a little while ago I was a living man ! '' 
There , where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle , all was silence now . 
The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with horses and riders , inextricably heaped up . 
