Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment ; a thousand mysterious crashes in the air , the breath of armed masses set in movement in the streets which were not visible , the intermittent gallop of cavalry , the heavy shock of artillery on the march , the firing by squads , and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris , the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs , indescribable and vaguely terrible cries , lightnings of menace everywhere , the tocsin of Saint-Merry , which now had the accents of a sob , the mildness of the weather , the splendor of the sky filled with sun and clouds , the beauty of the day , and the alarming silence of the houses . 
For , since the preceding evening , the two rows of houses in the Rue de la Chanvrerie had become two walls ; ferocious walls , doors closed , windows closed , shutters closed . 
In those days , so different from those in which we live , when the hour was come , when the people wished to put an end to a situation , which had lasted too long , with a charter granted or with a legal country , when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere , when the city consented to the tearing up of the pavements , when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear , then the inhabitant , thoroughly penetrated with the revolt , so to speak , was the auxiliary of the combatant , and the house fraternized with the improvised fortress which rested on it . 
When the situation was not ripe , when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted , when the masses disowned the movement , all was over with the combatants , the city was changed into a desert around the revolt , souls grew chilled , refuges were nailed up , and the street turned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade . 
A people can not be forced , through surprise , to walk more quickly than it chooses . 
Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand ! 
A people does not let itself go at random . 
Then it abandons the insurrection to itself . 
The insurgents become noxious , infected with the plague . 
A house is an escarpment , a door is a refusal , a facade is a wall . 
