Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture , but he had not mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize ; that was his secret , and he had kept it for three reasons : in the first place , because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert ; next , because , to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead , on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort , was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert , and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict ; and lastly , because Javert , being an artist , had a taste for the unforeseen . 
He hated those well-heralded successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off . 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the last . 
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree , then from corner to corner of the street , and had not lost sight of him for a single instant ; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert 's eye had been on him . 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean ? 
Because he was still in doubt . 
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at its ease ; the free press embarrassed it ; several arbitrary arrests denounced by the newspapers , had echoed even as far as the Chambers , and had rendered the Prefecture timid . 
Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter . 
The police agents were afraid of making a mistake ; the prefect laid the blame on them ; a mistake meant dismissal . 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph , reproduced by twenty newspapers , would have caused in Paris : `` Yesterday , an aged grandfather , with white hair , a respectable and well-to-do gentleman , who was walking with his grandchild , aged eight , was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict ! '' 
