In his youth , in what had been for him the beginning of his life , and later on , quite recently again , he had beheld another , -- a frightful place , a terrible place , whose severities had always appeared to him the iniquity of justice , and the crime of the law . 
Now , after the galleys , he saw the cloister ; and when he meditated how he had formed a part of the galleys , and that he now , so to speak , was a spectator of the cloister , he confronted the two in his own mind with anxiety . 
Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe , and slowly descended the endless spirals of revery . 
He recalled his former companions : how wretched they were ; they rose at dawn , and toiled until night ; hardly were they permitted to sleep ; they lay on camp beds , where nothing was tolerated but mattresses two inches thick , in rooms which were heated only in the very harshest months of the year ; they were clothed in frightful red blouses ; they were allowed , as a great favor , linen trousers in the hottest weather , and a woollen carter 's blouse on their backs when it was very cold ; they drank no wine , and ate no meat , except when they went on `` fatigue duty . '' 
They lived nameless , designated only by numbers , and converted , after a manner , into ciphers themselves , with downcast eyes , with lowered voices , with shorn heads , beneath the cudgel and in disgrace . 
Then his mind reverted to the beings whom he had under his eyes . 
These beings also lived with shorn heads , with downcast eyes , with lowered voices , not in disgrace , but amid the scoffs of the world , not with their backs bruised with the cudgel , but with their shoulders lacerated with their discipline . 
Their names , also , had vanished from among men ; they no longer existed except under austere appellations . 
They never ate meat and they never drank wine ; they often remained until evening without food ; they were attired , not in a red blouse , but in a black shroud , of woollen , which was heavy in summer and thin in winter , without the power to add or subtract anything from it ; without having even , according to the season , the resource of the linen garment or the woollen cloak ; and for six months in the year they wore serge chemises which gave them fever . 
They dwelt , not in rooms warmed only during rigorous cold , but in cells where no fire was ever lighted ; they slept , not on mattresses two inches thick , but on straw . 
