The little Savoyards told each other about it : a great many of them passed that way . 
VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON Little by little , and in the course of time , all this opposition subsided . 
There had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine , in virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to , blackening and calumnies ; then they grew to be nothing more than ill-nature , then merely malicious remarks , then even this entirely disappeared ; respect became complete , unanimous , cordial , and towards 1821 the moment arrived when the word `` Monsieur le Maire '' was pronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as `` Monseigneur the Bishop '' had been pronounced in D -- in 1815 . 
People came from a distance of ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine . 
He put an end to differences , he prevented lawsuits , he reconciled enemies . 
Every one took him for the judge , and with good reason . 
It seemed as though he had for a soul the book of the natural law . 
It was like an epidemic of veneration , which in the course of six or seven years gradually took possession of the whole district . 
One single man in the town , in the arrondissement , absolutely escaped this contagion , and , whatever Father Madeleine did , remained his opponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinct kept him on the alert and uneasy . 
It seems , in fact , as though there existed in certain men a veritable bestial instinct , though pure and upright , like all instincts , which creates antipathies and sympathies , which fatally separates one nature from another nature , which does not hesitate , which feels no disquiet , which does not hold its peace , and which never belies itself , clear in its obscurity , infallible , imperious , intractable , stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence and to all the dissolvents of reason , and which , in whatever manner destinies are arranged , secretly warns the man-dog of the presence of the man-cat , and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion . 
