He was absorbed , in fact . 
Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed intelligence , he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was resting on him . 
In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled , each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance , he perceived with terror , mingled with rage , a sort of frightful accumulation of things , collecting and mounting above him , beyond the range of his vision , -- laws , prejudices , men , and deeds , -- whose outlines escaped him , whose mass terrified him , and which was nothing else than that prodigious pyramid which we call civilization . 
He distinguished , here and there in that swarming and formless mass , now near him , now afar off and on inaccessible table-lands , some group , some detail , vividly illuminated ; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel ; there the gendarme and his sword ; yonder the mitred archbishop ; away at the top , like a sort of sun , the Emperor , crowned and dazzling . 
It seemed to him that these distant splendors , far from dissipating his night , rendered it more funereal and more black . 
All this -- laws , prejudices , deeds , men , things -- went and came above him , over his head , in accordance with the complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization , walking over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness in its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference . 
Souls which have fallen to the bottom of all possible misfortune , unhappy men lost in the lowest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks , the reproved of the law , feel the whole weight of this human society , so formidable for him who is without , so frightful for him who is beneath , resting upon their heads . 
In this situation Jean Valjean meditated ; and what could be the nature of his meditation ? 
If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts , it would , doubtless , think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought . 
All these things , realities full of spectres , phantasmagories full of realities , had eventually created for him a sort of interior state which is almost indescribable . 
