Thoughts made their appearance on these faces ; it was a terrible moment ; visible demons with their masks removed , fierce souls laid bare . 
Though lighted up , this wild throng remained in gloom . 
Some , who were gay , had in their mouths quills through which they blew vermin over the crowd , picking out the women ; the dawn accentuated these lamentable profiles with the blackness of its shadows ; there was not one of these creatures who was not deformed by reason of wretchedness ; and the whole was so monstrous that one would have said that the sun 's brilliancy had been changed into the glare of the lightning . 
The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up a song , and were shouting at the top of their voices with a haggard joviality , a potpourri by Desaugiers , then famous , called The Vestal ; the trees shivered mournfully ; in the cross-lanes , countenances of bourgeois listened in an idiotic delight to these coarse strains droned by spectres . 
All sorts of distress met in this procession as in chaos ; here were to be found the facial angles of every sort of beast , old men , youths , bald heads , gray beards , cynical monstrosities , sour resignation , savage grins , senseless attitudes , snouts surmounted by caps , heads like those of young girls with corkscrew curls on the temples , infantile visages , and by reason of that , horrible thin skeleton faces , to which death alone was lacking . 
On the first cart was a negro , who had been a slave , in all probability , and who could make a comparison of his chains . 
The frightful leveller from below , shame , had passed over these brows ; at that degree of abasement , the last transformations were suffered by all in their extremest depths , and ignorance , converted into dulness , was the equal of intelligence converted into despair . 
There was no choice possible between these men who appeared to the eye as the flower of the mud . 
It was evident that the person who had had the ordering of that unclean procession had not classified them . 
These beings had been fettered and coupled pell-mell , in alphabetical disorder , probably , and loaded hap-hazard on those carts . 
