She was a woman about sixty years of age , short , thick , `` singing like a cracked pot , '' says the letter which we have already quoted ; an excellent woman , moreover , and the only merry one in the whole convent , and for that reason adored . 
She was learned , erudite , wise , competent , curiously proficient in history , crammed with Latin , stuffed with Greek , full of Hebrew , and more of a Benedictine monk than a Benedictine nun . 
The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun , Mother Cineres , who was almost blind . 
The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine ; the treasurer , Mother Sainte-Gertrude , the chief mistress of the novices ; Mother-Saint-Ange , the assistant mistress ; Mother Annonciation , the sacristan ; Mother Saint-Augustin , the nurse , the only one in the convent who was malicious ; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde -LRB- Mademoiselle Gauvain -RRB- , very young and with a beautiful voice ; Mother des Anges -LRB- Mademoiselle Drouet -RRB- , who had been in the convent of the Filles-Dieu , and in the convent du Tresor , between Gisors and Magny ; Mother Saint-Joseph -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cogolludo -RRB- , Mother Sainte-Adelaide -LRB- Mademoiselle d'Auverney -RRB- , Mother Misericorde -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cifuentes , who could not resist austerities -RRB- , Mother Compassion -LRB- Mademoiselle de la Miltiere , received at the age of sixty in defiance of the rule , and very wealthy -RRB- ; Mother Providence -LRB- Mademoiselle de Laudiniere -RRB- , Mother Presentation -LRB- Mademoiselle de Siguenza -RRB- , who was prioress in 1847 ; and finally , Mother Sainte-Celigne -LRB- sister of the sculptor Ceracchi -RRB- , who went mad ; Mother Sainte-Chantal -LRB- Mademoiselle de Suzon -RRB- , who went mad . 
There was also , among the prettiest of them , a charming girl of three and twenty , who was from the Isle de Bourbon , a descendant of the Chevalier Roze , whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze , and who was called Mother Assumption . 
Mother Sainte-Mechtilde , intrusted with the singing and the choir , was fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter . 
She usually took a complete scale of them , that is to say , seven , from ten to sixteen years of age , inclusive , of assorted voices and sizes , whom she made sing standing , drawn up in a line , side by side , according to age , from the smallest to the largest . 
This presented to the eye , something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls , a sort of living Pan-pipe made of angels . 
Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister Euphrasie , Sister Sainte-Marguerite , Sister Sainte-Marthe , who was in her dotage , and Sister Sainte-Michel , whose long nose made them laugh . 
All these women were gentle with the children . 
