Javert bestowed a respectful salute on the mayor , whose back was turned to him . 
The mayor did not look at him , but went on annotating this docket . 
Javert advanced two or three paces into the study , and halted , without breaking the silence . 
If any physiognomist who had been familiar with Javert , and who had made a lengthy study of this savage in the service of civilization , this singular composite of the Roman , the Spartan , the monk , and the corporal , this spy who was incapable of a lie , this unspotted police agent -- if any physiognomist had known his secret and long-cherished aversion for M. Madeleine , his conflict with the mayor on the subject of Fantine , and had examined Javert at that moment , he would have said to himself , `` What has taken place ? '' 
It was evident to any one acquainted with that clear , upright , sincere , honest , austere , and ferocious conscience , that Javert had but just gone through some great interior struggle . 
Javert had nothing in his soul which he had not also in his countenance . 
Like violent people in general , he was subject to abrupt changes of opinion . 
His physiognomy had never been more peculiar and startling . 
On entering he bowed to M. Madeleine with a look in which there was neither rancor , anger , nor distrust ; he halted a few paces in the rear of the mayor 's arm-chair , and there he stood , perfectly erect , in an attitude almost of discipline , with the cold , ingenuous roughness of a man who has never been gentle and who has always been patient ; he waited without uttering a word , without making a movement , in genuine humility and tranquil resignation , calm , serious , hat in hand , with eyes cast down , and an expression which was half-way between that of a soldier in the presence of his officer and a criminal in the presence of his judge , until it should please the mayor to turn round . 
All the sentiments as well as all the memories which one might have attributed to him had disappeared . 
