and as kindly as Henri IV . 
Now , to our mind , in history , where kindness is the rarest of pearls , the man who is kindly almost takes precedence of the man who is great . 
Louis Philippe having been severely judged by some , harshly , perhaps , by others , it is quite natural that a man , himself a phantom at the present day , who knew that king , should come and testify in his favor before history ; this deposition , whatever else it may be , is evidently and above all things , entirely disinterested ; an epitaph penned by a dead man is sincere ; one shade may console another shade ; the sharing of the same shadows confers the right to praise it ; it is not greatly to be feared that it will ever be said of two tombs in exile : `` This one flattered the other . '' 
CRACKS BENEATH THE FOUNDATION At the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point of penetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelop the beginning of Louis Philippe 's reign , it was necessary that there should be no equivoque , and it became requisite that this book should offer some explanation with regard to this king . 
Louis Philippe had entered into possession of his royal authority without violence , without any direct action on his part , by virtue of a revolutionary change , evidently quite distinct from the real aim of the Revolution , but in which he , the Duc d'Orleans , exercised no personal initiative . 
He had been born a Prince , and he believed himself to have been elected King . 
He had not served this mandate on himself ; he had not taken it ; it had been offered to him , and he had accepted it ; convinced , wrongly , to be sure , but convinced nevertheless , that the offer was in accordance with right and that the acceptance of it was in accordance with duty . 
Hence his possession was in good faith . 
Now , we say it in good conscience , Louis Philippe being in possession in perfect good faith , and the democracy being in good faith in its attack , the amount of terror discharged by the social conflicts weighs neither on the King nor on the democracy . 
A clash of principles resembles a clash of elements . 
