Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on the right , as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus , by houses of mean aspect ; on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines , composed of numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue Petit-Picpus side ; so that this building , which was very lofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side , was tolerably low on the side adjoining the Rue Polonceau . 
There , at the angle of which we have spoken , it descended to such a degree that it consisted of merely a wall . 
This wall did not abut directly on the Street ; it formed a deeply retreating niche , concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been , one in the Rue Polonceau , the other in the Rue Droit-Mur . 
Beginning with these angles of the niche , the wall extended along the Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49 , and along the Rue Droit-Mur , where the fragment was much shorter , as far as the gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected , thus forming another retreating angle in the street . 
This gable was sombre of aspect ; only one window was visible , or , to speak more correctly , two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept constantly closed . 
The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is rigorously exact , and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in the mind of old inhabitants of the quarter . 
The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and wretched door ; it was a vast , formless assemblage of perpendicular planks , the upper ones being broader than the lower , bound together by long transverse strips of iron . 
At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary dimensions , and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years previously . 
A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche , and the wall was covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau . 
In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself , this sombre building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted him . 
