Two or three had a straw rope attached to the cross-bar of the dray , and suspended under them like a stirrup , which supported their feet . 
One of them held in his hand and raised to his mouth something which had the appearance of a black stone and which he seemed to be gnawing ; it was bread which he was eating . 
There were no eyes there which were not either dry , dulled , or flaming with an evil light . 
The escort troop cursed , the men in chains did not utter a syllable ; from time to time the sound of a blow became audible as the cudgels descended on shoulder-blades or skulls ; some of these men were yawning ; their rags were terrible ; their feet hung down , their shoulders oscillated , their heads clashed together , their fetters clanked , their eyes glared ferociously , their fists clenched or fell open inertly like the hands of corpses ; in the rear of the convoy ran a band of children screaming with laughter . 
This file of vehicles , whatever its nature was , was mournful . 
It was evident that to-morrow , that an hour hence , a pouring rain might descend , that it might be followed by another and another , and that their dilapidated garments would be drenched , that once soaked , these men would not get dry again , that once chilled , they would not again get warm , that their linen trousers would be glued to their bones by the downpour , that the water would fill their shoes , that no lashes from the whips would be able to prevent their jaws from chattering , that the chain would continue to bind them by the neck , that their legs would continue to dangle , and it was impossible not to shudder at the sight of these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the cold clouds of autumn , and delivered over to the rain , to the blast , to all the furies of the air , like trees and stones . 
Blows from the cudgel were not omitted even in the case of the sick men , who lay there knotted with ropes and motionless on the seventh wagon , and who appeared to have been tossed there like sacks filled with misery . 
Suddenly , the sun made its appearance ; the immense light of the Orient burst forth , and one would have said that it had set fire to all those ferocious heads . 
Their tongues were unloosed ; a conflagration of grins , oaths , and songs exploded . 
The broad horizontal sheet of light severed the file in two parts , illuminating heads and bodies , leaving feet and wheels in the obscurity . 
