you think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieu affair , that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury , that the name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself , out of gratitude for a service rendered to him , and that I might assuredly keep it , and that I should be happy in that chamber which you offer me , that I should not be in any one 's way , that I should be in my own little corner , and that , while you would have Cosette , I should have the idea that I was in the same house with her . 
Each one of us would have had his share of happiness . 
If I continued to be Monsieur Fauchelevent , that would arrange everything . 
Yes , with the exception of my soul . 
There was joy everywhere upon my surface , but the bottom of my soul remained black . 
It is not enough to be happy , one must be content . 
Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , thus I should have concealed my true visage , thus , in the presence of your expansion , I should have had an enigma , thus , in the midst of your full noonday , I should have had shadows , thus , without crying ` ` ware , ' I should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside , I should have taken my seat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was , you would drive me from it , I should have allowed myself to be served by domestics who , had they known , would have said : ` How horrible ! ' 
I should have touched you with my elbow , which you have a right to dislike , I should have filched your clasps of the hand ! 
There would have existed in your house a division of respect between venerable white locks and tainted white locks ; at your most intimate hours , when all hearts thought themselves open to the very bottom to all the rest , when we four were together , your grandfather , you two and myself , a stranger would have been present ! 
I should have been side by side with you in your existence , having for my only care not to disarrange the cover of my dreadful pit . 
