In this manner he reached the elbow of that short section of the Rue Mondetour which was , as the reader will remember , the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with the outside world . 
At the corner of the last house , on his left , he thrust his head forward , and looked into the fragment of the Rue Mondetour . 
A little beyond the angle of the lane and the Rue de la Chanvrerie which cast a broad curtain of shadow , in which he was himself engulfed , he perceived some light on the pavement , a bit of the wine-shop , and beyond , a flickering lamp within a sort of shapeless wall , and men crouching down with guns on their knees . 
All this was ten fathoms distant from him . 
It was the interior of the barricade . 
The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest of the wine-shop , the large barricade , and the flag from him . 
Marius had but a step more to take . 
Then the unhappy young man seated himself on a post , folded his arms , and fell to thinking about his father . 
He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy , who had been so proud a soldier , who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic , and had touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon , who had beheld Genoa , Alexandria , Milan , Turin , Madrid , Vienna , Dresden , Berlin , Moscow , who had left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that same blood , which he , Marius , had in his veins , who had grown gray before his time in discipline and command , who had lived with his sword-belt buckled , his epaulets falling on his breast , his cockade blackened with powder , his brow furrowed with his helmet , in barracks , in camp , in the bivouac , in ambulances , and who , at the expiration of twenty years , had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek , a smiling countenance , tranquil , admirable , pure as a child , having done everything for France and nothing against her . 
He said to himself that his day had also come now , that his hour had struck , that following his father , he too was about to show himself brave , intrepid , bold , to run to meet the bullets , to offer his breast to bayonets , to shed his blood , to seek the enemy , to seek death , that he was about to wage war in his turn and descend to the field of battle , and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend was the street , and that the war in which he was about to engage was civil war ! 
