Marius shuddered at that reproach of ingratitude directed against his father , and which he was on the point of so fatally justifying . 
His perplexity was redoubled . 
Moreover , there was in all these words of Thenardier , in his accent , in his gesture , in his glance which darted flames at every word , there was , in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything , in that mixture of braggadocio and abjectness , of pride and pettiness , of rage and folly , in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments , in that immodesty of a malicious man tasting the voluptuous delights of violence , in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul , in that conflagration of all sufferings combined with all hatreds , something which was as hideous as evil , and as heart-rending as the truth . 
The picture of the master , the painting by David which he had proposed that M. Leblanc should purchase , was nothing else , as the reader has divined , than the sign of his tavern painted , as it will be remembered , by himself , the only relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck at Montfermeil . 
As he had ceased to intercept Marius ' visual ray , Marius could examine this thing , and in the daub , he actually did recognize a battle , a background of smoke , and a man carrying another man . 
It was the group composed of Pontmercy and Thenardier ; the sergeant the rescuer , the colonel rescued . 
Marius was like a drunken man ; this picture restored his father to life in some sort ; it was no longer the signboard of the wine-shop at Montfermeil , it was a resurrection ; a tomb had yawned , a phantom had risen there . 
Marius heard his heart beating in his temples , he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears , his bleeding father , vaguely depicted on that sinister panel terrified him , and it seemed to him that the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him . 
When Thenardier had recovered his breath , he turned his bloodshot eyes on M. Leblanc , and said to him in a low , curt voice : -- `` What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you ? '' 
M. Leblanc held his peace . 
