It is a floating forest . 
And moreover , let this be borne in mind , it is only a question here of the military vessel of forty years ago , of the simple sailing-vessel ; steam , then in its infancy , has since added new miracles to that prodigy which is called a war vessel . 
At the present time , for example , the mixed vessel with a screw is a surprising machine , propelled by three thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand five hundred horse-power . 
Not to mention these new marvels , the ancient vessel of Christopher Columbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man . 
It is as inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales ; it stores up the wind in its sails , it is precise in the immense vagueness of the billows , it floats , and it reigns . 
There comes an hour , nevertheless , when the gale breaks that sixty-foot yard like a straw , when the wind bends that mast four hundred feet tall , when that anchor , which weighs tens of thousands , is twisted in the jaws of the waves like a fisherman 's hook in the jaws of a pike , when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars , which the hurricane bears forth into the void and into night , when all that power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty which are superior . 
Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immense feebleness it affords men food for thought , Hence in the ports curious people abound around these marvellous machines of war and of navigation , without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why . 
Every day , accordingly , from morning until night , the quays , sluices , and the jetties of the port of Toulon were covered with a multitude of idlers and loungers , as they say in Paris , whose business consisted in staring at the Orion . 
The Orion was a ship that had been ailing for a long time ; in the course of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collected on its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed ; it had gone into the dry dock the year before this , in order to have the barnacles scraped off , then it had put to sea again ; but this cleaning had affected the bolts of the keel : in the neighborhood of the Balearic Isles the sides had been strained and had opened ; and , as the plating in those days was not of sheet iron , the vessel had sprung a leak . 
A violent equinoctial gale had come up , which had first staved in a grating and a porthole on the larboard side , and damaged the foretop-gallant-shrouds ; in consequence of these injuries , the Orion had run back to Toulon . 
