His name is God . 
M. BAMATABOIS 'S INACTIVITY There is in all small towns , and there was at M. sur M. in particular , a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred francs with the same air with which their prototypes devour two hundred thousand francs a year in Paris . 
These are beings of the great neuter species : impotent men , parasites , cyphers , who have a little land , a little folly , a little wit ; who would be rustics in a drawing-room , and who think themselves gentlemen in the dram-shop ; who say , `` My fields , my peasants , my woods '' ; who hiss actresses at the theatre to prove that they are persons of taste ; quarrel with the officers of the garrison to prove that they are men of war ; hunt , smoke , yawn , drink , smell of tobacco , play billiards , stare at travellers as they descend from the diligence , live at the cafe , dine at the inn , have a dog which eats the bones under the table , and a mistress who eats the dishes on the table ; who stick at a sou , exaggerate the fashions , admire tragedy , despise women , wear out their old boots , copy London through Paris , and Paris through the medium of Pont-A-Mousson , grow old as dullards , never work , serve no use , and do no great harm . 
M. Felix Tholomyes , had he remained in his own province and never beheld Paris , would have been one of these men . 
If they were richer , one would say , `` They are dandies ; '' if they were poorer , one would say , `` They are idlers . '' 
They are simply men without employment . 
Among these unemployed there are bores , the bored , dreamers , and some knaves . 
At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar , a big cravat , a watch with trinkets , three vests of different colors , worn one on top of the other -- the red and blue inside ; of a short-waisted olive coat , with a codfish tail , a double row of silver buttons set close to each other and running up to the shoulder ; and a pair of trousers of a lighter shade of olive , ornamented on the two seams with an indefinite , but always uneven , number of lines , varying from one to eleven -- a limit which was never exceeded . 
Add to this , high shoes with little irons on the heels , a tall hat with a narrow brim , hair worn in a tuft , an enormous cane , and conversation set off by puns of Potier . 
Over all , spurs and a mustache . 
