It was hither that he had come every time that M. Gillenormand had said : `` He is sleeping out . '' 
Lieutenant Theodule was absolutely put out of countenance by this unexpected encounter with a sepulchre ; he experienced a singular and disagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing , and which was composed of respect for the tomb , mingled with respect for the colonel . 
He retreated , leaving Marius alone in the cemetery , and there was discipline in this retreat . 
Death appeared to him with large epaulets , and he almost made the military salute to him . 
Not knowing what to write to his aunt , he decided not to write at all ; and it is probable that nothing would have resulted from the discovery made by Theodule as to the love affairs of Marius , if , by one of those mysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance , the scene at Vernon had not had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris . 
Marius returned from Vernon on the third day , in the middle of the morning , descended at his grandfather 's door , and , wearied by the two nights spent in the diligence , and feeling the need of repairing his loss of sleep by an hour at the swimming-school , he mounted rapidly to his chamber , took merely time enough to throw off his travelling-coat , and the black ribbon which he wore round his neck , and went off to the bath . 
M.Gillenormand , who had risen betimes like all old men in good health , had heard his entrance , and had made haste to climb , as quickly as his old legs permitted , the stairs to the upper story where Marius lived , in order to embrace him , and to question him while so doing , and to find out where he had been . 
But the youth had taken less time to descend than the old man had to ascend , and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic , Marius was no longer there . 
The bed had not been disturbed , and on the bed lay , outspread , but not defiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon . 
`` I like this better , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
