The sand has covered them . 
He draws his feet out of the sand , he tries to retrace his steps , he turns back , he sinks in more deeply than before . 
The sand is up to his ankles , he tears himself free from it and flings himself to the left , the sand reaches to mid-leg , he flings himself to the right , the sand comes up to his knees . 
Then , with indescribable terror , he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a quicksand , and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in which neither man can walk nor fish can swim . 
He flings away his burden , if he have one , he lightens himself , like a ship in distress ; it is too late , the sand is above his knees . 
He shouts , he waves his hat , or his handkerchief , the sand continually gains on him ; if the beach is deserted , if the land is too far away , if the bank of sand is too ill-famed , there is no hero in the neighborhood , all is over , he is condemned to be engulfed . 
He is condemned to that terrible interment , long , infallible , implacable , which it is impossible to either retard or hasten , which lasts for hours , which will not come to an end , which seizes you erect , free , in the flush of health , which drags you down by the feet , which , at every effort that you attempt , at every shout that you utter , draws you a little lower , which has the air of punishing you for your resistance by a redoubled grasp , which forces a man to return slowly to earth , while leaving him time to survey the horizon , the trees , the verdant country , the smoke of the villages on the plain , the sails of the ships on the sea , the birds which fly and sing , the sun and the sky . 
This engulfment is the sepulchre which assumes a tide , and which mounts from the depths of the earth towards a living man . 
Each minute is an inexorable layer-out of the dead . 
The wretched man tries to sit down , to lie down , to climb ; every movement that he makes buries him deeper ; he straightens himself up , he sinks ; he feels that he is being swallowed up ; he shrieks , implores , cries to the clouds , wrings his hands , grows desperate . 
