There was a stone bench in one corner , one or two mouldy statues , several lattices which had lost their nails with time , were rotting on the wall , and there were no walks nor turf ; but there was enough grass everywhere . 
Gardening had taken its departure , and nature had returned . 
Weeds abounded , which was a great piece of luck for a poor corner of land . 
The festival of gilliflowers was something splendid . 
Nothing in this garden obstructed the sacred effort of things towards life ; venerable growth reigned there among them . 
The trees had bent over towards the nettles , the plant had sprung upward , the branch had inclined , that which crawls on the earth had gone in search of that which expands in the air , that which floats on the wind had bent over towards that which trails in the moss ; trunks , boughs , leaves , fibres , clusters , tendrils , shoots , spines , thorns , had mingled , crossed , married , confounded themselves in each other ; vegetation in a deep and close embrace , had celebrated and accomplished there , under the well-pleased eye of the Creator , in that enclosure three hundred feet square , the holy mystery of fraternity , symbol of the human fraternity . 
This garden was no longer a garden , it was a colossal thicket , that is to say , something as impenetrable as a forest , as peopled as a city , quivering like a nest , sombre like a cathedral , fragrant like a bouquet , solitary as a tomb , living as a throng . 
In Floreal -LSB- 34 -RSB- this enormous thicket , free behind its gate and within its four walls , entered upon the secret labor of germination , quivered in the rising sun , almost like an animal which drinks in the breaths of cosmic love , and which feels the sap of April rising and boiling in its veins , and shakes to the wind its enormous wonderful green locks , sprinkled on the damp earth , on the defaced statues , on the crumbling steps of the pavilion , and even on the pavement of the deserted street , flowers like stars , dew like pearls , fecundity , beauty , life , joy , perfumes . 
At midday , a thousand white butterflies took refuge there , and it was a divine spectacle to see that living summer snow whirling about there in flakes amid the shade . 
There , in those gay shadows of verdure , a throng of innocent voices spoke sweetly to the soul , and what the twittering forgot to say the humming completed . 
