He who sees Paris thinks he sees the bottom of all history with heaven and constellations in the intervals . 
Paris has a capital , the Town-Hall , a Parthenon , Notre-Dame , a Mount Aventine , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , an Asinarium , the Sorbonne , a Pantheon , the Pantheon , a Via Sacra , the Boulevard des Italiens , a temple of the winds , opinion ; and it replaces the Gemoniae by ridicule . 
Its majo is called `` faraud , '' its Transteverin is the man of the faubourgs , its hammal is the market-porter , its lazzarone is the pegre , its cockney is the native of Ghent . 
Everything that exists elsewhere exists at Paris . 
The fishwoman of Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides , the discobols Vejanus lives again in the Forioso , the tight-rope dancer . 
Therapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncoeur the grenadier , Damasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy among bric-a-brac merchants , Vincennes could grasp Socrates in its fist as just as Agora could imprison Diderot , Grimod de la Reyniere discovered larded roast beef , as Curtillus invented roast hedgehog , we see the trapeze which figures in Plautus reappear under the vault of the Arc of l'Etoile , the sword-eater of Poecilus encountered by Apuleius is a sword-swallower on the PontNeuf , the nephew of Rameau and Curculio the parasite make a pair , Ergasilus could get himself presented to Cambaceres by d'Aigrefeuille ; the four dandies of Rome : Alcesimarchus , Phoedromus , Diabolus , and Argyrippus , descend from Courtille in Labatut 's posting-chaise ; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front of Congrio than would Charles Nodier in front of Punchinello ; Marto is not a tigress , but Pardalisca was not a dragon ; Pantolabus the wag jeers in the Cafe Anglais at Nomentanus the fast liver , Hermogenus is a tenor in the Champs-Elysees , and round him , Thracius the beggar , clad like Bobeche , takes up a collection ; the bore who stops you by the button of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat after a lapse of two thousand years Thesprion 's apostrophe : Quis properantem me prehendit pallio ? 
The wine on Surene is a parody of the wine of Alba , the red border of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting of Balatro , Pere Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains same gleams as the Esquiliae , and the grave of the poor bought for five years , is certainly the equivalent of the slave 's hived coffin . 
Seek something that Paris has not . 
The vat of Trophonius contains nothing that is not in Mesmer 's tub ; Ergaphilas lives again in Cagliostro ; the Brahmin Vasaphanta become incarnate in the Comte de Saint-Germain ; the cemetery of Saint-Medard works quite as good miracles as the Mosque of Oumoumie at Damascus . 
Paris has an AEsop-Mayeux , and a Canidia , Mademoiselle Lenormand . 
