Jean Valjean , without replying , helped the insurgent whom he was saving to don his uniform . 
THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A BARRICADE The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place , had as result and culminating point Enjolras ' supreme melancholy . 
Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution ; he was incomplete , however , so far as the absolute can be so ; he had too much of Saint-Just about him , and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots ; still , his mind , in the society of the Friends of the A B C , had ended by undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre 's ideas ; for some time past , he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form of dogma , and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence of progress , and he had come to accept , as a definitive and magnificent evolution , the transformation of the great French Republic , into the immense human republic . 
As far as the immediate means were concerned , a violent situation being given , he wished to be violent ; on that point , he never varied ; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is summed up in the words : `` Eighty-three . '' 
Enjolras was standing erect on the staircase of paving-stones , one elbow resting on the stock of his gun . 
He was engaged in thought ; he quivered , as at the passage of prophetic breaths ; places where death is have these effects of tripods . 
A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes , which were filled with an inward look . 
All at once he threw back his head , his blond locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of stars , they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo , and Enjolras cried : `` Citizens , do you picture the future to yourselves ? 
The streets of cities inundated with light , green branches on the thresholds , nations sisters , men just , old men blessing children , the past loving the present , thinkers entirely at liberty , believers on terms of full equality , for religion heaven , God the direct priest , human conscience become an altar , no more hatreds , the fraternity of the workshop and the school , for sole penalty and recompense fame , work for all , right for all , peace over all , no more bloodshed , no more wars , happy mothers ! 
To conquer matter is the first step ; to realize the ideal is the second . 
