In 1832 , in a number of streets , in the Rue de l'Etoile , the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue du Temple , the Rue Vielle-duTemple , the Rue Notre-Dame de Nazareth , the Rue Folie-Mericourt , the Quai aux Fleurs , the Rue du Petit-Muse , the Rue du Normandie , the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches , the Rue des Marais , the Faubourg Saint-Martin , the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires , the Faubourg Montmartre , the Rue Grange-Bateliere , in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Jacob , the Rue de Tournon , the ancient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw . 
It consisted of enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts , with monumental effrontery . 
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 1663 ; five thousand three hundred fathoms . 
After Bruneseau , on the 1st of January , 1832 , it had forty thousand three hundred metres . 
Between 1806 and 1831 , there had been built , on an average , seven hundred and fifty metres annually , afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were constructed every year , in masonry , of small stones , with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water , on a cement foundation . 
At two hundred francs the metre , the sixty leagues of Paris ' sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions . 
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the beginning , grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense question : the sewers of Paris . 
Paris is the centre of two sheets , a sheet of water and a sheet of air . 
The sheet of water , lying at a tolerably great depth underground , but already sounded by two bores , is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone ; this layer may be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference ; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze there ; one drinks the Seine , the Marne , the Yonne , the Oise , the Aisne , the Cher , the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle . 
The sheet of water is healthy , it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the earth ; the sheet of air is unhealthy , it comes from the sewer . 
