and which runs straight to the collecting sewer , called the Grand Sewer , with but a single elbow , on the right , on the elevation of the ancient Cour des Miracles , and a single branch , the Saint-Martin sewer , whose four arms describe a cross . 
But the gut of the Petite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of the Corinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the Rue Saint-Denis ; it ended at the Montmartre sewer , and it was in this that Jean Valjean was entangled . 
There opportunities of losing oneself abound . 
The Montmartre sewer is one of the most labyrinthine of the ancient network . 
Fortunately , Jean Valjean had left behind him the sewer of the markets whose geometrical plan presents the appearance of a multitude of parrots ' roosts piled on top of each other ; but he had before him more than one embarrassing encounter and more than one street corner -- for they are streets -- presenting itself in the gloom like an interrogation point ; first , on his left , the vast sewer of the Platriere , a sort of Chinese puzzle , thrusting out and entangling its chaos of Ts and Zs under the Post-Office and under the rotunda of the Wheat Market , as far as the Seine , where it terminates in a Y ; secondly , on his right , the curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran with its three teeth , which are also blind courts ; thirdly , on his left , the branch of the Mail , complicated , almost at its inception , with a sort of fork , and proceeding from zig-zag to zig-zag until it ends in the grand crypt of the outlet of the Louvre , truncated and ramified in every direction ; and lastly , the blind alley of a passage of the Rue des Jeuneurs , without counting little ducts here and there , before reaching the belt sewer , which alone could conduct him to some issue sufficiently distant to be safe . 
Had Jean Valjean had any idea of all that we have here pointed out , he would speedily have perceived , merely by feeling the wall , that he was not in the subterranean gallery of the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Instead of the ancient stone , instead of the antique architecture , haughty and royal even in the sewer , with pavement and string courses of granite and mortar costing eight hundred livres the fathom , he would have felt under his hand contemporary cheapness , economical expedients , porous stone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation , which costs two hundred francs the metre , and the bourgeoise masonry known as a petits materiaux -- small stuff ; but of all this he knew nothing . 
He advanced with anxiety , but with calmness , seeing nothing , knowing nothing , buried in chance , that is to say , engulfed in providence . 
By degrees , we will admit , a certain horror seized upon him . 
The gloom which enveloped him penetrated his spirit . 
