It seemed to him , that , after having descended into these depths , after having long groped among the darkest of these shadows , he had at last found one of these diamonds , one of these truths , and that he now held it in his hand , and he was dazzled as he gazed upon it . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` this is right ; I am on the right road ; I have the solution ; I must end by holding fast to something ; my resolve is taken ; let things take their course ; let us no longer vacillate ; let us no longer hang back ; this is for the interest of all , not for my own ; I am Madeleine , and Madeleine I remain . 
Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean ! 
I am no longer he ; I do not know that man ; I no longer know anything ; it turns out that some one is Jean Valjean at the present moment ; let him look out for himself ; that does not concern me ; it is a fatal name which was floating abroad in the night ; if it halts and descends on a head , so much the worse for that head . '' 
He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece , and said : -- `` Hold ! 
it has relieved me to come to a decision ; I am quite another man now . '' 
He proceeded a few paces further , then he stopped short . 
`` Come ! '' 
he said , `` I must not flinch before any of the consequences of the resolution which I have once adopted ; there are still threads which attach me to that Jean Valjean ; they must be broken ; in this very room there are objects which would betray me , dumb things which would bear witness against me ; it is settled ; all these things must disappear . '' 
He fumbled in his pocket , drew out his purse , opened it , and took out a small key ; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly be seen , so hidden was it in the most sombre tones of the design which covered the wall-paper ; a secret receptacle opened , a sort of false cupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and the chimney-piece ; in this hiding-place there were some rags -- a blue linen blouse , an old pair of trousers , an old knapsack , and a huge thorn cudgel shod with iron at both ends . 
