Braine-l'Alleud is a Belgian village ; Ohain is another . 
These villages , both of them concealed in curves of the landscape , are connected by a road about a league and a half in length , which traverses the plain along its undulating level , and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow , which makes a ravine of this road in some places . 
In 1815 , as at the present day , this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles ; only , it is now on a level with the plain ; it was then a hollow way . 
Its two slopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock . 
This road was , and still is , a trench throughout the greater portion of its course ; a hollow trench , sometimes a dozen feet in depth , and whose banks , being too steep , crumbled away here and there , particularly in winter , under driving rains . 
Accidents happened here . 
The road was so narrow at the Braine-l'Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart , as is proved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery , and which gives the name of the dead , Monsieur Bernard Debrye , Merchant of Brussels , and the date of the accident , February , 1637 . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- It was so deep on the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant , Mathieu Nicaise , was crushed there , in 1783 , by a slide from the slope , as is stated on another stone cross , the top of which has disappeared in the process of clearing the ground , but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the grassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- This is the inscription : -- D. O. M. CY A ETE ECRASE PAR MALHEUR SOUS UN CHARIOT , MONSIEUR BERNARD DE BRYE MARCHAND A BRUXELLE LE -LSB- Illegible -RSB- FEVRIER 1637 . 
On the day of battle , this hollow road whose existence was in no way indicated , bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean , a trench at the summit of the escarpment , a rut concealed in the soil , was invisible ; that is to say , terrible . 
