A throng of bearded men , in sad-coloured garments and grey steeple-crowned hats , inter-mixed with women , some wearing hoods , and others bareheaded , was assembled in front of a wooden edifice , the door of which was heavily timbered with oak , and studded with iron spikes . 
The founders of a new colony , whatever Utopia of human virtue and happiness they might originally project , have invariably recognised it among their earliest practical necessities to allot a portion of the virgin soil as a cemetery , and another portion as the site of a prison . 
In accordance with this rule it may safely be assumed that the forefathers of Boston had built the first prison-house somewhere in the Vicinity of Cornhill , almost as seasonably as they marked out the first burial-ground , on Isaac Johnson 's lot , and round about his grave , which subsequently became the nucleus of all the congregated sepulchres in the old churchyard of King 's Chapel . 
Certain it is that , some fifteen or twenty years after the settlement of the town , the wooden jail was already marked with weather-stains and other indications of age , which gave a yet darker aspect to its beetle-browed and gloomy front . 
The rust on the ponderous iron-work of its oaken door looked more antique than anything else in the New World . 
Like all that pertains to crime , it seemed never to have known a youthful era . 
Before this ugly edifice , and between it and the wheel-track of the street , was a grass-plot , much overgrown with burdock , pig-weed , apple-pern , and such unsightly vegetation , which evidently found something congenial in the soil that had so early borne the black flower of civilised society , a prison . 
But on one side of the portal , and rooted almost at the threshold , was a wild rose-bush , covered , in this month of June , with its delicate gems , which might be imagined to offer their fragrance and fragile beauty to the prisoner as he went in , and to the condemned criminal as he came forth to his doom , in token that the deep heart of Nature could pity and be kind to him . 
This rose-bush , by a strange chance , has been kept alive in history ; but whether it had merely survived out of the stern old wilderness , so long after the fall of the gigantic pines and oaks that originally overshadowed it , or whether , as there is fair authority for believing , it had sprung up under the footsteps of the sainted Ann Hutchinson as she entered the prison-door , we shall not take upon us to determine . 
Finding it so directly on the threshold of our narrative , which is now about to issue from that inauspicious portal , we could hardly do otherwise than pluck one of its flowers , and present it to the reader . 
It may serve , let us hope , to symbolise some sweet moral blossom that may be found along the track , or relieve the darkening close of a tale of human frailty and sorrow . 
The grass-plot before the jail , in Prison Lane , on a certain summer morning , not less than two centuries ago , was occupied by a pretty large number of the inhabitants of Boston , all with their eyes intently fastened on the iron-clamped oaken door . 
Amongst any other population , or at a later period in the history of New England , the grim rigidity that petrified the bearded physiognomies of these good people would have augured some awful business in hand . 
It could have betokened nothing short of the anticipated execution of some noted culprit , on whom the sentence of a legal tribunal had but confirmed the verdict of public sentiment . 
But , in that early severity of the Puritan character , an inference of this kind could not so indubitably be drawn . 
It might be that a sluggish bond-servant , or an undutiful child , whom his parents had given over to the civil authority , was to be corrected at the whipping-post . 
It might be that an Antinomian , a Quaker , or other heterodox religionist , was to be scourged out of the town , or an idle or vagrant Indian , whom the white man 's firewater had made riotous about the streets , was to be driven with stripes into the shadow of the forest . 
It might be , too , that a witch , like old Mistress Hibbins , the bitter-tempered widow of the magistrate , was to die upon the gallows . 
In either case , there was very much the same solemnity of demeanour on the part of the spectators , as befitted a people among whom religion and law were almost identical , and in whose character both were so thoroughly interfused , that the mildest and severest acts of public discipline were alike made venerable and awful . 
Meagre , indeed , and cold , was the sympathy that a transgressor might look for , from such bystanders , at the scaffold . 
On the other hand , a penalty which , in our days , would infer a degree of mocking infamy and ridicule , might then be invested with almost as stern a dignity as the punishment of death itself . 
It was a circumstance to be noted on the summer morning when our story begins its course , that the women , of whom there were several in the crowd , appeared to take a peculiar interest in whatever penal infliction might be expected to ensue . 
The age had not so much refinement , that any sense of impropriety restrained the wearers of petticoat and farthingale from stepping forth into the public ways , and wedging their not unsubstantial persons , if occasion were , into the throng nearest to the scaffold at an execution . 
Morally , as well as materially , there was a coarser fibre in those wives and maidens of old English birth and breeding than in their fair descendants , separated from them by a series of six or seven generations ; for , throughout that chain of ancestry , every successive mother had transmitted to her child a fainter bloom , a more delicate and briefer beauty , and a slighter physical frame , if not character of less force and solidity than her own . 
The women who were now standing about the prison-door stood within less than half a century of the period when the man-like Elizabeth had been the not altogether unsuitable representative of the sex . 
They were her countrywomen : and the beef and ale of their native land , with a moral diet not a whit more refined , entered largely into their composition . 
The bright morning sun , therefore , shone on broad shoulders and well-developed busts , and on round and ruddy cheeks , that had ripened in the far-off island , and had hardly yet grown paler or thinner in the atmosphere of New England . 
There was , moreover , a boldness and rotundity of speech among these matrons , as most of them seemed to be , that would startle us at the present day , whether in respect to its purport or its volume of tone . 
`` Goodwives , '' said a hard-featured dame of fifty , `` I 'll tell ye a piece of my mind . 
It would be greatly for the public behoof if we women , being of mature age and church-members in good repute , should have the handling of such malefactresses as this Hester Prynne . 
What think ye , gossips ? 
If the hussy stood up for judgment before us five , that are now here in a knot together , would she come off with such a sentence as the worshipful magistrates have awarded ? 
Marry , I trow not . '' 
`` People say , '' said another , `` that the Reverend Master Dimmesdale , her godly pastor , takes it very grievously to heart that such a scandal should have come upon his congregation . '' 
`` The magistrates are God-fearing gentlemen , but merciful overmuch -- that is a truth , '' added a third autumnal matron . 
`` At the very least , they should have put the brand of a hot iron on Hester Prynne 's forehead . 
Madame Hester would have winced at that , I warrant me . 
But she -- the naughty baggage -- little will she care what they put upon the bodice of her gown ! 
Why , look you , she may cover it with a brooch , or such like heathenish adornment , and so walk the streets as brave as ever ! '' 
`` Ah , but , '' interposed , more softly , a young wife , holding a child by the hand , `` let her cover the mark as she will , the pang of it will be always in her heart . '' 
`` What do we talk of marks and brands , whether on the bodice of her gown or the flesh of her forehead ? '' 
cried another female , the ugliest as well as the most pitiless of these self-constituted judges . 
`` This woman has brought shame upon us all , and ought to die ; is there not law for it ? 
Truly there is , both in the Scripture and the statute-book . 
Then let the magistrates , who have made it of no effect , thank themselves if their own wives and daughters go astray . '' 
`` Mercy on us , goodwife ! '' 
exclaimed a man in the crowd , `` is there no virtue in woman , save what springs from a wholesome fear of the gallows ? 
That is the hardest word yet ! 
Hush now , gossips for the lock is turning in the prison-door , and here comes Mistress Prynne herself . '' 
The door of the jail being flung open from within there appeared , in the first place , like a black shadow emerging into sunshine , the grim and grisly presence of the town-beadle , with a sword by his side , and his staff of office in his hand . 
This personage prefigured and represented in his aspect the whole dismal severity of the Puritanic code of law , which it was his business to administer in its final and closest application to the offender . 
Stretching forth the official staff in his left hand , he laid his right upon the shoulder of a young woman , whom he thus drew forward , until , on the threshold of the prison-door , she repelled him , by an action marked with natural dignity and force of character , and stepped into the open air as if by her own free will . 
She bore in her arms a child , a baby of some three months old , who winked and turned aside its little face from the too vivid light of day ; because its existence , heretofore , had brought it acquaintance only with the grey twilight of a dungeon , or other darksome apartment of the prison . 
When the young woman -- the mother of this child -- stood fully revealed before the crowd , it seemed to be her first impulse to clasp the infant closely to her bosom ; not so much by an impulse of motherly affection , as that she might thereby conceal a certain token , which was wrought or fastened into her dress . 
In a moment , however , wisely judging that one token of her shame would but poorly serve to hide another , she took the baby on her arm , and with a burning blush , and yet a haughty smile , and a glance that would not be abashed , looked around at her townspeople and neighbours . 
On the breast of her gown , in fine red cloth , surrounded with an elaborate embroidery and fantastic flourishes of gold thread , appeared the letter A . 
It was so artistically done , and with so much fertility and gorgeous luxuriance of fancy , that it had all the effect of a last and fitting decoration to the apparel which she wore , and which was of a splendour in accordance with the taste of the age , but greatly beyond what was allowed by the sumptuary regulations of the colony . 
The young woman was tall , with a figure of perfect elegance on a large scale . 
She had dark and abundant hair , so glossy that it threw off the sunshine with a gleam ; and a face which , besides being beautiful from regularity of feature and richness of complexion , had the impressiveness belonging to a marked brow and deep black eyes . 
She was ladylike , too , after the manner of the feminine gentility of those days ; characterised by a certain state and dignity , rather than by the delicate , evanescent , and indescribable grace which is now recognised as its indication . 
And never had Hester Prynne appeared more ladylike , in the antique interpretation of the term , than as she issued from the prison . 
Those who had before known her , and had expected to behold her dimmed and obscured by a disastrous cloud , were astonished , and even startled , to perceive how her beauty shone out , and made a halo of the misfortune and ignominy in which she was enveloped . 
It may be true that , to a sensitive observer , there was some thing exquisitely painful in it . 
Her attire , which indeed , she had wrought for the occasion in prison , and had modelled much after her own fancy , seemed to express the attitude of her spirit , the desperate recklessness of her mood , by its wild and picturesque peculiarity . 
But the point which drew all eyes , and , as it were , transfigured the wearer -- so that both men and women who had been familiarly acquainted with Hester Prynne were now impressed as if they beheld her for the first time -- was that SCARLET LETTER , so fantastically embroidered and illuminated upon her bosom . 
It had the effect of a spell , taking her out of the ordinary relations with humanity , and enclosing her in a sphere by herself . 
`` She hath good skill at her needle , that 's certain , '' remarked one of her female spectators ; `` but did ever a woman , before this brazen hussy , contrive such a way of showing it ? 
Why , gossips , what is it but to laugh in the faces of our godly magistrates , and make a pride out of what they , worthy gentlemen , meant for a punishment ? '' 
`` It were well , '' muttered the most iron-visaged of the old dames , `` if we stripped Madame Hester 's rich gown off her dainty shoulders ; and as for the red letter which she hath stitched so curiously , I 'll bestow a rag of mine own rheumatic flannel to make a fitter one ! '' 
`` Oh , peace , neighbours -- peace ! '' 
whispered their youngest companion ; `` do not let her hear you ! 
Not a stitch in that embroidered letter but she has felt it in her heart . '' 
The grim beadle now made a gesture with his staff . 
`` Make way , good people -- make way , in the King 's name ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Open a passage ; and I promise ye , Mistress Prynne shall be set where man , woman , and child may have a fair sight of her brave apparel from this time till an hour past meridian . 
A blessing on the righteous colony of the Massachusetts , where iniquity is dragged out into the sunshine ! 
Come along , Madame Hester , and show your scarlet letter in the market-place ! '' 
A lane was forthwith opened through the crowd of spectators . 
Preceded by the beadle , and attended by an irregular procession of stern-browed men and unkindly visaged women , Hester Prynne set forth towards the place appointed for her punishment . 
A crowd of eager and curious schoolboys , understanding little of the matter in hand , except that it gave them a half-holiday , ran before her progress , turning their heads continually to stare into her face and at the winking baby in her arms , and at the ignominious letter on her breast . 
It was no great distance , in those days , from the prison door to the market-place . 
Measured by the prisoner 's experience , however , it might be reckoned a journey of some length ; for haughty as her demeanour was , she perchance underwent an agony from every footstep of those that thronged to see her , as if her heart had been flung into the street for them all to spurn and trample upon . 
In our nature , however , there is a provision , alike marvellous and merciful , that the sufferer should never know the intensity of what he endures by its present torture , but chiefly by the pang that rankles after it . 
With almost a serene deportment , therefore , Hester Prynne passed through this portion of her ordeal , and came to a sort of scaffold , at the western extremity of the market-place . 
It stood nearly beneath the eaves of Boston 's earliest church , and appeared to be a fixture there . 
In fact , this scaffold constituted a portion of a penal machine , which now , for two or three generations past , has been merely historical and traditionary among us , but was held , in the old time , to be as effectual an agent , in the promotion of good citizenship , as ever was the guillotine among the terrorists of France . 
It was , in short , the platform of the pillory ; and above it rose the framework of that instrument of discipline , so fashioned as to confine the human head in its tight grasp , and thus hold it up to the public gaze . 
The very ideal of ignominy was embodied and made manifest in this contrivance of wood and iron . 
There can be no outrage , methinks , against our common nature -- whatever be the delinquencies of the individual -- no outrage more flagrant than to forbid the culprit to hide his face for shame ; as it was the essence of this punishment to do . 
In Hester Prynne 's instance , however , as not unfrequently in other cases , her sentence bore that she should stand a certain time upon the platform , but without undergoing that gripe about the neck and confinement of the head , the proneness to which was the most devilish characteristic of this ugly engine . 
Knowing well her part , she ascended a flight of wooden steps , and was thus displayed to the surrounding multitude , at about the height of a man 's shoulders above the street . 
Had there been a Papist among the crowd of Puritans , he might have seen in this beautiful woman , so picturesque in her attire and mien , and with the infant at her bosom , an object to remind him of the image of Divine Maternity , which so many illustrious painters have vied with one another to represent ; something which should remind him , indeed , but only by contrast , of that sacred image of sinless motherhood , whose infant was to redeem the world . 
Here , there was the taint of deepest sin in the most sacred quality of human life , working such effect , that the world was only the darker for this woman 's beauty , and the more lost for the infant that she had borne . 
The scene was not without a mixture of awe , such as must always invest the spectacle of guilt and shame in a fellow-creature , before society shall have grown corrupt enough to smile , instead of shuddering at it . 
The witnesses of Hester Prynne 's disgrace had not yet passed beyond their simplicity . 
They were stern enough to look upon her death , had that been the sentence , without a murmur at its severity , but had none of the heartlessness of another social state , which would find only a theme for jest in an exhibition like the present . 
Even had there been a disposition to turn the matter into ridicule , it must have been repressed and overpowered by the solemn presence of men no less dignified than the governor , and several of his counsellors , a judge , a general , and the ministers of the town , all of whom sat or stood in a balcony of the meeting-house , looking down upon the platform . 
When such personages could constitute a part of the spectacle , without risking the majesty , or reverence of rank and office , it was safely to be inferred that the infliction of a legal sentence would have an earnest and effectual meaning . 
Accordingly , the crowd was sombre and grave . 
The unhappy culprit sustained herself as best a woman might , under the heavy weight of a thousand unrelenting eyes , all fastened upon her , and concentrated at her bosom . 
It was almost intolerable to be borne . 
Of an impulsive and passionate nature , she had fortified herself to encounter the stings and venomous stabs of public contumely , wreaking itself in every variety of insult ; but there was a quality so much more terrible in the solemn mood of the popular mind , that she longed rather to behold all those rigid countenances contorted with scornful merriment , and herself the object . 
Had a roar of laughter burst from the multitude -- each man , each woman , each little shrill-voiced child , contributing their individual parts -- Hester Prynne might have repaid them all with a bitter and disdainful smile . 
But , under the leaden infliction which it was her doom to endure , she felt , at moments , as if she must needs shriek out with the full power of her lungs , and cast herself from the scaffold down upon the ground , or else go mad at once . 
Yet there were intervals when the whole scene , in which she was the most conspicuous object , seemed to vanish from her eyes , or , at least , glimmered indistinctly before them , like a mass of imperfectly shaped and spectral images . 
Her mind , and especially her memory , was preternaturally active , and kept bringing up other scenes than this roughly hewn street of a little town , on the edge of the western wilderness : other faces than were lowering upon her from beneath the brims of those steeple-crowned hats . 
Reminiscences , the most trifling and immaterial , passages of infancy and school-days , sports , childish quarrels , and the little domestic traits of her maiden years , came swarming back upon her , intermingled with recollections of whatever was gravest in her subsequent life ; one picture precisely as vivid as another ; as if all were of similar importance , or all alike a play . 
Possibly , it was an instinctive device of her spirit to relieve itself by the exhibition of these phantasmagoric forms , from the cruel weight and hardness of the reality . 
Be that as it might , the scaffold of the pillory was a point of view that revealed to Hester Prynne the entire track along which she had been treading , since her happy infancy . 
Standing on that miserable eminence , she saw again her native village , in Old England , and her paternal home : a decayed house of grey stone , with a poverty-stricken aspect , but retaining a half obliterated shield of arms over the portal , in token of antique gentility . 
She saw her father 's face , with its bold brow , and reverend white beard that flowed over the old-fashioned Elizabethan ruff ; her mother 's , too , with the look of heedful and anxious love which it always wore in her remembrance , and which , even since her death , had so often laid the impediment of a gentle remonstrance in her daughter 's pathway . 
She saw her own face , glowing with girlish beauty , and illuminating all the interior of the dusky mirror in which she had been wont to gaze at it . 
There she beheld another countenance , of a man well stricken in years , a pale , thin , scholar-like visage , with eyes dim and bleared by the lamp-light that had served them to pore over many ponderous books . 
Yet those same bleared optics had a strange , penetrating power , when it was their owner 's purpose to read the human soul . 
This figure of the study and the cloister , as Hester Prynne 's womanly fancy failed not to recall , was slightly deformed , with the left shoulder a trifle higher than the right . 
Next rose before her in memory 's picture-gallery , the intricate and narrow thoroughfares , the tall , grey houses , the huge cathedrals , and the public edifices , ancient in date and quaint in architecture , of a continental city ; where new life had awaited her , still in connexion with the misshapen scholar : a new life , but feeding itself on time-worn materials , like a tuft of green moss on a crumbling wall . 
Lastly , in lieu of these shifting scenes , came back the rude market-place of the Puritan , settlement , with all the townspeople assembled , and levelling their stern regards at Hester Prynne -- yes , at herself -- who stood on the scaffold of the pillory , an infant on her arm , and the letter A , in scarlet , fantastically embroidered with gold thread , upon her bosom . 
Could it be true ? 
She clutched the child so fiercely to her breast that it sent forth a cry ; she turned her eyes downward at the scarlet letter , and even touched it with her finger , to assure herself that the infant and the shame were real . 
Yes these were her realities -- all else had vanished ! 
From this intense consciousness of being the object of severe and universal observation , the wearer of the scarlet letter was at length relieved , by discerning , on the outskirts of the crowd , a figure which irresistibly took possession of her thoughts . 
An Indian in his native garb was standing there ; but the red men were not so infrequent visitors of the English settlements that one of them would have attracted any notice from Hester Prynne at such a time ; much less would he have excluded all other objects and ideas from her mind . 
By the Indian 's side , and evidently sustaining a companionship with him , stood a white man , clad in a strange disarray of civilized and savage costume . 
He was small in stature , with a furrowed visage , which as yet could hardly be termed aged . 
There was a remarkable intelligence in his features , as of a person who had so cultivated his mental part that it could not fail to mould the physical to itself and become manifest by unmistakable tokens . 
Although , by a seemingly careless arrangement of his heterogeneous garb , he had endeavoured to conceal or abate the peculiarity , it was sufficiently evident to Hester Prynne that one of this man 's shoulders rose higher than the other . 
Again , at the first instant of perceiving that thin visage , and the slight deformity of the figure , she pressed her infant to her bosom with so convulsive a force that the poor babe uttered another cry of pain . 
But the mother did not seem to hear it . 
At his arrival in the market-place , and some time before she saw him , the stranger had bent his eyes on Hester Prynne . 
It was carelessly at first , like a man chiefly accustomed to look inward , and to whom external matters are of little value and import , unless they bear relation to something within his mind . 
Very soon , however , his look became keen and penetrative . 
A writhing horror twisted itself across his features , like a snake gliding swiftly over them , and making one little pause , with all its wreathed intervolutions in open sight . 
His face darkened with some powerful emotion , which , nevertheless , he so instantaneously controlled by an effort of his will , that , save at a single moment , its expression might have passed for calmness . 
After a brief space , the convulsion grew almost imperceptible , and finally subsided into the depths of his nature . 
When he found the eyes of Hester Prynne fastened on his own , and saw that she appeared to recognize him , he slowly and calmly raised his finger , made a gesture with it in the air , and laid it on his lips . 
Then touching the shoulder of a townsman who stood near to him , he addressed him in a formal and courteous manner : `` I pray you , good Sir , '' said he , `` who is this woman ? 
-- and wherefore is she here set up to public shame ? '' 
`` You must needs be a stranger in this region , friend , '' answered the townsman , looking curiously at the questioner and his savage companion , `` else you would surely have heard of Mistress Hester Prynne and her evil doings . 
She hath raised a great scandal , I promise you , in godly Master Dimmesdale 's church . '' 
`` You say truly , '' replied the other ; `` I am a stranger , and have been a wanderer , sorely against my will . 
I have met with grievous mishaps by sea and land , and have been long held in bonds among the heathen-folk to the southward ; and am now brought hither by this Indian to be redeemed out of my captivity . 
Will it please you , therefore , to tell me of Hester Prynne 's -- have I her name rightly ? 
-- of this woman 's offences , and what has brought her to yonder scaffold ? '' 
`` Truly , friend ; and methinks it must gladden your heart , after your troubles and sojourn in the wilderness , '' said the townsman , `` to find yourself at length in a land where iniquity is searched out and punished in the sight of rulers and people , as here in our godly New England . 
Yonder woman , Sir , you must know , was the wife of a certain learned man , English by birth , but who had long ago dwelt in Amsterdam , whence some good time agone he was minded to cross over and cast in his lot with us of the Massachusetts . 
To this purpose he sent his wife before him , remaining himself to look after some necessary affairs . 
Marry , good Sir , in some two years , or less , that the woman has been a dweller here in Boston , no tidings have come of this learned gentleman , Master Prynne ; and his young wife , look you , being left to her own misguidance -- '' `` Ah ! 
-- aha ! 
-- I conceive you , '' said the stranger with a bitter smile . 
`` So learned a man as you speak of should have learned this too in his books . 
And who , by your favour , Sir , may be the father of yonder babe -- it is some three or four months old , I should judge -- which Mistress Prynne is holding in her arms ? '' 
`` Of a truth , friend , that matter remaineth a riddle ; and the Daniel who shall expound it is yet a-wanting , '' answered the townsman . 
`` Madame Hester absolutely refuseth to speak , and the magistrates have laid their heads together in vain . 
Peradventure the guilty one stands looking on at this sad spectacle , unknown of man , and forgetting that God sees him . '' 
`` The learned man , '' observed the stranger with another smile , `` should come himself to look into the mystery . '' 
`` It behoves him well if he be still in life , '' responded the townsman . 
`` Now , good Sir , our Massachusetts magistracy , bethinking themselves that this woman is youthful and fair , and doubtless was strongly tempted to her fall , and that , moreover , as is most likely , her husband may be at the bottom of the sea , they have not been bold to put in force the extremity of our righteous law against her . 
The penalty thereof is death . 
But in their great mercy and tenderness of heart they have doomed Mistress Prynne to stand only a space of three hours on the platform of the pillory , and then and thereafter , for the remainder of her natural life to wear a mark of shame upon her bosom . '' 
`` A wise sentence , '' remarked the stranger , gravely , bowing his head . 
`` Thus she will be a living sermon against sin , until the ignominious letter be engraved upon her tombstone . 
It irks me , nevertheless , that the partner of her iniquity should not at least , stand on the scaffold by her side . 
But he will be known -- he will be known ! 
-- he will be known ! '' 
He bowed courteously to the communicative townsman , and whispering a few words to his Indian attendant , they both made their way through the crowd . 
While this passed , Hester Prynne had been standing on her pedestal , still with a fixed gaze towards the stranger -- so fixed a gaze that , at moments of intense absorption , all other objects in the visible world seemed to vanish , leaving only him and her . 
Such an interview , perhaps , would have been more terrible than even to meet him as she now did , with the hot mid-day sun burning down upon her face , and lighting up its shame ; with the scarlet token of infamy on her breast ; with the sin-born infant in her arms ; with a whole people , drawn forth as to a festival , staring at the features that should have been seen only in the quiet gleam of the fireside , in the happy shadow of a home , or beneath a matronly veil at church . 
Dreadful as it was , she was conscious of a shelter in the presence of these thousand witnesses . 
It was better to stand thus , with so many betwixt him and her , than to greet him face to face -- they two alone . 
She fled for refuge , as it were , to the public exposure , and dreaded the moment when its protection should be withdrawn from her . 
Involved in these thoughts , she scarcely heard a voice behind her until it had repeated her name more than once , in a loud and solemn tone , audible to the whole multitude . 
`` Hearken unto me , Hester Prynne ! '' 
said the voice . 
It has already been noticed that directly over the platform on which Hester Prynne stood was a kind of balcony , or open gallery , appended to the meeting-house . 
It was the place whence proclamations were wont to be made , amidst an assemblage of the magistracy , with all the ceremonial that attended such public observances in those days . 
Here , to witness the scene which we are describing , sat Governor Bellingham himself with four sergeants about his chair , bearing halberds , as a guard of honour . 
He wore a dark feather in his hat , a border of embroidery on his cloak , and a black velvet tunic beneath -- a gentleman advanced in years , with a hard experience written in his wrinkles . 
He was not ill-fitted to be the head and representative of a community which owed its origin and progress , and its present state of development , not to the impulses of youth , but to the stern and tempered energies of manhood and the sombre sagacity of age ; accomplishing so much , precisely because it imagined and hoped so little . 
The other eminent characters by whom the chief ruler was surrounded were distinguished by a dignity of mien , belonging to a period when the forms of authority were felt to possess the sacredness of Divine institutions . 
They were , doubtless , good men , just and sage . 
But , out of the whole human family , it would not have been easy to select the same number of wise and virtuous persons , who should be less capable of sitting in judgment on an erring woman 's heart , and disentangling its mesh of good and evil , than the sages of rigid aspect towards whom Hester Prynne now turned her face . 
She seemed conscious , indeed , that whatever sympathy she might expect lay in the larger and warmer heart of the multitude ; for , as she lifted her eyes towards the balcony , the unhappy woman grew pale , and trembled . 
The voice which had called her attention was that of the reverend and famous John Wilson , the eldest clergyman of Boston , a great scholar , like most of his contemporaries in the profession , and withal a man of kind and genial spirit . 
This last attribute , however , had been less carefully developed than his intellectual gifts , and was , in truth , rather a matter of shame than self-congratulation with him . 
There he stood , with a border of grizzled locks beneath his skull-cap , while his grey eyes , accustomed to the shaded light of his study , were winking , like those of Hester 's infant , in the unadulterated sunshine . 
He looked like the darkly engraved portraits which we see prefixed to old volumes of sermons , and had no more right than one of those portraits would have to step forth , as he now did , and meddle with a question of human guilt , passion , and anguish . 
`` Hester Prynne , '' said the clergyman , `` I have striven with my young brother here , under whose preaching of the Word you have been privileged to sit '' -- here Mr. Wilson laid his hand on the shoulder of a pale young man beside him -- `` I have sought , I say , to persuade this godly youth , that he should deal with you , here in the face of Heaven , and before these wise and upright rulers , and in hearing of all the people , as touching the vileness and blackness of your sin . 
Knowing your natural temper better than I , he could the better judge what arguments to use , whether of tenderness or terror , such as might prevail over your hardness and obstinacy , insomuch that you should no longer hide the name of him who tempted you to this grievous fall . 
But he opposes to me -- with a young man 's over-softness , albeit wise beyond his years -- that it were wronging the very nature of woman to force her to lay open her heart 's secrets in such broad daylight , and in presence of so great a multitude . 
Truly , as I sought to convince him , the shame lay in the commission of the sin , and not in the showing of it forth . 
What say you to it , once again , brother Dimmesdale ? 
Must it be thou , or I , that shall deal with this poor sinner 's soul ? '' 
There was a murmur among the dignified and reverend occupants of the balcony ; and Governor Bellingham gave expression to its purport , speaking in an authoritative voice , although tempered with respect towards the youthful clergyman whom he addressed : `` Good Master Dimmesdale , '' said he , `` the responsibility of this woman 's soul lies greatly with you . 
It behoves you ; therefore , to exhort her to repentance and to confession , as a proof and consequence thereof . '' 
The directness of this appeal drew the eyes of the whole crowd upon the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale -- young clergyman , who had come from one of the great English universities , bringing all the learning of the age into our wild forest land . 
His eloquence and religious fervour had already given the earnest of high eminence in his profession . 
He was a person of very striking aspect , with a white , lofty , and impending brow ; large , brown , melancholy eyes , and a mouth which , unless when he forcibly compressed it , was apt to be tremulous , expressing both nervous sensibility and a vast power of self restraint . 
Notwithstanding his high native gifts and scholar-like attainments , there was an air about this young minister -- an apprehensive , a startled , a half-frightened look -- as of a being who felt himself quite astray , and at a loss in the pathway of human existence , and could only be at ease in some seclusion of his own . 
Therefore , so far as his duties would permit , he trod in the shadowy by-paths , and thus kept himself simple and childlike , coming forth , when occasion was , with a freshness , and fragrance , and dewy purity of thought , which , as many people said , affected them like the speech of an angel . 
Such was the young man whom the Reverend Mr. Wilson and the Governor had introduced so openly to the public notice , bidding him speak , in the hearing of all men , to that mystery of a woman 's soul , so sacred even in its pollution . 
The trying nature of his position drove the blood from his cheek , and made his lips tremulous . 
`` Speak to the woman , my brother , '' said Mr. Wilson . 
`` It is of moment to her soul , and , therefore , as the worshipful Governor says , momentous to thine own , in whose charge hers is . 
Exhort her to confess the truth ! '' 
The Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale bent his head , in silent prayer , as it seemed , and then came forward . 
`` Hester Prynne , '' said he , leaning over the balcony and looking down steadfastly into her eyes , `` thou hearest what this good man says , and seest the accountability under which I labour . 
If thou feelest it to be for thy soul 's peace , and that thy earthly punishment will thereby be made more effectual to salvation , I charge thee to speak out the name of thy fellow-sinner and fellow-sufferer ! 
Be not silent from any mistaken pity and tenderness for him ; for , believe me , Hester , though he were to step down from a high place , and stand there beside thee , on thy pedestal of shame , yet better were it so than to hide a guilty heart through life . 
What can thy silence do for him , except it tempt him -- yea , compel him , as it were -- to add hypocrisy to sin ? 
Heaven hath granted thee an open ignominy , that thereby thou mayest work out an open triumph over the evil within thee and the sorrow without . 
Take heed how thou deniest to him -- who , perchance , hath not the courage to grasp it for himself -- the bitter , but wholesome , cup that is now presented to thy lips ! '' 
The young pastor 's voice was tremulously sweet , rich , deep , and broken . 
The feeling that it so evidently manifested , rather than the direct purport of the words , caused it to vibrate within all hearts , and brought the listeners into one accord of sympathy . 
Even the poor baby at Hester 's bosom was affected by the same influence , for it directed its hitherto vacant gaze towards Mr. Dimmesdale , and held up its little arms with a half-pleased , half-plaintive murmur . 
So powerful seemed the minister 's appeal that the people could not believe but that Hester Prynne would speak out the guilty name , or else that the guilty one himself in whatever high or lowly place he stood , would be drawn forth by an inward and inevitable necessity , and compelled to ascend the scaffold . 
Hester shook her head . 
`` Woman , transgress not beyond the limits of Heaven 's mercy ! '' 
cried the Reverend Mr. Wilson , more harshly than before . 
`` That little babe hath been gifted with a voice , to second and confirm the counsel which thou hast heard . 
Speak out the name ! 
That , and thy repentance , may avail to take the scarlet letter off thy breast . '' 
`` Never , '' replied Hester Prynne , looking , not at Mr. Wilson , but into the deep and troubled eyes of the younger clergyman . 
`` It is too deeply branded . 
Ye can not take it off . 
And would that I might endure his agony as well as mine ! '' 
`` Speak , woman ! '' 
said another voice , coldly and sternly , proceeding from the crowd about the scaffold , `` Speak ; and give your child a father ! '' 
`` I will not speak ! '' 
answered Hester , turning pale as death , but responding to this voice , which she too surely recognised . 
`` And my child must seek a heavenly father ; she shall never know an earthly one ! '' 
`` She will not speak ! '' 
murmured Mr. Dimmesdale , who , leaning over the balcony , with his hand upon his heart , had awaited the result of his appeal . 
He now drew back with a long respiration . 
`` Wondrous strength and generosity of a woman 's heart ! 
She will not speak ! '' 
Discerning the impracticable state of the poor culprit 's mind , the elder clergyman , who had carefully prepared himself for the occasion , addressed to the multitude a discourse on sin , in all its branches , but with continual reference to the ignominious letter . 
So forcibly did he dwell upon this symbol , for the hour or more during which his periods were rolling over the people 's heads , that it assumed new terrors in their imagination , and seemed to derive its scarlet hue from the flames of the infernal pit . 
Hester Prynne , meanwhile , kept her place upon the pedestal of shame , with glazed eyes , and an air of weary indifference . 
She had borne that morning all that nature could endure ; and as her temperament was not of the order that escapes from too intense suffering by a swoon , her spirit could only shelter itself beneath a stony crust of insensibility , while the faculties of animal life remained entire . 
In this state , the voice of the preacher thundered remorselessly , but unavailingly , upon her ears . 
The infant , during the latter portion of her ordeal , pierced the air with its wailings and screams ; she strove to hush it mechanically , but seemed scarcely to sympathise with its trouble . 
With the same hard demeanour , she was led back to prison , and vanished from the public gaze within its iron-clamped portal . 
It was whispered by those who peered after her that the scarlet letter threw a lurid gleam along the dark passage-way of the interior . 
After her return to the prison , Hester Prynne was found to be in a state of nervous excitement , that demanded constant watchfulness , lest she should perpetrate violence on herself , or do some half-frenzied mischief to the poor babe . 
As night approached , it proving impossible to quell her insubordination by rebuke or threats of punishment , Master Brackett , the jailer , thought fit to introduce a physician . 
He described him as a man of skill in all Christian modes of physical science , and likewise familiar with whatever the savage people could teach in respect to medicinal herbs and roots that grew in the forest . 
To say the truth , there was much need of professional assistance , not merely for Hester herself , but still more urgently for the child -- who , drawing its sustenance from the maternal bosom , seemed to have drank in with it all the turmoil , the anguish and despair , which pervaded the mother 's system . 
It now writhed in convulsions of pain , and was a forcible type , in its little frame , of the moral agony which Hester Prynne had borne throughout the day . 
Closely following the jailer into the dismal apartment , appeared that individual , of singular aspect whose presence in the crowd had been of such deep interest to the wearer of the scarlet letter . 
He was lodged in the prison , not as suspected of any offence , but as the most convenient and suitable mode of disposing of him , until the magistrates should have conferred with the Indian sagamores respecting his ransom . 
His name was announced as Roger Chillingworth . 
The jailer , after ushering him into the room , remained a moment , marvelling at the comparative quiet that followed his entrance ; for Hester Prynne had immediately become as still as death , although the child continued to moan . 
`` Prithee , friend , leave me alone with my patient , '' said the practitioner . 
`` Trust me , good jailer , you shall briefly have peace in your house ; and , I promise you , Mistress Prynne shall hereafter be more amenable to just authority than you may have found her heretofore . '' 
`` Nay , if your worship can accomplish that , '' answered Master Brackett , `` I shall own you for a man of skill , indeed ! 
Verily , the woman hath been like a possessed one ; and there lacks little that I should take in hand , to drive Satan out of her with stripes . '' 
The stranger had entered the room with the characteristic quietude of the profession to which he announced himself as belonging . 
Nor did his demeanour change when the withdrawal of the prison keeper left him face to face with the woman , whose absorbed notice of him , in the crowd , had intimated so close a relation between himself and her . 
His first care was given to the child , whose cries , indeed , as she lay writhing on the trundle-bed , made it of peremptory necessity to postpone all other business to the task of soothing her . 
He examined the infant carefully , and then proceeded to unclasp a leathern case , which he took from beneath his dress . 
It appeared to contain medical preparations , one of which he mingled with a cup of water . 
`` My old studies in alchemy , '' observed he , `` and my sojourn , for above a year past , among a people well versed in the kindly properties of simples , have made a better physician of me than many that claim the medical degree . 
Here , woman ! 
The child is yours -- she is none of mine -- neither will she recognise my voice or aspect as a father 's . 
Administer this draught , therefore , with thine own hand . '' 
Hester repelled the offered medicine , at the same time gazing with strongly marked apprehension into his face . 
`` Wouldst thou avenge thyself on the innocent babe ? '' 
whispered she . 
`` Foolish woman ! '' 
responded the physician , half coldly , half soothingly . 
`` What should ail me to harm this misbegotten and miserable babe ? 
The medicine is potent for good , and were it my child -- yea , mine own , as well as thine ! 
I could do no better for it . '' 
As she still hesitated , being , in fact , in no reasonable state of mind , he took the infant in his arms , and himself administered the draught . 
It soon proved its efficacy , and redeemed the leech 's pledge . 
The moans of the little patient subsided ; its convulsive tossings gradually ceased ; and in a few moments , as is the custom of young children after relief from pain , it sank into a profound and dewy slumber . 
The physician , as he had a fair right to be termed , next bestowed his attention on the mother . 
With calm and intent scrutiny , he felt her pulse , looked into her eyes -- a gaze that made her heart shrink and shudder , because so familiar , and yet so strange and cold -- and , finally , satisfied with his investigation , proceeded to mingle another draught . 
`` I know not Lethe nor Nepenthe , '' remarked he ; `` but I have learned many new secrets in the wilderness , and here is one of them -- a recipe that an Indian taught me , in requital of some lessons of my own , that were as old as Paracelsus . 
Drink it ! 
It may be less soothing than a sinless conscience . 
That I can not give thee . 
But it will calm the swell and heaving of thy passion , like oil thrown on the waves of a tempestuous sea . '' 
He presented the cup to Hester , who received it with a slow , earnest look into his face ; not precisely a look of fear , yet full of doubt and questioning as to what his purposes might be . 
She looked also at her slumbering child . 
`` I have thought of death , '' said she -- `` have wished for it -- would even have prayed for it , were it fit that such as I should pray for anything . 
Yet , if death be in this cup , I bid thee think again , ere thou beholdest me quaff it . 
See ! 
it is even now at my lips . '' 
`` Drink , then , '' replied he , still with the same cold composure . 
`` Dost thou know me so little , Hester Prynne ? 
Are my purposes wont to be so shallow ? 
Even if I imagine a scheme of vengeance , what could I do better for my object than to let thee live -- than to give thee medicines against all harm and peril of life -- so that this burning shame may still blaze upon thy bosom ? '' 
As he spoke , he laid his long fore-finger on the scarlet letter , which forthwith seemed to scorch into Hester 's breast , as if it had been red hot . 
He noticed her involuntary gesture , and smiled . 
`` Live , therefore , and bear about thy doom with thee , in the eyes of men and women -- in the eyes of him whom thou didst call thy husband -- in the eyes of yonder child ! 
And , that thou mayest live , take off this draught . '' 
Without further expostulation or delay , Hester Prynne drained the cup , and , at the motion of the man of skill , seated herself on the bed , where the child was sleeping ; while he drew the only chair which the room afforded , and took his own seat beside her . 
She could not but tremble at these preparations ; for she felt that -- having now done all that humanity , or principle , or , if so it were , a refined cruelty , impelled him to do for the relief of physical suffering -- he was next to treat with her as the man whom she had most deeply and irreparably injured . 
`` Hester , '' said he , `` I ask not wherefore , nor how thou hast fallen into the pit , or say , rather , thou hast ascended to the pedestal of infamy on which I found thee . 
The reason is not far to seek . 
It was my folly , and thy weakness . 
I -- a man of thought -- the book-worm of great libraries -- a man already in decay , having given my best years to feed the hungry dream of knowledge -- what had I to do with youth and beauty like thine own ? 
Misshapen from my birth-hour , how could I delude myself with the idea that intellectual gifts might veil physical deformity in a young girl 's fantasy ? 
Men call me wise . 
If sages were ever wise in their own behoof , I might have foreseen all this . 
I might have known that , as I came out of the vast and dismal forest , and entered this settlement of Christian men , the very first object to meet my eyes would be thyself , Hester Prynne , standing up , a statue of ignominy , before the people . 
Nay , from the moment when we came down the old church-steps together , a married pair , I might have beheld the bale-fire of that scarlet letter blazing at the end of our path ! '' 
`` Thou knowest , '' said Hester -- for , depressed as she was , she could not endure this last quiet stab at the token of her shame -- `` thou knowest that I was frank with thee . 
I felt no love , nor feigned any . '' 
`` True , '' replied he . 
`` It was my folly ! 
I have said it . 
But , up to that epoch of my life , I had lived in vain . 
The world had been so cheerless ! 
My heart was a habitation large enough for many guests , but lonely and chill , and without a household fire . 
I longed to kindle one ! 
It seemed not so wild a dream -- old as I was , and sombre as I was , and misshapen as I was -- that the simple bliss , which is scattered far and wide , for all mankind to gather up , might yet be mine . 
And so , Hester , I drew thee into my heart , into its innermost chamber , and sought to warm thee by the warmth which thy presence made there ! '' 
`` I have greatly wronged thee , '' murmured Hester . 
`` We have wronged each other , '' answered he . 
`` Mine was the first wrong , when I betrayed thy budding youth into a false and unnatural relation with my decay . 
Therefore , as a man who has not thought and philosophised in vain , I seek no vengeance , plot no evil against thee . 
Between thee and me , the scale hangs fairly balanced . 
But , Hester , the man lives who has wronged us both ! 
Who is he ? '' 
`` Ask me not ! '' 
replied Hester Prynne , looking firmly into his face . 
`` That thou shalt never know ! '' 
`` Never , sayest thou ? '' 
rejoined he , with a smile of dark and self-relying intelligence . 
`` Never know him ! 
Believe me , Hester , there are few things whether in the outward world , or , to a certain depth , in the invisible sphere of thought -- few things hidden from the man who devotes himself earnestly and unreservedly to the solution of a mystery . 
Thou mayest cover up thy secret from the prying multitude . 
Thou mayest conceal it , too , from the ministers and magistrates , even as thou didst this day , when they sought to wrench the name out of thy heart , and give thee a partner on thy pedestal . 
But , as for me , I come to the inquest with other senses than they possess . 
I shall seek this man , as I have sought truth in books : as I have sought gold in alchemy . 
There is a sympathy that will make me conscious of him . 
I shall see him tremble . 
I shall feel myself shudder , suddenly and unawares . 
Sooner or later , he must needs be mine . '' 
The eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed so intensely upon her , that Hester Prynne clasped her hand over her heart , dreading lest he should read the secret there at once . 
`` Thou wilt not reveal his name ? 
Not the less he is mine , '' resumed he , with a look of confidence , as if destiny were at one with him . 
`` He bears no letter of infamy wrought into his garment , as thou dost , but I shall read it on his heart . 
Yet fear not for him ! 
Think not that I shall interfere with Heaven 's own method of retribution , or , to my own loss , betray him to the gripe of human law . 
Neither do thou imagine that I shall contrive aught against his life ; no , nor against his fame , if as I judge , he be a man of fair repute . 
Let him live ! 
Let him hide himself in outward honour , if he may ! 
Not the less he shall be mine ! '' 
`` Thy acts are like mercy , '' said Hester , bewildered and appalled ; `` but thy words interpret thee as a terror ! '' 
`` One thing , thou that wast my wife , I would enjoin upon thee , '' continued the scholar . 
`` Thou hast kept the secret of thy paramour . 
Keep , likewise , mine ! 
There are none in this land that know me . 
Breathe not to any human soul that thou didst ever call me husband ! 
Here , on this wild outskirt of the earth , I shall pitch my tent ; for , elsewhere a wanderer , and isolated from human interests , I find here a woman , a man , a child , amongst whom and myself there exist the closest ligaments . 
No matter whether of love or hate : no matter whether of right or wrong ! 
Thou and thine , Hester Prynne , belong to me . 
My home is where thou art and where he is . 
But betray me not ! '' 
`` Wherefore dost thou desire it ? '' 
inquired Hester , shrinking , she hardly knew why , from this secret bond . 
`` Why not announce thyself openly , and cast me off at once ? '' 
`` It may be , '' he replied , `` because I will not encounter the dishonour that besmirches the husband of a faithless woman . 
It may be for other reasons . 
Enough , it is my purpose to live and die unknown . 
Let , therefore , thy husband be to the world as one already dead , and of whom no tidings shall ever come . 
Recognise me not , by word , by sign , by look ! 
Breathe not the secret , above all , to the man thou wottest of . 
Shouldst thou fail me in this , beware ! 
His fame , his position , his life will be in my hands . 
Beware ! '' 
`` I will keep thy secret , as I have his , '' said Hester . 
`` Swear it ! '' 
rejoined he . 
And she took the oath . 
`` And now , Mistress Prynne , '' said old Roger Chillingworth , as he was hereafter to be named , `` I leave thee alone : alone with thy infant and the scarlet letter ! 
How is it , Hester ? 
Doth thy sentence bind thee to wear the token in thy sleep ? 
Art thou not afraid of nightmares and hideous dreams ? '' 
`` Why dost thou smile so at me ? '' 
inquired Hester , troubled at the expression of his eyes . 
`` Art thou like the Black Man that haunts the forest round about us ? 
Hast thou enticed me into a bond that will prove the ruin of my soul ? '' 
`` Not thy soul , '' he answered , with another smile . 
`` No , not thine ! '' 
Hester Prynne 's term of confinement was now at an end . 
Her prison-door was thrown open , and she came forth into the sunshine , which , falling on all alike , seemed , to her sick and morbid heart , as if meant for no other purpose than to reveal the scarlet letter on her breast . 
Perhaps there was a more real torture in her first unattended footsteps from the threshold of the prison than even in the procession and spectacle that have been described , where she was made the common infamy , at which all mankind was summoned to point its finger . 
Then , she was supported by an unnatural tension of the nerves , and by all the combative energy of her character , which enabled her to convert the scene into a kind of lurid triumph . 
It was , moreover , a separate and insulated event , to occur but once in her lifetime , and to meet which , therefore , reckless of economy , she might call up the vital strength that would have sufficed for many quiet years . 
The very law that condemned her -- a giant of stern features but with vigour to support , as well as to annihilate , in his iron arm -- had held her up through the terrible ordeal of her ignominy . 
But now , with this unattended walk from her prison door , began the daily custom ; and she must either sustain and carry it forward by the ordinary resources of her nature , or sink beneath it . 
She could no longer borrow from the future to help her through the present grief . 
Tomorrow would bring its own trial with it ; so would the next day , and so would the next : each its own trial , and yet the very same that was now so unutterably grievous to be borne . 
The days of the far-off future would toil onward , still with the same burden for her to take up , and bear along with her , but never to fling down ; for the accumulating days and added years would pile up their misery upon the heap of shame . 
Throughout them all , giving up her individuality , she would become the general symbol at which the preacher and moralist might point , and in which they might vivify and embody their images of woman 's frailty and sinful passion . 
Thus the young and pure would be taught to look at her , with the scarlet letter flaming on her breast -- at her , the child of honourable parents -- at her , the mother of a babe that would hereafter be a woman -- at her , who had once been innocent -- as the figure , the body , the reality of sin . 
And over her grave , the infamy that she must carry thither would be her only monument . 
It may seem marvellous that , with the world before her -- kept by no restrictive clause of her condemnation within the limits of the Puritan settlement , so remote and so obscure -- free to return to her birth-place , or to any other European land , and there hide her character and identity under a new exterior , as completely as if emerging into another state of being -- and having also the passes of the dark , inscrutable forest open to her , where the wildness of her nature might assimilate itself with a people whose customs and life were alien from the law that had condemned her -- it may seem marvellous that this woman should still call that place her home , where , and where only , she must needs be the type of shame . 
But there is a fatality , a feeling so irresistible and inevitable that it has the force of doom , which almost invariably compels human beings to linger around and haunt , ghost-like , the spot where some great and marked event has given the colour to their lifetime ; and , still the more irresistibly , the darker the tinge that saddens it . 
Her sin , her ignominy , were the roots which she had struck into the soil . 
It was as if a new birth , with stronger assimilations than the first , had converted the forest-land , still so uncongenial to every other pilgrim and wanderer , into Hester Prynne 's wild and dreary , but life-long home . 
All other scenes of earth -- even that village of rural England , where happy infancy and stainless maidenhood seemed yet to be in her mother 's keeping , like garments put off long ago -- were foreign to her , in comparison . 
The chain that bound her here was of iron links , and galling to her inmost soul , but could never be broken . 
It might be , too -- doubtless it was so , although she hid the secret from herself , and grew pale whenever it struggled out of her heart , like a serpent from its hole -- it might be that another feeling kept her within the scene and pathway that had been so fatal . 
There dwelt , there trode , the feet of one with whom she deemed herself connected in a union that , unrecognised on earth , would bring them together before the bar of final judgment , and make that their marriage-altar , for a joint futurity of endless retribution . 
Over and over again , the tempter of souls had thrust this idea upon Hester 's contemplation , and laughed at the passionate and desperate joy with which she seized , and then strove to cast it from her . 
She barely looked the idea in the face , and hastened to bar it in its dungeon . 
What she compelled herself to believe -- what , finally , she reasoned upon as her motive for continuing a resident of New England -- was half a truth , and half a self-delusion . 
Here , she said to herself had been the scene of her guilt , and here should be the scene of her earthly punishment ; and so , perchance , the torture of her daily shame would at length purge her soul , and work out another purity than that which she had lost : more saint-like , because the result of martyrdom . 
Hester Prynne , therefore , did not flee . 
On the outskirts of the town , within the verge of the peninsula , but not in close vicinity to any other habitation , there was a small thatched cottage . 
It had been built by an earlier settler , and abandoned , because the soil about it was too sterile for cultivation , while its comparative remoteness put it out of the sphere of that social activity which already marked the habits of the emigrants . 
It stood on the shore , looking across a basin of the sea at the forest-covered hills , towards the west . 
A clump of scrubby trees , such as alone grew on the peninsula , did not so much conceal the cottage from view , as seem to denote that here was some object which would fain have been , or at least ought to be , concealed . 
In this little lonesome dwelling , with some slender means that she possessed , and by the licence of the magistrates , who still kept an inquisitorial watch over her , Hester established herself , with her infant child . 
A mystic shadow of suspicion immediately attached itself to the spot . 
Children , too young to comprehend wherefore this woman should be shut out from the sphere of human charities , would creep nigh enough to behold her plying her needle at the cottage-window , or standing in the doorway , or labouring in her little garden , or coming forth along the pathway that led townward , and , discerning the scarlet letter on her breast , would scamper off with a strange contagious fear . 
Lonely as was Hester 's situation , and without a friend on earth who dared to show himself , she , however , incurred no risk of want . 
She possessed an art that sufficed , even in a land that afforded comparatively little scope for its exercise , to supply food for her thriving infant and herself . 
It was the art , then , as now , almost the only one within a woman 's grasp -- of needle-work . 
She bore on her breast , in the curiously embroidered letter , a specimen of her delicate and imaginative skill , of which the dames of a court might gladly have availed themselves , to add the richer and more spiritual adornment of human ingenuity to their fabrics of silk and gold . 
Here , indeed , in the sable simplicity that generally characterised the Puritanic modes of dress , there might be an infrequent call for the finer productions of her handiwork . 
Yet the taste of the age , demanding whatever was elaborate in compositions of this kind , did not fail to extend its influence over our stern progenitors , who had cast behind them so many fashions which it might seem harder to dispense with . 
Public ceremonies , such as ordinations , the installation of magistrates , and all that could give majesty to the forms in which a new government manifested itself to the people , were , as a matter of policy , marked by a stately and well-conducted ceremonial , and a sombre , but yet a studied magnificence . 
Deep ruffs , painfully wrought bands , and gorgeously embroidered gloves , were all deemed necessary to the official state of men assuming the reins of power , and were readily allowed to individuals dignified by rank or wealth , even while sumptuary laws forbade these and similar extravagances to the plebeian order . 
In the array of funerals , too -- whether for the apparel of the dead body , or to typify , by manifold emblematic devices of sable cloth and snowy lawn , the sorrow of the survivors -- there was a frequent and characteristic demand for such labour as Hester Prynne could supply . 
Baby-linen -- for babies then wore robes of state -- afforded still another possibility of toil and emolument . 
By degrees , not very slowly , her handiwork became what would now be termed the fashion . 
Whether from commiseration for a woman of so miserable a destiny ; or from the morbid curiosity that gives a fictitious value even to common or worthless things ; or by whatever other intangible circumstance was then , as now , sufficient to bestow , on some persons , what others might seek in vain ; or because Hester really filled a gap which must otherwise have remained vacant ; it is certain that she had ready and fairly requited employment for as many hours as she saw fit to occupy with her needle . 
Vanity , it may be , chose to mortify itself , by putting on , for ceremonials of pomp and state , the garments that had been wrought by her sinful hands . 
Her needle-work was seen on the ruff of the Governor ; military men wore it on their scarfs , and the minister on his band ; it decked the baby 's little cap ; it was shut up , to be mildewed and moulder away , in the coffins of the dead . 
But it is not recorded that , in a single instance , her skill was called in to embroider the white veil which was to cover the pure blushes of a bride . 
The exception indicated the ever relentless vigour with which society frowned upon her sin . 
Hester sought not to acquire anything beyond a subsistence , of the plainest and most ascetic description , for herself , and a simple abundance for her child . 
Her own dress was of the coarsest materials and the most sombre hue , with only that one ornament -- the scarlet letter -- which it was her doom to wear . 
The child 's attire , on the other hand , was distinguished by a fanciful , or , we may rather say , a fantastic ingenuity , which served , indeed , to heighten the airy charm that early began to develop itself in the little girl , but which appeared to have also a deeper meaning . 
We may speak further of it hereafter . 
Except for that small expenditure in the decoration of her infant , Hester bestowed all her superfluous means in charity , on wretches less miserable than herself , and who not unfrequently insulted the hand that fed them . 
Much of the time , which she might readily have applied to the better efforts of her art , she employed in making coarse garments for the poor . 
It is probable that there was an idea of penance in this mode of occupation , and that she offered up a real sacrifice of enjoyment in devoting so many hours to such rude handiwork . 
She had in her nature a rich , voluptuous , Oriental characteristic -- a taste for the gorgeously beautiful , which , save in the exquisite productions of her needle , found nothing else , in all the possibilities of her life , to exercise itself upon . 
Women derive a pleasure , incomprehensible to the other sex , from the delicate toil of the needle . 
To Hester Prynne it might have been a mode of expressing , and therefore soothing , the passion of her life . 
Like all other joys , she rejected it as sin . 
This morbid meddling of conscience with an immaterial matter betokened , it is to be feared , no genuine and steadfast penitence , but something doubtful , something that might be deeply wrong beneath . 
In this manner , Hester Prynne came to have a part to perform in the world . 
With her native energy of character and rare capacity , it could not entirely cast her off , although it had set a mark upon her , more intolerable to a woman 's heart than that which branded the brow of Cain . 
In all her intercourse with society , however , there was nothing that made her feel as if she belonged to it . 
Every gesture , every word , and even the silence of those with whom she came in contact , implied , and often expressed , that she was banished , and as much alone as if she inhabited another sphere , or communicated with the common nature by other organs and senses than the rest of human kind . 
She stood apart from mortal interests , yet close beside them , like a ghost that revisits the familiar fireside , and can no longer make itself seen or felt ; no more smile with the household joy , nor mourn with the kindred sorrow ; or , should it succeed in manifesting its forbidden sympathy , awakening only terror and horrible repugnance . 
These emotions , in fact , and its bitterest scorn besides , seemed to be the sole portion that she retained in the universal heart . 
It was not an age of delicacy ; and her position , although she understood it well , and was in little danger of forgetting it , was often brought before her vivid self-perception , like a new anguish , by the rudest touch upon the tenderest spot . 
The poor , as we have already said , whom she sought out to be the objects of her bounty , often reviled the hand that was stretched forth to succour them . 
Dames of elevated rank , likewise , whose doors she entered in the way of her occupation , were accustomed to distil drops of bitterness into her heart ; sometimes through that alchemy of quiet malice , by which women can concoct a subtle poison from ordinary trifles ; and sometimes , also , by a coarser expression , that fell upon the sufferer 's defenceless breast like a rough blow upon an ulcerated wound . 
Hester had schooled herself long and well ; and she never responded to these attacks , save by a flush of crimson that rose irrepressibly over her pale cheek , and again subsided into the depths of her bosom . 
She was patient -- a martyr , indeed but she forebore to pray for enemies , lest , in spite of her forgiving aspirations , the words of the blessing should stubbornly twist themselves into a curse . 
Continually , and in a thousand other ways , did she feel the innumerable throbs of anguish that had been so cunningly contrived for her by the undying , the ever-active sentence of the Puritan tribunal . 
Clergymen paused in the streets , to address words of exhortation , that brought a crowd , with its mingled grin and frown , around the poor , sinful woman . 
If she entered a church , trusting to share the Sabbath smile of the Universal Father , it was often her mishap to find herself the text of the discourse . 
She grew to have a dread of children ; for they had imbibed from their parents a vague idea of something horrible in this dreary woman gliding silently through the town , with never any companion but one only child . 
Therefore , first allowing her to pass , they pursued her at a distance with shrill cries , and the utterances of a word that had no distinct purport to their own minds , but was none the less terrible to her , as proceeding from lips that babbled it unconsciously . 
It seemed to argue so wide a diffusion of her shame , that all nature knew of it ; it could have caused her no deeper pang had the leaves of the trees whispered the dark story among themselves -- had the summer breeze murmured about it -- had the wintry blast shrieked it aloud ! 
Another peculiar torture was felt in the gaze of a new eye . 
When strangers looked curiously at the scarlet letter and none ever failed to do so -- they branded it afresh in Hester 's soul ; so that , oftentimes , she could scarcely refrain , yet always did refrain , from covering the symbol with her hand . 
But then , again , an accustomed eye had likewise its own anguish to inflict . 
Its cool stare of familiarity was intolerable . 
From first to last , in short , Hester Prynne had always this dreadful agony in feeling a human eye upon the token ; the spot never grew callous ; it seemed , on the contrary , to grow more sensitive with daily torture . 
But sometimes , once in many days , or perchance in many months , she felt an eye -- a human eye -- upon the ignominious brand , that seemed to give a momentary relief , as if half of her agony were shared . 
The next instant , back it all rushed again , with still a deeper throb of pain ; for , in that brief interval , she had sinned anew . 
-LRB- Had Hester sinned alone ? -RRB- 
Her imagination was somewhat affected , and , had she been of a softer moral and intellectual fibre would have been still more so , by the strange and solitary anguish of her life . 
Walking to and fro , with those lonely footsteps , in the little world with which she was outwardly connected , it now and then appeared to Hester -- if altogether fancy , it was nevertheless too potent to be resisted -- she felt or fancied , then , that the scarlet letter had endowed her with a new sense . 
She shuddered to believe , yet could not help believing , that it gave her a sympathetic knowledge of the hidden sin in other hearts . 
She was terror-stricken by the revelations that were thus made . 
What were they ? 
Could they be other than the insidious whispers of the bad angel , who would fain have persuaded the struggling woman , as yet only half his victim , that the outward guise of purity was but a lie , and that , if truth were everywhere to be shown , a scarlet letter would blaze forth on many a bosom besides Hester Prynne 's ? 
Or , must she receive those intimations -- so obscure , yet so distinct -- as truth ? 
In all her miserable experience , there was nothing else so awful and so loathsome as this sense . 
It perplexed , as well as shocked her , by the irreverent inopportuneness of the occasions that brought it into vivid action . 
Sometimes the red infamy upon her breast would give a sympathetic throb , as she passed near a venerable minister or magistrate , the model of piety and justice , to whom that age of antique reverence looked up , as to a mortal man in fellowship with angels . 
`` What evil thing is at hand ? '' 
would Hester say to herself . 
Lifting her reluctant eyes , there would be nothing human within the scope of view , save the form of this earthly saint ! 
Again a mystic sisterhood would contumaciously assert itself , as she met the sanctified frown of some matron , who , according to the rumour of all tongues , had kept cold snow within her bosom throughout life . 
That unsunned snow in the matron 's bosom , and the burning shame on Hester Prynne 's -- what had the two in common ? 
Or , once more , the electric thrill would give her warning -- `` Behold Hester , here is a companion ! '' 
and , looking up , she would detect the eyes of a young maiden glancing at the scarlet letter , shyly and aside , and quickly averted , with a faint , chill crimson in her cheeks as if her purity were somewhat sullied by that momentary glance . 
O Fiend , whose talisman was that fatal symbol , wouldst thou leave nothing , whether in youth or age , for this poor sinner to revere ? 
-- such loss of faith is ever one of the saddest results of sin . 
Be it accepted as a proof that all was not corrupt in this poor victim of her own frailty , and man 's hard law , that Hester Prynne yet struggled to believe that no fellow-mortal was guilty like herself . 
The vulgar , who , in those dreary old times , were always contributing a grotesque horror to what interested their imaginations , had a story about the scarlet letter which we might readily work up into a terrific legend . 
They averred that the symbol was not mere scarlet cloth , tinged in an earthly dye-pot , but was red-hot with infernal fire , and could be seen glowing all alight whenever Hester Prynne walked abroad in the night-time . 
And we must needs say it seared Hester 's bosom so deeply , that perhaps there was more truth in the rumour than our modern incredulity may be inclined to admit . 
We have as yet hardly spoken of the infant ; that little creature , whose innocent life had sprung , by the inscrutable decree of Providence , a lovely and immortal flower , out of the rank luxuriance of a guilty passion . 
How strange it seemed to the sad woman , as she watched the growth , and the beauty that became every day more brilliant , and the intelligence that threw its quivering sunshine over the tiny features of this child ! 
