She who has once been a woman , and ceased to be so , might at any moment become a woman again , if there were only the magic touch to effect the transformation . 
We shall see whether Hester Prynne were ever afterwards so touched and so transfigured . 
Much of the marble coldness of Hester 's impression was to be attributed to the circumstance that her life had turned , in a great measure , from passion and feeling to thought . 
Standing alone in the world -- alone , as to any dependence on society , and with little Pearl to be guided and protected -- alone , and hopeless of retrieving her position , even had she not scorned to consider it desirable -- she cast away the fragment of a broken chain . 
The world 's law was no law for her mind . 
It was an age in which the human intellect , newly emancipated , had taken a more active and a wider range than for many centuries before . 
Men of the sword had overthrown nobles and kings . 
Men bolder than these had overthrown and rearranged -- not actually , but within the sphere of theory , which was their most real abode -- the whole system of ancient prejudice , wherewith was linked much of ancient principle . 
Hester Prynne imbibed this spirit . 
She assumed a freedom of speculation , then common enough on the other side of the Atlantic , but which our forefathers , had they known it , would have held to be a deadlier crime than that stigmatised by the scarlet letter . 
In her lonesome cottage , by the seashore , thoughts visited her such as dared to enter no other dwelling in New England ; shadowy guests , that would have been as perilous as demons to their entertainer , could they have been seen so much as knocking at her door . 
It is remarkable that persons who speculate the most boldly often conform with the most perfect quietude to the external regulations of society . 
The thought suffices them , without investing itself in the flesh and blood of action . 
So it seemed to be with Hester . 
Yet , had little Pearl never come to her from the spiritual world , it might have been far otherwise . 
Then she might have come down to us in history , hand in hand with Ann Hutchinson , as the foundress of a religious sect . 
She might , in one of her phases , have been a prophetess . 
She might , and not improbably would , have suffered death from the stern tribunals of the period , for attempting to undermine the foundations of the Puritan establishment . 
But , in the education of her child , the mother 's enthusiasm of thought had something to wreak itself upon . 
Providence , in the person of this little girl , had assigned to Hester 's charge , the germ and blossom of womanhood , to be cherished and developed amid a host of difficulties . 
Everything was against her . 
The world was hostile . 
The child 's own nature had something wrong in it which continually betokened that she had been born amiss -- the effluence of her mother 's lawless passion -- and often impelled Hester to ask , in bitterness of heart , whether it were for ill or good that the poor little creature had been born at all . 
Indeed , the same dark question often rose into her mind with reference to the whole race of womanhood . 
Was existence worth accepting even to the happiest among them ? 
As concerned her own individual existence , she had long ago decided in the negative , and dismissed the point as settled . 
A tendency to speculation , though it may keep women quiet , as it does man , yet makes her sad . 
She discerns , it may be , such a hopeless task before her . 
As a first step , the whole system of society is to be torn down and built up anew . 
Then the very nature of the opposite sex , or its long hereditary habit , which has become like nature , is to be essentially modified before woman can be allowed to assume what seems a fair and suitable position . 
Finally , all other difficulties being obviated , woman can not take advantage of these preliminary reforms until she herself shall have undergone a still mightier change , in which , perhaps , the ethereal essence , wherein she has her truest life , will be found to have evaporated . 
A woman never overcomes these problems by any exercise of thought . 
They are not to be solved , or only in one way . 
If her heart chance to come uppermost , they vanish . 
Thus Hester Prynne , whose heart had lost its regular and healthy throb , wandered without a clue in the dark labyrinth of mind ; now turned aside by an insurmountable precipice ; now starting back from a deep chasm . 
There was wild and ghastly scenery all around her , and a home and comfort nowhere . 
At times a fearful doubt strove to possess her soul , whether it were not better to send Pearl at once to Heaven , and go herself to such futurity as Eternal Justice should provide . 
The scarlet letter had not done its office . 
Now , however , her interview with the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale , on the night of his vigil , had given her a new theme of reflection , and held up to her an object that appeared worthy of any exertion and sacrifice for its attainment . 
She had witnessed the intense misery beneath which the minister struggled , or , to speak more accurately , had ceased to struggle . 
She saw that he stood on the verge of lunacy , if he had not already stepped across it . 
It was impossible to doubt that , whatever painful efficacy there might be in the secret sting of remorse , a deadlier venom had been infused into it by the hand that proffered relief . 
A secret enemy had been continually by his side , under the semblance of a friend and helper , and had availed himself of the opportunities thus afforded for tampering with the delicate springs of Mr. Dimmesdale 's nature . 
Hester could not but ask herself whether there had not originally been a defect of truth , courage , and loyalty on her own part , in allowing the minister to be thrown into a position where so much evil was to be foreboded and nothing auspicious to be hoped . 
Her only justification lay in the fact that she had been able to discern no method of rescuing him from a blacker ruin than had overwhelmed herself except by acquiescing in Roger Chillingworth 's scheme of disguise . 
Under that impulse she had made her choice , and had chosen , as it now appeared , the more wretched alternative of the two . 
She determined to redeem her error so far as it might yet be possible . 
Strengthened by years of hard and solemn trial , she felt herself no longer so inadequate to cope with Roger Chillingworth as on that night , abased by sin and half-maddened by the ignominy that was still new , when they had talked together in the prison-chamber . 
She had climbed her way since then to a higher point . 
The old man , on the other hand , had brought himself nearer to her level , or , perhaps , below it , by the revenge which he had stooped for . 
In fine , Hester Prynne resolved to meet her former husband , and do what might be in her power for the rescue of the victim on whom he had so evidently set his gripe . 
The occasion was not long to seek . 
One afternoon , walking with Pearl in a retired part of the peninsula , she beheld the old physician with a basket on one arm and a staff in the other hand , stooping along the ground in quest of roots and herbs to concoct his medicine withal . 
Hester bade little Pearl run down to the margin of the water , and play with the shells and tangled sea-weed , until she should have talked awhile with yonder gatherer of herbs . 
So the child flew away like a bird , and , making bare her small white feet went pattering along the moist margin of the sea . 
Here and there she came to a full stop , and peeped curiously into a pool , left by the retiring tide as a mirror for Pearl to see her face in . 
Forth peeped at her , out of the pool , with dark , glistening curls around her head , and an elf-smile in her eyes , the image of a little maid whom Pearl , having no other playmate , invited to take her hand and run a race with her . 
But the visionary little maid on her part , beckoned likewise , as if to say -- `` This is a better place ; come thou into the pool . '' 
And Pearl , stepping in mid-leg deep , beheld her own white feet at the bottom ; while , out of a still lower depth , came the gleam of a kind of fragmentary smile , floating to and fro in the agitated water . 
Meanwhile her mother had accosted the physician . 
`` I would speak a word with you , '' said she -- `` a word that concerns us much . '' 
`` Aha ! 
and is it Mistress Hester that has a word for old Roger Chillingworth ? '' 
answered he , raising himself from his stooping posture . 
`` With all my heart ! 
Why , mistress , I hear good tidings of you on all hands ! 
No longer ago than yester-eve , a magistrate , a wise and godly man , was discoursing of your affairs , Mistress Hester , and whispered me that there had been question concerning you in the council . 
It was debated whether or no , with safety to the commonweal , yonder scarlet letter might be taken off your bosom . 
On my life , Hester , I made my intreaty to the worshipful magistrate that it might be done forthwith . '' 
`` It lies not in the pleasure of the magistrates to take off the badge , '' calmly replied Hester . 
`` Were I worthy to be quit of it , it would fall away of its own nature , or be transformed into something that should speak a different purport . '' 
`` Nay , then , wear it , if it suit you better , '' rejoined he , `` A woman must needs follow her own fancy touching the adornment of her person . 
The letter is gaily embroidered , and shows right bravely on your bosom ! '' 
All this while Hester had been looking steadily at the old man , and was shocked , as well as wonder-smitten , to discern what a change had been wrought upon him within the past seven years . 
It was not so much that he had grown older ; for though the traces of advancing life were visible he bore his age well , and seemed to retain a wiry vigour and alertness . 
But the former aspect of an intellectual and studious man , calm and quiet , which was what she best remembered in him , had altogether vanished , and been succeeded by an eager , searching , almost fierce , yet carefully guarded look . 
It seemed to be his wish and purpose to mask this expression with a smile , but the latter played him false , and flickered over his visage so derisively that the spectator could see his blackness all the better for it . 
Ever and anon , too , there came a glare of red light out of his eyes , as if the old man 's soul were on fire and kept on smouldering duskily within his breast , until by some casual puff of passion it was blown into a momentary flame . 
This he repressed as speedily as possible , and strove to look as if nothing of the kind had happened . 
In a word , old Roger Chillingworth was a striking evidence of man 's faculty of transforming himself into a devil , if he will only , for a reasonable space of time , undertake a devil 's office . 
This unhappy person had effected such a transformation by devoting himself for seven years to the constant analysis of a heart full of torture , and deriving his enjoyment thence , and adding fuel to those fiery tortures which he analysed and gloated over . 
The scarlet letter burned on Hester Prynne 's bosom . 
Here was another ruin , the responsibility of which came partly home to her . 
`` What see you in my face , '' asked the physician , `` that you look at it so earnestly ? '' 
`` Something that would make me weep , if there were any tears bitter enough for it , '' answered she . 
`` But let it pass ! 
It is of yonder miserable man that I would speak . '' 
`` And what of him ? '' 
cried Roger Chillingworth , eagerly , as if he loved the topic , and were glad of an opportunity to discuss it with the only person of whom he could make a confidant . 
`` Not to hide the truth , Mistress Hester , my thoughts happen just now to be busy with the gentleman . 
So speak freely and I will make answer . '' 
`` When we last spake together , '' said Hester , `` now seven years ago , it was your pleasure to extort a promise of secrecy as touching the former relation betwixt yourself and me . 
As the life and good fame of yonder man were in your hands there seemed no choice to me , save to be silent in accordance with your behest . 
Yet it was not without heavy misgivings that I thus bound myself , for , having cast off all duty towards other human beings , there remained a duty towards him , and something whispered me that I was betraying it in pledging myself to keep your counsel . 
Since that day no man is so near to him as you . 
You tread behind his every footstep . 
You are beside him , sleeping and waking . 
You search his thoughts . 
You burrow and rankle in his heart ! 
Your clutch is on his life , and you cause him to die daily a living death , and still he knows you not . 
In permitting this I have surely acted a false part by the only man to whom the power was left me to be true ! '' 
`` What choice had you ? '' 
asked Roger Chillingworth . 
`` My finger , pointed at this man , would have hurled him from his pulpit into a dungeon , thence , peradventure , to the gallows ! '' 
`` It had been better so ! '' 
said Hester Prynne . 
`` What evil have I done the man ? '' 
asked Roger Chillingworth again . 
`` I tell thee , Hester Prynne , the richest fee that ever physician earned from monarch could not have bought such care as I have wasted on this miserable priest ! 
But for my aid his life would have burned away in torments within the first two years after the perpetration of his crime and thine . 
For , Hester , his spirit lacked the strength that could have borne up , as thine has , beneath a burden like thy scarlet letter . 
Oh , I could reveal a goodly secret ! 
But enough . 
What art can do , I have exhausted on him . 
That he now breathes and creeps about on earth is owing all to me ! '' 
`` Better he had died at once ! '' 
said Hester Prynne . 
`` Yea , woman , thou sayest truly ! '' 
cried old Roger Chillingworth , letting the lurid fire of his heart blaze out before her eyes . 
`` Better had he died at once ! 
Never did mortal suffer what this man has suffered . 
And all , all , in the sight of his worst enemy ! 
He has been conscious of me . 
He has felt an influence dwelling always upon him like a curse . 
He knew , by some spiritual sense -- for the Creator never made another being so sensitive as this -- he knew that no friendly hand was pulling at his heartstrings , and that an eye was looking curiously into him , which sought only evil , and found it . 
But he knew not that the eye and hand were mine ! 
With the superstition common to his brotherhood , he fancied himself given over to a fiend , to be tortured with frightful dreams and desperate thoughts , the sting of remorse and despair of pardon , as a foretaste of what awaits him beyond the grave . 
But it was the constant shadow of my presence , the closest propinquity of the man whom he had most vilely wronged , and who had grown to exist only by this perpetual poison of the direst revenge ! 
Yea , indeed , he did not err , there was a fiend at his elbow ! 
A mortal man , with once a human heart , has become a fiend for his especial torment . '' 
The unfortunate physician , while uttering these words , lifted his hands with a look of horror , as if he had beheld some frightful shape , which he could not recognise , usurping the place of his own image in a glass . 
It was one of those moments -- which sometimes occur only at the interval of years -- when a man 's moral aspect is faithfully revealed to his mind 's eye . 
Not improbably he had never before viewed himself as he did now . 
`` Hast thou not tortured him enough ? '' 
said Hester , noticing the old man 's look . 
`` Has he not paid thee all ? '' 
`` No , no ! 
He has but increased the debt ! '' 
answered the physician , and as he proceeded , his manner lost its fiercer characteristics , and subsided into gloom . 
`` Dost thou remember me , Hester , as I was nine years agone ? 
Even then I was in the autumn of my days , nor was it the early autumn . 
But all my life had been made up of earnest , studious , thoughtful , quiet years , bestowed faithfully for the increase of mine own knowledge , and faithfully , too , though this latter object was but casual to the other -- faithfully for the advancement of human welfare . 
No life had been more peaceful and innocent than mine ; few lives so rich with benefits conferred . 
Dost thou remember me ? 
Was I not , though you might deem me cold , nevertheless a man thoughtful for others , craving little for himself -- kind , true , just and of constant , if not warm affections ? 
Was I not all this ? '' 
`` All this , and more , '' said Hester . 
`` And what am I now ? '' 
demanded he , looking into her face , and permitting the whole evil within him to be written on his features . 
`` I have already told thee what I am -- a fiend ! 
Who made me so ? '' 
`` It was myself , '' cried Hester , shuddering . 
`` It was I , not less than he . 
Why hast thou not avenged thyself on me ? '' 
`` I have left thee to the scarlet letter , '' replied Roger Chillingworth . 
`` If that has not avenged me , I can do no more ! '' 
He laid his finger on it with a smile . 
`` It has avenged thee , '' answered Hester Prynne . 
`` I judged no less , '' said the physician . 
`` And now what wouldst thou with me touching this man ? '' 
`` I must reveal the secret , '' answered Hester , firmly . 
`` He must discern thee in thy true character . 
What may be the result I know not . 
But this long debt of confidence , due from me to him , whose bane and ruin I have been , shall at length be paid . 
So far as concerns the overthrow or preservation of his fair fame and his earthly state , and perchance his life , he is in my hands . 
Nor do I -- whom the scarlet letter has disciplined to truth , though it be the truth of red-hot iron entering into the soul -- nor do I perceive such advantage in his living any longer a life of ghastly emptiness , that I shall stoop to implore thy mercy . 
Do with him as thou wilt ! 
There is no good for him , no good for me , no good for thee . 
There is no good for little Pearl . 
There is no path to guide us out of this dismal maze . '' 
`` Woman , I could well-nigh pity thee , '' said Roger Chillingworth , unable to restrain a thrill of admiration too , for there was a quality almost majestic in the despair which she expressed . 
`` Thou hadst great elements . 
Peradventure , hadst thou met earlier with a better love than mine , this evil had not been . 
I pity thee , for the good that has been wasted in thy nature . '' 
`` And I thee , '' answered Hester Prynne , `` for the hatred that has transformed a wise and just man to a fiend ! 
Wilt thou yet purge it out of thee , and be once more human ? 
If not for his sake , then doubly for thine own ! 
Forgive , and leave his further retribution to the Power that claims it ! 
I said , but now , that there could be no good event for him , or thee , or me , who are here wandering together in this gloomy maze of evil , and stumbling at every step over the guilt wherewith we have strewn our path . 
It is not so ! 
There might be good for thee , and thee alone , since thou hast been deeply wronged and hast it at thy will to pardon . 
Wilt thou give up that only privilege ? 
Wilt thou reject that priceless benefit ? '' 
`` Peace , Hester -- peace ! '' 
replied the old man , with gloomy sternness -- `` it is not granted me to pardon . 
I have no such power as thou tellest me of . 
My old faith , long forgotten , comes back to me , and explains all that we do , and all we suffer . 
By thy first step awry , thou didst plant the germ of evil ; but since that moment it has all been a dark necessity . 
Ye that have wronged me are not sinful , save in a kind of typical illusion ; neither am I fiend-like , who have snatched a fiend 's office from his hands . 
It is our fate . 
Let the black flower blossom as it may ! 
Now , go thy ways , and deal as thou wilt with yonder man . '' 
He waved his hand , and betook himself again to his employment of gathering herbs . 
So Roger Chillingworth -- a deformed old figure with a face that haunted men 's memories longer than they liked -- took leave of Hester Prynne , and went stooping away along the earth . 
He gathered here and there a herb , or grubbed up a root and put it into the basket on his arm . 
His gray beard almost touched the ground as he crept onward . 
Hester gazed after him a little while , looking with a half fantastic curiosity to see whether the tender grass of early spring would not be blighted beneath him and show the wavering track of his footsteps , sere and brown , across its cheerful verdure . 
She wondered what sort of herbs they were which the old man was so sedulous to gather . 
Would not the earth , quickened to an evil purpose by the sympathy of his eye , greet him with poisonous shrubs of species hitherto unknown , that would start up under his fingers ? 
Or might it suffice him that every wholesome growth should be converted into something deleterious and malignant at his touch ? 
Did the sun , which shone so brightly everywhere else , really fall upon him ? 
Or was there , as it rather seemed , a circle of ominous shadow moving along with his deformity whichever way he turned himself ? 
And whither was he now going ? 
Would he not suddenly sink into the earth , leaving a barren and blasted spot , where , in due course of time , would be seen deadly nightshade , dogwood , henbane , and whatever else of vegetable wickedness the climate could produce , all flourishing with hideous luxuriance ? 
Or would he spread bat 's wings and flee away , looking so much the uglier the higher he rose towards heaven ? 
`` Be it sin or no , '' said Hester Prynne , bitterly , as still she gazed after him , `` I hate the man ! '' 
She upbraided herself for the sentiment , but could not overcome or lessen it . 
Attempting to do so , she thought of those long-past days in a distant land , when he used to emerge at eventide from the seclusion of his study and sit down in the firelight of their home , and in the light of her nuptial smile . 
He needed to bask himself in that smile , he said , in order that the chill of so many lonely hours among his books might be taken off the scholar 's heart . 
Such scenes had once appeared not otherwise than happy , but now , as viewed through the dismal medium of her subsequent life , they classed themselves among her ugliest remembrances . 
She marvelled how such scenes could have been ! 
She marvelled how she could ever have been wrought upon to marry him ! 
She deemed it her crime most to be repented of , that she had ever endured and reciprocated the lukewarm grasp of his hand , and had suffered the smile of her lips and eyes to mingle and melt into his own . 
And it seemed a fouler offence committed by Roger Chillingworth than any which had since been done him , that , in the time when her heart knew no better , he had persuaded her to fancy herself happy by his side . 
`` Yes , I hate him ! '' 
repeated Hester more bitterly than before . 
`` He betrayed me ! 
He has done me worse wrong than I did him ! '' 
Let men tremble to win the hand of woman , unless they win along with it the utmost passion of her heart ! 
Else it may be their miserable fortune , as it was Roger Chillingworth 's , when some mightier touch than their own may have awakened all her sensibilities , to be reproached even for the calm content , the marble image of happiness , which they will have imposed upon her as the warm reality . 
But Hester ought long ago to have done with this injustice . 
What did it betoken ? 
Had seven long years , under the torture of the scarlet letter , inflicted so much of misery and wrought out no repentance ? 
The emotion of that brief space , while she stood gazing after the crooked figure of old Roger Chillingworth , threw a dark light on Hester 's state of mind , revealing much that she might not otherwise have acknowledged to herself . 
He being gone , she summoned back her child . 
`` Pearl ! 
Little Pearl ! 
Where are you ? '' 
Pearl , whose activity of spirit never flagged , had been at no loss for amusement while her mother talked with the old gatherer of herbs . 
At first , as already told , she had flirted fancifully with her own image in a pool of water , beckoning the phantom forth , and -- as it declined to venture -- seeking a passage for herself into its sphere of impalpable earth and unattainable sky . 
Soon finding , however , that either she or the image was unreal , she turned elsewhere for better pastime . 
She made little boats out of birch-bark , and freighted them with snailshells , and sent out more ventures on the mighty deep than any merchant in New England ; but the larger part of them foundered near the shore . 
She seized a live horse-shoe by the tail , and made prize of several five-fingers , and laid out a jelly-fish to melt in the warm sun . 
Then she took up the white foam that streaked the line of the advancing tide , and threw it upon the breeze , scampering after it with winged footsteps to catch the great snowflakes ere they fell . 
Perceiving a flock of beach-birds that fed and fluttered along the shore , the naughty child picked up her apron full of pebbles , and , creeping from rock to rock after these small sea-fowl , displayed remarkable dexterity in pelting them . 
One little gray bird , with a white breast , Pearl was almost sure had been hit by a pebble , and fluttered away with a broken wing . 
But then the elf-child sighed , and gave up her sport , because it grieved her to have done harm to a little being that was as wild as the sea-breeze , or as wild as Pearl herself . 
Her final employment was to gather seaweed of various kinds , and make herself a scarf or mantle , and a head-dress , and thus assume the aspect of a little mermaid . 
She inherited her mother 's gift for devising drapery and costume . 
As the last touch to her mermaid 's garb , Pearl took some eel-grass and imitated , as best she could , on her own bosom the decoration with which she was so familiar on her mother 's . 
A letter -- the letter A -- but freshly green instead of scarlet . 
The child bent her chin upon her breast , and contemplated this device with strange interest , even as if the one only thing for which she had been sent into the world was to make out its hidden import . 
`` I wonder if mother will ask me what it means ? '' 
thought Pearl . 
Just then she heard her mother 's voice , and , flitting along as lightly as one of the little sea-birds , appeared before Hester Prynne dancing , laughing , and pointing her finger to the ornament upon her bosom . 
`` My little Pearl , '' said Hester , after a moment 's silence , `` the green letter , and on thy childish bosom , has no purport . 
But dost thou know , my child , what this letter means which thy mother is doomed to wear ? '' 
`` Yes , mother , '' said the child . 
`` It is the great letter A. Thou hast taught me in the horn-book . '' 
Hester looked steadily into her little face ; but though there was that singular expression which she had so often remarked in her black eyes , she could not satisfy herself whether Pearl really attached any meaning to the symbol . 
She felt a morbid desire to ascertain the point . 
`` Dost thou know , child , wherefore thy mother wears this letter ? '' 
`` Truly do I ! '' 
answered Pearl , looking brightly into her mother 's face . 
`` It is for the same reason that the minister keeps his hand over his heart ! '' 
`` And what reason is that ? '' 
asked Hester , half smiling at the absurd incongruity of the child 's observation ; but on second thoughts turning pale . 
`` What has the letter to do with any heart save mine ? '' 
`` Nay , mother , I have told all I know , '' said Pearl , more seriously than she was wont to speak . 
`` Ask yonder old man whom thou hast been talking with , -- it may be he can tell . 
But in good earnest now , mother dear , what does this scarlet letter mean ? 
-- and why dost thou wear it on thy bosom ? 
-- and why does the minister keep his hand over his heart ? '' 
She took her mother 's hand in both her own , and gazed into her eyes with an earnestness that was seldom seen in her wild and capricious character . 
The thought occurred to Hester , that the child might really be seeking to approach her with childlike confidence , and doing what she could , and as intelligently as she knew how , to establish a meeting-point of sympathy . 
It showed Pearl in an unwonted aspect . 
Heretofore , the mother , while loving her child with the intensity of a sole affection , had schooled herself to hope for little other return than the waywardness of an April breeze , which spends its time in airy sport , and has its gusts of inexplicable passion , and is petulant in its best of moods , and chills oftener than caresses you , when you take it to your bosom ; in requital of which misdemeanours it will sometimes , of its own vague purpose , kiss your cheek with a kind of doubtful tenderness , and play gently with your hair , and then be gone about its other idle business , leaving a dreamy pleasure at your heart . 
And this , moreover , was a mother 's estimate of the child 's disposition . 
Any other observer might have seen few but unamiable traits , and have given them a far darker colouring . 
But now the idea came strongly into Hester 's mind , that Pearl , with her remarkable precocity and acuteness , might already have approached the age when she could have been made a friend , and intrusted with as much of her mother 's sorrows as could be imparted , without irreverence either to the parent or the child . 
In the little chaos of Pearl 's character there might be seen emerging and could have been from the very first -- the steadfast principles of an unflinching courage -- an uncontrollable will -- sturdy pride , which might be disciplined into self-respect -- and a bitter scorn of many things which , when examined , might be found to have the taint of falsehood in them . 
She possessed affections , too , though hitherto acrid and disagreeable , as are the richest flavours of unripe fruit . 
With all these sterling attributes , thought Hester , the evil which she inherited from her mother must be great indeed , if a noble woman do not grow out of this elfish child . 
Pearl 's inevitable tendency to hover about the enigma of the scarlet letter seemed an innate quality of her being . 
From the earliest epoch of her conscious life , she had entered upon this as her appointed mission . 
Hester had often fancied that Providence had a design of justice and retribution , in endowing the child with this marked propensity ; but never , until now , had she bethought herself to ask , whether , linked with that design , there might not likewise be a purpose of mercy and beneficence . 
If little Pearl were entertained with faith and trust , as a spirit messenger no less than an earthly child , might it not be her errand to soothe away the sorrow that lay cold in her mother 's heart , and converted it into a tomb ? 
-- and to help her to overcome the passion , once so wild , and even yet neither dead nor asleep , but only imprisoned within the same tomb-like heart ? 
Such were some of the thoughts that now stirred in Hester 's mind , with as much vivacity of impression as if they had actually been whispered into her ear . 
And there was little Pearl , all this while , holding her mother 's hand in both her own , and turning her face upward , while she put these searching questions , once and again , and still a third time . 
`` What does the letter mean , mother ? 
and why dost thou wear it ? 
and why does the minister keep his hand over his heart ? '' 
`` What shall I say ? '' 
thought Hester to herself . 
`` No ! 
if this be the price of the child 's sympathy , I can not pay it . '' 
Then she spoke aloud -- `` Silly Pearl , '' said she , `` what questions are these ? 
There are many things in this world that a child must not ask about . 
What know I of the minister 's heart ? 
And as for the scarlet letter , I wear it for the sake of its gold thread . '' 
In all the seven bygone years , Hester Prynne had never before been false to the symbol on her bosom . 
It may be that it was the talisman of a stern and severe , but yet a guardian spirit , who now forsook her ; as recognising that , in spite of his strict watch over her heart , some new evil had crept into it , or some old one had never been expelled . 
As for little Pearl , the earnestness soon passed out of her face . 
But the child did not see fit to let the matter drop . 
Two or three times , as her mother and she went homeward , and as often at supper-time , and while Hester was putting her to bed , and once after she seemed to be fairly asleep , Pearl looked up , with mischief gleaming in her black eyes . 
`` Mother , '' said she , `` what does the scarlet letter mean ? '' 
And the next morning , the first indication the child gave of being awake was by popping up her head from the pillow , and making that other enquiry , which she had so unaccountably connected with her investigations about the scarlet letter -- `` Mother ! 
-- Mother ! 
-- Why does the minister keep his hand over his heart ? '' 
`` Hold thy tongue , naughty child ! '' 
answered her mother , with an asperity that she had never permitted to herself before . 
`` Do not tease me ; else I shall put thee into the dark closet ! '' 
Hester Prynne remained constant in her resolve to make known to Mr. Dimmesdale , at whatever risk of present pain or ulterior consequences , the true character of the man who had crept into his intimacy . 
For several days , however , she vainly sought an opportunity of addressing him in some of the meditative walks which she knew him to be in the habit of taking along the shores of the Peninsula , or on the wooded hills of the neighbouring country . 
There would have been no scandal , indeed , nor peril to the holy whiteness of the clergyman 's good fame , had she visited him in his own study , where many a penitent , ere now , had confessed sins of perhaps as deep a dye as the one betokened by the scarlet letter . 
But , partly that she dreaded the secret or undisguised interference of old Roger Chillingworth , and partly that her conscious heart imparted suspicion where none could have been felt , and partly that both the minister and she would need the whole wide world to breathe in , while they talked together -- for all these reasons Hester never thought of meeting him in any narrower privacy than beneath the open sky . 
At last , while attending a sick chamber , whither the Rev. Mr. Dimmesdale had been summoned to make a prayer , she learnt that he had gone , the day before , to visit the Apostle Eliot , among his Indian converts . 
He would probably return by a certain hour in the afternoon of the morrow . 
Betimes , therefore , the next day , Hester took little Pearl -- who was necessarily the companion of all her mother 's expeditions , however inconvenient her presence -- and set forth . 
The road , after the two wayfarers had crossed from the Peninsula to the mainland , was no other than a foot-path . 
It straggled onward into the mystery of the primeval forest . 
This hemmed it in so narrowly , and stood so black and dense on either side , and disclosed such imperfect glimpses of the sky above , that , to Hester 's mind , it imaged not amiss the moral wilderness in which she had so long been wandering . 
The day was chill and sombre . 
Overhead was a gray expanse of cloud , slightly stirred , however , by a breeze ; so that a gleam of flickering sunshine might now and then be seen at its solitary play along the path . 
This flitting cheerfulness was always at the further extremity of some long vista through the forest . 
The sportive sunlight -- feebly sportive , at best , in the predominant pensiveness of the day and scene -- withdrew itself as they came nigh , and left the spots where it had danced the drearier , because they had hoped to find them bright . 
`` Mother , '' said little Pearl , `` the sunshine does not love you . 
It runs away and hides itself , because it is afraid of something on your bosom . 
Now , see ! 
There it is , playing a good way off . 
Stand you here , and let me run and catch it . 
I am but a child . 
It will not flee from me -- for I wear nothing on my bosom yet ! '' 
`` Nor ever will , my child , I hope , '' said Hester . 
`` And why not , mother ? '' 
asked Pearl , stopping short , just at the beginning of her race . 
`` Will not it come of its own accord when I am a woman grown ? '' 
`` Run away , child , '' answered her mother , `` and catch the sunshine . 
It will soon be gone . '' 
Pearl set forth at a great pace , and as Hester smiled to perceive , did actually catch the sunshine , and stood laughing in the midst of it , all brightened by its splendour , and scintillating with the vivacity excited by rapid motion . 
The light lingered about the lonely child , as if glad of such a playmate , until her mother had drawn almost nigh enough to step into the magic circle too . 
`` It will go now , '' said Pearl , shaking her head . 
`` See ! '' 
answered Hester , smiling ; `` now I can stretch out my hand and grasp some of it . '' 
As she attempted to do so , the sunshine vanished ; or , to judge from the bright expression that was dancing on Pearl 's features , her mother could have fancied that the child had absorbed it into herself , and would give it forth again , with a gleam about her path , as they should plunge into some gloomier shade . 
There was no other attribute that so much impressed her with a sense of new and untransmitted vigour in Pearl 's nature , as this never failing vivacity of spirits : she had not the disease of sadness , which almost all children , in these latter days , inherit , with the scrofula , from the troubles of their ancestors . 
Perhaps this , too , was a disease , and but the reflex of the wild energy with which Hester had fought against her sorrows before Pearl 's birth . 
It was certainly a doubtful charm , imparting a hard , metallic lustre to the child 's character . 
She wanted -- what some people want throughout life -- a grief that should deeply touch her , and thus humanise and make her capable of sympathy . 
But there was time enough yet for little Pearl . 
`` Come , my child ! '' 
said Hester , looking about her from the spot where Pearl had stood still in the sunshine -- `` we will sit down a little way within the wood , and rest ourselves . '' 
`` I am not aweary , mother , '' replied the little girl . 
`` But you may sit down , if you will tell me a story meanwhile . '' 
`` A story , child ! '' 
said Hester . 
`` And about what ? '' 
`` Oh , a story about the Black Man , '' answered Pearl , taking hold of her mother 's gown , and looking up , half earnestly , half mischievously , into her face . 
`` How he haunts this forest , and carries a book with him a big , heavy book , with iron clasps ; and how this ugly Black Man offers his book and an iron pen to everybody that meets him here among the trees ; and they are to write their names with their own blood ; and then he sets his mark on their bosoms . 
Didst thou ever meet the Black Man , mother ? '' 
`` And who told you this story , Pearl , '' asked her mother , recognising a common superstition of the period . 
`` It was the old dame in the chimney corner , at the house where you watched last night , '' said the child . 
`` But she fancied me asleep while she was talking of it . 
She said that a thousand and a thousand people had met him here , and had written in his book , and have his mark on them . 
And that ugly tempered lady , old Mistress Hibbins , was one . 
And , mother , the old dame said that this scarlet letter was the Black Man 's mark on thee , and that it glows like a red flame when thou meetest him at midnight , here in the dark wood . 
Is it true , mother ? 
And dost thou go to meet him in the nighttime ? '' 
`` Didst thou ever awake and find thy mother gone ? '' 
asked Hester . 
`` Not that I remember , '' said the child . 
`` If thou fearest to leave me in our cottage , thou mightest take me along with thee . 
I would very gladly go ! 
But , mother , tell me now ! 
Is there such a Black Man ? 
And didst thou ever meet him ? 
And is this his mark ? '' 
`` Wilt thou let me be at peace , if I once tell thee ? '' 
asked her mother . 
`` Yes , if thou tellest me all , '' answered Pearl . 
`` Once in my life I met the Black Man ! '' 
said her mother . 
`` This scarlet letter is his mark ! '' 
Thus conversing , they entered sufficiently deep into the wood to secure themselves from the observation of any casual passenger along the forest track . 
Here they sat down on a luxuriant heap of moss ; which at some epoch of the preceding century , had been a gigantic pine , with its roots and trunk in the darksome shade , and its head aloft in the upper atmosphere . 
It was a little dell where they had seated themselves , with a leaf-strewn bank rising gently on either side , and a brook flowing through the midst , over a bed of fallen and drowned leaves . 
The trees impending over it had flung down great branches from time to time , which choked up the current , and compelled it to form eddies and black depths at some points ; while , in its swifter and livelier passages there appeared a channel-way of pebbles , and brown , sparkling sand . 
Letting the eyes follow along the course of the stream , they could catch the reflected light from its water , at some short distance within the forest , but soon lost all traces of it amid the bewilderment of tree-trunks and underbrush , and here and there a huge rock covered over with gray lichens . 
All these giant trees and boulders of granite seemed intent on making a mystery of the course of this small brook ; fearing , perhaps , that , with its never-ceasing loquacity , it should whisper tales out of the heart of the old forest whence it flowed , or mirror its revelations on the smooth surface of a pool . 
Continually , indeed , as it stole onward , the streamlet kept up a babble , kind , quiet , soothing , but melancholy , like the voice of a young child that was spending its infancy without playfulness , and knew not how to be merry among sad acquaintance and events of sombre hue . 
`` Oh , brook ! 
Oh , foolish and tiresome little brook ! '' 
cried Pearl , after listening awhile to its talk , `` Why art thou so sad ? 
Pluck up a spirit , and do not be all the time sighing and murmuring ! '' 
But the brook , in the course of its little lifetime among the forest trees , had gone through so solemn an experience that it could not help talking about it , and seemed to have nothing else to say . 
Pearl resembled the brook , inasmuch as the current of her life gushed from a well-spring as mysterious , and had flowed through scenes shadowed as heavily with gloom . 
But , unlike the little stream , she danced and sparkled , and prattled airily along her course . 
`` What does this sad little brook say , mother ? '' 
inquired she . 
`` If thou hadst a sorrow of thine own , the brook might tell thee of it , '' answered her mother , `` even as it is telling me of mine . 
But now , Pearl , I hear a footstep along the path , and the noise of one putting aside the branches . 
I would have thee betake thyself to play , and leave me to speak with him that comes yonder . '' 
`` Is it the Black Man ? '' 
asked Pearl . 
`` Wilt thou go and play , child ? '' 
repeated her mother , `` But do not stray far into the wood . 
And take heed that thou come at my first call . '' 
`` Yes , mother , '' answered Pearl , `` But if it be the Black Man , wilt thou not let me stay a moment , and look at him , with his big book under his arm ? '' 
`` Go , silly child ! '' 
said her mother impatiently . 
`` It is no Black Man ! 
Thou canst see him now , through the trees . 
It is the minister ! '' 
`` And so it is ! '' 
said the child . 
`` And , mother , he has his hand over his heart ! 
Is it because , when the minister wrote his name in the book , the Black Man set his mark in that place ? 
But why does he not wear it outside his bosom , as thou dost , mother ? '' 
`` Go now , child , and thou shalt tease me as thou wilt another time , '' cried Hester Prynne . 
`` But do not stray far . 
Keep where thou canst hear the babble of the brook . '' 
The child went singing away , following up the current of the brook , and striving to mingle a more lightsome cadence with its melancholy voice . 
But the little stream would not be comforted , and still kept telling its unintelligible secret of some very mournful mystery that had happened -- or making a prophetic lamentation about something that was yet to happen -- within the verge of the dismal forest . 
So Pearl , who had enough of shadow in her own little life , chose to break off all acquaintance with this repining brook . 
She set herself , therefore , to gathering violets and wood-anemones , and some scarlet columbines that she found growing in the crevice of a high rock . 
When her elf-child had departed , Hester Prynne made a step or two towards the track that led through the forest , but still remained under the deep shadow of the trees . 
She beheld the minister advancing along the path entirely alone , and leaning on a staff which he had cut by the wayside . 
He looked haggard and feeble , and betrayed a nerveless despondency in his air , which had never so remarkably characterised him in his walks about the settlement , nor in any other situation where he deemed himself liable to notice . 
Here it was wofully visible , in this intense seclusion of the forest , which of itself would have been a heavy trial to the spirits . 
There was a listlessness in his gait , as if he saw no reason for taking one step further , nor felt any desire to do so , but would have been glad , could he be glad of anything , to fling himself down at the root of the nearest tree , and lie there passive for evermore . 
The leaves might bestrew him , and the soil gradually accumulate and form a little hillock over his frame , no matter whether there were life in it or no . 
Death was too definite an object to be wished for or avoided . 
To Hester 's eye , the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale exhibited no symptom of positive and vivacious suffering , except that , as little Pearl had remarked , he kept his hand over his heart . 
Slowly as the minister walked , he had almost gone by before Hester Prynne could gather voice enough to attract his observation . 
At length she succeeded . 
`` Arthur Dimmesdale ! '' 
she said , faintly at first , then louder , but hoarsely -- `` Arthur Dimmesdale ! '' 
`` Who speaks ? '' 
answered the minister . 
Gathering himself quickly up , he stood more erect , like a man taken by surprise in a mood to which he was reluctant to have witnesses . 
Throwing his eyes anxiously in the direction of the voice , he indistinctly beheld a form under the trees , clad in garments so sombre , and so little relieved from the gray twilight into which the clouded sky and the heavy foliage had darkened the noontide , that he knew not whether it were a woman or a shadow . 
It may be that his pathway through life was haunted thus by a spectre that had stolen out from among his thoughts . 
He made a step nigher , and discovered the scarlet letter . 
`` Hester ! 
Hester Prynne ! '' 
, said he ; `` is it thou ? 
Art thou in life ? '' 
`` Even so . '' 
she answered . 
`` In such life as has been mine these seven years past ! 
And thou , Arthur Dimmesdale , dost thou yet live ? '' 
It was no wonder that they thus questioned one another 's actual and bodily existence , and even doubted of their own . 
So strangely did they meet in the dim wood that it was like the first encounter in the world beyond the grave of two spirits who had been intimately connected in their former life , but now stood coldly shuddering in mutual dread , as not yet familiar with their state , nor wonted to the companionship of disembodied beings . 
Each a ghost , and awe-stricken at the other ghost . 
They were awe-stricken likewise at themselves , because the crisis flung back to them their consciousness , and revealed to each heart its history and experience , as life never does , except at such breathless epochs . 
The soul beheld its features in the mirror of the passing moment . 
It was with fear , and tremulously , and , as it were , by a slow , reluctant necessity , that Arthur Dimmesdale put forth his hand , chill as death , and touched the chill hand of Hester Prynne . 
The grasp , cold as it was , took away what was dreariest in the interview . 
They now felt themselves , at least , inhabitants of the same sphere . 
Without a word more spoken -- neither he nor she assuming the guidance , but with an unexpressed consent -- they glided back into the shadow of the woods whence Hester had emerged , and sat down on the heap of moss where she and Pearl had before been sitting . 
When they found voice to speak , it was at first only to utter remarks and inquiries such as any two acquaintances might have made , about the gloomy sky , the threatening storm , and , next , the health of each . 
Thus they went onward , not boldly , but step by step , into the themes that were brooding deepest in their hearts . 
So long estranged by fate and circumstances , they needed something slight and casual to run before and throw open the doors of intercourse , so that their real thoughts might be led across the threshold . 
After awhile , the minister fixed his eyes on Hester Prynne 's . 
`` Hester , '' said he , `` hast thou found peace ? '' 
She smiled drearily , looking down upon her bosom . 
`` Hast thou ? '' 
she asked . 
`` None -- nothing but despair ! '' 
he answered . 
`` What else could I look for , being what I am , and leading such a life as mine ? 
Were I an atheist -- a man devoid of conscience -- a wretch with coarse and brutal instincts -- I might have found peace long ere now . 
Nay , I never should have lost it . 
But , as matters stand with my soul , whatever of good capacity there originally was in me , all of God 's gifts that were the choicest have become the ministers of spiritual torment . 
Hester , I am most miserable ! '' 
`` The people reverence thee , '' said Hester . 
`` And surely thou workest good among them ! 
Doth this bring thee no comfort ? '' 
`` More misery , Hester ! 
-- Only the more misery ! '' 
answered the clergyman with a bitter smile . 
`` As concerns the good which I may appear to do , I have no faith in it . 
It must needs be a delusion . 
What can a ruined soul like mine effect towards the redemption of other souls ? 
-- or a polluted soul towards their purification ? 
And as for the people 's reverence , would that it were turned to scorn and hatred ! 
Canst thou deem it , Hester , a consolation that I must stand up in my pulpit , and meet so many eyes turned upward to my face , as if the light of heaven were beaming from it ! 
-- must see my flock hungry for the truth , and listening to my words as if a tongue of Pentecost were speaking ! 
-- and then look inward , and discern the black reality of what they idolise ? 
I have laughed , in bitterness and agony of heart , at the contrast between what I seem and what I am ! 
And Satan laughs at it ! '' 
`` You wrong yourself in this , '' said Hester gently . 
`` You have deeply and sorely repented . 
Your sin is left behind you in the days long past . 
Your present life is not less holy , in very truth , than it seems in people 's eyes . 
Is there no reality in the penitence thus sealed and witnessed by good works ? 
And wherefore should it not bring you peace ? '' 
`` No , Hester -- no ! '' 
replied the clergyman . 
`` There is no substance in it ! 
It is cold and dead , and can do nothing for me ! 
Of penance , I have had enough ! 
Of penitence , there has been none ! 
Else , I should long ago have thrown off these garments of mock holiness , and have shown myself to mankind as they will see me at the judgment-seat . 
Happy are you , Hester , that wear the scarlet letter openly upon your bosom ! 
Mine burns in secret ! 
Thou little knowest what a relief it is , after the torment of a seven years ' cheat , to look into an eye that recognises me for what I am ! 
Had I one friend -- or were it my worst enemy ! 
-- to whom , when sickened with the praises of all other men , I could daily betake myself , and be known as the vilest of all sinners , methinks my soul might keep itself alive thereby . 
