You must a met him on the road , did n't you ? 
-- oldish man , with a -- '' `` No , I did n't see nobody , Aunt Sally . 
The boat landed just at daylight , and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town and out a piece in the country , to put in the time and not get here too soon ; and so I come down the back way . '' 
`` Who 'd you give the baggage to ? '' 
`` Nobody . '' 
`` Why , child , it 'll be stole ! '' 
`` Not where I hid it I reckon it wo n't , '' I says . 
`` How 'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat ? '' 
It was kinder thin ice , but I says : `` The captain see me standing around , and told me I better have something to eat before I went ashore ; so he took me in the texas to the officers ' lunch , and give me all I wanted . '' 
I was getting so uneasy I could n't listen good . 
I had my mind on the children all the time ; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump them a little , and find out who I was . 
But I could n't get no show , Mrs. Phelps kept it up and run on so . 
Pretty soon she made the cold chills streak all down my back , because she says : `` But here we 're a-running on this way , and you hai n't told me a word about Sis , nor any of them . 
Now I 'll rest my works a little , and you start up yourn ; just tell me everything -- tell me all about 'm all every one of 'm ; and how they are , and what they 're doing , and what they told you to tell me ; and every last thing you can think of . '' 
Well , I see I was up a stump -- and up it good . 
Providence had stood by me this fur all right , but I was hard and tight aground now . 
I see it war n't a bit of use to try to go ahead -- I 'd got to throw up my hand . 
So I says to myself , here 's another place where I got to resk the truth . 
I opened my mouth to begin ; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind the bed , and says : `` Here he comes ! 
Stick your head down lower -- there , that 'll do ; you ca n't be seen now . 
Do n't you let on you 're here . 
I 'll play a joke on him . 
Children , do n't you say a word . '' 
I see I was in a fix now . 
But it war n't no use to worry ; there war n't nothing to do but just hold still , and try and be ready to stand from under when the lightning struck . 
I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in ; then the bed hid him . 
Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him , and says : `` Has he come ? '' 
`` No , '' says her husband . 
`` Good - ness gracious ! '' 
she says , `` what in the warld can have become of him ? '' 
`` I ca n't imagine , '' says the old gentleman ; `` and I must say it makes me dreadful uneasy . '' 
`` Uneasy ! '' 
she says ; `` I 'm ready to go distracted ! 
He must a come ; and you 've missed him along the road . 
I know it 's so -- something tells me so . '' 
`` Why , Sally , I could n't miss him along the road -- you know that . '' 
`` But oh , dear , dear , what will Sis say ! 
He must a come ! 
You must a missed him . 
He -- '' `` Oh , do n't distress me any more 'n I 'm already distressed . 
I do n't know what in the world to make of it . 
I 'm at my wit 's end , and I do n't mind acknowledging ' t I 'm right down scared . 
But there 's no hope that he 's come ; for he could n't come and me miss him . 
Sally , it 's terrible -- just terrible -- something 's happened to the boat , sure ! '' 
`` Why , Silas ! 
Look yonder ! 
-- up the road ! 
-- ai n't that somebody coming ? '' 
He sprung to the window at the head of the bed , and that give Mrs. Phelps the chance she wanted . 
She stooped down quick at the foot of the bed and give me a pull , and out I come ; and when he turned back from the window there she stood , a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire , and I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside . 
The old gentleman stared , and says : `` Why , who 's that ? '' 
`` Who do you reckon ' t is ? '' 
`` I hai n't no idea . 
Who is it ? '' 
`` It 's Tom Sawyer ! '' 
By jings , I most slumped through the floor ! 
But there war n't no time to swap knives ; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook , and kept on shaking ; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and cry ; and then how they both did fire off questions about Sid , and Mary , and the rest of the tribe . 
But if they was joyful , it war n't nothing to what I was ; for it was like being born again , I was so glad to find out who I was . 
Well , they froze to me for two hours ; and at last , when my chin was so tired it could n't hardly go any more , I had told them more about my family -- I mean the Sawyer family -- than ever happened to any six Sawyer families . 
And I explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of White River , and it took us three days to fix it . 
Which was all right , and worked first-rate ; because they did n't know but what it would take three days to fix it . 
If I 'd a called it a bolthead it would a done just as well . 
Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side , and pretty uncomfortable all up the other . 
Being Tom Sawyer was easy and comfortable , and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the river . 
Then I says to myself , s ` pose Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat ? 
And s ` pose he steps in here any minute , and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet ? 
Well , I could n't have it that way ; it would n't do at all . 
I must go up the road and waylay him . 
So I told the folks I reckoned I would go up to the town and fetch down my baggage . 
The old gentleman was for going along with me , but I said no , I could drive the horse myself , and I druther he would n't take no trouble about me . 
SO I started for town in the wagon , and when I was half-way I see a wagon coming , and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer , and I stopped and waited till he come along . 
I says `` Hold on ! '' 
and it stopped alongside , and his mouth opened up like a trunk , and stayed so ; and he swallowed two or three times like a person that 's got a dry throat , and then says : `` I hai n't ever done you no harm . 
You know that . 
So , then , what you want to come back and ha ` nt me for ? '' 
I says : `` I hai n't come back -- I hai n't been gone . '' 
When he heard my voice it righted him up some , but he war n't quite satisfied yet . 
He says : `` Do n't you play nothing on me , because I would n't on you . 
Honest injun now , you ai n't a ghost ? '' 
`` Honest injun , I ai n't , '' I says . 
`` Well -- I -- I -- well , that ought to settle it , of course ; but I ca n't somehow seem to understand it no way . 
Looky here , war n't you ever murdered at all ? '' 
`` No . 
I war n't ever murdered at all -- I played it on them . 
You come in here and feel of me if you do n't believe me . '' 
So he done it ; and it satisfied him ; and he was that glad to see me again he did n't know what to do . 
And he wanted to know all about it right off , because it was a grand adventure , and mysterious , and so it hit him where he lived . 
But I said , leave it alone till by and by ; and told his driver to wait , and we drove off a little piece , and I told him the kind of a fix I was in , and what did he reckon we better do ? 
He said , let him alone a minute , and do n't disturb him . 
So he thought and thought , and pretty soon he says : `` It 's all right ; I 've got it . 
Take my trunk in your wagon , and let on it 's your ` n ; and you turn back and fool along slow , so as to get to the house about the time you ought to ; and I 'll go towards town a piece , and take a fresh start , and get there a quarter or a half an hour after you ; and you need n't let on to know me at first . '' 
I says : `` All right ; but wait a minute . 
There 's one more thing -- a thing that nobody do n't know but me . 
And that is , there 's a nigger here that I 'm a-trying to steal out of slavery , and his name is Jim -- old Miss Watson 's Jim . '' 
He says : `` What ! 
Why , Jim is -- '' He stopped and went to studying . 
I says : `` I know what you 'll say . 
You 'll say it 's dirty , low-down business ; but what if it is ? 
I 'm low down ; and I 'm a-going to steal him , and I want you keep mum and not let on . 
Will you ? '' 
His eye lit up , and he says : `` I 'll help you steal him ! '' 
Well , I let go all holts then , like I was shot . 
It was the most astonishing speech I ever heard -- and I 'm bound to say Tom Sawyer fell considerable in my estimation . 
Only I could n't believe it . 
Tom Sawyer a nigger-stealer ! 
`` Oh , shucks ! '' 
I says ; `` you 're joking . '' 
`` I ai n't joking , either . '' 
`` Well , then , '' I says , `` joking or no joking , if you hear anything said about a runaway nigger , do n't forget to remember that you do n't know nothing about him , and I do n't know nothing about him . '' 
Then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon , and he drove off his way and I drove mine . 
But of course I forgot all about driving slow on accounts of being glad and full of thinking ; so I got home a heap too quick for that length of a trip . 
The old gentleman was at the door , and he says : `` Why , this is wonderful ! 
Whoever would a thought it was in that mare to do it ? 
I wish we 'd a timed her . 
And she hai n't sweated a hair -- not a hair . 
It 's wonderful . 
Why , I would n't take a hundred dollars for that horse now -- I would n't , honest ; and yet I 'd a sold her for fifteen before , and thought 't was all she was worth . '' 
That 's all he said . 
He was the innocentest , best old soul I ever see . 
But it war n't surprising ; because he war n't only just a farmer , he was a preacher , too , and had a little one-horse log church down back of the plantation , which he built it himself at his own expense , for a church and schoolhouse , and never charged nothing for his preaching , and it was worth it , too . 
There was plenty other farmer-preachers like that , and done the same way , down South . 
In about half an hour Tom 's wagon drove up to the front stile , and Aunt Sally she see it through the window , because it was only about fifty yards , and says : `` Why , there 's somebody come ! 
I wonder who 't is ? 
Why , I do believe it 's a stranger . 
Jimmy '' -LRB- that 's one of the children -RRB- `` run and tell Lize to put on another plate for dinner . '' 
Everybody made a rush for the front door , because , of course , a stranger do n't come every year , and so he lays over the yaller-fever , for interest , when he does come . 
Tom was over the stile and starting for the house ; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village , and we was all bunched in the front door . 
Tom had his store clothes on , and an audience -- and that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer . 
In them circumstances it war n't no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was suitable . 
He war n't a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep ; no , he come ca 'm and important , like the ram . 
When he got a-front of us he lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty , like it was the lid of a box that had butterflies asleep in it and he did n't want to disturb them , and says : `` Mr. Archibald Nichols , I presume ? '' 
`` No , my boy , '' says the old gentleman , `` I 'm sorry to say ' t your driver has deceived you ; Nichols 's place is down a matter of three mile more . 
Come in , come in . '' 
Tom he took a look back over his shoulder , and says , `` Too late -- he 's out of sight . '' 
`` Yes , he 's gone , my son , and you must come in and eat your dinner with us ; and then we 'll hitch up and take you down to Nichols 's . '' 
`` Oh , I ca n't make you so much trouble ; I could n't think of it . 
I 'll walk -- I do n't mind the distance . '' 
`` But we wo n't let you walk -- it would n't be Southern hospitality to do it . 
Come right in . '' 
`` Oh , do , '' says Aunt Sally ; `` it ai n't a bit of trouble to us , not a bit in the world . 
You must stay . 
It 's a long , dusty three mile , and we ca n't let you walk . 
And , besides , I 've already told 'em to put on another plate when I see you coming ; so you must n't disappoint us . 
Come right in and make yourself at home . '' 
So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome , and let himself be persuaded , and come in ; and when he was in he said he was a stranger from Hicksville , Ohio , and his name was William Thompson -- and he made another bow . 
Well , he run on , and on , and on , making up stuff about Hicksville and everybody in it he could invent , and I getting a little nervious , and wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape ; and at last , still talking along , he reached over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the mouth , and then settled back again in his chair comfortable , and was going on talking ; but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of her hand , and says : `` You owdacious puppy ! '' 
He looked kind of hurt , and says : `` I 'm surprised at you , m ` am . '' 
`` You 're s ` rp -- Why , what do you reckon I am ? 
I 've a good notion to take and -- Say , what do you mean by kissing me ? '' 
He looked kind of humble , and says : `` I did n't mean nothing , m ` am . 
I did n't mean no harm . 
I -- I -- thought you 'd like it . '' 
`` Why , you born fool ! '' 
She took up the spinning stick , and it looked like it was all she could do to keep from giving him a crack with it . 
`` What made you think I 'd like it ? '' 
`` Well , I do n't know . 
Only , they -- they -- told me you would . '' '' 
They told you I would . 
Whoever told you 's another lunatic . 
I never heard the beat of it . 
Who 's they ? '' 
`` Why , everybody . 
They all said so , m ` am . '' 
It was all she could do to hold in ; and her eyes snapped , and her fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him ; and she says : `` Who 's ` everybody ' ? 
Out with their names , or ther 'll be an idiot short . '' 
He got up and looked distressed , and fumbled his hat , and says : `` I 'm sorry , and I war n't expecting it . 
They told me to . 
They all told me to . 
They all said , kiss her ; and said she 'd like it . 
They all said it -- every one of them . 
But I 'm sorry , m ` am , and I wo n't do it no more -- I wo n't , honest . '' 
`` You wo n't , wo n't you ? 
Well , I sh 'd reckon you wo n't ! '' 
`` No 'm , I 'm honest about it ; I wo n't ever do it again -- till you ask me . '' 
`` Till I ask you ! 
Well , I never see the beat of it in my born days ! 
I lay you 'll be the Methusalem-numskull of creation before ever I ask you -- or the likes of you . '' 
`` Well , '' he says , `` it does surprise me so . 
I ca n't make it out , somehow . 
They said you would , and I thought you would . 
But -- '' He stopped and looked around slow , like he wished he could run across a friendly eye somewheres , and fetched up on the old gentleman 's , and says , `` Did n't you think she 'd like me to kiss her , sir ? '' 
`` Why , no ; I -- I -- well , no , I b ` lieve I did n't . '' 
Then he looks on around the same way to me , and says : `` Tom , did n't you think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say , ` Sid Sawyer -- ' '' `` My land ! '' 
she says , breaking in and jumping for him , `` you impudent young rascal , to fool a body so -- '' and was going to hug him , but he fended her off , and says : `` No , not till you 've asked me first . '' 
So she did n't lose no time , but asked him ; and hugged him and kissed him over and over again , and then turned him over to the old man , and he took what was left . 
And after they got a little quiet again she says : `` Why , dear me , I never see such a surprise . 
We war n't looking for you at all , but only Tom . 
Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but him . '' 
`` It 's because it war n't intended for any of us to come but Tom , '' he says ; `` but I begged and begged , and at the last minute she let me come , too ; so , coming down the river , me and Tom thought it would be a first-rate surprise for him to come here to the house first , and for me to by and by tag along and drop in , and let on to be a stranger . 
But it was a mistake , Aunt Sally . 
This ai n't no healthy place for a stranger to come . '' 
`` No -- not impudent whelps , Sid . 
You ought to had your jaws boxed ; I hai n't been so put out since I do n't know when . 
But I do n't care , I do n't mind the terms -- I 'd be willing to stand a thousand such jokes to have you here . 
Well , to think of that performance ! 
I do n't deny it , I was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack . '' 
We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and the kitchen ; and there was things enough on that table for seven families -- and all hot , too ; none of your flabby , tough meat that 's laid in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of old cold cannibal in the morning . 
Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long blessing over it , but it was worth it ; and it did n't cool it a bit , neither , the way I 've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times . 
There was a considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon , and me and Tom was on the lookout all the time ; but it war n't no use , they did n't happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger , and we was afraid to try to work up to it . 
But at supper , at night , one of the little boys says : `` Pa , may n't Tom and Sid and me go to the show ? '' 
`` No , '' says the old man , `` I reckon there ai n't going to be any ; and you could n't go if there was ; because the runaway nigger told Burton and me all about that scandalous show , and Burton said he would tell the people ; so I reckon they 've drove the owdacious loafers out of town before this time . '' 
So there it was ! 
-- but I could n't help it . 
Tom and me was to sleep in the same room and bed ; so , being tired , we bid good-night and went up to bed right after supper , and clumb out of the window and down the lightning-rod , and shoved for the town ; for I did n't believe anybody was going to give the king and the duke a hint , and so if I did n't hurry up and give them one they 'd get into trouble sure . 
On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered , and how pap disappeared pretty soon , and did n't come back no more , and what a stir there was when Jim run away ; and I told Tom all about our Royal Nonesuch rapscallions , and as much of the raft voyage as I had time to ; and as we struck into the town and up through the the middle of it -- it was as much as half-after eight , then -- here comes a raging rush of people with torches , and an awful whooping and yelling , and banging tin pans and blowing horns ; and we jumped to one side to let them go by ; and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a rail -- that is , I knowed it was the king and the duke , though they was all over tar and feathers , and did n't look like nothing in the world that was human -- just looked like a couple of monstrous big soldier-plumes . 
Well , it made me sick to see it ; and I was sorry for them poor pitiful rascals , it seemed like I could n't ever feel any hardness against them any more in the world . 
It was a dreadful thing to see . 
Human beings can be awful cruel to one another . 
We see we was too late -- could n't do no good . 
We asked some stragglers about it , and they said everybody went to the show looking very innocent ; and laid low and kept dark till the poor old king was in the middle of his cavortings on the stage ; then somebody give a signal , and the house rose up and went for them . 
So we poked along back home , and I war n't feeling so brash as I was before , but kind of ornery , and humble , and to blame , somehow -- though I had n't done nothing . 
But that 's always the way ; it do n't make no difference whether you do right or wrong , a person 's conscience ai n't got no sense , and just goes for him anyway . 
If I had a yaller dog that did n't know no more than a person 's conscience does I would pison him . 
It takes up more room than all the rest of a person 's insides , and yet ai n't no good , nohow . 
Tom Sawyer he says the same . 
WE stopped talking , and got to thinking . 
By and by Tom says : `` Looky here , Huck , what fools we are to not think of it before ! 
I bet I know where Jim is . '' 
`` No ! 
Where ? '' 
`` In that hut down by the ash-hopper . 
Why , looky here . 
When we was at dinner , did n't you see a nigger man go in there with some vittles ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` What did you think the vittles was for ? '' 
`` For a dog . '' 
`` So 'd I. Well , it was n't for a dog . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because part of it was watermelon . '' 
`` So it was -- I noticed it . 
Well , it does beat all that I never thought about a dog not eating watermelon . 
It shows how a body can see and do n't see at the same time . '' 
`` Well , the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in , and he locked it again when he came out . 
He fetched uncle a key about the time we got up from table -- same key , I bet . 
Watermelon shows man , lock shows prisoner ; and it ai n't likely there 's two prisoners on such a little plantation , and where the people 's all so kind and good . 
Jim 's the prisoner . 
All right -- I 'm glad we found it out detective fashion ; I would n't give shucks for any other way . 
Now you work your mind , and study out a plan to steal Jim , and I will study out one , too ; and we 'll take the one we like the best . '' 
What a head for just a boy to have ! 
If I had Tom Sawyer 's head I would n't trade it off to be a duke , nor mate of a steamboat , nor clown in a circus , nor nothing I can think of . 
I went to thinking out a plan , but only just to be doing something ; I knowed very well where the right plan was going to come from . 
Pretty soon Tom says : `` Ready ? '' 
`` Yes , '' I says . 
`` All right -- bring it out . '' 
`` My plan is this , '' I says . 
`` We can easy find out if it 's Jim in there . 
Then get up my canoe to-morrow night , and fetch my raft over from the island . 
Then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the old man 's britches after he goes to bed , and shove off down the river on the raft with Jim , hiding daytimes and running nights , the way me and Jim used to do before . 
Would n't that plan work ? '' '' 
Work ? 
Why , cert ` nly it would work , like rats a-fighting . 
But it 's too blame ' simple ; there ai n't nothing to it . 
What 's the good of a plan that ai n't no more trouble than that ? 
It 's as mild as goose-milk . 
Why , Huck , it would n't make no more talk than breaking into a soap factory . '' 
I never said nothing , because I war n't expecting nothing different ; but I knowed mighty well that whenever he got his plan ready it would n't have none of them objections to it . 
And it did n't . 
He told me what it was , and I see in a minute it was worth fifteen of mine for style , and would make Jim just as free a man as mine would , and maybe get us all killed besides . 
So I was satisfied , and said we would waltz in on it . 
I need n't tell what it was here , because I knowed it would n't stay the way , it was . 
I knowed he would be changing it around every which way as we went along , and heaving in new bullinesses wherever he got a chance . 
And that is what he done . 
Well , one thing was dead sure , and that was that Tom Sawyer was in earnest , and was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery . 
That was the thing that was too many for me . 
Here was a boy that was respectable and well brung up ; and had a character to lose ; and folks at home that had characters ; and he was bright and not leather-headed ; and knowing and not ignorant ; and not mean , but kind ; and yet here he was , without any more pride , or rightness , or feeling , than to stoop to this business , and make himself a shame , and his family a shame , before everybody . 
I could n't understand it no way at all . 
It was outrageous , and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so ; and so be his true friend , and let him quit the thing right where he was and save himself . 
And I did start to tell him ; but he shut me up , and says : `` Do n't you reckon I know what I 'm about ? 
Do n't I generly know what I 'm about ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Did n't I say I was going to help steal the nigger ? '' 
`` Yes . '' '' 
Well , then . '' 
That 's all he said , and that 's all I said . 
It war n't no use to say any more ; because when he said he 'd do a thing , he always done it . 
But I could n't make out how he was willing to go into this thing ; so I just let it go , and never bothered no more about it . 
If he was bound to have it so , I could n't help it . 
When we got home the house was all dark and still ; so we went on down to the hut by the ash-hopper for to examine it . 
We went through the yard so as to see what the hounds would do . 
They knowed us , and did n't make no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by in the night . 
When we got to the cabin we took a look at the front and the two sides ; and on the side I war n't acquainted with -- which was the north side -- we found a square window-hole , up tolerable high , with just one stout board nailed across it . 
I says : `` Here 's the ticket . 
This hole 's big enough for Jim to get through if we wrench off the board . '' 
Tom says : `` It 's as simple as tit-tat-toe , three-in-a-row , and as easy as playing hooky . 
I should hope we can find a way that 's a little more complicated than that , Huck Finn . '' 
`` Well , then , '' I says , `` how 'll it do to saw him out , the way I done before I was murdered that time ? '' 
`` That 's more like , '' he says . 
`` It 's real mysterious , and troublesome , and good , '' he says ; `` but I bet we can find a way that 's twice as long . 
There ai n't no hurry ; le 's keep on looking around . '' 
Betwixt the hut and the fence , on the back side , was a lean-to that joined the hut at the eaves , and was made out of plank . 
It was as long as the hut , but narrow -- only about six foot wide . 
The door to it was at the south end , and was padlocked . 
Tom he went to the soap-kettle and searched around , and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with ; so he took it and prized out one of the staples . 
The chain fell down , and we opened the door and went in , and shut it , and struck a match , and see the shed was only built against a cabin and had n't no connection with it ; and there war n't no floor to the shed , nor nothing in it but some old rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a crippled plow . 
The match went out , and so did we , and shoved in the staple again , and the door was locked as good as ever . 
Tom was joyful . 
He says ; `` Now we 're all right . 
We 'll dig him out . 
It 'll take about a week ! '' 
Then we started for the house , and I went in the back door -- you only have to pull a buckskin latch-string , they do n't fasten the doors -- but that war n't romantical enough for Tom Sawyer ; no way would do him but he must climb up the lightning-rod . 
But after he got up half way about three times , and missed fire and fell every time , and the last time most busted his brains out , he thought he 'd got to give it up ; but after he was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck , and this time he made the trip . 
In the morning we was up at break of day , and down to the nigger cabins to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed Jim -- if it was Jim that was being fed . 
The niggers was just getting through breakfast and starting for the fields ; and Jim 's nigger was piling up a tin pan with bread and meat and things ; and whilst the others was leaving , the key come from the house . 
This nigger had a good-natured , chuckle-headed face , and his wool was all tied up in little bunches with thread . 
That was to keep witches off . 
He said the witches was pestering him awful these nights , and making him see all kinds of strange things , and hear all kinds of strange words and noises , and he did n't believe he was ever witched so long before in his life . 
He got so worked up , and got to running on so about his troubles , he forgot all about what he 'd been a-going to do . 
So Tom says : `` What 's the vittles for ? 
Going to feed the dogs ? '' 
The nigger kind of smiled around gradually over his face , like when you heave a brickbat in a mud-puddle , and he says : `` Yes , Mars Sid , A dog . 
Cur ` us dog , too . 
Does you want to go en look at ` im ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
I hunched Tom , and whispers : `` You going , right here in the daybreak ? 
that war n't the plan . '' 
`` No , it war n't ; but it 's the plan now . '' 
So , drat him , we went along , but I did n't like it much . 
When we got in we could n't hardly see anything , it was so dark ; but Jim was there , sure enough , and could see us ; and he sings out : `` Why , Huck ! 
En good lan ' ! 
ain ' dat Misto Tom ? '' 
I just knowed how it would be ; I just expected it . 
I did n't know nothing to do ; and if I had I could n't a done it , because that nigger busted in and says : `` Why , de gracious sakes ! 
do he know you genlmen ? '' 
We could see pretty well now . 
Tom he looked at the nigger , steady and kind of wondering , and says : `` Does who know us ? '' 
`` Why , dis-yer runaway nigger . '' 
`` I do n't reckon he does ; but what put that into your head ? '' 
`` What put it dar ? 
Didn ' he jis ' dis minute sing out like he knowed you ? '' 
Tom says , in a puzzled-up kind of way : `` Well , that 's mighty curious . 
Who sung out ? 
when did he sing out ? 
what did he sing out ? '' 
And turns to me , perfectly ca 'm , and says , `` Did you hear anybody sing out ? '' 
Of course there war n't nothing to be said but the one thing ; so I says : `` No ; I ai n't heard nobody say nothing . '' 
Then he turns to Jim , and looks him over like he never see him before , and says : `` Did you sing out ? '' 
`` No , sah , '' says Jim ; `` I hai n't said nothing , sah . '' 
`` Not a word ? '' 
`` No , sah , I hai n't said a word . '' 
`` Did you ever see us before ? '' 
`` No , sah ; not as I knows on . '' 
So Tom turns to the nigger , which was looking wild and distressed , and says , kind of severe : `` What do you reckon 's the matter with you , anyway ? 
What made you think somebody sung out ? '' 
`` Oh , it 's de dad-blame ' witches , sah , en I wisht I was dead , I do . 
Dey 's awluz at it , sah , en dey do mos ' kill me , dey sk ` yers me so . 
Please to do n't tell nobody ` bout it sah , er ole Mars Silas he 'll scole me ; ` kase he say dey ai n't no witches . 
I jis ' wish to goodness he was heah now -- den what would he say ! 
I jis ' bet he couldn ' fine no way to git aroun ' it dis time . 
But it 's awluz jis ' so ; people dat 's sot , stays sot ; dey wo n't look into noth 'n' en fine it out f ' r deyselves , en when you fine it out en tell um ` bout it , dey doan ' b ` lieve you . '' 
Tom give him a dime , and said we would n't tell nobody ; and told him to buy some more thread to tie up his wool with ; and then looks at Jim , and says : `` I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to hang this nigger . 
If I was to catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away , I would n't give him up , I 'd hang him . '' 
And whilst the nigger stepped to the door to look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good , he whispers to Jim and says : `` Do n't ever let on to know us . 
And if you hear any digging going on nights , it 's us ; we 're going to set you free . '' 
Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it ; then the nigger come back , and we said we 'd come again some time if the nigger wanted us to ; and he said he would , more particular if it was dark , because the witches went for him mostly in the dark , and it was good to have folks around then . 
IT would be most an hour yet till breakfast , so we left and struck down into the woods ; because Tom said we got to have some light to see how to dig by , and a lantern makes too much , and might get us into trouble ; what we must have was a lot of them rotten chunks that 's called fox-fire , and just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a dark place . 
We fetched an armful and hid it in the weeds , and set down to rest , and Tom says , kind of dissatisfied : `` Blame it , this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be . 
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan . 
There ai n't no watchman to be drugged -- now there ought to be a watchman . 
There ai n't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to . 
And there 's Jim chained by one leg , with a ten-foot chain , to the leg of his bed : why , all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain . 
And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody ; sends the key to the punkin-headed nigger , and do n't send nobody to watch the nigger . 
Jim could a got out of that window-hole before this , only there would n't be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg . 
Why , drat it , Huck , it 's the stupidest arrangement I ever see . 
You got to invent all the difficulties . 
Well , we ca n't help it ; we got to do the best we can with the materials we 've got . 
Anyhow , there 's one thing -- there 's more honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers , where there war n't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was their duty to furnish them , and you had to contrive them all out of your own head . 
Now look at just that one thing of the lantern . 
When you come down to the cold facts , we simply got to let on that a lantern 's resky . 
Why , we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to , I believe . 
Now , whilst I think of it , we got to hunt up something to make a saw out of the first chance we get . '' 
`` What do we want of a saw ? '' 
`` What do we want of it ? 
Hai n't we got to saw the leg of Jim 's bed off , so as to get the chain loose ? '' 
`` Why , you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain off . '' 
`` Well , if that ai n't just like you , Huck Finn . 
You can get up the infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing . 
Why , hai n't you ever read any books at all ? 
-- Baron Trenck , nor Casanova , nor Benvenuto Chelleeny , nor Henri IV. , nor none of them heroes ? 
Who ever heard of getting a prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that ? 
No ; the way all the best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two , and leave it just so , and swallow the sawdust , so it ca n't be found , and put some dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal ca n't see no sign of it 's being sawed , and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound . 
Then , the night you 're ready , fetch the leg a kick , down she goes ; slip off your chain , and there you are . 
Nothing to do but hitch your rope ladder to the battlements , shin down it , break your leg in the moat -- because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short , you know -- and there 's your horses and your trusty vassles , and they scoop you up and fling you across a saddle , and away you go to your native Langudoc , or Navarre , or wherever it is . 
It 's gaudy , Huck . 
I wish there was a moat to this cabin . 
If we get time , the night of the escape , we 'll dig one . '' 
I says : `` What do we want of a moat when we 're going to snake him out from under the cabin ? '' 
But he never heard me . 
He had forgot me and everything else . 
He had his chin in his hand , thinking . 
Pretty soon he sighs and shakes his head ; then sighs again , and says : `` No , it would n't do -- there ai n't necessity enough for it . '' 
`` For what ? '' 
I says . 
`` Why , to saw Jim 's leg off , '' he says . 
`` Good land ! '' 
I says ; `` why , there ai n't no necessity for it . 
And what would you want to saw his leg off for , anyway ? '' 
`` Well , some of the best authorities has done it . 
They could n't get the chain off , so they just cut their hand off and shoved . 
And a leg would be better still . 
But we got to let that go . 
There ai n't necessity enough in this case ; and , besides , Jim 's a nigger , and would n't understand the reasons for it , and how it 's the custom in Europe ; so we 'll let it go . 
But there 's one thing -- he can have a rope ladder ; we can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough . 
And we can send it to him in a pie ; it 's mostly done that way . 
And I 've et worse pies . '' 
`` Why , Tom Sawyer , how you talk , '' I says ; `` Jim ai n't got no use for a rope ladder . '' 
`` He has got use for it . 
How you talk , you better say ; you do n't know nothing about it . 
He 's got to have a rope ladder ; they all do . '' 
`` What in the nation can he do with it ? '' '' 
Do with it ? 
He can hide it in his bed , ca n't he ? '' 
That 's what they all do ; and he 's got to , too . 
Huck , you do n't ever seem to want to do anything that 's regular ; you want to be starting something fresh all the time . 
S'pose he do n't do nothing with it ? 
ai n't it there in his bed , for a clew , after he 's gone ? 
and do n't you reckon they 'll want clews ? 
Of course they will . 
And you would n't leave them any ? 
That would be a pretty howdy-do , would n't it ! 
I never heard of such a thing . '' 
`` Well , '' I says , `` if it 's in the regulations , and he 's got to have it , all right , let him have it ; because I do n't wish to go back on no regulations ; but there 's one thing , Tom Sawyer -- if we go to tearing up our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder , we 're going to get into trouble with Aunt Sally , just as sure as you 're born . 
Now , the way I look at it , a hickry-bark ladder do n't cost nothing , and do n't waste nothing , and is just as good to load up a pie with , and hide in a straw tick , as any rag ladder you can start ; and as for Jim , he ai n't had no experience , and so he do n't care what kind of a -- '' `` Oh , shucks , Huck Finn , if I was as ignorant as you I 'd keep still -- that 's what I 'D do . 
Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping by a hickry-bark ladder ? 
Why , it 's perfectly ridiculous . '' 
`` Well , all right , Tom , fix it your own way ; but if you 'll take my advice , you 'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline . '' 
He said that would do . 
And that gave him another idea , and he says : `` Borrow a shirt , too . '' 
`` What do we want of a shirt , Tom ? '' 
`` Want it for Jim to keep a journal on . '' 
`` Journal your granny -- Jim ca n't write . '' 
`` S'pose he ca n't write -- he can make marks on the shirt , ca n't he , if we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron barrel-hoop ? '' 
`` Why , Tom , we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better one ; and quicker , too . '' '' 
Prisoners do n't have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull pens out of , you muggins . 
They always make their pens out of the hardest , toughest , troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or something like that they can get their hands on ; and it takes them weeks and weeks and months and months to file it out , too , because they 've got to do it by rubbing it on the wall . 
They would n't use a goose-quill if they had it . 
It ai n't regular . '' 
`` Well , then , what 'll we make him the ink out of ? '' 
`` Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears ; but that 's the common sort and women ; the best authorities uses their own blood . 
Jim can do that ; and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message to let the world know where he 's captivated , he can write it on the bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window . 
The Iron Mask always done that , and it 's a blame ' good way , too . '' 
`` Jim ai n't got no tin plates . 
They feed him in a pan . '' 
`` That ai n't nothing ; we can get him some . '' 
`` Ca n't nobody read his plates . '' 
`` That ai n't got anything to do with it , Huck Finn . 
All he 's got to do is to write on the plate and throw it out . 
You do n't have to be able to read it . 
Why , half the time you ca n't read anything a prisoner writes on a tin plate , or anywhere else . '' 
`` Well , then , what 's the sense in wasting the plates ? '' 
`` Why , blame it all , it ai n't the prisoner 's plates . '' 
`` But it 's somebody 's plates , ai n't it ? '' 
`` Well , spos 'n it is ? 
What does the prisoner care whose -- '' He broke off there , because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing . 
So we cleared out for the house . 
Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the clothes-line ; and I found an old sack and put them in it , and we went down and got the fox-fire , and put that in too . 
I called it borrowing , because that was what pap always called it ; but Tom said it war n't borrowing , it was stealing . 
He said we was representing prisoners ; and prisoners do n't care how they get a thing so they get it , and nobody do n't blame them for it , either . 
It ai n't no crime in a prisoner to steal the thing he needs to get away with , Tom said ; it 's his right ; and so , as long as we was representing a prisoner , we had a perfect right to steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves out of prison with . 
He said if we war n't prisoners it would be a very different thing , and nobody but a mean , ornery person would steal when he war n't a prisoner . 
So we allowed we would steal everything there was that come handy . 
And yet he made a mighty fuss , one day , after that , when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it ; and he made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it was for . 
Tom said that what he meant was , we could steal anything we needed . 
Well , I says , I needed the watermelon . 
But he said I did n't need it to get out of prison with ; there 's where the difference was . 
He said if I 'd a wanted it to hide a knife in , and smuggle it to Jim to kill the seneskal with , it would a been all right . 
So I let it go at that , though I could n't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon . 
Well , as I was saying , we waited that morning till everybody was settled down to business , and nobody in sight around the yard ; then Tom he carried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep watch . 
By and by he come out , and we went and set down on the woodpile to talk . 
He says : `` Everything 's all right now except tools ; and that 's easy fixed . '' 
`` Tools ? '' 
I says . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Tools for what ? '' 
`` Why , to dig with . 
We ai n't a-going to gnaw him out , are we ? '' 
`` Ai n't them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a nigger out with ? '' 
I says . 
He turns on me , looking pitying enough to make a body cry , and says : `` Huck Finn , did you ever hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels , and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with ? 
Now I want to ask you -- if you got any reasonableness in you at all -- what kind of a show would that give him to be a hero ? 
Why , they might as well lend him the key and done with it . 
Picks and shovels -- why , they would n't furnish 'em to a king . '' 
`` Well , then , '' I says , `` if we do n't want the picks and shovels , what do we want ? '' 
`` A couple of case-knives . '' 
`` To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Confound it , it 's foolish , Tom . '' 
`` It do n't make no difference how foolish it is , it 's the right way -- and it 's the regular way . 
And there ai n't no other way , that ever I heard of , and I 've read all the books that gives any information about these things . 
They always dig out with a case-knife -- and not through dirt , mind you ; generly it 's through solid rock . 
And it takes them weeks and weeks and weeks , and for ever and ever . 
Why , look at one of them prisoners in the bottom dungeon of the Castle Deef , in the harbor of Marseilles , that dug himself out that way ; how long was he at it , you reckon ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` Well , guess . '' 
`` I do n't know . 
A month and a half . '' '' 
Thirty-seven year -- and he come out in China . 
That 's the kind . 
I wish the bottom of this fortress was solid rock . '' '' 
Jim do n't know nobody in China . '' 
`` What 's that got to do with it ? 
