Again , a third instance . 
After parting from the old church member , he met the youngest sister of them all . 
It was a maiden newly-won -- and won by the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale 's own sermon , on the Sabbath after his vigil -- to barter the transitory pleasures of the world for the heavenly hope that was to assume brighter substance as life grew dark around her , and which would gild the utter gloom with final glory . 
She was fair and pure as a lily that had bloomed in Paradise . 
The minister knew well that he was himself enshrined within the stainless sanctity of her heart , which hung its snowy curtains about his image , imparting to religion the warmth of love , and to love a religious purity . 
Satan , that afternoon , had surely led the poor young girl away from her mother 's side , and thrown her into the pathway of this sorely tempted , or -- shall we not rather say ? 
-- this lost and desperate man . 
As she drew nigh , the arch-fiend whispered him to condense into small compass , and drop into her tender bosom a germ of evil that would be sure to blossom darkly soon , and bear black fruit betimes . 
Such was his sense of power over this virgin soul , trusting him as she did , that the minister felt potent to blight all the field of innocence with but one wicked look , and develop all its opposite with but a word . 
So -- with a mightier struggle than he had yet sustained -- he held his Geneva cloak before his face , and hurried onward , making no sign of recognition , and leaving the young sister to digest his rudeness as she might . 
She ransacked her conscience -- which was full of harmless little matters , like her pocket or her work-bag -- and took herself to task , poor thing ! 
for a thousand imaginary faults , and went about her household duties with swollen eyelids the next morning . 
Before the minister had time to celebrate his victory over this last temptation , he was conscious of another impulse , more ludicrous , and almost as horrible . 
It was -- we blush to tell it -- it was to stop short in the road , and teach some very wicked words to a knot of little Puritan children who were playing there , and had but just begun to talk . 
Denying himself this freak , as unworthy of his cloth , he met a drunken seaman , one of the ship 's crew from the Spanish Main . 
And here , since he had so valiantly forborne all other wickedness , poor Mr. Dimmesdale longed at least to shake hands with the tarry black-guard , and recreate himself with a few improper jests , such as dissolute sailors so abound with , and a volley of good , round , solid , satisfactory , and heaven-defying oaths ! 
It was not so much a better principle , as partly his natural good taste , and still more his buckramed habit of clerical decorum , that carried him safely through the latter crisis . 
`` What is it that haunts and tempts me thus ? '' 
cried the minister to himself , at length , pausing in the street , and striking his hand against his forehead . 
`` Am I mad ? 
or am I given over utterly to the fiend ? 
Did I make a contract with him in the forest , and sign it with my blood ? 
And does he now summon me to its fulfilment , by suggesting the performance of every wickedness which his most foul imagination can conceive ? '' 
At the moment when the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale thus communed with himself , and struck his forehead with his hand , old Mistress Hibbins , the reputed witch-lady , is said to have been passing by . 
She made a very grand appearance , having on a high head-dress , a rich gown of velvet , and a ruff done up with the famous yellow starch , of which Anne Turner , her especial friend , had taught her the secret , before this last good lady had been hanged for Sir Thomas Overbury 's murder . 
Whether the witch had read the minister 's thoughts or no , she came to a full stop , looked shrewdly into his face , smiled craftily , and -- though little given to converse with clergymen -- began a conversation . 
`` So , reverend sir , you have made a visit into the forest , '' observed the witch-lady , nodding her high head-dress at him . 
`` The next time I pray you to allow me only a fair warning , and I shall be proud to bear you company . 
Without taking overmuch upon myself my good word will go far towards gaining any strange gentleman a fair reception from yonder potentate you wot of . '' 
`` I profess , madam , '' answered the clergyman , with a grave obeisance , such as the lady 's rank demanded , and his own good breeding made imperative -- `` I profess , on my conscience and character , that I am utterly bewildered as touching the purport of your words ! 
I went not into the forest to seek a potentate , neither do I , at any future time , design a visit thither , with a view to gaining the favour of such personage . 
My one sufficient object was to greet that pious friend of mine , the Apostle Eliot , and rejoice with him over the many precious souls he hath won from heathendom ! '' 
`` Ha , ha , ha ! '' 
cackled the old witch-lady , still nodding her high head-dress at the minister . 
`` Well , well ! 
we must needs talk thus in the daytime ! 
You carry it off like an old hand ! 
But at midnight , and in the forest , we shall have other talk together ! '' 
She passed on with her aged stateliness , but often turning back her head and smiling at him , like one willing to recognise a secret intimacy of connexion . 
`` Have I then sold myself , '' thought the minister , `` to the fiend whom , if men say true , this yellow-starched and velveted old hag has chosen for her prince and master ? '' 
The wretched minister ! 
He had made a bargain very like it ! 
Tempted by a dream of happiness , he had yielded himself with deliberate choice , as he had never done before , to what he knew was deadly sin . 
And the infectious poison of that sin had been thus rapidly diffused throughout his moral system . 
It had stupefied all blessed impulses , and awakened into vivid life the whole brotherhood of bad ones . 
Scorn , bitterness , unprovoked malignity , gratuitous desire of ill , ridicule of whatever was good and holy , all awoke to tempt , even while they frightened him . 
And his encounter with old Mistress Hibbins , if it were a real incident , did but show its sympathy and fellowship with wicked mortals , and the world of perverted spirits . 
He had by this time reached his dwelling on the edge of the burial ground , and , hastening up the stairs , took refuge in his study . 
The minister was glad to have reached this shelter , without first betraying himself to the world by any of those strange and wicked eccentricities to which he had been continually impelled while passing through the streets . 
He entered the accustomed room , and looked around him on its books , its windows , its fireplace , and the tapestried comfort of the walls , with the same perception of strangeness that had haunted him throughout his walk from the forest dell into the town and thitherward . 
Here he had studied and written ; here gone through fast and vigil , and come forth half alive ; here striven to pray ; here borne a hundred thousand agonies ! 
There was the Bible , in its rich old Hebrew , with Moses and the Prophets speaking to him , and God 's voice through all . 
There on the table , with the inky pen beside it , was an unfinished sermon , with a sentence broken in the midst , where his thoughts had ceased to gush out upon the page two days before . 
He knew that it was himself , the thin and white-cheeked minister , who had done and suffered these things , and written thus far into the Election Sermon ! 
But he seemed to stand apart , and eye this former self with scornful pitying , but half-envious curiosity . 
That self was gone . 
Another man had returned out of the forest -- a wiser one -- with a knowledge of hidden mysteries which the simplicity of the former never could have reached . 
A bitter kind of knowledge that ! 
While occupied with these reflections , a knock came at the door of the study , and the minister said , `` Come in ! '' 
-- not wholly devoid of an idea that he might behold an evil spirit . 
And so he did ! 
It was old Roger Chillingworth that entered . 
The minister stood white and speechless , with one hand on the Hebrew Scriptures , and the other spread upon his breast . 
`` Welcome home , reverend sir , '' said the physician `` And how found you that godly man , the Apostle Eliot ? 
But methinks , dear sir , you look pale , as if the travel through the wilderness had been too sore for you . 
Will not my aid be requisite to put you in heart and strength to preach your Election Sermon ? '' 
`` Nay , I think not so , '' rejoined the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale . 
`` My journey , and the sight of the holy Apostle yonder , and the free air which I have breathed have done me good , after so long confinement in my study . 
I think to need no more of your drugs , my kind physician , good though they be , and administered by a friendly hand . '' 
All this time Roger Chillingworth was looking at the minister with the grave and intent regard of a physician towards his patient . 
But , in spite of this outward show , the latter was almost convinced of the old man 's knowledge , or , at least , his confident suspicion , with respect to his own interview with Hester Prynne . 
The physician knew then that in the minister 's regard he was no longer a trusted friend , but his bitterest enemy . 
So much being known , it would appear natural that a part of it should be expressed . 
It is singular , however , how long a time often passes before words embody things ; and with what security two persons , who choose to avoid a certain subject , may approach its very verge , and retire without disturbing it . 
Thus the minister felt no apprehension that Roger Chillingworth would touch , in express words , upon the real position which they sustained towards one another . 
Yet did the physician , in his dark way , creep frightfully near the secret . 
`` Were it not better , '' said he , `` that you use my poor skill tonight ? 
Verily , dear sir , we must take pains to make you strong and vigorous for this occasion of the Election discourse . 
The people look for great things from you , apprehending that another year may come about and find their pastor gone . '' 
`` Yes , to another world , '' replied the minister with pious resignation . 
`` Heaven grant it be a better one ; for , in good sooth , I hardly think to tarry with my flock through the flitting seasons of another year ! 
But touching your medicine , kind sir , in my present frame of body I need it not . '' 
`` I joy to hear it , '' answered the physician . 
`` It may be that my remedies , so long administered in vain , begin now to take due effect . 
Happy man were I , and well deserving of New England 's gratitude , could I achieve this cure ! '' 
`` I thank you from my heart , most watchful friend , '' said the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale with a solemn smile . 
`` I thank you , and can but requite your good deeds with my prayers . '' 
`` A good man 's prayers are golden recompense ! '' 
rejoined old Roger Chillingworth , as he took his leave . 
`` Yea , they are the current gold coin of the New Jerusalem , with the King 's own mint mark on them ! '' 
Left alone , the minister summoned a servant of the house , and requested food , which , being set before him , he ate with ravenous appetite . 
Then flinging the already written pages of the Election Sermon into the fire , he forthwith began another , which he wrote with such an impulsive flow of thought and emotion , that he fancied himself inspired ; and only wondered that Heaven should see fit to transmit the grand and solemn music of its oracles through so foul an organ pipe as he . 
However , leaving that mystery to solve itself , or go unsolved for ever , he drove his task onward with earnest haste and ecstasy . 
Thus the night fled away , as if it were a winged steed , and he careering on it ; morning came , and peeped , blushing , through the curtains ; and at last sunrise threw a golden beam into the study , and laid it right across the minister 's bedazzled eyes . 
There he was , with the pen still between his fingers , and a vast , immeasurable tract of written space behind him ! 
Betimes in the morning of the day on which the new Governor was to receive his office at the hands of the people , Hester Prynne and little Pearl came into the market-place . 
It was already thronged with the craftsmen and other plebeian inhabitants of the town , in considerable numbers , among whom , likewise , were many rough figures , whose attire of deer-skins marked them as belonging to some of the forest settlements , which surrounded the little metropolis of the colony . 
On this public holiday , as on all other occasions for seven years past , Hester was clad in a garment of coarse gray cloth . 
Not more by its hue than by some indescribable peculiarity in its fashion , it had the effect of making her fade personally out of sight and outline ; while again the scarlet letter brought her back from this twilight indistinctness , and revealed her under the moral aspect of its own illumination . 
Her face , so long familiar to the townspeople , showed the marble quietude which they were accustomed to behold there . 
It was like a mask ; or , rather like the frozen calmness of a dead woman 's features ; owing this dreary resemblance to the fact that Hester was actually dead , in respect to any claim of sympathy , and had departed out of the world with which she still seemed to mingle . 
It might be , on this one day , that there was an expression unseen before , nor , indeed , vivid enough to be detected now ; unless some preternaturally gifted observer should have first read the heart , and have afterwards sought a corresponding development in the countenance and mien . 
Such a spiritual seer might have conceived , that , after sustaining the gaze of the multitude through several miserable years as a necessity , a penance , and something which it was a stern religion to endure , she now , for one last time more , encountered it freely and voluntarily , in order to convert what had so long been agony into a kind of triumph . 
`` Look your last on the scarlet letter and its wearer ! '' 
-- the people 's victim and lifelong bond-slave , as they fancied her , might say to them . 
`` Yet a little while , and she will be beyond your reach ! 
A few hours longer and the deep , mysterious ocean will quench and hide for ever the symbol which ye have caused to burn on her bosom ! '' 
Nor were it an inconsistency too improbable to be assigned to human nature , should we suppose a feeling of regret in Hester 's mind , at the moment when she was about to win her freedom from the pain which had been thus deeply incorporated with her being . 
Might there not be an irresistible desire to quaff a last , long , breathless draught of the cup of wormwood and aloes , with which nearly all her years of womanhood had been perpetually flavoured . 
The wine of life , henceforth to be presented to her lips , must be indeed rich , delicious , and exhilarating , in its chased and golden beaker , or else leave an inevitable and weary languor , after the lees of bitterness wherewith she had been drugged , as with a cordial of intensest potency . 
Pearl was decked out with airy gaiety . 
It would have been impossible to guess that this bright and sunny apparition owed its existence to the shape of gloomy gray ; or that a fancy , at once so gorgeous and so delicate as must have been requisite to contrive the child 's apparel , was the same that had achieved a task perhaps more difficult , in imparting so distinct a peculiarity to Hester 's simple robe . 
The dress , so proper was it to little Pearl , seemed an effluence , or inevitable development and outward manifestation of her character , no more to be separated from her than the many-hued brilliancy from a butterfly 's wing , or the painted glory from the leaf of a bright flower . 
As with these , so with the child ; her garb was all of one idea with her nature . 
On this eventful day , moreover , there was a certain singular inquietude and excitement in her mood , resembling nothing so much as the shimmer of a diamond , that sparkles and flashes with the varied throbbings of the breast on which it is displayed . 
Children have always a sympathy in the agitations of those connected with them : always , especially , a sense of any trouble or impending revolution , of whatever kind , in domestic circumstances ; and therefore Pearl , who was the gem on her mother 's unquiet bosom , betrayed , by the very dance of her spirits , the emotions which none could detect in the marble passiveness of Hester 's brow . 
This effervescence made her flit with a bird-like movement , rather than walk by her mother 's side . 
She broke continually into shouts of a wild , inarticulate , and sometimes piercing music . 
When they reached the market-place , she became still more restless , on perceiving the stir and bustle that enlivened the spot ; for it was usually more like the broad and lonesome green before a village meeting-house , than the centre of a town 's business . 
`` Why , what is this , mother ? '' 
cried she . 
`` Wherefore have all the people left their work to-day ? 
Is it a play-day for the whole world ? 
See , there is the blacksmith ! 
He has washed his sooty face , and put on his Sabbath-day clothes , and looks as if he would gladly be merry , if any kind body would only teach him how ! 
And there is Master Brackett , the old jailer , nodding and smiling at me . 
Why does he do so , mother ? '' 
`` He remembers thee a little babe , my child , '' answered Hester . 
`` He should not nod and smile at me , for all that -- the black , grim , ugly-eyed old man ! '' 
said Pearl . 
`` He may nod at thee , if he will ; for thou art clad in gray , and wearest the scarlet letter . 
But see , mother , how many faces of strange people , and Indians among them , and sailors ! 
What have they all come to do , here in the market-place ? '' 
`` They wait to see the procession pass , '' said Hester . 
`` For the Governor and the magistrates are to go by , and the ministers , and all the great people and good people , with the music and the soldiers marching before them . '' 
`` And will the minister be there ? '' 
asked Pearl . 
`` And will he hold out both his hands to me , as when thou ledst me to him from the brook-side ? '' 
`` He will be there , child , '' answered her mother , `` but he will not greet thee to-day , nor must thou greet him . '' 
`` What a strange , sad man is he ! '' 
said the child , as if speaking partly to herself . 
`` In the dark nighttime he calls us to him , and holds thy hand and mine , as when we stood with him on the scaffold yonder ! 
And in the deep forest , where only the old trees can hear , and the strip of sky see it , he talks with thee , sitting on a heap of moss ! 
And he kisses my forehead , too , so that the little brook would hardly wash it off ! 
But , here , in the sunny day , and among all the people , he knows us not ; nor must we know him ! 
A strange , sad man is he , with his hand always over his heart ! '' 
`` Be quiet , Pearl -- thou understandest not these things , '' said her mother . 
`` Think not now of the minister , but look about thee , and see how cheery is everybody 's face to-day . 
The children have come from their schools , and the grown people from their workshops and their fields , on purpose to be happy , for , to-day , a new man is beginning to rule over them ; and so -- as has been the custom of mankind ever since a nation was first gathered -- they make merry and rejoice : as if a good and golden year were at length to pass over the poor old world ! '' 
It was as Hester said , in regard to the unwonted jollity that brightened the faces of the people . 
Into this festal season of the year -- as it already was , and continued to be during the greater part of two centuries -- the Puritans compressed whatever mirth and public joy they deemed allowable to human infirmity ; thereby so far dispelling the customary cloud , that , for the space of a single holiday , they appeared scarcely more grave than most other communities at a period of general affliction . 
But we perhaps exaggerate the gray or sable tinge , which undoubtedly characterized the mood and manners of the age . 
The persons now in the market-place of Boston had not been born to an inheritance of Puritanic gloom . 
They were native Englishmen , whose fathers had lived in the sunny richness of the Elizabethan epoch ; a time when the life of England , viewed as one great mass , would appear to have been as stately , magnificent , and joyous , as the world has ever witnessed . 
Had they followed their hereditary taste , the New England settlers would have illustrated all events of public importance by bonfires , banquets , pageantries , and processions . 
Nor would it have been impracticable , in the observance of majestic ceremonies , to combine mirthful recreation with solemnity , and give , as it were , a grotesque and brilliant embroidery to the great robe of state , which a nation , at such festivals , puts on . 
There was some shadow of an attempt of this kind in the mode of celebrating the day on which the political year of the colony commenced . 
The dim reflection of a remembered splendour , a colourless and manifold diluted repetition of what they had beheld in proud old London -- we will not say at a royal coronation , but at a Lord Mayor 's show -- might be traced in the customs which our forefathers instituted , with reference to the annual installation of magistrates . 
The fathers and founders of the commonwealth -- the statesman , the priest , and the soldier -- seemed it a duty then to assume the outward state and majesty , which , in accordance with antique style , was looked upon as the proper garb of public and social eminence . 
All came forth to move in procession before the people 's eye , and thus impart a needed dignity to the simple framework of a government so newly constructed . 
Then , too , the people were countenanced , if not encouraged , in relaxing the severe and close application to their various modes of rugged industry , which at all other times , seemed of the same piece and material with their religion . 
Here , it is true , were none of the appliances which popular merriment would so readily have found in the England of Elizabeth 's time , or that of James -- no rude shows of a theatrical kind ; no minstrel , with his harp and legendary ballad , nor gleeman with an ape dancing to his music ; no juggler , with his tricks of mimic witchcraft ; no Merry Andrew , to stir up the multitude with jests , perhaps a hundred years old , but still effective , by their appeals to the very broadest sources of mirthful sympathy . 
All such professors of the several branches of jocularity would have been sternly repressed , not only by the rigid discipline of law , but by the general sentiment which give law its vitality . 
Not the less , however , the great , honest face of the people smiled -- grimly , perhaps , but widely too . 
Nor were sports wanting , such as the colonists had witnessed , and shared in , long ago , at the country fairs and on the village-greens of England ; and which it was thought well to keep alive on this new soil , for the sake of the courage and manliness that were essential in them . 
Wrestling matches , in the different fashions of Cornwall and Devonshire , were seen here and there about the market-place ; in one corner , there was a friendly bout at quarterstaff ; and -- what attracted most interest of all -- on the platform of the pillory , already so noted in our pages , two masters of defence were commencing an exhibition with the buckler and broadsword . 
But , much to the disappointment of the crowd , this latter business was broken off by the interposition of the town beadle , who had no idea of permitting the majesty of the law to be violated by such an abuse of one of its consecrated places . 
It may not be too much to affirm , on the whole , -LRB- the people being then in the first stages of joyless deportment , and the offspring of sires who had known how to be merry , in their day -RRB- , that they would compare favourably , in point of holiday keeping , with their descendants , even at so long an interval as ourselves . 
Their immediate posterity , the generation next to the early emigrants , wore the blackest shade of Puritanism , and so darkened the national visage with it , that all the subsequent years have not sufficed to clear it up . 
We have yet to learn again the forgotten art of gaiety . 
The picture of human life in the market-place , though its general tint was the sad gray , brown , or black of the English emigrants , was yet enlivened by some diversity of hue . 
A party of Indians -- in their savage finery of curiously embroidered deerskin robes , wampum-belts , red and yellow ochre , and feathers , and armed with the bow and arrow and stone-headed spear -- stood apart with countenances of inflexible gravity , beyond what even the Puritan aspect could attain . 
Nor , wild as were these painted barbarians , were they the wildest feature of the scene . 
This distinction could more justly be claimed by some mariners -- a part of the crew of the vessel from the Spanish Main -- who had come ashore to see the humours of Election Day . 
They were rough-looking desperadoes , with sun-blackened faces , and an immensity of beard ; their wide short trousers were confined about the waist by belts , often clasped with a rough plate of gold , and sustaining always a long knife , and in some instances , a sword . 
From beneath their broad-brimmed hats of palm-leaf , gleamed eyes which , even in good-nature and merriment , had a kind of animal ferocity . 
They transgressed without fear or scruple , the rules of behaviour that were binding on all others : smoking tobacco under the beadle 's very nose , although each whiff would have cost a townsman a shilling ; and quaffing at their pleasure , draughts of wine or aqua-vitae from pocket flasks , which they freely tendered to the gaping crowd around them . 
It remarkably characterised the incomplete morality of the age , rigid as we call it , that a licence was allowed the seafaring class , not merely for their freaks on shore , but for far more desperate deeds on their proper element . 
The sailor of that day would go near to be arraigned as a pirate in our own . 
There could be little doubt , for instance , that this very ship 's crew , though no unfavourable specimens of the nautical brotherhood , had been guilty , as we should phrase it , of depredations on the Spanish commerce , such as would have perilled all their necks in a modern court of justice . 
But the sea in those old times heaved , swelled , and foamed very much at its own will , or subject only to the tempestuous wind , with hardly any attempts at regulation by human law . 
The buccaneer on the wave might relinquish his calling and become at once if he chose , a man of probity and piety on land ; nor , even in the full career of his reckless life , was he regarded as a personage with whom it was disreputable to traffic or casually associate . 
Thus the Puritan elders in their black cloaks , starched bands , and steeple-crowned hats , smiled not unbenignantly at the clamour and rude deportment of these jolly seafaring men ; and it excited neither surprise nor animadversion when so reputable a citizen as old Roger Chillingworth , the physician , was seen to enter the market-place in close and familiar talk with the commander of the questionable vessel . 
The latter was by far the most showy and gallant figure , so far as apparel went , anywhere to be seen among the multitude . 
He wore a profusion of ribbons on his garment , and gold lace on his hat , which was also encircled by a gold chain , and surmounted with a feather . 
There was a sword at his side and a sword-cut on his forehead , which , by the arrangement of his hair , he seemed anxious rather to display than hide . 
A landsman could hardly have worn this garb and shown this face , and worn and shown them both with such a galliard air , without undergoing stern question before a magistrate , and probably incurring a fine or imprisonment , or perhaps an exhibition in the stocks . 
As regarded the shipmaster , however , all was looked upon as pertaining to the character , as to a fish his glistening scales . 
After parting from the physician , the commander of the Bristol ship strolled idly through the market-place ; until happening to approach the spot where Hester Prynne was standing , he appeared to recognise , and did not hesitate to address her . 
As was usually the case wherever Hester stood , a small vacant area -- a sort of magic circle -- had formed itself about her , into which , though the people were elbowing one another at a little distance , none ventured or felt disposed to intrude . 
It was a forcible type of the moral solitude in which the scarlet letter enveloped its fated wearer ; partly by her own reserve , and partly by the instinctive , though no longer so unkindly , withdrawal of her fellow-creatures . 
Now , if never before , it answered a good purpose by enabling Hester and the seaman to speak together without risk of being overheard ; and so changed was Hester Prynne 's repute before the public , that the matron in town , most eminent for rigid morality , could not have held such intercourse with less result of scandal than herself . 
`` So , mistress , '' said the mariner , `` I must bid the steward make ready one more berth than you bargained for ! 
No fear of scurvy or ship fever this voyage . 
What with the ship 's surgeon and this other doctor , our only danger will be from drug or pill ; more by token , as there is a lot of apothecary 's stuff aboard , which I traded for with a Spanish vessel . '' 
`` What mean you ? '' 
inquired Hester , startled more than she permitted to appear . 
`` Have you another passenger ? '' 
`` Why , know you not , '' cried the shipmaster , `` that this physician here -- Chillingworth he calls himself -- is minded to try my cabin-fare with you ? 
Ay , ay , you must have known it ; for he tells me he is of your party , and a close friend to the gentleman you spoke of -- he that is in peril from these sour old Puritan rulers . '' 
`` They know each other well , indeed , '' replied Hester , with a mien of calmness , though in the utmost consternation . 
`` They have long dwelt together . '' 
Nothing further passed between the mariner and Hester Prynne . 
But at that instant she beheld old Roger Chillingworth himself , standing in the remotest corner of the market-place and smiling on her ; a smile which -- across the wide and bustling square , and through all the talk and laughter , and various thoughts , moods , and interests of the crowd -- conveyed secret and fearful meaning . 
Before Hester Prynne could call together her thoughts , and consider what was practicable to be done in this new and startling aspect of affairs , the sound of military music was heard approaching along a contiguous street . 
It denoted the advance of the procession of magistrates and citizens on its way towards the meeting-house : where , in compliance with a custom thus early established , and ever since observed , the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale was to deliver an Election Sermon . 
Soon the head of the procession showed itself , with a slow and stately march , turning a corner , and making its way across the market-place . 
First came the music . 
It comprised a variety of instruments , perhaps imperfectly adapted to one another , and played with no great skill ; but yet attaining the great object for which the harmony of drum and clarion addresses itself to the multitude -- that of imparting a higher and more heroic air to the scene of life that passes before the eye . 
Little Pearl at first clapped her hands , but then lost for an instant the restless agitation that had kept her in a continual effervescence throughout the morning ; she gazed silently , and seemed to be borne upward like a floating sea-bird on the long heaves and swells of sound . 
But she was brought back to her former mood by the shimmer of the sunshine on the weapons and bright armour of the military company , which followed after the music , and formed the honorary escort of the procession . 
This body of soldiery -- which still sustains a corporate existence , and marches down from past ages with an ancient and honourable fame -- was composed of no mercenary materials . 
Its ranks were filled with gentlemen who felt the stirrings of martial impulse , and sought to establish a kind of College of Arms , where , as in an association of Knights Templars , they might learn the science , and , so far as peaceful exercise would teach them , the practices of war . 
The high estimation then placed upon the military character might be seen in the lofty port of each individual member of the company . 
Some of them , indeed , by their services in the Low Countries and on other fields of European warfare , had fairly won their title to assume the name and pomp of soldiership . 
The entire array , moreover , clad in burnished steel , and with plumage nodding over their bright morions , had a brilliancy of effect which no modern display can aspire to equal . 
And yet the men of civil eminence , who came immediately behind the military escort , were better worth a thoughtful observer 's eye . 
Even in outward demeanour they showed a stamp of majesty that made the warrior 's haughty stride look vulgar , if not absurd . 
It was an age when what we call talent had far less consideration than now , but the massive materials which produce stability and dignity of character a great deal more . 
The people possessed by hereditary right the quality of reverence , which , in their descendants , if it survive at all , exists in smaller proportion , and with a vastly diminished force in the selection and estimate of public men . 
The change may be for good or ill , and is partly , perhaps , for both . 
In that old day the English settler on these rude shores -- having left king , nobles , and all degrees of awful rank behind , while still the faculty and necessity of reverence was strong in him -- bestowed it on the white hair and venerable brow of age -- on long-tried integrity -- on solid wisdom and sad-coloured experience -- on endowments of that grave and weighty order which gave the idea of permanence , and comes under the general definition of respectability . 
These primitive statesmen , therefore -- Bradstreet , Endicott , Dudley , Bellingham , and their compeers -- who were elevated to power by the early choice of the people , seem to have been not often brilliant , but distinguished by a ponderous sobriety , rather than activity of intellect . 
They had fortitude and self-reliance , and in time of difficulty or peril stood up for the welfare of the state like a line of cliffs against a tempestuous tide . 
The traits of character here indicated were well represented in the square cast of countenance and large physical development of the new colonial magistrates . 
So far as a demeanour of natural authority was concerned , the mother country need not have been ashamed to see these foremost men of an actual democracy adopted into the House of Peers , or make the Privy Council of the Sovereign . 
Next in order to the magistrates came the young and eminently distinguished divine , from whose lips the religious discourse of the anniversary was expected . 
His was the profession at that era in which intellectual ability displayed itself far more than in political life ; for -- leaving a higher motive out of the question it offered inducements powerful enough in the almost worshipping respect of the community , to win the most aspiring ambition into its service . 
Even political power -- as in the case of Increase Mather -- was within the grasp of a successful priest . 
It was the observation of those who beheld him now , that never , since Mr. Dimmesdale first set his foot on the New England shore , had he exhibited such energy as was seen in the gait and air with which he kept his pace in the procession . 
There was no feebleness of step as at other times ; his frame was not bent , nor did his hand rest ominously upon his heart . 
Yet , if the clergyman were rightly viewed , his strength seemed not of the body . 
It might be spiritual and imparted to him by angelical ministrations . 
It might be the exhilaration of that potent cordial which is distilled only in the furnace-glow of earnest and long-continued thought . 
Or perchance his sensitive temperament was invigorated by the loud and piercing music that swelled heaven-ward , and uplifted him on its ascending wave . 
Nevertheless , so abstracted was his look , it might be questioned whether Mr. Dimmesdale even heard the music . 
There was his body , moving onward , and with an unaccustomed force . 
But where was his mind ? 
Far and deep in its own region , busying itself , with preternatural activity , to marshal a procession of stately thoughts that were soon to issue thence ; and so he saw nothing , heard nothing , knew nothing of what was around him ; but the spiritual element took up the feeble frame and carried it along , unconscious of the burden , and converting it to spirit like itself . 
Men of uncommon intellect , who have grown morbid , possess this occasional power of mighty effort , into which they throw the life of many days and then are lifeless for as many more . 
Hester Prynne , gazing steadfastly at the clergyman , felt a dreary influence come over her , but wherefore or whence she knew not , unless that he seemed so remote from her own sphere , and utterly beyond her reach . 
One glance of recognition she had imagined must needs pass between them . 
She thought of the dim forest , with its little dell of solitude , and love , and anguish , and the mossy tree-trunk , where , sitting hand-in-hand , they had mingled their sad and passionate talk with the melancholy murmur of the brook . 
How deeply had they known each other then ! 
And was this the man ? 
She hardly knew him now ! 
He , moving proudly past , enveloped as it were , in the rich music , with the procession of majestic and venerable fathers ; he , so unattainable in his worldly position , and still more so in that far vista of his unsympathizing thoughts , through which she now beheld him ! 
Her spirit sank with the idea that all must have been a delusion , and that , vividly as she had dreamed it , there could be no real bond betwixt the clergyman and herself . 
And thus much of woman was there in Hester , that she could scarcely forgive him -- least of all now , when the heavy footstep of their approaching Fate might be heard , nearer , nearer , nearer ! 
-- for being able so completely to withdraw himself from their mutual world -- while she groped darkly , and stretched forth her cold hands , and found him not . 
Pearl either saw and responded to her mother 's feelings , or herself felt the remoteness and intangibility that had fallen around the minister . 
While the procession passed , the child was uneasy , fluttering up and down , like a bird on the point of taking flight . 
When the whole had gone by , she looked up into Hester 's face -- `` Mother , '' said she , `` was that the same minister that kissed me by the brook ? '' 
`` Hold thy peace , dear little Pearl ! '' 
whispered her mother . 
`` We must not always talk in the marketplace of what happens to us in the forest . '' 
`` I could not be sure that it was he -- so strange he looked , '' continued the child . 
`` Else I would have run to him , and bid him kiss me now , before all the people , even as he did yonder among the dark old trees . 
What would the minister have said , mother ? 
Would he have clapped his hand over his heart , and scowled on me , and bid me begone ? '' 
`` What should he say , Pearl , '' answered Hester , `` save that it was no time to kiss , and that kisses are not to be given in the market-place ? 
Well for thee , foolish child , that thou didst not speak to him ! '' 
Another shade of the same sentiment , in reference to Mr. Dimmesdale , was expressed by a person whose eccentricities -- insanity , as we should term it -- led her to do what few of the townspeople would have ventured on -- to begin a conversation with the wearer of the scarlet letter in public . 
It was Mistress Hibbins , who , arrayed in great magnificence , with a triple ruff , a broidered stomacher , a gown of rich velvet , and a gold-headed cane , had come forth to see the procession . 
As this ancient lady had the renown -LRB- which subsequently cost her no less a price than her life -RRB- of being a principal actor in all the works of necromancy that were continually going forward , the crowd gave way before her , and seemed to fear the touch of her garment , as if it carried the plague among its gorgeous folds . 
Seen in conjunction with Hester Prynne -- kindly as so many now felt towards the latter -- the dread inspired by Mistress Hibbins had doubled , and caused a general movement from that part of the market-place in which the two women stood . 
`` Now , what mortal imagination could conceive it ? '' 
whispered the old lady confidentially to Hester . 
`` Yonder divine man ! 
That saint on earth , as the people uphold him to be , and as -- I must needs say -- he really looks ! 
Who , now , that saw him pass in the procession , would think how little while it is since he went forth out of his study -- chewing a Hebrew text of Scripture in his mouth , I warrant -- to take an airing in the forest ! 
Aha ! 
we know what that means , Hester Prynne ! 
But truly , forsooth , I find it hard to believe him the same man . 
Many a church member saw I , walking behind the music , that has danced in the same measure with me , when Somebody was fiddler , and , it might be , an Indian powwow or a Lapland wizard changing hands with us ! 
That is but a trifle , when a woman knows the world . 
But this minister . 
Couldst thou surely tell , Hester , whether he was the same man that encountered thee on the forest path ? '' 
`` Madam , I know not of what you speak , '' answered Hester Prynne , feeling Mistress Hibbins to be of infirm mind ; yet strangely startled and awe-stricken by the confidence with which she affirmed a personal connexion between so many persons -LRB- herself among them -RRB- and the Evil One . 
`` It is not for me to talk lightly of a learned and pious minister of the Word , like the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale . '' 
`` Fie , woman -- fie ! '' 
cried the old lady , shaking her finger at Hester . 
`` Dost thou think I have been to the forest so many times , and have yet no skill to judge who else has been there ? 
Yea , though no leaf of the wild garlands which they wore while they danced be left in their hair ! 
I know thee , Hester , for I behold the token . 
We may all see it in the sunshine ! 
and it glows like a red flame in the dark . 
Thou wearest it openly , so there need be no question about that . 
But this minister ! 
Let me tell thee in thine ear ! 
When the Black Man sees one of his own servants , signed and sealed , so shy of owning to the bond as is the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale , he hath a way of ordering matters so that the mark shall be disclosed , in open daylight , to the eyes of all the world ! 
What is that the minister seeks to hide , with his hand always over his heart ? 
Ha , Hester Prynne ? '' 
`` What is it , good Mistress Hibbins ? '' 
eagerly asked little Pearl . 
`` Hast thou seen it ? '' 
`` No matter , darling ! '' 
responded Mistress Hibbins , making Pearl a profound reverence . 
`` Thou thyself wilt see it , one time or another . 
They say , child , thou art of the lineage of the Prince of Air ! 
Wilt thou ride with me some fine night to see thy father ? 
Then thou shalt know wherefore the minister keeps his hand over his heart ! '' 
Laughing so shrilly that all the market-place could hear her , the weird old gentlewoman took her departure . 
By this time the preliminary prayer had been offered in the meeting-house , and the accents of the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale were heard commencing his discourse . 
An irresistible feeling kept Hester near the spot . 
As the sacred edifice was too much thronged to admit another auditor , she took up her position close beside the scaffold of the pillory . 
It was in sufficient proximity to bring the whole sermon to her ears , in the shape of an indistinct but varied murmur and flow of the minister 's very peculiar voice . 
This vocal organ was in itself a rich endowment , insomuch that a listener , comprehending nothing of the language in which the preacher spoke , might still have been swayed to and fro by the mere tone and cadence . 
Like all other music , it breathed passion and pathos , and emotions high or tender , in a tongue native to the human heart , wherever educated . 
Muffled as the sound was by its passage through the church walls , Hester Prynne listened with such intenseness , and sympathized so intimately , that the sermon had throughout a meaning for her , entirely apart from its indistinguishable words . 
These , perhaps , if more distinctly heard , might have been only a grosser medium , and have clogged the spiritual sense . 
Now she caught the low undertone , as of the wind sinking down to repose itself ; then ascended with it , as it rose through progressive gradations of sweetness and power , until its volume seemed to envelop her with an atmosphere of awe and solemn grandeur . 
And yet , majestic as the voice sometimes became , there was for ever in it an essential character of plaintiveness . 
A loud or low expression of anguish -- the whisper , or the shriek , as it might be conceived , of suffering humanity , that touched a sensibility in every bosom ! 
At times this deep strain of pathos was all that could be heard , and scarcely heard sighing amid a desolate silence . 
But even when the minister 's voice grew high and commanding -- when it gushed irrepressibly upward -- when it assumed its utmost breadth and power , so overfilling the church as to burst its way through the solid walls , and diffuse itself in the open air -- still , if the auditor listened intently , and for the purpose , he could detect the same cry of pain . 
What was it ? 
The complaint of a human heart , sorrow-laden , perchance guilty , telling its secret , whether of guilt or sorrow , to the great heart of mankind ; beseeching its sympathy or forgiveness , -- at every moment , -- in each accent , -- and never in vain ! 
It was this profound and continual undertone that gave the clergyman his most appropriate power . 
During all this time , Hester stood , statue-like , at the foot of the scaffold . 
If the minister 's voice had not kept her there , there would , nevertheless , have been an inevitable magnetism in that spot , whence she dated the first hour of her life of ignominy . 
There was a sense within her -- too ill-defined to be made a thought , but weighing heavily on her mind -- that her whole orb of life , both before and after , was connected with this spot , as with the one point that gave it unity . 
Little Pearl , meanwhile , had quitted her mother 's side , and was playing at her own will about the market-place . 
She made the sombre crowd cheerful by her erratic and glistening ray , even as a bird of bright plumage illuminates a whole tree of dusky foliage by darting to and fro , half seen and half concealed amid the twilight of the clustering leaves . 
She had an undulating , but oftentimes a sharp and irregular movement . 
It indicated the restless vivacity of her spirit , which to-day was doubly indefatigable in its tip-toe dance , because it was played upon and vibrated with her mother 's disquietude . 
Whenever Pearl saw anything to excite her ever active and wandering curiosity , she flew thitherward , and , as we might say , seized upon that man or thing as her own property , so far as she desired it , but without yielding the minutest degree of control over her motions in requital . 
The Puritans looked on , and , if they smiled , were none the less inclined to pronounce the child a demon offspring , from the indescribable charm of beauty and eccentricity that shone through her little figure , and sparkled with its activity . 
She ran and looked the wild Indian in the face , and he grew conscious of a nature wilder than his own . 
Thence , with native audacity , but still with a reserve as characteristic , she flew into the midst of a group of mariners , the swarthy-cheeked wild men of the ocean , as the Indians were of the land ; and they gazed wonderingly and admiringly at Pearl , as if a flake of the sea-foam had taken the shape of a little maid , and were gifted with a soul of the sea-fire , that flashes beneath the prow in the night-time . 
One of these seafaring men the shipmaster , indeed , who had spoken to Hester Prynne was so smitten with Pearl 's aspect , that he attempted to lay hands upon her , with purpose to snatch a kiss . 
Finding it as impossible to touch her as to catch a humming-bird in the air , he took from his hat the gold chain that was twisted about it , and threw it to the child . 
Pearl immediately twined it around her neck and waist with such happy skill , that , once seen there , it became a part of her , and it was difficult to imagine her without it . 
`` Thy mother is yonder woman with the scarlet letter , '' said the seaman , `` Wilt thou carry her a message from me ? '' 
`` If the message pleases me , I will , '' answered Pearl . 
`` Then tell her , '' rejoined he , `` that I spake again with the black-a-visaged , hump shouldered old doctor , and he engages to bring his friend , the gentleman she wots of , aboard with him . 
So let thy mother take no thought , save for herself and thee . 
Wilt thou tell her this , thou witch-baby ? '' 
`` Mistress Hibbins says my father is the Prince of the Air ! '' 
cried Pearl , with a naughty smile . 
`` If thou callest me that ill-name , I shall tell him of thee , and he will chase thy ship with a tempest ! '' 
Pursuing a zigzag course across the marketplace , the child returned to her mother , and communicated what the mariner had said . 
Hester 's strong , calm steadfastly-enduring spirit almost sank , at last , on beholding this dark and grim countenance of an inevitable doom , which at the moment when a passage seemed to open for the minister and herself out of their labyrinth of misery -- showed itself with an unrelenting smile , right in the midst of their path . 
With her mind harassed by the terrible perplexity in which the shipmaster 's intelligence involved her , she was also subjected to another trial . 
There were many people present from the country round about , who had often heard of the scarlet letter , and to whom it had been made terrific by a hundred false or exaggerated rumours , but who had never beheld it with their own bodily eyes . 
These , after exhausting other modes of amusement , now thronged about Hester Prynne with rude and boorish intrusiveness . 
Unscrupulous as it was , however , it could not bring them nearer than a circuit of several yards . 
At that distance they accordingly stood , fixed there by the centrifugal force of the repugnance which the mystic symbol inspired . 
The whole gang of sailors , likewise , observing the press of spectators , and learning the purport of the scarlet letter , came and thrust their sunburnt and desperado-looking faces into the ring . 
Even the Indians were affected by a sort of cold shadow of the white man 's curiosity and , gliding through the crowd , fastened their snake-like black eyes on Hester 's bosom , conceiving , perhaps , that the wearer of this brilliantly embroidered badge must needs be a personage of high dignity among her people . 
Lastly , the inhabitants of the town -LRB- their own interest in this worn-out subject languidly reviving itself , by sympathy with what they saw others feel -RRB- lounged idly to the same quarter , and tormented Hester Prynne , perhaps more than all the rest , with their cool , well-acquainted gaze at her familiar shame . 
Hester saw and recognized the selfsame faces of that group of matrons , who had awaited her forthcoming from the prison-door seven years ago ; all save one , the youngest and only compassionate among them , whose burial-robe she had since made . 
At the final hour , when she was so soon to fling aside the burning letter , it had strangely become the centre of more remark and excitement , and was thus made to sear her breast more painfully , than at any time since the first day she put it on . 
While Hester stood in that magic circle of ignominy , where the cunning cruelty of her sentence seemed to have fixed her for ever , the admirable preacher was looking down from the sacred pulpit upon an audience whose very inmost spirits had yielded to his control . 
The sainted minister in the church ! 
The woman of the scarlet letter in the marketplace ! 
What imagination would have been irreverent enough to surmise that the same scorching stigma was on them both ! 
The eloquent voice , on which the souls of the listening audience had been borne aloft as on the swelling waves of the sea , at length came to a pause . 
There was a momentary silence , profound as what should follow the utterance of oracles . 
Then ensued a murmur and half-hushed tumult , as if the auditors , released from the high spell that had transported them into the region of another 's mind , were returning into themselves , with all their awe and wonder still heavy on them . 
In a moment more the crowd began to gush forth from the doors of the church . 
Now that there was an end , they needed more breath , more fit to support the gross and earthly life into which they relapsed , than that atmosphere which the preacher had converted into words of flame , and had burdened with the rich fragrance of his thought . 
In the open air their rapture broke into speech . 
The street and the market-place absolutely babbled , from side to side , with applauses of the minister . 
His hearers could not rest until they had told one another of what each knew better than he could tell or hear . 
According to their united testimony , never had man spoken in so wise , so high , and so holy a spirit , as he that spake this day ; nor had inspiration ever breathed through mortal lips more evidently than it did through his . 
Its influence could be seen , as it were , descending upon him , and possessing him , and continually lifting him out of the written discourse that lay before him , and filling him with ideas that must have been as marvellous to himself as to his audience . 
His subject , it appeared , had been the relation between the Deity and the communities of mankind , with a special reference to the New England which they were here planting in the wilderness . 
And , as he drew towards the close , a spirit as of prophecy had come upon him , constraining him to its purpose as mightily as the old prophets of Israel were constrained , only with this difference , that , whereas the Jewish seers had denounced judgments and ruin on their country , it was his mission to foretell a high and glorious destiny for the newly gathered people of the Lord . 
But , throughout it all , and through the whole discourse , there had been a certain deep , sad undertone of pathos , which could not be interpreted otherwise than as the natural regret of one soon to pass away . 
Yes ; their minister whom they so loved -- and who so loved them all , that he could not depart heavenward without a sigh -- had the foreboding of untimely death upon him , and would soon leave them in their tears . 
This idea of his transitory stay on earth gave the last emphasis to the effect which the preacher had produced ; it was as if an angel , in his passage to the skies , had shaken his bright wings over the people for an instant -- at once a shadow and a splendour -- and had shed down a shower of golden truths upon them . 
Thus , there had come to the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale -- as to most men , in their various spheres , though seldom recognised until they see it far behind them -- an epoch of life more brilliant and full of triumph than any previous one , or than any which could hereafter be . 
He stood , at this moment , on the very proudest eminence of superiority , to which the gifts or intellect , rich lore , prevailing eloquence , and a reputation of whitest sanctity , could exalt a clergyman in New England 's earliest days , when the professional character was of itself a lofty pedestal . 
Such was the position which the minister occupied , as he bowed his head forward on the cushions of the pulpit at the close of his Election Sermon . 
Meanwhile Hester Prynne was standing beside the scaffold of the pillory , with the scarlet letter still burning on her breast ! 
Now was heard again the clamour of the music , and the measured tramp of the military escort issuing from the church door . 
The procession was to be marshalled thence to the town hall , where a solemn banquet would complete the ceremonies of the day . 
Once more , therefore , the train of venerable and majestic fathers were seen moving through a broad pathway of the people , who drew back reverently , on either side , as the Governor and magistrates , the old and wise men , the holy ministers , and all that were eminent and renowned , advanced into the midst of them . 
When they were fairly in the marketplace , their presence was greeted by a shout . 
This -- though doubtless it might acquire additional force and volume from the child-like loyalty which the age awarded to its rulers -- was felt to be an irrepressible outburst of enthusiasm kindled in the auditors by that high strain of eloquence which was yet reverberating in their ears . 
Each felt the impulse in himself , and in the same breath , caught it from his neighbour . 
Within the church , it had hardly been kept down ; beneath the sky it pealed upward to the zenith . 
There were human beings enough , and enough of highly wrought and symphonious feeling to produce that more impressive sound than the organ tones of the blast , or the thunder , or the roar of the sea ; even that mighty swell of many voices , blended into one great voice by the universal impulse which makes likewise one vast heart out of the many . 
Never , from the soil of New England had gone up such a shout ! 
Never , on New England soil had stood the man so honoured by his mortal brethren as the preacher ! 
How fared it with him , then ? 
Were there not the brilliant particles of a halo in the air about his head ? 
So etherealised by spirit as he was , and so apotheosised by worshipping admirers , did his footsteps , in the procession , really tread upon the dust of earth ? 
As the ranks of military men and civil fathers moved onward , all eyes were turned towards the point where the minister was seen to approach among them . 
The shout died into a murmur , as one portion of the crowd after another obtained a glimpse of him . 
How feeble and pale he looked , amid all his triumph ! 
The energy -- or say , rather , the inspiration which had held him up , until he should have delivered the sacred message that had brought its own strength along with it from heaven -- was withdrawn , now that it had so faithfully performed its office . 
The glow , which they had just before beheld burning on his cheek , was extinguished , like a flame that sinks down hopelessly among the late decaying embers . 
It seemed hardly the face of a man alive , with such a death-like hue : it was hardly a man with life in him , that tottered on his path so nervously , yet tottered , and did not fall ! 
One of his clerical brethren -- it was the venerable John Wilson -- observing the state in which Mr. Dimmesdale was left by the retiring wave of intellect and sensibility , stepped forward hastily to offer his support . 
The minister tremulously , but decidedly , repelled the old man 's arm . 
He still walked onward , if that movement could be so described , which rather resembled the wavering effort of an infant , with its mother 's arms in view , outstretched to tempt him forward . 
And now , almost imperceptible as were the latter steps of his progress , he had come opposite the well-remembered and weather-darkened scaffold , where , long since , with all that dreary lapse of time between , Hester Prynne had encountered the world 's ignominious stare . 
There stood Hester , holding little Pearl by the hand ! 
And there was the scarlet letter on her breast ! 
The minister here made a pause ; although the music still played the stately and rejoicing march to which the procession moved . 
It summoned him onward -- inward to the festival ! 
-- but here he made a pause . 
Bellingham , for the last few moments , had kept an anxious eye upon him . 
He now left his own place in the procession , and advanced to give assistance judging , from Mr. Dimmesdale 's aspect that he must otherwise inevitably fall . 
But there was something in the latter 's expression that warned back the magistrate , although a man not readily obeying the vague intimations that pass from one spirit to another . 
The crowd , meanwhile , looked on with awe and wonder . 
This earthly faintness , was , in their view , only another phase of the minister 's celestial strength ; nor would it have seemed a miracle too high to be wrought for one so holy , had he ascended before their eyes , waxing dimmer and brighter , and fading at last into the light of heaven ! 
He turned towards the scaffold , and stretched forth his arms . 
`` Hester , '' said he , `` come hither ! 
Come , my little Pearl ! '' 
It was a ghastly look with which he regarded them ; but there was something at once tender and strangely triumphant in it . 
The child , with the bird-like motion , which was one of her characteristics , flew to him , and clasped her arms about his knees . 
Hester Prynne -- slowly , as if impelled by inevitable fate , and against her strongest will -- likewise drew near , but paused before she reached him . 
At this instant old Roger Chillingworth thrust himself through the crowd -- or , perhaps , so dark , disturbed , and evil was his look , he rose up out of some nether region -- to snatch back his victim from what he sought to do ! 
Be that as it might , the old man rushed forward , and caught the minister by the arm . 
`` Madman , hold ! 
what is your purpose ? '' 
whispered he . 
`` Wave back that woman ! 
Cast off this child ! 
All shall be well ! 
Do not blacken your fame , and perish in dishonour ! 
I can yet save you ! 
Would you bring infamy on your sacred profession ? '' 
`` Ha , tempter ! 
Methinks thou art too late ! '' 
answered the minister , encountering his eye , fearfully , but firmly . 
`` Thy power is not what it was ! 
With God 's help , I shall escape thee now ! '' 
He again extended his hand to the woman of the scarlet letter . 
`` Hester Prynne , '' cried he , with a piercing earnestness , `` in the name of Him , so terrible and so merciful , who gives me grace , at this last moment , to do what -- for my own heavy sin and miserable agony -- I withheld myself from doing seven years ago , come hither now , and twine thy strength about me ! 
Thy strength , Hester ; but let it be guided by the will which God hath granted me ! 
This wretched and wronged old man is opposing it with all his might ! 
-- with all his own might , and the fiend 's ! 
Come , Hester -- come ! 
Support me up yonder scaffold . '' 
The crowd was in a tumult . 
The men of rank and dignity , who stood more immediately around the clergyman , were so taken by surprise , and so perplexed as to the purport of what they saw -- unable to receive the explanation which most readily presented itself , or to imagine any other -- that they remained silent and inactive spectators of the judgement which Providence seemed about to work . 
They beheld the minister , leaning on Hester 's shoulder , and supported by her arm around him , approach the scaffold , and ascend its steps ; while still the little hand of the sin-born child was clasped in his . 
Old Roger Chillingworth followed , as one intimately connected with the drama of guilt and sorrow in which they had all been actors , and well entitled , therefore to be present at its closing scene . 
`` Hadst thou sought the whole earth over , '' said he looking darkly at the clergyman , `` there was no one place so secret -- no high place nor lowly place , where thou couldst have escaped me -- save on this very scaffold ! '' 
`` Thanks be to Him who hath led me hither ! '' 
answered the minister . 
Yet he trembled , and turned to Hester , with an expression of doubt and anxiety in his eyes , not the less evidently betrayed , that there was a feeble smile upon his lips . 
`` Is not this better , '' murmured he , `` than what we dreamed of in the forest ? '' 
`` I know not ! 
I know not ! '' 
she hurriedly replied . 
`` Better ? 
Yea ; so we may both die , and little Pearl die with us ! '' 
`` For thee and Pearl , be it as God shall order , '' said the minister ; `` and God is merciful ! 
Let me now do the will which He hath made plain before my sight . 
For , Hester , I am a dying man . 
So let me make haste to take my shame upon me ! '' 
Partly supported by Hester Prynne , and holding one hand of little Pearl 's , the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale turned to the dignified and venerable rulers ; to the holy ministers , who were his brethren ; to the people , whose great heart was thoroughly appalled yet overflowing with tearful sympathy , as knowing that some deep life-matter -- which , if full of sin , was full of anguish and repentance likewise -- was now to be laid open to them . 
The sun , but little past its meridian , shone down upon the clergyman , and gave a distinctness to his figure , as he stood out from all the earth , to put in his plea of guilty at the bar of Eternal Justice . 
`` People of New England ! '' 
cried he , with a voice that rose over them , high , solemn , and majestic -- yet had always a tremor through it , and sometimes a shriek , struggling up out of a fathomless depth of remorse and woe -- `` ye , that have loved me ! 
-- ye , that have deemed me holy ! 
-- behold me here , the one sinner of the world ! 
At last -- at last ! 
-- I stand upon the spot where , seven years since , I should have stood , here , with this woman , whose arm , more than the little strength wherewith I have crept hitherward , sustains me at this dreadful moment , from grovelling down upon my face ! 
Lo , the scarlet letter which Hester wears ! 
Ye have all shuddered at it ! 
Wherever her walk hath been -- wherever , so miserably burdened , she may have hoped to find repose -- it hath cast a lurid gleam of awe and horrible repugnance round about her . 
But there stood one in the midst of you , at whose brand of sin and infamy ye have not shuddered ! '' 
It seemed , at this point , as if the minister must leave the remainder of his secret undisclosed . 
But he fought back the bodily weakness -- and , still more , the faintness of heart -- that was striving for the mastery with him . 
He threw off all assistance , and stepped passionately forward a pace before the woman and the children . 
`` It was on him ! '' 
he continued , with a kind of fierceness ; so determined was he to speak out the whole . 
`` God 's eye beheld it ! 
The angels were for ever pointing at it ! 
-LRB- The Devil knew it well , and fretted it continually with the touch of his burning finger ! -RRB- 
But he hid it cunningly from men , and walked among you with the mien of a spirit , mournful , because so pure in a sinful world ! 
-- and sad , because he missed his heavenly kindred ! 
Now , at the death-hour , he stands up before you ! 
He bids you look again at Hester 's scarlet letter ! 
He tells you , that , with all its mysterious horror , it is but the shadow of what he bears on his own breast , and that even this , his own red stigma , is no more than the type of what has seared his inmost heart ! 
Stand any here that question God 's judgment on a sinner ! 
Behold ! 
Behold , a dreadful witness of it ! '' 
With a convulsive motion , he tore away the ministerial band from before his breast . 
It was revealed ! 
But it were irreverent to describe that revelation . 
For an instant , the gaze of the horror-stricken multitude was concentrated on the ghastly miracle ; while the minister stood , with a flush of triumph in his face , as one who , in the crisis of acutest pain , had won a victory . 
Then , down he sank upon the scaffold ! 
Hester partly raised him , and supported his head against her bosom . 
Old Roger Chillingworth knelt down beside him , with a blank , dull countenance , out of which the life seemed to have departed . 
`` Thou hast escaped me ! '' 
he repeated more than once . 
`` Thou hast escaped me ! '' 
`` May God forgive thee ! '' 
said the minister . 
`` Thou , too , hast deeply sinned ! '' 
He withdrew his dying eyes from the old man , and fixed them on the woman and the child . 
`` My little Pearl , '' said he , feebly and there was a sweet and gentle smile over his face , as of a spirit sinking into deep repose ; nay , now that the burden was removed , it seemed almost as if he would be sportive with the child -- `` dear little Pearl , wilt thou kiss me now ? 
Thou wouldst not , yonder , in the forest ! 
