Two extremes at the same moment , or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their existence is incomplete . 
They are wide , wide as mother Russia ; they include everything and put up with everything . 
`` By the way , gentlemen of the jury , we 've just touched upon that three thousand roubles , and I will venture to anticipate things a little . 
Can you conceive that a man like that , on receiving that sum and in such a way , at the price of such shame , such disgrace , such utter degradation , could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum , that very day , and sewing it up in a little bag , and would have had the firmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole month afterwards , in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it ! 
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns , nor when he was flying into the country , trying to get from God knows whom , the money so essential to him to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father , did he bring himself to touch that little bag ! 
Why , if only to avoid abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous , he would have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to keep watch over her , and to await the moment when she would say to him at last ' I am yours , ' and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings . 
`` But no , he did not touch his talisman , and what is the reason he gives for it ? 
The chief reason , as I have just said , was that when she would say ' I am yours , take me where you will , ' he might have the wherewithal to take her . 
But that first reason , in the prisoner 's own words , was of little weight beside the second . 
While I have that money on me , he said , I am a scoundrel , not a thief , for I can always go to my insulted betrothed , and , laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated , I can always say to her , ` You see , I 've squandered half your money , and shown I am a weak and immoral man , and , if you like , a scoundrel ' -LRB- I use the prisoner 's own expressions -RRB- , ` but though I am a scoundrel , I am not a thief , for if I had been a thief , I should n't have brought you back this half of the money , but should have taken it as I did the other half ! ' 
A marvellous explanation ! 
This frantic , but weak man , who could not resist the temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price of such disgrace , this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness , and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it . 
Does that fit in at all with the character we have analysed ? 
No , and I venture to tell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in such circumstances , if he really had brought himself to put away the money . 
`` At the first temptation - for instance , to entertain the woman with whom he had already squandered half the money - he would have unpicked his little bag and have taken out some hundred roubles , for why should he have taken back precisely half the money , that is , fifteen hundred roubles ? 
Why not fourteen hundred ? 
He could just as well have said then that he was not a thief , because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles . 
Then another time he would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred , and then a third , and then a fourth , and before the end of the month he would have taken the last note but one , feeling that if he took back only a hundred it would answer the purpose , for a thief would have stolen it all . 
And then he would have looked at this last note , and have said to himself , ` It 's really not worth while to give back one hundred ; let 's spend that , too ! ' 
That 's how the real Dmitri Karamazov , as we know him , would have behaved . 
One can not imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact than this legend of the little bag . 
Nothing could be more inconceivable . 
But we shall return to that later . '' 
After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning the financial relations of father and son , and arguing again and again that it was utterly impossible , from the facts known , to determine which was in the wrong , Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medical experts in reference to Mitya 's fixed idea about the three thousand owing him . 
An Historical Survey `` THE medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is out of his mind and , in fact , a maniac . 
I maintain that he is in his right mind , and that if he had not been , he would have behaved more cleverly . 
As for his being a maniac , that I would agree with , but only in one point , that is , his fixed idea about the three thousand . 
Yet I think one might find a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity . 
For my part I agree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner 's mental faculties have always been normal , and that he has only been irritable and exasperated . 
The object of the prisoner 's continual and violent anger was not the sum itself ; there was a special motive at the bottom of it . 
That motive is jealousy ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner 's fatal passion for Grushenka . 
He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the `` young person 's '' lodgings `` to beat her '' - `` I use his own expression , '' the prosecutor explained - `` but instead of beating her , he remained there , at her feet . 
That was the beginning of the passion . 
At the same time the prisoner 's father was captivated by the same young person - a strange and fatal coincidence , for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously , though both had known her before . 
And she inspired in both of them the most violent , characteristically Karamazov passion . 
We have her own confession : ' I was laughing at both of them . ' 
Yes , the sudden desire to make a jest of them came over her , and she conquered both of them at once . 
The old man , who worshipped money , at once set aside three thousand roubles as a reward for one visit from her , but soon after that , he would have been happy to lay his property and his name at her feet , if only she would become his lawful wife . 
We have good evidence of this . 
As for the prisoner , the tragedy of his fate is evident ; it is before us . 
But such was the young person 's ` game . ' 
The enchantress gave the unhappy young man no hope until the last moment , when he knelt before her , stretching out hands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival . 
It was in that position that he was arrested . 
` Send me to Siberia with him , I have brought him to this , I am most to blame , ' the woman herself cried , in genuine remorse at the moment of his arrest . 
`` The talented young man , to whom I have referred already , Mr. Rakitin , characterised this heroine in brief and impressive terms : ` She was disillusioned early in life , deceived and ruined by a betrothed , who seduced and abandoned her . 
She was left in poverty , cursed by her respectable family and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man , whom she still , however , considers as her benefactor . 
There was perhaps much that was good in her young heart , but it was embittered too early . 
She became prudent and saved money . 
She grew sarcastic and resentful against society . ' 
