The paper began coming out this year . 
I am awfully fond of gossip , and I take it in , and now it pays me out - this is what gossip comes to ! 
Here it is , here , this passage . 
Read it . '' 
And she handed Alyosha a sheet of newspaper which had been under her pillow . 
It was not exactly that she was upset , she seemed overwhelmed and perhaps everything really was mixed up in a tangle in her head . 
The paragraph was very typical , and must have been a great shock to her , but , fortunately perhaps , she was unable to keep her mind fixed on any one subject at that moment , and so might race off in a minute to something else and quite forget the newspaper . 
Alyosha was well aware that the story of the terrible case had spread all over Russia . 
And , good heavens ! 
what wild rumours about his brother , about the Karamazovs , and about himself he had read in the course of those two months , among other equally credible items ! 
One paper had even stated that he had gone into a monastery and become a monk , in horror at his brother 's crime . 
Another contradicted this , and stated that he and his elder , Father Zossima , had broken into the monastery chest and `` made tracks from the monastery . '' 
The present paragraph in the paper Gossip was under the heading , `` The Karamazov Case at Skotoprigonyevsk . '' 
-LRB- That , alas ! 
was the name of our little town . 
I had hitherto kept it concealed . -RRB- 
It was brief , and Madame Hohlakov was not directly mentioned in it . 
No names appeared , in fact . 
It was merely stated that the criminal , whose approaching trial was making such a sensation - retired army captain , an idle swaggerer , and reactionary bully - was continually involved in amorous intrigues , and particularly popular with certain ladies `` who were pining in solitude . '' 
One such lady , a pining widow , who tried to seem young though she had a grown-up daughter , was so fascinated by him that only two hours before the crime she offered him three thousand roubles , on condition that he would elope with her to the gold mines . 
But the criminal , counting on escaping punishment , had preferred to murder his father to get the three thousand rather than go off to Siberia with the middle-aged charms of his pining lady . 
This playful paragraph finished , of course , with an outburst of generous indignation at the wickedness of parricide and at the lately abolished institution of serfdom . 
Reading it with curiosity , Alyosha folded up the paper and handed it back to Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Well , that must be me , '' she hurried on again . 
`` Of course I am meant . 
Scarcely more than an hour before , I suggested gold mines to him , and here they talk of ` middle-aged charms ' as though that were my motive ! 
He writes that out of spite ! 
God Almighty forgive him for the middle-aged charms , as I forgive him ! 
You know it 's - Do you know who it is ? 
It 's your friend Rakitin . '' 
`` Perhaps , '' said Alyosha , `` though I 've heard nothing about it . '' 
`` It 's he , it 's he ! 
No ` perhaps ' about it . 
You know I turned him out of the house ... . 
You know all that story , do n't you ? '' 
`` I know that you asked him not to visit you for the future , but why it was , I have n't heard ... from you , at least . '' 
`` Ah , then you 've heard it from him ! 
He abuses me , I suppose , abuses me dreadfully ? '' 
`` Yes , he does ; but then he abuses everyone . 
But why you 've given him up I , have n't heard from him either . 
I meet him very seldom now , indeed . 
We are not friends . '' 
`` Well , then , I 'll tell you all about it . 
There 's no help for it , I 'll confess , for there is one point in which I was perhaps to blame . 
Only a little , little point , so little that perhaps it does n't count . 
You see , my dear boy '' - Madame Hohlakov suddenly looked arch and a charming , though enigmatic , smile played about her lips - `` you see , I suspect ... You must forgive me , Alyosha . 
I am like a mother to you ... No , no ; quite the contrary . 
I speak to you now as though you were my father - mother 's quite out of place . 
Well , it 's as though I were confessing to Father Zossima , that 's just it . 
I called you a monk just now . 
