Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still more gaily , nudging Alyosha with his knee . 
`` He 's a rascal , that 's what he is ! '' 
burst from Grigory . 
He looked Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face . 
`` As for being a rascal , wait a little , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' answered Smerdyakov with perfect composure . 
`` You 'd better consider yourself that , once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race , and they demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holy christening , I am fully entitled to act by my own reason , since there would be no sin in it . '' 
`` But you 've said that before . 
Do n't waste words . 
Prove it , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` Soup-maker ! '' 
muttered Grigory contemptuously . 
`` As for being a soup-maker , wait a bit , too , and consider for yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , without abusing me . 
For as soon as I say to those enemies , ` No , I 'm not a Christian , and I curse my true God , ' then at once , by God 's high judgment , I become immediately and specially anathema accursed , and am cut off from the Holy Church , exactly as though I were a heathen , so that at that very instant , not only when I say it aloud , but when I think of saying it , before a quarter of a second has passed , I am cut off . 
Is that so or not , Grigory Vassilyevitch ? '' 
He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction , though he was really answering Fyodor Pavlovitch 's questions , and was well aware of it , and intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions . 
`` Ivan , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly , `` stoop down for me to whisper . 
He 's got this all up for your benefit . 
He wants you to praise him . 
Praise him . '' 
Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father 's excited whisper . 
`` Stay , Smerdyakov , be quiet a minute , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more . 
`` Ivan , your ear again . '' 
Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face . 
`` I love you as I do Alyosha . 
Do n't think I do n't love you . 
Some brandy ? '' 
`` Yes . 
- But you 're rather drunk yourself , '' thought Ivan , looking steadily at his father . 
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity . 
`` You 're anathema accursed , as it is , Grigory suddenly burst out , `` and how dare you argue , you rascal , after that , if - '' `` Do n't scold him , Grigory , do n't scold him , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him short . 
`` You should wait , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if only a short time , and listen , for I have n't finished all I had to say . 
For at the very moment I become accursed , at that same highest moment , I become exactly like a heathen , and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail . 
Is n't that so ? '' 
`` Make haste and finish , my boy , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him , sipping from his wineglass with relish . 
`` And if I 've ceased to be a Christian , then I told no lie to the enemy when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian , seeing I had already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of the thought alone , before I had time to utter a word to the enemy . 
And if I have already been discharged , in what manner and with what sort of justice can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for having denied Christ , when , through the very thought alone , before denying Him I had been relieved from my christening ? 
If I 'm no longer a Christian , then I ca n't renounce Christ , for I 've nothing then to renounce . 
Who will hold an unclean Tatar responsible , Grigory Vassilyevitch , even in heaven , for not having been born a Christian ? 
And who would punish him for that , considering that you ca n't take two skins off one ox ? 
For God Almighty Himself , even if He did make the Tatar responsible , when he dies would give him the smallest possible punishment , I imagine -LRB- since he must be punished -RRB- , judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the world an unclean heathen , from heathen parents . 
The Lord God ca n't surely take a Tatar and say he was a Christian ? 
That would mean that the Almighty would tell a real untruth . 
And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie , even in one word ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator , his eyes nearly starting out of his head . 
Though he did not clearly understand what was said , he had caught something in this rigmarole , and stood , looking like a man who has just hit his head against a wall . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch emptied his glass and went off into his shrill laugh . 
`` Alyosha ! 
Alyosha ! 
What do you say to that ! 
Ah , you casuist ! 
