So what have I done ? 
How have I wronged you , tell me ? '' 
Instead of answering , the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away . 
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street , and for a long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever , not turning his head and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail . 
He made up his mind to find him out as soon as he had time , and to solve this mystery . 
just now he had not the time . 
At the Hohlakovs ' ALYOSHA soon reached Madame Hohlakov 's house , a handsome stone house of two stories , one of the finest in our town . 
Though Madame Hohlakov spent most of her time in another province where she had an estate , or in Moscow , where she had a house of her own , yet she had a house in our town too , inherited from her forefathers . 
The estate in our district was the largest of her three estates , yet she had been very little in our province before this time . 
She ran out to Alyosha in the hall . 
`` Did you get my letter about the new miracle ? '' 
She spoke rapidly and nervously . 
`` Yes '' `` Did you show it to everyone ? 
He restored the son to his mother ! '' 
`` He is dying to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I have heard , I know , oh , how I long to talk to you , to you or someone , about all this . 
No , to you , to you ! 
And how sorry I am I ca n't see him ! 
The whole town is in excitement , they are all suspense . 
But now - do you know Katerina Ivanovna is here now ? '' 
`` Ah , that 's lucky , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Then I shall see her here . 
She told me yesterday to be sure to come and see her to-day . '' 
`` I know , I know all . 
I 've heard exactly what happened yesterday - and the atrocious behaviour of that - creature . 
C'est tragique , and if I 'd been in her place I do n't know what I should have done . 
And your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , what do you think of him ? 
- my goodness ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am forgetting , only fancy ; your brother is in there with her , not that dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday , but the other , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he is sitting with her talking ; they are having a serious conversation . 
If you could only imagine what 's passing between them now - it 's awful , I tell you it 's lacerating , it 's like some incredible tale of horror . 
They are ruining their lives for no reason anyone can see . 
They both recognise it and revel in it . 
I 've been watching for you ! 
I 've been thirsting for you ! 
It 's too much for me . 
that 's the worst of it . 
I 'll tell you all about it presently , but now I must speak of something else , the most important thing - I had quite forgotten what 's most important . 
Tell me , why has Lise been in hysterics ? 
As soon as she heard you were here , she began to be hysterical ! '' 
`` Maman , it 's you who are hysterical now , not I , '' Lise 's voice carolled through a tiny crack of the door at the side . 
Her voice sounded as though she wanted to laugh , but was doing her utmost to control it . 
Alyosha at once noticed the crack , and no doubt Lise was peeping through it , but that he could not see . 
`` And no wonder , Lise , no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical too . 
But she is so ill , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she has been so ill all night , feverish and moaning ! 
I could hardly wait for the morning and for Herzenstube to come . 
He says that he can make nothing of it , that we must wait . 
Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it . 
As soon as you approached the house , she screamed , fell into hysterics , and insisted on being wheeled back into this room here . '' 
`` Mamma , I did n't know he had come . 
It was n't on his account I wanted to be wheeled into this room . '' 
