I beg you to understand that ! '' 
Rakitin was intensely irritated . 
`` Forgive me , for goodness ' sake , I had no idea ... besides ... how can you call her a harlot ? 
Is she ... that sort of woman ? '' 
Alyosha flushed suddenly . 
`` I tell you again , I heard that she was a relation of yours . 
You often go to see her , and you told me yourself you 're not her lover . 
I never dreamed that you of all people had such contempt for her ! 
Does she really deserve it ? '' 
`` I may have reasons of my own for visiting her . 
That 's not your business . 
But as for relationship , your brother , or even your father , is more likely to make her yours than mine . 
Well , here we are . 
You 'd better go to the kitchen . 
Hullo ! 
what 's wrong , what is it ? 
Are we late ? 
They ca n't have finished dinner so soon ! 
Have the Karamazovs been making trouble again ? 
No doubt they have . 
Here 's your father and your brother Ivan after him . 
They 've broken out from the Father Superior 's . 
And look , Father Isidor 's shouting out something after them from the steps . 
And your father 's shouting and waving his arms . 
I expect he 's swearing . 
Bah , and there goes Miusov driving away in his carriage . 
You see , he 's going . 
And there 's old Maximov running ! 
- there must have been a row . 
There ca n't have been any dinner . 
Surely they 've not been beating the Father Superior ! 
Or have they , perhaps , been beaten ? 
It would serve them right ! '' 
There was reason for Rakitin 's exclamations . 
There had been a scandalous , an unprecedented scene . 
It had all come from the impulse of a moment . 
The Scandalous Scene MIUSOV , as a man of breeding and delicacy , could not but feel some inward qualms , when he reached the Father Superior 's with Ivan : he felt ashamed of having lost his temper . 
He felt that he ought to have disdained that despicable wretch , Fyodor Pavlovitch , too much to have been upset by him in Father Zossima 's cell , and so to have forgotten himself . 
`` The monks were not to blame , in any case , '' he reflected , on the steps . 
`` And if they 're decent people here -LRB- and the Father Superior , I understand , is a nobleman -RRB- why not be friendly and courteous with them ? 
I wo n't argue , I 'll fall in with everything , I 'll win them by politeness , and ... and ... show them that I 've nothing to do with that Aesop , that buffoon , that Pierrot , and have merely been taken in over this affair , just as they have . '' 
He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery , and relinquish his claims to the wood-cutting and fishery rights at once . 
He was the more ready to do this because the rights had become much less valuable , and he had indeed the vaguest idea where the wood and river in question were . 
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the Father Superior 's dining-room , though , strictly speaking , it was not a dining-room , for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether ; they were , however , much larger and more comfortable than Father Zossima 's . 
But there was no great luxury about the furnishing of these rooms either . 
The furniture was of mahogany , covered with leather , in the old-fashioned style of 1820 the floor was not even stained , but everything was shining with cleanliness , and there were many choice flowers in the windows ; the most sumptuous thing in the room at the moment was , of course , the beautifully decorated table . 
The cloth was clean , the service shone ; there were three kinds of well-baked bread , two bottles of wine , two of excellent mead , and a large glass jug of kvas - both the latter made in the monastery , and famous in the neighbourhood . 
There was no vodka . 
Rakitin related afterwards that there were five dishes : fish-soup made of sterlets , served with little fish patties ; then boiled fish served in a special way ; then salmon cutlets , ice pudding and compote , and finally , blanc-mange . 
Rakitin found out about all these good things , for he could not resist peeping into the kitchen , where he already had a footing . 
