I believed that , nasty as I am , someone would really love me , not only with a shameful love ! '' 
`` What have I done to you ? '' 
answered Alyosha , bending over her with a tender smile , and gently taking her by the hands ; `` I only gave you an onion , nothing but a tiny little onion , that was all ! '' 
He was moved to tears himself as he said it . 
At that moment there was a sudden noise in the passage , someone came into the hall . 
Grushenka jumped up , seeming greatly alarmed . 
Fenya ran noisily into the room , crying out : `` Mistress , mistress darling , a messenger has galloped up , '' she cried , breathless and joyful . 
`` A carriage from Mokroe for you , Timofey the driver , with three horses , they are just putting in fresh horses ... . 
A letter , here 's the letter , mistress . '' 
A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while she talked . 
Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to the candle . 
It was only a note , a few lines . 
She read it in one instant . 
`` He has sent for me , '' she cried , her face white and distorted , with a wan smile ; `` he whistles ! 
Crawl back , little dog ! '' 
But only for one instant she stood as though hesitating ; suddenly the blood rushed to her head and sent a glow to her cheeks . 
`` I will go , '' she cried ; `` five years of my life ! 
Good-bye ! 
Good-bye , Alyosha , my fate is sealed . 
Go , go , leave me all of you , do n't let me see you again ! 
Grushenka is flying to a new life ... . 
Do n't you remember evil against me either , Rakitin . 
I may be going to my death ! 
Ugh ! 
I feel as though I were drunk ! '' 
She suddenly left them and ran into her bedroom . 
`` Well , she has no thoughts for us now ! '' 
grumbled Rakitin . 
`` Let 's go , or we may hear that feminine shriek again . 
I am sick of all these tears and cries . '' 
Alyosha mechanically let himself be led out . 
In the yard stood a covered cart . 
Horses were being taken out of the shafts , men were running to and fro with a lantern . 
Three fresh horses were being led in at the open gate . 
But when Alyosha and Rakitin reached the bottom of the steps , Grushenka 's bedroom window was suddenly opened and she called in a ringing voice after Alyosha : `` Alyosha , give my greetings to your brother Mitya and tell him not to remember evil against me , though I have brought him misery . 
And tell him , too , in my words : ` Grushenka has fallen to a scoundrel , and not to you , noble heart . ' 
And add , too , that Grushenka loved him only one hour , only one short hour she loved him - so let him remember that hour all his life-say , ` Grushenka tells you to ! ' 
She ended in a voice full of sobs . 
The window was shut with a slam . 
`` H 'm , h 'm ! '' 
growled Rakitin , laughing , `` she murders your brother Mitya and then tells him to remember it all his life ! 
What ferocity ! '' 
Alyosha made no reply , he seemed not to have heard . 
He walked fast beside Rakitin as though in a terrible hurry . 
He was lost in thought and moved mechanically . 
Rakitin felt a sudden twinge as though he had been touched on an open wound . 
He had expected something quite different by bringing Grushenka and Alyosha together . 
Something very different from what he had hoped for had happened . 
`` He is a Pole , that officer of hers , '' he began again , restraining himself ; `` and indeed he is not an officer at all now . 
He served in the customs in Siberia , somewhere on the Chinese frontier , some puny little beggar of a Pole , I expect . 
