`` Away with the past . 
I 've done with the old world for ever , and may I have no news , no echo , from it . 
To a new life , new places , and no looking back ! '' 
But instead of delight his soul was filled with such gloom , and his heart ached with such anguish , as he had never known in his life before . 
He was thinking all the night . 
The train flew on , and only at daybreak , when he was approaching Moscow , he suddenly roused himself from his meditation . 
`` I am a scoundrel , '' he whispered to himself . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off . 
For two hours afterwards he felt almost happy , and sat drinking brandy . 
But suddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant for everyone in the house , and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch 's equanimity at once . 
Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and fell down from the top of the steps . 
Fortunately , Marfa Ignatyevna was in the yard and heard him in time . 
She did not see the fall , but heard his scream - the strange , peculiar scream , long familiar to her - the scream of the epileptic falling in a fit . 
They could not tell whether the fit had come on him at the moment he was decending the steps , so that he must have fallen unconscious , or whether it was the fall and the shock that had caused the fit in Smerdyakov , who was known to be liable to them . 
They found him at the bottom of the cellar steps , writhing in convulsions and foaming at the mouth . 
It was thought at first that he must have broken something - an arm or a leg - and hurt himself , but `` God had preserved him , '' as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it - nothing of the kind had happened . 
But it was difficult to get him out of the cellar . 
They asked the neighbours to help and managed it somehow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at the whole ceremony . 
He helped , evidently alarmed and upset . 
The sick man did not regain consciousness ; the convulsions ceased for a time , but then began again , and everyone concluded that the same thing would happen , as had happened a year before , when he accidently fell from the garret . 
They remembered that ice been put on his head then . 
There was still ice in the cellar , and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up . 
In the evening , Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube , who arrived at once . 
He was a most estimable old man , and the most careful and conscientious doctor in the province . 
After careful examination , he concluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have serious consequences ; that meanwhile he , Herzenstube , did not fully understand it , but that by to-morrow morning , if the present remedies were unavailing , he would venture to try something else . 
The invalid was taken to the lodge , to a room next to Grigory 's and Marfa Ignatyevna 's . 
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with that day . 
Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner , and the soup , compared with Smerdyakov 's , was `` no better than dish-water , '' and the fowl was so dried up that it was impossible to masticate it . 
To her master 's bitter , though deserved , reproaches , Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a very old one to begin with , and that she had never been trained as a cook . 
In the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch ; he was informed that Grigory , who had not been well for the last three days , was completely laid up by his lumbago . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea as early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house . 
He was in terrible excitement and suspense . 
That evening he reckoned on Grushenka 's coming almost as a certainty . 
He had received from Smerdyakov that morning an assurance `` that she had promised to come without fail . '' 
The incorrigible old man 's heart throbbed with excitement ; he paced up and down his empty rooms listening . 
He had to be on the alert . 
Dmitri might be on the watch for her somewhere , and when she knocked on the window -LRB- Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her where and how to knock -RRB- the door must be opened at once . 
She must not be a second in the passage , for fear which God forbid ! 
- that she should be frightened and run away . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of , but never had his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes . 
This time he could say almost certainly that she would come ! 
The Russian Monk . 
Father Zossima and His Visitors WHEN with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder 's cell , he stood still almost astonished . 
Instead of a sick man at his last gasp , perhaps unconscious , as he had feared to find him , he saw him sitting up in his chair and , though weak and exhausted , his face was bright and cheerful , he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyful conversation . 
But he had only got up from his bed a quarter of an hour before Alyosha 's arrival ; his visitors had gathered together in his cell earlier , waiting for him to wake , having received a most confident assurance from Father Paissy that `` the teacher would get up , and as he had himself promised in the morning , converse once more with those dear to his heart . '' 
This promise and indeed every word of the dying elder Father Paissy put implicit trust in . 
If he had seen him unconscious , if he had seen him breathe his last , and yet had his promise that he would rise up and say good-bye to him , he would not have believed perhaps even in death , but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfil his promise . 
In the morning as he lay down to sleep , Father Zossima had told him positively : `` I shall not die without the delight of another conversation with you , beloved of my heart . 
I shall look once more on your dear face and pour out my heart to you once again . '' 
