There was a note of defiance in her voice . 
It was then Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
`` Did that take place not here , but at the beginning of your acquaintance ? '' 
Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously , feeling his way , instantly scenting something favourable . 
I must mention in parenthesis that , though Fetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance of Katerina Ivanovna herself , he knew nothing about the episode of the four thousand roubles given her by Mitya , and of her `` bowing to the ground to him . '' 
She concealed this from him and said nothing about it , and that was strange . 
It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in the court , and waited for the inspiration of the moment . 
No , I can never forget those moments . 
She began telling her story . 
She told everything , the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha , and her bowing to the ground , and her reason . 
She told about her father and her going to Mitya , and did not in one word , in a single hint , suggest that Mitya had himself , through her sister , proposed they should `` send him Katerina Ivanovna '' to fetch the money . 
She generously concealed that and was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse run to the young officer , relying on something ... to beg him for the money . 
It was something tremendous ! 
I turned cold and trembled as I listened . 
The court was hushed , trying to catch each word . 
It was something unexampled . 
Even from such a self-willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was , such an extremely frank avowal , such sacrifice , such self-immolation , seemed incredible . 
And for what , for whom ? 
To save the man who had deceived and insulted her and to help , in however small a degree , in saving him , by creating a strong impression in his favour . 
And , indeed , the figure of the young officer who , with a respectful bow to the innocent girl , handed her his last four thousand roubles - all he had in the world - was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light , but ... I had a painful misgiving at heart ! 
I felt that calumny might come of it later -LRB- and it did , in fact , it did -RRB- . 
It was repeated all over the town afterwards with spiteful laughter that was perhaps not quite complete - that is , in the statement that the officer had let the young lady depart `` with nothing but a respectful bow . '' 
It was hinted that something was here omitted . 
`` And even if nothing had been omitted , if this were the whole story , '' the most highly respected of our ladies maintained , `` even then it 's very doubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way , even for the sake of saving her father . '' 
And can Katerina Ivanovna , with her intelligence , her morbid sensitiveness , have failed to understand that people would talk like that ? 
She must have understood it , yet she made up her mind to tell everything . 
Of course , all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her story only arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed by it . 
As for the judges and the lawyers , they listened in reverent , almost shamefaced silence to Katerina Ivanovna . 
The prosecutor did not venture upon even one question on the subject . 
Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her . 
Oh , he was almost triumphant ! 
Much ground had been gained . 
For a man to give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the same man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand - the idea seemed too incongruous . 
Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge of theft , at least , was as good as disproved . 
`` The case '' was thrown into quite a different light . 
There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya . 
As for him ... . 
I was told that once or twice , while Katerina Ivanovna was giving her evidence , he jumped up from his seat , sank back again , and hid his face in his hands . 
But when she had finished , he suddenly cried in a sobbing voice : `` Katya , why have you ruined me ? '' 
and his sobs were audible all over the court . 
But he instantly restrained himself , and cried again : `` Now I am condemned ! '' 
Then he sat rigid in his place , with his teeth clenched and his arms across his chest . 
Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down in her place . 
She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down . 
Those who were sitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over as though in a fever . 
Grushenka was called . 
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final cause of Mitya 's ruin . 
For I am convinced , so is everyone - all the lawyers said the same afterwards - that if the episode had not occurred , the prisoner would at least have been recommended to mercy . 
But of that later . 
A few words first about Grushenka . 
