asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , he did , long ago . 
Would you believe it , he told me three weeks ago ? 
You do n't suppose he too came to murder me , do you ? 
He must have had some object in coming . '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
Why do you say such things ? '' 
said Alyosha , troubled . 
`` He does n't ask for money , it 's true , but yet he wo n't get a farthing from me . 
I intend living as long as possible , you may as well know , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , and so I need every farthing , and the longer I live , the more I shall need it , '' he continued , pacing from one corner of the room to the other , keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy overcoat made of yellow cotton material . 
`` I can still pass for a man at five and fifty , but I want to pass for one for another twenty years . 
As I get older , you know , I sha n't be a pretty object . 
The wenches wo n't come to me of their own accord , so I shall want my money . 
So I am saving up more and more , simply for myself , my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
You may as well know . 
For I mean to go on in my sins to the end , let me tell you . 
For sin is sweet ; all abuse it , but all men live in it , only others do it on the sly , and I openly . 
And so all the other sinners fall upon me for being so simple . 
And your paradise , Alexey Fyodorovitch , is not to my taste , let me tell you that ; and it 's not the proper place for a gentleman , your paradise , even if it exists . 
I believe that I fall asleep and do n't wake up again , and that 's all . 
You can pray for my soul if you like . 
And if you do n't want to , do n't , damn you ! 
That 's my philosophy . 
Ivan talked well here yesterday , though we were all drunk . 
Ivan is a conceited coxcomb , but he has no particular learning ... nor education either . 
He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking - that 's what pulls him through . '' 
Alyosha listened to him in silence . 
`` Why wo n't he talk to me ? 
If he does speak , he gives himself airs . 
Your Ivan is a scoundrel ! 
And I 'll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to . 
For if you 've money , Alexey Fyodorovitch , you have only to want a thing and you can have it . 
That 's what Ivan is afraid of , he is on the watch to prevent me getting married and that 's why he is egging on Mitya to marry Grushenka himself . 
He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that -LRB- as though I should leave him my money if I do n't marry her ! -RRB- . 
Besides if Mitya marries Grushenka , Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed , that 's what he 's reckoning on ! 
He is a scoundrel , your Ivan ! '' 
`` How cross you are ! 
It 's because of yesterday ; you had better lie down , '' said Alyosha . 
`` There ! 
you say that , '' the old man observed suddenly , as though it had struck him for the first time , `` and I am not angry with you . 
But if Ivan said it , I should be angry with him . 
It is only with you I have good moments , else you know I am an ill-natured man . '' 
`` You are not ill-natured , but distorted , '' said Alyosha with a smile . 
`` Listen . 
I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and I do n't know now what I shall decide about it . 
Of course in these fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice , but even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the hair , to kick him in the face in his own house , and brag of murdering him outright - all in the presence of witnesses . 
If I liked , I could crush him and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday . '' 
`` Then you do n't mean to take proceedings ? '' 
`` Ivan has dissuaded me . 
I should n't care about Ivan , but there 's another thing . '' 
