I sat down on the stone . 
And in the air there were lots of kites flapping and whirling . 
There were as many as thirty in sight . 
Of course , it 's just the season for the kites . 
` Look , Ilusha , ' said I , ` it 's time we got out our last year 's kite again . 
I 'll mend it ; where have you put it away ? ' 
My boy made no answer . 
He looked away and turned sideways to me . 
And then a gust of wind blew up the sand . 
He suddenly fell on me , threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight . 
You know , when children are silent and proud , and try to keep back their tears when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down , their tears fall in streams . 
With those warm streams of tears , he suddenly wetted my face . 
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions , and squeezed up against me as I sat on the stone . 
` Father , ' he kept crying , ` dear father , how he insulted you ! ' 
And I sobbed too . 
We sat shaking in each other 's arms . 
` Ilusha , ' I said to him , ` Ilusha , darling . ' 
No one saw us then . 
God alone saw us ; I hope He will record it to my credit . 
You must thank your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
No , sir , I wo n't thrash my boy for your satisfaction . '' 
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery . 
Alyosha felt , though , that he trusted him , and that if there had been someone else in his , Alyosha 's place , the man would not have spoken so openly and would not have told what he had just told . 
This encouraged Alyosha , whose heart was trembling on the verge of tears . 
`` Ah , how I would like to make friends with your boy ! '' 
he cried . 
`` If you could arrange it - '' `` Certainly , sir , '' muttered the captain . 
`` But now listen to something quite different ! '' 
Alyosha went on . 
`` I have a message for you . 
That same brother of mine , Dmitri , has insulted his betrothed , too , a noble-hearted girl of whom you have probably heard . 
I have a right to tell you of her wrong ; I ought to do so , in fact , for , hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate position , she commissioned me at once - just now - to bring you this help from her - but only from her alone , not from Dmitri , who has abandoned her . 
Nor from me , his brother , nor from anyone else , but from her , only from her ! 
She entreats you to accept her help ... You have both been insulted by the same man . 
She thought of you only when she had just received a similar insult from him - similar in its cruelty , I mean . 
She comes like a sister to help a brother in misfortune ... . 
She told me to persuade you to take these two hundred roubles from her , as from a sister , knowing that you are in such need . 
No one will know of it , it can give rise to no unjust slander . 
There are the two hundred roubles , and I swear you must take them unless - unless all men are to be enemies on earth ! 
But there are brothers even on earth ... . 
You have a generous heart ... you must see that , you must , '' and Alyosha held out two new rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes . 
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence , and there was no one near . 
The notes seemed to produce a tremendous impression on the captain . 
He started , but at first only from astonishment . 
Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he expected . 
Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help from anyone - and such a sum ! 
He took the notes , and for a minute he was almost unable to answer , quite a new expression came into his face . 
`` That for me ? 
So much money - two hundred roubles ! 
Good heavens ! 
