Aie ! 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , darling , I 'll tell you everything directly , I wo n't hide anything , '' gabbled Fenya , frightened to death ; `` she 's gone to Mokroe , to her officer . '' 
`` What officer ? '' 
roared Mitya . 
`` To her officer , the same one she used to know , the one who threw her over five years ago , '' cackled Fenya , as fast as she could speak . 
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat . 
He stood facing her , pale as death , unable to utter a word , but his eyes showed that he realised it all , all , from the first word , and guessed the whole position . 
Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe whether he understood or not . 
She remained sitting on the trunk as she had been when he ran into the room , trembling all over , holding her hands out before her as though trying to defend herself . 
She seemed to have grown rigid in that position . 
Her wide-opened , scared eyes were fixed immovably upon him . 
And to make matters worse , both his hands were smeared with blood . 
On the way , as he ran , he must have touched his forehead with them , wiping off the perspiration , so that on his forehead and his right cheek were bloodstained patches . 
Fenya was on the verge of hysterics . 
The old cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman , almost unconscious with terror . 
Mitya stood for a moment , then mechanically sank on to a chair next to Fenya . 
He sat , not reflecting but , as it were , terror-stricken , benumbed . 
Yet everything was clear as day : that officer , he knew about him , he knew everything perfectly , he had known it from Grushenka herself , had known that a letter had come from him a month before . 
So that for a month , for a whole month , this had been going on , a secret from him , till the very arrival of this new man , and he had never thought of him ! 
But how could he , how could he not have thought of him ? 
Why was it he had forgotten this officer , like that , forgotten him as soon as he heard of him ? 
That was the question that faced him like some monstrous thing . 
And he looked at this monstrous thing with horror , growing cold with horror . 
But suddenly , as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child , he began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had scared and hurt her just now . 
He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme preciseness , astonishing in his position , and though the girl looked wildly at his blood-stained hands , she , too , with wonderful readiness and rapidity , answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him . 
Little by little , even with a sort of enjoyment , she began explaining every detail , not wanting to torment him , but , as it were , eager to be of the utmost service to him . 
She described the whole of that day , in great detail , the visit of Rakitin and Alyosha , how she , Fenya , had stood on the watch , how the mistress had set off , and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him , Mitya , her greetings , and to tell him `` to remember for ever how she had loved him for an hour . '' 
Hearing of the message , Mitya suddenly smiled , and there was a flush of colour on his pale cheeks . 
At the same moment Fenya said to him , not a bit afraid now to be inquisitive : `` Look at your hands , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 're all over blood ! 
`` Yes , '' answered Mitya mechanically . 
He looked carelessly at his hands and at once forgot them and Fenya 's question . 
He sank into silence again . 
Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in . 
His first horror was over , but evidently some new fixed determination had taken possession of him . 
He suddenly stood up , smiling dreamily . 
`` What has happened to you , sir ? '' 
said Fenya , pointing to his hands again . 
She spoke compassionately , as though she felt very near to him now in his grief . 
Mitya looked at his hands again . 
`` That 's blood , Fenya , '' he said , looking at her with a strange expression . 
`` That 's human blood , and my God ! 
why was it shed ? 
But ... Fenya ... there 's a fence here '' -LRB- he looked at her as though setting her a riddle -RRB- , `` a high fence , and terrible to look at . 
But at dawn to-morrow , when the sun rises , Mitya will leap over that fence ... . 
You do n't understand what fence , Fenya , and , never mind ... . 
You 'll hear to-morrow and understand ... and now , good-bye . 
I wo n't stand in her way . 
I 'll step aside , I know how to step aside . 
Live , my joy ... . 
