There is very little doubt that she would not on any account have married him if she had known a little more about him in time . 
But she lived in another province ; besides , what could a little girl of sixteen know about it , except that she would be better at the bottom of the river than remaining with her benefactress . 
So the poor child exchanged a benefactress for a benefactor . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not get a penny this time , for the general 's widow was furious . 
She gave them nothing and cursed them both . 
But he had not reckoned on a dowry ; what allured him was the remarkable beauty of the innocent girl , above all her innocent appearance , which had a peculiar attraction for a vicious profligate , who had hitherto admired only the coarser types of feminine beauty . 
`` Those innocent eyes slit my soul up like a razor , '' he used to say afterwards , with his loathsome snigger . 
In a man so depraved this might , of course , mean no more than sensual attraction . 
As he had received no dowry with his wife , and had , so to speak , taken her `` from the halter , '' he did not stand on ceremony with her . 
Making her feel that she had `` wronged '' him , he took advantage of her phenomenal meekness and submissiveness to trample on the elementary decencies of marriage . 
He gathered loose women into his house , and carried on orgies of debauchery in his wife 's presence . 
To show what a pass things had come to , I may mention that Grigory , the gloomy , stupid , obstinate , argumentative servant , who had always hated his first mistress , Adelaida Ivanovna , took the side of his new mistress . 
He championed her cause , abusing Fyodor Pavlovitch in a manner little befitting a servant , and on one occasion broke up the revels and drove all the disorderly women out of the house . 
In the end this unhappy young woman , kept in terror from her childhood , fell into that kind of nervous disease which is most frequently found in peasant women who are said to be `` possessed by devils . '' 
At times after terrible fits of hysterics she even lost her reason . 
Yet she bore Fyodor Pavlovitch two sons , Ivan and Alexey , the eldest in the first year of marriage and the second three years later . 
When she died , little Alexey was in his fourth year , and , strange as it seems , I know that he remembered his mother all his life , like a dream , of course . 
At her death almost exactly the same thing happened to the two little boys as to their elder brother , Mitya . 
They were completely forgotten and abandoned by their father . 
They were looked after by the same Grigory and lived in his cottage , where they were found by the tyrannical old lady who had brought up their mother . 
She was still alive , and had not , all those eight years , forgotten the insult done her . 
All that time she was obtaining exact information as to her Sofya 's manner of life , and hearing of her illness and hideous surroundings she declared aloud two or three times to her retainers : `` It serves her right . 
God has punished her for her ingratitude . '' 
Exactly three months after Sofya Ivanovna 's death the general 's widow suddenly appeared in our town , and went straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house . 
She spent only half an hour in the town but she did a great deal . 
It was evening . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , whom she had not seen for those eight years , came in to her drunk . 
The story is that instantly upon seeing him , without any sort of explanation , she gave him two good , resounding slaps on the face , seized him by a tuft of hair , and shook him three times up and down . 
Then , without a word , she went straight to the cottage to the two boys . 
Seeing , at the first glance , that they were unwashed and in dirty linen , she promptly gave Grigory , too , a box on the ear , and announcing that she would carry off both the children she wrapped them just as they were in a rug , put them in the carriage , and drove off to her own town . 
Grigory accepted the blow like a devoted slave , without a word , and when he escorted the old lady to her carriage he made her a low bow and pronounced impressively that , `` God would repay her for orphans . '' 
`` You are a blockhead all the same , '' the old lady shouted to him as she drove away . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , thinking it over , decided that it was a good thing , and did not refuse the general 's widow his formal consent to any proposition in regard to his children 's education . 
As for the slaps she had given him , he drove all over the town telling the story . 
It happened that the old lady died soon after this , but she left the boys in her will a thousand roubles each `` for their instruction , and so that all be spent on them exclusively , with the condition that it be so portioned out as to last till they are twenty-one , for it is more than adequate provision for such children . 
If other people think fit to throw away their money , let them . '' 
I have not read the will myself , but I heard there was something queer of the sort , very whimsically expressed . 
The principal heir , Yefim Petrovitch Polenov , the Marshal of Nobility of the province , turned out , however , to be an honest man . 
Writing to Fyodor Pavlovitch , and discerning at once that he could extract nothing from him for his children 's education -LRB- though the latter never directly refused but only procrastinated as he always did in such cases , and was , indeed , at times effusively sentimental -RRB- , Yefim Petrovitch took a personal interest in the orphans . 
He became especially fond of the younger , Alexey , who lived for a long while as one of his family . 
I beg the reader to note this from the beginning . 
And to Yefim Petrovitch , a man of a generosity and humanity rarely to be met with , the young people were more indebted for their education and bringing up than to anyone . 
He kept the two thousand roubles left to them by the general 's widow intact , so that by the time they came of age their portions had been doubled by the accumulation of interest . 
He educated them both at his own expense , and certainly spent far more than a thousand roubles upon each of them . 
I wo n't enter into a detailed account of their boyhood and youth , but will only mention a few of the most important events . 
Of the elder , Ivan , I will only say that he grew into a somewhat morose and reserved , though far from timid boy . 
At ten years old he had realised that they were living not in their own home but on other people 's charity , and that their father was a man of whom it was disgraceful to speak . 
This boy began very early , almost in his infancy -LRB- so they say at least -RRB- , to show a brilliant and unusual aptitude for learning . 
I do n't know precisely why , but he left the family of Yefim Petrovitch when he was hardly thirteen , entering a Moscow gymnasium and boarding with an experienced and celebrated teacher , an old friend of Yefim Petrovitch . 
Ivan used to declare afterwards that this was all due to the `` ardour for good works '' of Yefim Petrovitch , who was captivated by the idea that the boy 's genius should be trained by a teacher of genius . 
