Believe that , believe it without doubt ; for in that lies all the hope and faith of the saints . 
Work without ceasing . 
If you remember in the night as you go to sleep , `` I have not done what I ought to have done , '' rise up at once and do it . 
If the people around you are spiteful and callous and will not hear you , fall down before them and beg their forgiveness ; for in truth you are to blame for their not wanting to hear you . 
And if you can not speak to them in their bitterness , serve them in silence and in humility , never losing hope . 
If all men abandon you and even drive you away by force , then when you are left alone fall on the earth and kiss it , water it with your tears and it will bring forth fruit even though no one has seen or heard you in your solitude . 
Believe to the end , even if all men went astray and you were left the only one faithful ; bring your offering even then and praise God in your loneliness . 
And if two of you are gathered together - then there is a whole world , a world of living love . 
Embrace each other tenderly and praise God , for if only in you two His truth has been fulfilled . 
If you sin yourself and grieve even unto death for your sins or for your sudden sin , then rejoice for others , rejoice for the righteous man , rejoice that if you have sinned , he is righteous and has not sinned . 
If the evil-doing of men moves you to indignation and overwhelming distress , even to a desire for vengeance on the evil-doers , shun above all things that feeling . 
Go at once and seek suffering for yourself , as though you were yourself guilty of that wrong . 
Accept that suffering and bear it and your heart will find comfort , and you will understand that you too are guilty , for you might have been a light to the evil-doers , even as the one man sinless , and you were not a light to them . 
If you had been a light , you would have lightened the path for others too , and the evil-doer might perhaps have been saved by your light from his sin . 
And even though your light was shining , yet you see men were not saved by it , hold firm and doubt not the power of the heavenly light . 
Believe that if they were not saved , they will be saved hereafter . 
And if they are not saved hereafter , then their sons will be saved , for your light will not die even when you are dead . 
The righteous man departs , but his light remains . 
Men are always saved after the death of the deliverer . 
Men reject their prophets and slay them , but they love their martyrs and honour those whom they have slain . 
You are working for the whole , are acting for the future . 
Seek no reward , for great is your reward on this earth : the spiritual joy which is only vouchsafed to the righteous man . 
Fear not the great nor the mighty , but be wise and ever serene . 
Know the measure , know the times , study that . 
When you are left alone , pray . 
Love to throw yourself on the earth and kiss it . 
Kiss the earth and love it with an unceasing , consuming love . 
Love all men , love everything . 
Seek that rapture and ecstasy . 
Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears . 
Do n't be ashamed of that ecstasy , prize it , for it is a gift of God and a great one ; it is not given to many but only to the elect . 
-LRB- i -RRB- Of Hell and Hell Fire , a Mystic Reflection . 
Fathers and teachers , I ponder , `` What is hell ? '' 
I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to love . 
Once in infinite existence , immeasurable in time and space , a spiritual creature was given on his coming to earth the power of saying , `` I am and I love . '' 
Once , only once , there was given him a moment of active lifting love , and for that was earthly life given him , and with it times and seasons . 
And that happy creature rejected the priceless gift , prized it and loved it not , scorned it and remained callous . 
Such a one , having left the earth , sees Abraham 's bosom and talks with Abraham as we are told in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus , and beholds heaven and can go up to the Lord . 
But that is just his torment , to rise up to the Lord without ever having loved , to be brought close to those who have loved when he has despised their love . 
For he sees clearly and says to himself , `` Now I have understanding , and though I now thirst to love , there will be nothing great , no sacrifice in my love , for my earthly life is over , and Abraham will not come even with a drop of living water -LRB- that is the gift of earthly active life -RRB- to cool the fiery thirst of spiritual love which burns in me now , though I despised it on earth ; there is no more life for me and will be no more time ! 
Even though I would gladly give my life for others , it can never be , for that life is passed which can be sacrificed for love , and now there is a gulf fixed between that life and this existence . '' 
They talk of hell fire in the material sense . 
I do n't go into that mystery and I shun it . 
But I think if there were fire in material sense , they would be glad of it , for I imagine that in material agony , their still greater spiritual agony would be forgotten for a moment . 
Moreover , that spiritual agony can not be taken from them , for that suffering is not external but within them . 
And if it could be taken from them , I think it would be bitterer still for the unhappy creatures . 
For even if the righteous in Paradise forgave them , beholding their torments , and called them up to heaven in their infinite love , they would only multiply their torments , for they would arouse in them still more keenly a flaming thirst for responsive , active and grateful love which is now impossible . 
In the timidity of my heart I imagine , however , that the very recognition of this impossibility would serve at last to console them . 
For accepting the love of the righteous together with the impossibility of repaying it , by this submissiveness and the effect of this humility , they will attain at last , as it were , to a certain semblance of that active love which they scorned in life , to something like its outward expression ... I am sorry , friends and brothers , that I can not express this clearly . 
But woe to those who have slain themselves on earth , woe to the suicides ! 
