I will gain my point . 
I will insist on his knowing me confiding entirely in me , without reserve , '' she cried , in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I will be a god to whom he can pray - and that , at least , he owes me for his treachery and for what I suffered yesterday through him . 
And let him see that all my life I will be true to him and the promise I gave him , in spite of his being untrue and betraying me . 
I will - I will become nothing but a means for his happiness , or - how shall I say ? 
- an instrument , a machine for his happiness , and that for my whole life , my whole life , and that he may see that all his life ! 
That 's my decision . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me . '' 
She was breathless . 
She had perhaps intended to express her idea with more dignity , art and naturalness , but her speech was too hurried and crude . 
It was full of youthful impulsiveness , it betrayed that she was still smarting from yesterday 's insult , and that her pride craved satisfaction . 
She felt this herself . 
Her face suddenly darkened , an unpleasant look came into her eyes . 
Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy . 
His brother Ivan made it worse by adding : `` I 've only expressed my own view , '' he said . 
`` From anyone else , this would have been affected and over-strained , but from you - no . 
Any other woman would have been wrong , but you are right . 
I do n't know how to explain it , but I see that you are absolutely genuine and , therefore , you are right . '' 
`` But that 's only for the moment . 
And what does this moment stand for ? 
Nothing but yesterday 's insult . '' 
Madame Hohlakov obviously had not intended to interfere , but she could not refrain from this very just comment . 
`` Quite so , quite so , '' cried Ivan , with peculiar eagerness , obviously annoyed at being interrupted , `` in anyone else this moment would be only due to yesterday 's impression and would be only a moment . 
But with Katerina Ivanovna 's character , that moment will last all her life . 
What for anyone else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting burdensome , grim perhaps , but unflagging duty . 
And she will be sustained by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled . 
Your life , Katerina Ivanovna , will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings , your own heroism , and your own suffering ; but in the end that suffering will be softened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfilment of a bold and proud design . 
Yes , proud it certainly is , and desperate in any case , but a triumph for you . 
And the consciousness of it will at last be a source of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything else . '' 
This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention ; even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and with intention . 
`` Oh , dear , how mistaken it all is ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov cried again . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you speak . 
I want dreadfully to know what you will say ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and burst into tears . 
Alyosha got up from the sofa . 
`` It 's nothing , nothing ! '' 
she went on through her tears . 
`` I 'm upset , I did n't sleep last night . 
But by the side of two such friends as you and your brother I still feel strong - for I know you two will never desert me . '' 
`` Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow - perhaps to-morrow - and to leave you for a long time - and , unluckily , it 's unavoidable , '' Ivan said suddenly . 
`` To-morrow - to Moscow ! '' 
her face was suddenly contorted ; `` but - but , dear me , how fortunate ! '' 
she cried in a voice suddenly changed . 
In one instant there was no trace left of her tears . 
She underwent an instantaneous transformation , which amazed Alyosha . 
Instead of a poor , insulted girl , weeping in a sort of `` laceration , '' he saw a woman completely self-possessed and even exceedingly pleased , as though something agreeable had just happened . 
`` Oh , not fortunate that I am losing you , of course not , '' she collected herself suddenly , with a charming society smile . 
`` Such a friend as you are could not suppose that . 
I am only too unhappy at losing you . '' 
