What is the meaning of that great word ? 
What is the great idea in that name ? 
We have just indicated in part what a true father is and what he ought to be . 
In the case in which we are now so deeply occupied and over which our hearts are aching - in the present case , the father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , did not correspond to that conception of a father to which we have just referred . 
That 's the misfortune . 
And indeed some fathers are a misfortune . 
Let us examine this misfortune rather more closely : we must shrink from nothing , gentlemen of the jury , considering the importance of the decision you have to make . 
It 's our particular duty not to shrink from any idea , like children or frightened women , as the talented prosecutor happily expresses it . 
`` But in the course of his heated speech my esteemed opponent -LRB- and he was my opponent before I opened my lips -RRB- exclaimed several times , ` Oh , I will not yield the defence of the prisoner to the lawyer who has come down from Petersburg . 
I accuse , but I defend also ! ' 
He exclaimed that several times , but forgot to mention that if this terrible prisoner was for twenty-three years so grateful for a mere pound of nuts given him by the only man who had been kind to him , as a child in his father 's house , might not such a man well have remembered for twenty-three years how he ran in his father 's back-yard , without boots on his feet and with his little trousers hanging by one button ' - to use the expression of the kindhearted doctor , Herzenstube ? 
`` Oh , gentlemen of the jury , why need we look more closely at this misfortune , why repeat what we all know already ? 
What did my client meet with when he arrived here , at his father 's house , and why depict my client as a heartless egoist and monster ? 
He is uncontrolled , he is wild and unruly - we are trying him now for that - but who is responsible for his life ? 
Who is responsible for his having received such an unseemly bringing up , in spite of his excellent disposition and his grateful and sensitive heart ? 
Did anyone train him to be reasonable ? 
Was he enlightened by study ? 
Did anyone love him ever so little in his childhood ? 
My client was left to the care of Providence like a beast of the field . 
He thirsted perhaps to see his father after long years of separation . 
A thousand times perhaps he may , recalling his childhood , have driven away the loathsome phantoms that haunted his childish dreams and with all his heart he may have longed to embrace and to forgive his father ! 
And what awaited him ? 
He was met by cynical taunts , suspicions and wrangling about money . 
He heard nothing but revolting talk and vicious precepts uttered daily over the brandy , and at last he saw his father seducing his mistress from him with his own money . 
Oh , gentlemen of the jury , that was cruel and revolting ! 
And that old man was always complaining of the disrespect and cruelty of his son . 
He slandered him in society , injured him , calumniated him , bought up his unpaid debts to get him thrown into prison . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , people like my client , who are fierce , unruly , and uncontrolled on the surface , are sometimes , most frequently indeed , exceedingly tender-hearted , only they do n't express it . 
Do n't laugh , do n't laugh at my idea ! 
The talented prosecutor laughed mercilessly just now at my client for loving Schiller - loving the sublime and beautiful ! 
I should not have laughed at that in his place . 
Yes , such natures - oh , let me speak in defence of such natures , so often and so cruelly misunderstood - these natures often thirst for tenderness , goodness , and justice , as it were , in contrast to themselves , their unruliness , their ferocity - they thirst for it unconsciously . 
Passionate and fierce on the surface , they are painfully capable of loving woman , for instance , and with a spiritual and elevated love . 
Again do not laugh at me , this is very often the case in such natures . 
But they can not hide their passions - sometimes very coarse - and that is conspicuous and is noticed , but the inner man is unseen . 
Their passions are quickly exhausted ; but , by the side of a noble and lofty creature that seemingly coarse and rough man seeks a new life , seeks to correct himself , to be better , to become noble and honourable , ` sublime and beautiful , ' however much the expression has been ridiculed . 
`` I said just now that I would not venture to touch upon my client 's engagement . 
But I may say half a word . 
What we heard just now was not evidence , but only the scream of a frenzied and revengeful woman , and it was not for her - oh , not for her ! 
- to reproach him with treachery , for she has betrayed him ! 
If she had had but a little time for reflection she would not have given such evidence . 
Oh , do not believe her ! 
No , my client is not a monster , as she called him ! 
`` The Lover of Mankind on the eve of His Crucifixion said : ' I am the Good Shepherd . 
The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep , so that not one of them might be lost . ' 
Let not a man 's soul be lost through us ! 
`` I asked just now what does ` father ' mean , and exclaimed that it was a great word , a precious name . 
But one must use words honestly , gentlemen , and I venture to call things by their right names : such a father as old Karamazov can not be called a father and does not deserve to be . 
Filial love for an unworthy father is an absurdity , an impossibility . 
Love can not be created from nothing : only God can create something from nothing . '' 
