All of a sudden the young lady rose , on whose account the duel had been fought and whom only lately I had intended to be my future wife . 
I had not noticed her coming into the room . 
She got up , came to me and held out her hand . 
`` Let me tell you , '' she said , `` that I am the first not to laugh at you , but on the contrary I thank you with tears and express my respect for you for your action then . '' 
Her husband , too , came up and then they all approached me and almost kissed me . 
My heart was filled with joy , but my attention was especially caught by a middle-aged man who came up to me with the others . 
I knew him by name already , but had never made his acquaintance nor exchanged a word with him till that evening . 
-LRB- d -RRB- The Mysterious Visitor . 
He had long been an official in the town ; he was in a prominent position , respected by all , rich and had a reputation for benevolence . 
He subscribed considerable sums to the almshouse and the orphan asylum ; he was very charitable , too , in secret , a fact which only became known after his death . 
He was a man of about fifty , almost stern in appearance and not much given to conversation . 
He had been married about ten years and his wife , who was still young , had borne him three children . 
Well , I was sitting alone in my room the following evening , when my door suddenly opened and this gentleman walked in . 
I must mention , by the way , that I was no longer living in my former quarters . 
As soon as I resigned my commission , I took rooms with an old lady , the widow of a government clerk . 
My landlady 's servant waited upon me , for I had moved into her rooms simply because on my return from the duel I had sent Afanasy back to the regiment , as I felt ashamed to look him in the face after my last interview with him . 
So prone is the man of the world to be ashamed of any righteous action . 
`` I have , '' said my visitor , `` with great interest listened to you speaking in different houses the last few days and I wanted at last to make your personal acquaintance , so as to talk to you more intimately . 
Can you , dear sir , grant me this favour ? '' 
`` I can , with the greatest pleasure , and I shall look upon it as an honour . '' 
I said this , though I felt almost dismayed , so greatly was I impressed from the first moment by the appearance of this man . 
For though other people had listened to me with interest and attention , no one had come to me before with such a serious , stern , and concentrated expression . 
And now he had come to see me in my own rooms . 
He sat down . 
`` You are , I see , a man of great strength of character '' he said ; `` as you have dared to serve the truth , even when by doing so you risked incurring the contempt of all . '' 
`` Your praise is , perhaps , excessive , '' I replied . 
`` No , it 's not excessive , '' he answered ; `` believe me , such a course of action is far more difficult than you think . 
It is that which has impressed me , and it is only on that account that I have come to you , '' he continued . 
`` Tell me , please , that is if you are not annoyed by my perhaps unseemly curiosity , what were your exact sensations , if you can recall them , at the moment when you made up your mind to ask forgiveness at the duel . 
Do not think my question frivolous ; on the contrary , I have in asking the question a secret motive of my own , which I will perhaps explain to you later on , if it is God 's will that we should become more intimately acquainted . '' 
All the while he was speaking , I was looking at him straight into the face and I felt all at once a complete trust in him and great curiosity on my side also , for I felt that there was some strange secret in his soul . 
`` You ask what were my exact sensations at the moment when I asked my opponent 's forgiveness , '' I answered ; `` but I had better tell you from the beginning what I have not yet told anyone else . '' 
And I described all that had passed between Afanasy and me , and how I had bowed down to the ground at his feet . 
`` From that you can see for yourself , '' I concluded , `` that at the time of the duel it was easier for me , for I had made a beginning already at home , and when once I had started on that road , to go farther along it was far from being difficult , but became a source of joy and happiness . '' 
I liked the way he looked at me as he listened . 
`` All that , '' he said , `` is exceedingly interesting . 
I will come to see you again and again . '' 
And from that time forth he came to see me nearly every evening . 
And we should have become greater friends , if only he had ever talked of himself . 
But about himself he scarcely ever said a word , yet continually asked me about myself . 
In spite of that I became very fond of him and spoke with perfect frankness to him about all my feelings ; `` for , '' thought I , `` what need have I to know his secrets , since I can see without that that is a good man ? 
Moreover , though he is such a serious man and my senior , he comes to see a youngster like me and treats me as his equal . '' 
And I learned a great deal that was profitable from him , for he was a man of lofty mind . 
`` That life is heaven , '' he said to me suddenly , `` that I have long been thinking about '' ; and all at once he added , `` I think of nothing else indeed . '' 
He looked at me and smiled . 
`` I am more convinced of it than you are , I will tell you later why . '' 
I listened to him and thought that he evidently wanted to tell me something . 
`` Heaven , '' he went on , `` lies hidden within all of us - here it lies hidden in me now , and if I will it , it will be revealed to me to-morrow and for all time . '' 
I looked at him ; he was speaking with great emotion and gazing mysteriously at me , as if he were questioning me . 
`` And that we are all responsible to all for all , apart from our own sins , you were quite right in thinking that , and it is wonderful how you could comprehend it in all its significance at once . 
