He was incapable of passive love . 
If he loved anyone , he set to work at once to help him . 
And to do so he must know what he was aiming at ; he must know for certain what was best for each , and having ascertained this it was natural for him to help them both . 
But instead of a definite aim , he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on all sides . 
`` It was lacerating , '' as was said just now . 
But what could he understand even in this `` laceration '' ? 
He did not understand the first word in this perplexing maze . 
Seeing Alyosha , Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan , who had already got up to go , `` A minute ! 
Stay another minute ! 
I want to hear the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely . 
Do n't go away , '' she added , addressing Madame Hohlakov . 
She made Alyosha sit down beside her , and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite , by Ivan . 
`` You are all my friends here , all I have in the world , dear friends , '' she warmly , in a voice which quivered with genuine tears of suffering , and Alyosha 's heart warmed to her at once . 
`` You , Alexey Fyodorovitch , were witness yesterday of that abominable scene , and saw what I did . 
You did not see it , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he did . 
What he thought of me yesterday I do n't know . 
I only know one thing , that if it were repeated to-day , this minute , I should express the same feelings again as yesterday - the same feelings , the same words , the same actions . 
You remember my actions , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; you checked me in one of them '' ... -LRB- as she said that , she flushed and her eyes shone -RRB- . 
`` I must tell you that I ca n't get over it . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't even know whether I still love him . 
I feel pity for him , and that is a poor sign of love . 
If I loved him , if I still loved him , perhaps I should n't be sorry for him now , but should hate him '' . 
Her voice quivered and tears glittered on her eyelashes . 
Alyosha shuddered inwardly . 
`` That girl is truthful and sincere , '' he thought , `` and she does not love Dmitri any more . '' 
`` That 's true , that 's true , '' cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Wait , dear . 
I have n't told you the chief , the final decision I came to during the night . 
I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one - for me , but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it - nothing . 
It will be so all my life . 
My dear , kind , ever-faithful and generous adviser , the one friend I have in the world , Ivan Fyodorovitch , with his deep insight into the heart , approves and commends my decision . 
He knows it . '' 
`` Yes , I approve of it , '' Ivan assented , in a subdued but firm voice . 
`` But I should like Alyosha , too -LRB- Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , forgive my calling you simply Alyosha -RRB- , I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch , too , to tell me before my two friends whether I am right . 
I feel instinctively that you , Alyosha , my dear brother -LRB- for are a dear brother to me -RRB- , '' she said again ecstatically , taking his cold hand in her hot one , `` I foresee that your decision , your approval , will bring me peace , in spite of all my sufferings , for , after your words , I shall be calm and submit - I feel that . '' 
`` I do n't know what you are asking me , '' said Alyosha , flushing . 
`` I only know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more than my own ! 
... But I know nothing about such affairs , '' something impelled him to add hurriedly . 
`` In such affairs , Alexey Fyodorovitch , in such affairs , the chief thing is honour and duty and something higher - I do n't know what but higher perhaps even than duty . 
I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart , and it compels me irresistibly . 
But it may all be put in two words . 
I 've already decided , even if he marries that - creature , '' she began solemnly , `` whom I never , never can forgive , even then I will not abandon him . 
Henceforward I will never , never abandon him ! '' 
she cried , breaking into a sort of pale , hysterical ecstasy . 
`` Not that I would run after him continually , get in his way and worry him . 
Oh , no ! 
I will go away to another town - where you like - but I will watch over him all my life - I will watch over him all my life unceasingly . 
When he becomes unhappy with that woman , and that is bound to happen quite soon , let him come to me and he will find a friend , a sister ... Only a sister , of course , and so for ever ; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister , who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him . 
