At first she was only employed by him in connection with his taverns and in some other shady business , but now he has suddenly realised all she is and has gone wild about her . 
He keeps pestering her with his offers , not honourable ones , of course . 
And they 'll come into collision , the precious father and son , on that path ! 
But Grushenka favours neither of them , she 's still playing with them , and teasing them both , considering which she can get most out of . 
For though she could filch a lot of money from the papa he would n't marry her , and maybe he 'll turn stingy in the end , and keep his purse shut . 
That 's where Mitya 's value comes in ; he has no money , but he 's ready to marry her . 
Yes , ready to marry her ! 
to abandon his betrothed , a rare beauty , Katerina Ivanovna , who 's rich , and the daughter of a colonel , and to marry Grushenka , who has been the mistress of a dissolute old merchant , Samsonov , a coarse , uneducated , provincial mayor . 
Some murderous conflict may well come to pass from all this , and that 's what your brother Ivan is waiting for . 
It would suit him down to the ground . 
He 'll carry off Katerina Ivanovna , for whom he is languishing , and pocket her dowry of sixty thousand . 
That 's very alluring to start with , for a man of no consequence and a beggar . 
And , take note , he wo n't be wronging Mitya , but doing him the greatest service . 
For I know as a fact that Mitya only last week , when he was with some Gipsy girls drunk in a tavern , cried out aloud that he was unworthy of his betrothed , Katya , but that his brother Ivan , he was the man who deserved her . 
And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the end refuse such a fascinating man as Ivan . 
She 's hesitating between the two of them already . 
And how has that Ivan won you all , so that you all worship him ? 
He is laughing at you , and enjoying himself at your expense . '' 
`` How do you know ? 
How can you speak so confidently ? '' 
Alyosha asked sharply , frowning . 
`` Why do you ask , and are frightened at my answer ? 
It shows that you know I 'm speaking the truth . '' 
`` You do n't like Ivan . 
Ivan would n't be tempted by money . '' 
`` Really ? 
And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna ? 
It 's not only the money , though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction . '' 
`` Ivan is above that . 
He would n't make up to anyone for thousands . 
It is not money , it 's not comfort Ivan is seeking . 
Perhaps it 's suffering he is seeking . '' 
`` What wild dream now ? 
Oh , you - aristocrats ! '' 
`` Ah , Misha , he has a stormy spirit . 
His mind is in bondage . 
He is haunted by a great , unsolved doubt . 
He is one of those who do n't want millions , but an answer to their questions . '' 
`` That 's plagiarism , Alyosha . 
You 're quoting your elder 's phrases . 
Ah , Ivan has set you a problem ! '' 
cried Rakitin , with undisguised malice . 
His face changed , and his lips twitched . 
`` And the problem 's a stupid one . 
It is no good guessing it . 
Rack your brains - you 'll understand it . 
His article is absurd and ridiculous . 
And did you hear his stupid theory just now : if there 's no immortality of the soul , then there 's no virtue , and everything is lawful . 
-LRB- And by the way , do you remember how your brother Mitya cried out : ' I will remember ! ' -RRB- 
An attractive theory for scoundrels ! 
