It 's shameful , it 's awful for me ! 
To-morrow , I beg you on my knees , come to-morrow . 
Do n't condemm me . 
Forgive me . 
I do n't know what I shall do with myself now ! '' 
Alyosha walked out into the street reeling . 
He could have wept as she did . 
Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid . 
`` The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov ; it 's been left with us since dinner-time . '' 
Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it , almost unconsciously , into his pocket . 
Another Reputation Ruined IT was not much more than three-quarters of a mile from the town to the monastery . 
Alyosha walked quickly along the road , at that hour deserted . 
It was almost night , and too dark to see anything clearly at thirty paces ahead . 
There were cross-roads half-way . 
A figure came into sight under a solitary willow at the cross-roads . 
As soon as Alyosha reached the cross-roads the figure moved out and rushed at him , shouting savagely : `` Your money or your life ! '' 
`` So it 's you , Mitya , '' cried Alyosha , in surprise , violently startled however . 
`` Ha ha ha ! 
You did n't expect me ? 
I wondered where to wait for you . 
By her house ? 
There are three ways from it , and I might have missed you . 
At last I thought of waiting here , for you had to pass here , there 's no other way to the monastery . 
Come , tell me the truth . 
Crush me like a beetle . 
But what 's the matter ? '' 
`` Nothing , brother - it 's the fright you gave me . 
Oh , Dmitri ! 
Father 's blood just now . '' 
-LRB- Alyosha began to cry , he had been on the verge of tears for a long time , and now something seemed to snap in his soul . -RRB- 
`` You almost killed him - cursed him - and now - here - you 're making jokes - ` Your money or your life ! ' '' 
`` Well , what of that ? 
It 's not seemly - is that it ? 
Not suitable in my position ? '' 
`` No - I only - '' `` Stay . 
Look at the night . 
You see what a dark night , what clouds , what a wind has risen . 
I hid here under the willow waiting for you . 
And as God 's above , I suddenly thought , why go on in misery any longer , what is there to wait for ? 
Here I have a willow , a handkerchief , a shirt , I can twist them into a rope in a minute , and braces besides , and why go on burdening the earth , dishonouring it with my vile presence ? 
And then I heard you coming - Heavens , it was as though something flew down to me suddenly . 
So there is a man , then , whom I love . 
Here he is , that man , my dear little brother , whom I love more than anyone in the world , the only one I love in the world . 
And I loved you so much , so much at that moment that I thought , ` I 'll fall on his neck at once . ' 
Then a stupid idea struck me , to have a joke with you and scare you . 
I shouted , like a fool , ` Your money ! ' 
Forgive my foolery - it was only nonsense , and there 's nothing unseemly in my soul ... . 
Damn it all , tell me what 's happened . 
What did she say ? 
Strike me , crush me , do n't spare me ! 
