His pointed beard was small and scanty , and his lips , which smiled frequently , were as thin as two threads . 
His nose was not long , but sharp , like a bird 's beak . 
`` To all appearances a malicious soul , full of petty pride , '' thought Miusov . 
He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position . 
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly , and served to begin the conversation . 
`` Precisely to our time , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but no sign of my son , Dmitri . 
I apologise for him , sacred elder ! '' 
-LRB- Alyosha shuddered all over at `` sacred elder '' . -RRB- 
`` I am always punctual myself , minute for minute , remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings ... `` But you are not a king , anyway , '' Miusov muttered , losing his self-restraint at once . 
`` Yes ; that 's true . 
I 'm not a king , and , would you believe it , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , I was aware of that myself . 
But , there ! 
I always say the wrong thing . 
Your reverence , '' he cried , with sudden pathos , `` you behold before you a buffoon in earnest ! 
I introduce myself as such . 
It 's an old habit , alas ! 
And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it 's with an object , with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable . 
One must be agreeable , must n't one ? 
I was seven years ago in a little town where I had business , and I made friends with some merchants there . 
We went to the captain of police because we had to see him about something , and to ask him to dine with us . 
He was a tall , fat , fair , sulky man , the most dangerous type in such cases . 
It 's their liver . 
I went straight up to him , and with the ease of a man of the world , you know , ` Mr. Ispravnik , ' said I , ` be our Napravnik . ' 
` What do you mean by Napravnik ? ' 
said he . 
I saw , at the first half-second , that it had missed fire . 
He stood there so glum . ' 
I wanted to make a joke , ' said I , ` for the general diversion , as Mr. Napravnik is our well-known Russian orchestra conductor and what we need for the harmony of our undertaking is someone of that sort . ' 
And I explained my comparison very reasonably , did n't I ? 
` Excuse me , ' said he , ' I am an Ispravnik , and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling . ' 
He turned and walked away . 
I followed him , shouting , ` Yes , yes , you are an Ispravnik , not a Napravnik . ' 
` No , ' he said , ` since you called me a Napravnik I am one . ' 
And would you believe it , it ruined our business ! 
And I 'm always like that , always like that . 
Always injuring myself with my politeness . 
Once , many years ago , I said to an influential person : ` Your wife is a ticklish lady , ' in an honourable sense , of the moral qualities , so to speak . 
But he asked me , ` Why , have you tickled her ? ' 
I thought I 'd be polite , so I could n't help saying , ` Yes , ' and he gave me a fine tickling on the spot . 
Only that happened long ago , so I 'm not ashamed to tell the story . 
I 'm always injuring myself like that . '' 
`` You 're doing it now , '' muttered Miusov , with disgust . 
Father Zossima scrutinised them both in silence . 
`` Am I ? 
Would you believe it , I was aware of that , too , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , and let tell you , indeed , I foresaw I should as soon as I began to speak . 
And do you know I foresaw , too , that you 'd be the first to remark on it . 
The minute I see my joke is n't coming off , your reverence , both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lower jaw and there is almost a spasm in them . 
That 's been so since I was young , when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen 's families . 
I am an inveterate buffoon , and have been from birth up , your reverence , it 's as though it were a craze in me . 
I dare say it 's a devil within me . 
