But you must see that you could puzzle God Himself with such questions . 
` How did you step ? 
Where did you step ? 
When did you step ? 
And on what did you step ? ' 
I shall get mixed up , if you go on like this , and you will put it all down against me . 
And what will that lead to ? 
To nothing ! 
And even if it 's nonsense I 'm talking now , let me finish , and you , gentlemen , being men of honour and refinement , will forgive me ! 
I 'll finish by asking you , gentlemen , to drop that conventional method of questioning . 
I mean , beginning from some miserable trifle , how I got up , what I had for breakfast , how I spat , and where I spat , and so distracting the attention of the criminal , suddenly stun him with an overwhelming question , ` Whom did you murder ? 
Whom did you rob ? ' 
Ha-ha ! 
That 's your regulation method , that 's where all your cunning comes in . 
You can put peasants off their guard like that , but not me . 
I know the tricks . 
I 've been in the service , too . 
Ha ha ha ! 
You 're not angry , gentlemen ? 
You forgive my impertinence ? '' 
he cried , looking at them with a good-nature that was almost surprising . 
`` It 's only Mitya Karamazov , you know , so you can overlook it . 
It would be inexcusable in a sensible man ; but you can forgive it in Mitya . 
Ha ha ! '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch listened , and laughed too . 
Though the prosecutor did not laugh , he kept his eyes fixed keenly on Mitya , as though anxious not to miss the least syllable , the slightest movement , the smallest twitch of any feature of his face . 
`` That 's how we have treated you from the beginning , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , still laughing . 
`` We have n't tried to put you out by asking how you got up in the morning and what you had for breakfast . 
We began , indeed , with questions of the greatest importance . '' 
`` I understand . 
I saw it and appreciated it , and I appreciate still more your present kindness to me , an unprecedented kindness , worthy of your noble hearts . 
We three here are gentlemen and let everything be on the footing of mutual confidence between educated , well-bred people , who have the common bond of noble birth and honour . 
In any case , allow me to look upon you as my best friends at this moment of my life , at this moment when my honour is assailed . 
That 's no offence to you , gentlemen , is it ? '' 
On the contrary . 
You 've expressed all that so well , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch answered with dignified approbation . 
`` And enough of those trivial questions , gentlemen , all those tricky questions ! 
cried Mitya enthusiastically . 
`` Or there 's simply no knowing where we shall get to ! 
Is there ? '' 
`` I will follow your sensible advice entirely , '' the prosecutor interposed , addressing Mitya . 
`` I do n't withdraw my question , however . 
It is now vitally important for us to know exactly why you needed that sum , I mean precisely three thousand . '' 
`` Why I needed it ? 
... Oh , for one thing and another ... . 
Well , it was to pay a debt . '' 
`` A debt to whom ? '' 
`` That I absolutely refuse to answer , gentlemen . 
Not because I could n't , or because I should n't dare , or because it would be damaging , for it 's all a paltry matter and absolutely trifling , but - I wo n't , because it 's a matter of principle : that 's my private life , and I wo n't allow any intrusion into my private life . 
That 's my principle . 
