The old man knew that the elder Zossima , who was living in the monastery hermitage , had made a special impression upon his `` gentle boy . '' 
`` That is the most honest monk among them , of course , '' he observed , after listening in thoughtful silence to Alyosha , and seeming scarcely surprised at his request . 
`` H 'm ! 
... So that 's where you want to be , my gentle boy ? '' 
He was half drunk , and suddenly he grinned his slow half-drunken grin , which was not without a certain cunning and tipsy slyness . 
`` H 'm ! 
... I had a presentiment that you would end in something like this . 
Would you believe it ? 
You were making straight for it . 
Well , to be sure you have your own two thousand . 
That 's a dowry for you . 
And I 'll never desert you , my angel . 
And I 'll pay what 's wanted for you there , if they ask for it . 
But , of course , if they do n't ask , why should we worry them ? 
What do you say ? 
You know , you spend money like a canary , two grains a week . 
H 'm ! 
... Do you know that near one monastery there 's a place outside the town where every baby knows there are none but ` the monks ' wives ' living , as they are called . 
Thirty women , I believe . 
I have been there myself . 
You know , it 's interesting in its way , of course , as a variety . 
The worst of it is it 's awfully Russian . 
There are no French women there . 
Of course , they could get them fast enough , they have plenty of money . 
If they get to hear of it they 'll come along . 
Well , there 's nothing of that sort here , no ` monks ' wives , ' and two hundred monks . 
They 're honest . 
They keep the fasts . 
I admit it ... . 
H 'm ... . 
So you want to be a monk ? 
And do you know I 'm sorry to lose you , Alyosha ; would you believe it , I 've really grown fond of you ? 
Well , it 's a good opportunity . 
You 'll pray for us sinners ; we have sinned too much here . 
I 've always been thinking who would pray for me , and whether there 's anyone in the world to do it . 
My dear boy , I 'm awfully stupid about that . 
You would n't believe it . 
Awfully . 
You see , however stupid I am about it , I keep thinking , I keep thinking - from time to time , of course , not all the while . 
It 's impossible , I think , for the devils to forget to drag me down to hell with their hooks when I die . 
Then I wonder - hooks ? 
Where would they get them ? 
What of ? 
Iron hooks ? 
Where do they forge them ? 
Have they a foundry there of some sort ? 
The monks in the monastery probably believe that there 's a ceiling in hell , for instance . 
Now I 'm ready to believe in hell , but without a ceiling . 
It makes it more refined , more enlightened , more Lutheran that is . 
And , after all , what does it matter whether it has a ceiling or has n't ? 
