`` Lock it , '' said Kalganov . 
But the key clicked on the other side , they had locked it from within . 
`` That 's capital ! '' 
exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly . 
`` Serve them right ! '' 
Delirium WHAT followed was almost an orgy , a feast to which all were welcome . 
Grushenka was the first to call for wine . 
`` I want to drink . 
I want to be quite drunk , as we were before . 
Do you remember , Mitya , do you remember how we made friends here last time ! '' 
Mitya himself was almost delirious , feeling that his happiness was at hand . 
But Grushenka was continually sending him away from her . 
`` Go and enjoy yourself . 
Tell them to dance , to make merry , ` let the stove and cottage dance ' ; as we had it last time , '' she kept exclaiming . 
She was tremendously excited . 
And Mitya hastened to obey her . 
The chorus were in the next room . 
The room in which they had been sitting till that moment was too small , and was divided in two by cotton curtains , behind which was a huge bed with a puffy feather mattress and a pyramid of cotton pillows . 
In the four rooms for visitors there were beds . 
Grushenka settled herself just at the door . 
Mitya set an easy chair for her . 
She had sat in the same place to watch the dancing and singing `` the time before , '' when they had made merry there . 
All the girls who had come had been there then ; the Jewish band with fiddles and zithers had come , too , and at last the long expected cart had arrived with the wines and provisions . 
Mitya bustled about . 
All sorts of people began coming into the room to look on , peasants and their women , who had been roused from sleep and attracted by the hopes of another marvellous entertainment such as they had enjoyed a month before . 
Mitya remembered their faces , greeting and embracing everyone he knew . 
He uncorked bottles and poured out wine for everyone who presented himself . 
Only the girls were very eager for the champagne . 
The men preferred rum , brandy , and , above all , hot punch . 
Mitya had chocolate made for all the girls , and ordered that three samovars should be kept boiling all night to provide tea and punch for everyone to help himself . 
An absurd chaotic confusion followed , but Mitya was in his natural element , and the more foolish it became , the more his spirits rose . 
If the peasants had asked him for money at that moment , he would have pulled out his notes and given them away right and left . 
This was probably why the landlord , Trifon Borissovitch , kept hovering about Mitya to protect him . 
He seemed to have given up all idea of going to bed that night ; but he drank little , only one glass of punch , and kept a sharp look-out on Mitya 's interests after his own fashion . 
He intervened in the nick of time , civilly and obsequiously persuading Mitya not to give away `` cigars and Rhine wine , '' and , above all , money to the peasants as he had done before . 
He was very indignant , too , at the peasant girls drinking liqueur , and eating sweets . 
`` They 're a lousy lot , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' he said . 
`` I 'd give them a kick , every one of them , and they 'd take it as an honour - that 's all they 're worth ! '' 
Mitya remembered Andrey again , and ordered punch to be sent out to him . 
`` I was rude to him just now , '' he repeated with a sinking , softened voice . 
Kalgonov did to drink , and at first did not care for the girls singing ; but after he had drunk a couple of glasses of champagne he became extraordinarily lively , strolling about the room , laughing and praising the music and the songs , admiring everyone and everything . 
Maximov , blissfully drunk , never left his side . 
Grushenka , too , was beginning to get drunk . 
Pointing to Kalganov , she said to Mitya : `` What a dear , charming boy he is ! '' 
And Mitya , delighted , ran to kiss Kalgonov and Maximov . 
Oh , great were his hopes ! 
She had said nothing yet , and seemed , indeed , purposely to refrain from speaking . 
But she looked at him from time to time with caressing and passionate eyes . 
At last she suddenly gripped his hand and drew him vigorously to her . 
She was sitting at the moment in the low chair by the door . 
