`` I must , I must get back to-night , '' he repeated , as he was jolted along in the cart , `` and I dare say I shall have to bring this Lyagavy back here ... to draw up the deed . '' 
So mused Mitya , with a throbbing heart , but alas ! 
his dreams were not fated to be carried out . 
To begin with , he was late , taking a short cut from Volovya station which turned out to be eighteen versts instead of twelve . 
Secondly , he did not find the priest at home at Ilyinskoe ; he had gone off to a neighbouring village . 
While Mitya , setting off there with the same exhausted horses , was looking for him , it was almost dark . 
The priest , a shy and amiable looking little man , informed him at once that though Lyagavy had been staying with him at first , he was now at Suhoy Possyolok , that he was staying the night in the forester 's cottage , as he was buying timber there too . 
At Mitya 's urgent request that he would take him to Lyagavy at once , and by so doing `` save him , so to speak , '' the priest agreed , after some demur , to conduct him to Suhoy Possyolok ; his curiosity was obviously aroused . 
But , unluckily , he advised their going on foot , as it would not be `` much over '' a verst . 
Mitya , of course , agreed , and marched off with his yard-long strides , so that the poor priest almost ran after him . 
He was a very cautious man , though not old . 
Mitya at once began talking to him , too , of his plans , nervously and excitedly asking advice in regard to Lyagavy , and talking all the way . 
The priest listened attentively , but gave little advice . 
He turned off Mitya 's questions with : `` I do n't know . 
Ah , I ca n't say . 
How can I tell ? '' 
and so on . 
When Mitya began to speak of his quarrel with his father over his inheritance , the priest was positively alarmed , as he was in some way dependent on Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He inquired , however , with surprise , why he called the peasant-trader Gorstkin , Lyagavy , and obligingly explained to Mitya that , though the man 's name really was Lyagavy , he was never called so , as he would be grievously offended at the name , and that he must be sure to call him Gorstkin , `` or you 'll do nothing with him ; he wo n't even listen to you , '' said the priest in conclusion . 
Mitya was somewhat surprised for a moment , and explained that that was what Samsonov had called him . 
On hearing this fact , the priest dropped the subject , though he would have done well to put into words his doubt whether , if Samsonov had sent him to that peasant , calling him Lyagavy , there was not something wrong about it and he was turning him into ridicule . 
But Mitya had no time to pause over such trifles . 
He hurried , striding along , and only when he reached Suhoy Possyolok did he realise that they had come not one verst , nor one and a half , but at least three . 
This annoyed him , but he controlled himself . 
They went into the hut . 
The forester lived in one half of the hut , and Gorstkin was lodging in the other , the better room the other side of the passage . 
They went into that room and lighted a tallow candle . 
The hut was extremely overheated . 
On the table there was a samovar that had gone out , a tray with cups , an empty rum bottle , a bottle of vodka partly full , and some half-eaten crusts of wheaten bread . 
The visitor himself lay stretched at full length on the bench , with his coat crushed up under his head for a pillow , snoring heavily . 
Mitya stood in perplexity . 
`` Of course , I must wake him . 
My business is too important . 
I 've come in such haste . 
I 'm in a hurry to get back to-day , '' he said in great agitation . 
But the priest and the forester stood in silence , not giving their opinion . 
Mitya went up and began trying to wake him himself ; he tried vigorously , but the sleeper did not wake . 
`` He 's drunk , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Good Lord ! 
What am I to do ? 
What am I to do ? '' 
And , terribly impatient , he began pulling him by the arms , by the legs , shaking his head , lifting him up and making him sit on the bench . 
Yet , after prolonged exertions , he could only succeed in getting the drunken man to utter absurd grunts , and violent , but inarticulate oaths . 
`` No , you 'd better wait a little , '' the priest pronounced at last , `` for he 's obviously not in a fit state . '' 
`` He 's been drinking the whole day , '' the forester chimed in . 
`` Good heavens ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` If only you knew how important it is to me and how desperate I am ! '' 
`` No , you 'd better wait till morning , '' the priest repeated . 
`` Till morning ? 
