Follow the regular course ! '' 
cried Nikolay Parfenovitch , fearfully excited too , `` otherwise it 's absolutely impossible ! 
... '' `` Judge us together ! '' 
Grushenka cried frantically , still kneeling . 
`` Punish us together . 
I will go with him now , if it 's to death ! '' 
`` Grusha , my life , my blood , my holy one ! '' 
Mitya fell on his knees beside her and held her tight in his arms . 
`` Do n't believe her , '' he cried , `` she 's not guilty of anything , of any blood , of anything ! '' 
He remembered afterwards that he was forcibly dragged away from her by several men , and that she was led out , and that when he recovered himself he was sitting at the table . 
Beside him and behind him stood the men with metal plates . 
Facing him on the other side of the table sat Nikolay Parfenovitch , the investigating lawyer . 
He kept persuading him to drink a little water out of a glass that stood on the table . 
`` That will refresh you , that will calm you . 
Be calm , do n't be frightened , '' he added , extremely politely . 
Mitya -LRB- he remembered it afterwards -RRB- became suddenly intensely interested in his big rings , one with an amethyst , and another with a transparent bright yellow stone , of great brilliance . 
And long afterwards he remembered with wonder how those rings had riveted his attention through all those terrible hours of interrogation , so that he was utterly unable to tear himself away from them and dismiss them , as things that had nothing to do with his position . 
On Mitya 's left side , in the place where Maximov had been sitting at the beginning of the evening , the prosecutor was now seated , and on Mitya 's right hand , where Grushenka had been , was a rosy-cheeked young man in a sort of shabby hunting-jacket , with ink and paper before him . 
This was the secretary of the investigating lawyer , who had brought him with him . 
The police captain was now standing by the window at the other end of the room , beside Kalganov , who was sitting there . 
`` Drink some water , '' said the investigating lawyer softly , for the tenth time . 
`` I have drunk it , gentlemen , I have ... but come gentlemen , crush me , punish me , decide my fate ! '' 
cried Mitya , staring with terribly fixed wide-open eyes at the investigating lawyer . 
`` So you positively declare that you are not guilty of the death of your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
asked the investigating lawyer , softly but insistently . 
`` I am not guilty . 
I am guilty of the blood of another old man , but not of my father 's . 
And I weep for it ! 
I killed , I killed the old man and knocked him down ... . 
But it 's hard to have to answer for that murder with another , a terrible murder of which I am not guilty ... It 's a terrible accusation , gentlemen , a knockdown blow . 
But who has killed my father , who has killed him ? 
Who can have killed him if I did n't ? 
It 's marvellous , extraordinary , impossible . '' 
`` Yes , who can have killed him ? '' 
the investigating lawyer was beginning , but Ippolit Kirillovitch , the prosecutor , glancing at him , addressed Mitya . 
`` You need not worry yourself about the old servant , Grigory Vasilyevitch . 
He is alive , he has recovered , and in spite of the terrible blows inflicted , according to his own and your evidence , by you , there seems no doubt that he will live , so the doctor says , at least . '' 
`` Alive ? 
He 's alive ? '' 
cried Mitya , flinging up his hands . 
His face beamed . 
`` Lord , I thank Thee for the miracle Thou has wrought for me , a sinner and evildoer . 
That 's an answer to my prayer . 
I 've been praying all night . '' 
And he crossed himself three times . 
He was almost breathless . 
`` So from this Grigory we have received such important evidence concerning you , that - '' The prosecutor would have continued , but Mitya suddenly jumped up from his chair . 
`` One minute , gentlemen , for God 's sake , one minute ; I will run to her - '' `` Excuse me , at this moment it 's quite impossible , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch almost shrieked . 
He , too , leapt to his feet . 
Mitya was seized by the men with the metal plates , but he sat down of his own accord ... `` Gentlemen , what a pity ! 
