From that time Alyosha noticed that Ivan began obviously to avoid him and seemed even to have taken a dislike to him , so much so that Alyosha gave up going to see him . 
Immediately after that meeting with him , Ivan had not gone home , but went straight to Smerdyakov again . 
The Second Visit to Smerdyakov BY that time Smerdyakov had been discharged from the hospital . 
Ivan knew his new lodging , the dilapidated little wooden house , divided in two by a passage , on one side of which lived Marya Kondratyevna and her mother , and on the other , Smerdyakov . 
No one knew on what terms he lived with them , whether as a friend or as a lodger . 
It was supposed afterwards that he had come to stay with them as Marya Kondratyevna 's betrothed , and was living there for a time without paying for board or lodging . 
Both mother and daughter had the greatest respect for him and looked upon him as greatly superior to themselves . 
Ivan knocked , and , on the door being opened , went straight into the passage . 
By Marya Kondratyevna 's directions he went straight to the better room on the left , occupied by Smerdyakov . 
There was a tiled stove in the room and it was extremely hot . 
The walls were gay with blue paper , which was a good deal used however , and in the cracks under it cockroaches swarmed in amazing numbers , so that there was a continual rustling from them . 
The furniture was very scanty : two benches against each wall and two chairs by the table . 
The table of plain wood was covered with a cloth with pink patterns on it . 
There was a pot of geranium on each of the two little windows . 
In the corner there was a case of ikons . 
On the table stood a little copper samovar with many dents in it , and a tray with two cups . 
But Smerdyakov had finished tea and the samovar was out . 
He was sitting at the table on a bench . 
He was looking at an exercise-book and slowly writing with a pen . 
There was a bottle of ink by him and a flat iron candlestick , but with a composite candle . 
Ivan saw at once from Smerdyakov 's face that he had completely recovered from his illness . 
His face was fresher , fuller , his hair stood up jauntily in front , and was plastered down at the sides . 
He was sitting in a parti-coloured , wadded dressing-gown , rather dirty and frayed , however . 
He had spectacles on his nose , which Ivan had never seen him wearing before . 
This trifling circumstance suddenly redoubled Ivan 's anger : `` A creature like that and wearing spectacles ! '' 
Smerdyakov slowly raised his head and looked intently at his visitor through his spectacles ; then he slowly took them off and rose from the bench , but by no means respectfully , almost lazily , doing the least possible required by common civility . 
All this struck Ivan instantly ; he took it all in and noted it at once - most of all the look in Smerdyakov 's eyes , positively malicious , churlish and haughty . 
`` What do you want to intrude for ? '' 
it seemed to say ; `` we settled everything then ; why have you come again ? '' 
Ivan could scarcely control himself . 
`` It 's hot here , '' he said , still standing , and unbuttoned his overcoat . 
`` Take off your coat , '' Smerdyakov conceded . 
Ivan took off his coat and threw it on a bench with trembling hands . 
He took a chair , moved it quickly to the table and sat down . 
Smerdyakov managed to sit down on his bench before him . 
`` To begin with , are we alone ? '' 
Ivan asked sternly and impulsively . 
`` Can they overhear us in there ? '' 
`` No one can hear anything . 
You 've seen for yourself : there 's a passage . '' 
`` Listen , my good fellow ; what was that you babbled , as I was leaving the hospital , that if I said nothing about your faculty of shamming fits , you would n't tell the investigating lawyer all our conversation at the gate ? 
What do you mean by all ? 
What could you mean by it ? 
Were you threatening me ? 
Have I entered into some sort of compact with you ? 
Do you suppose I am afraid of you ? '' 
Ivan said this in a perfect fury , giving him to understand with obvious intention that he scorned any subterfuge or indirectness and meant to show his cards . 
Smerdyakov 's eyes gleamed resentfully , his left eye winked , and he at once gave his answer , with his habitual composure and deliberation . 
`` You want to have everything above-board ; very well , you shall have it , '' he seemed to say . 
`` This is what I meant then , and this is why I said that , that you , knowing beforehand of this murder of your own parent , left him to his fate , and that people might n't after that conclude any evil about your feelings and perhaps of something else , too - that 's what I promised not to tell the authorities . '' 
