Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same solitary cell seven years previously . 
It was simply a peasant 's hut , though it looked like a chapel , for it contained an extraordinary number of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them - which men brought to the monastery as offerings to God . 
Father Ferapont had been appointed to look after them and keep the lamps burning . 
It was said -LRB- and indeed it was true -RRB- that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days . 
The beekeeper , who lived close by the apiary , used to bring him the bread every three days , and even to this man who waited upon him , Father Ferapont rarely uttered a word . 
The four pounds of bread , together with the sacrament bread , regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father Superior , made up his weekly rations . 
The water in his jug was changed every day . 
He rarely appeared at mass . 
Visitors who came to do him homage saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round . 
If he addressed them , he was brief , abrupt , strange , and almost always rude . 
On very rare occasions , however , he would talk to visitors , but for the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete riddle , and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in explanation . 
He was not a priest , but a simple monk . 
There was a strange belief , chiefly , however , among the most ignorant , that Father Ferapont had communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them , and so was silent with men . 
The monk from Obdorsk , having been directed to the apiary by the beekeeper , who was also a very silent and surly monk , went to the corner where Father Ferapont 's cell stood . 
`` Maybe he will speak as you are a stranger and maybe you 'll get nothing out of him , '' the beekeeper had warned him . 
The monk , as he related afterwards , approached in the utmost apprehension . 
It was rather late in the evening . 
Father Ferapont was sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench . 
A huge old elm was lightly rustling overhead . 
There was an evening freshness in the air . 
The monk from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing . 
`` Do you want me to bow down to you , monk ? '' 
said Father Ferapont . 
`` Get up ! '' 
The monk got up . 
`` Blessing , be blessed ! 
Sit beside me . 
Where have you come from ? '' 
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict fasting and great age , Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man . 
He was tall , held himself erect , and had a thin , but fresh and healthy face . 
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength . 
He was of athletic build . 
In spite of his great age he was not even quite grey , and still had very thick hair and a full beard , both of which had once been black . 
His eyes were grey , large and luminous , but strikingly prominent . 
He spoke with a broad accent . 
He was dressed in a peasant 's long reddish coat of coarse convict cloth -LRB- as it used to be called -RRB- and had a stout rope round his waist . 
His throat and chest were bare . 
Beneath his coat , his shirt of the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt , not having been changed for months . 
They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his coat . 
His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to pieces . 
`` From the little Obdorsk monastery , from St. Sylvester , '' the monk answered humbly , whilst his keen and inquisitive , but rather frightened little eyes kept watch on the hermit . 
`` I have been at your Sylvester 's . 
I used to stay there . 
Is Sylvester well ? '' 
The monk hesitated . 
`` You are a senseless lot ! 
How do you keep the fasts ? '' 
`` Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules . 
During Lent there are no meals provided for Monday , Wednesday , and Friday . 
For Tuesday and Thursday we have white bread , stewed fruit with honey , wild berries , or salt cabbage and whole meal stirabout . 
