I did n't move . 
I do n't mind owning I am plucky sometimes , Karamazov . 
I simply looked at him contemptuously , as though to say , ` This is how you repay all my kindness ! 
Do it again if you like , I 'm at your service . ' 
But he did n't stab me again ; he broke down ; he was frightened at what he had done ; he threw away the knife , burst out crying , and ran away . 
I did not sneak on him , of course , and I made them all keep quiet , so it should n't come to the ears of the masters . 
I did n't even tell my mother till it had healed up . 
And the wound was a mere scratch . 
And then I heard that the same day he 'd been throwing stones and had bitten your finger - but you understand now what a state he was in ! 
Well , it ca n't be helped : it was stupid of me not to come and forgive him - that is , to make it up with him - when he was taken ill . 
I am sorry for it now . 
But I had a special reason . 
So now I 've told you all about it ... but I 'm afraid it was stupid of me . '' 
`` Oh , what a pity , '' exclaimed Alyosha , with feeling , `` that I did n't know before what terms you were on with him , or I 'd have come to you long ago to beg you to go to him with me . 
Would you believe it , when he was feverish he talked about you in delirium . 
I did n't know how much you were to him ! 
And you 've really not succeeded in finding that dog ? 
His father and the boys have been hunting all over the town for it . 
Would you believe it , since he 's been ill , I 've three times heard him repeat with tears , ` It 's because I killed Zhutchka , father , that I am ill now . 
God is punishing me for it . ' 
He ca n't get that idea out of his head . 
And if the dog were found and proved to be alive , one might almost fancy the joy would cure him . 
We have all rested our hopes on you . '' 
`` Tell me , what made you hope that I should be the one to find him ? '' 
Kolya asked , with great curiosity . 
`` Why did you reckon on me rather than anyone else ? '' 
`` There was a report that you were looking for the dog , and that you would bring it when you 'd found it . 
Smurov said something of the sort . 
We 've all been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive , that it 's been seen . 
The boys brought him a live hare : he just looked at it , with a faint smile , and asked them to set it free in the fields . 
And so we did . 
His father has just this moment come back , bringing him a mastiff pup , hoping to comfort him with that ; but I think it only makes it worse . '' 
`` Tell me , Karamazov , what sort of man is the father ? 
I know him , but what do you make of him - a mountebank , a buffoon ? '' 
`` Oh no ; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed . 
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they dare n't speak the truth , from having been for years humiliated and intimidated by them . 
Believe me , Krassotkin , that sort of buffoonery is sometimes tragic in the extreme . 
His whole life now is centred in Ilusha , and if Ilusha dies , he will either go mad with grief or kill himself . 
I feel almost certain of that when I look at him now . '' 
`` I understand you , Karamazov . 
I see you understand human nature , '' Kolya added , with feeling . 
`` And as soon as I saw you with a dog , I thought it was Zhutchka you were bringing . '' 
`` Wait a bit , Karamazov , perhaps we shall find it yet ; but this is Perezvon . 
I 'll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha more than the mastiff pup . 
Wait a bit , Karamazov , you will know something in a minute . 
But , I say , I am keeping you here ! '' 
Kolya cried suddenly . 
`` You 've no overcoat on in this bitter cold . 
You see what an egoist I am . 
Oh , we are all egoists , Karamazov ! '' 
