Was not one moment of her love worth all the rest of life , even in the agonies of disgrace ? 
This wild question clutched at his heart . 
`` To her , to her alone , to see her , to hear her , to think of nothing , to forget everything , if only for that night , for an hour , for a moment ! '' 
Just as he turned from the balcony into the passage , he came upon the landlord , Trifon Borissovitch . 
He thought he looked gloomy and worried , and fancied he had come to find him . 
`` What is it , Trifon Borissovitch ? 
Are you looking for me ? '' 
`` No , sir , '' The landlord seemed disconcerted . 
`` Why should I be looking for you ? 
Where have you been ? '' 
`` Why do you look so glum ? 
You 're not angry , are you ? 
Wait a bit , you shall soon get to bed ... . 
What 's the time ? '' 
`` It 'll be three o'clock . 
Past three , it must be . '' 
`` We 'll leave off soon . 
We 'll leave off . '' 
`` Do n't mention it ; it does n't matter . 
Keep it up as long as you like ... '' `` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
Mitya wondered for an instant , and he ran back to the room where the girls were dancing . 
But she was not there . 
She was not in the blue room either ; there was no one but Kalgonov asleep on the sofa . 
Mitya peeped behind the curtain - she was there . 
She was sitting in the corner , on a trunk . 
Bent forward , with her head and arms on the bed close by , she was crying bitterly , doing her utmost to stifle her sobs that she might not be heard . 
Seeing Mitya , she beckoned him to her , and when he ran to her , she grasped his hand tightly . 
`` Mitya , Mitya , I loved him , you know . 
How I have loved him these five years , all that time ! 
Did I love him or only my own anger ? 
No , him , him ! 
It 's a lie that it was my anger I loved and not him . 
Mitya , I was only seventeen then ; he was so kind to me , so merry ; he used to sing to me ... . 
Or so it seemed to a silly girl like me ... . 
And now , O Lord , it 's not the same man . 
Even his face is not the same ; he 's different altogether . 
I should n't have known him . 
I drove here with Timofey , and all the way I was thinking how I should meet him , what I should say to him , how we should look at one another . 
My soul was faint , and all of a sudden it was just as though he had emptied a pail of dirty water over me . 
He talked to me like a schoolmaster , all so grave and learned ; he met me so solemnly that I was struck dumb . 
I could n't get a word in . 
At first I thought he was ashamed to talk before his great big Pole . 
I sat staring at him and wondering why I could n't say a word to him now . 
It must have been his wife that ruined him ; you know he threw me up to get married . 
She must have changed him like that . 
Mitya , how shameful it is ! 
Oh , Mitya , I 'm ashamed , I 'm ashamed for all my life . 
Curse it , curse it , curse those five years ! '' 
And again she burst into tears , but clung tight to Mitya 's hand and did not let it go . 
`` Mitya , darling , stay , do n't go away . 
