`` This is the one who is a saint ! 
This is the one who is a holy man ! '' 
some cried aloud , losing their fear . 
`` This is he who should be an elder , '' others added malignantly . 
`` He would n't be an elder ... he would refuse ... he would n't serve a cursed innovation ... he would n't imitate their foolery , '' other voices chimed in at once . 
And it is hard to say how far they might have gone , but at that moment the bell rang summoning them to service . 
All began crossing themselves at once . 
Father Ferapont , too , got up and crossing himself went back to his cell without looking round , still uttering exclamations which were utterly incoherent . 
A few followed him , but the greater number dispersed , hastening to service . 
Father Paissy let Father Iosif read in his place and went down . 
The frantic outcries of bigots could not shake him , but his heart was suddenly filled with melancholy for some special reason and he felt that . 
He stood still and suddenly wondered , `` Why am I sad even to dejection ? '' 
and immediately grasped with surprise that his sudden sadness was due to a very small and special cause . 
In the crowd thronging at the entrance to the cell , he had noticed Alyosha and he remembered that he had felt at once a pang at heart on seeing him . 
`` Can that boy mean so much to my heart now ? '' 
he asked himself , wondering . 
At that moment Alyosha passed him , hurrying away , but not in the direction of the church . 
Their eyes met . 
Alyosha quickly turned away his eyes and dropped them to the ground , and from the boy 's look alone , Father Paissy guessed what a great change was taking place in him at that moment . 
`` Have you , too , fallen into temptation ? '' 
cried Father Paissy . 
`` Can you be with those of little faith ? '' 
he added mournfully . 
Alyosha stood still and gazed vaguely at Father Paissy , but quickly turned his eyes away again and again looked on the ground . 
He stood sideways and did not turn his face to Father Paissy , who watched him attentively . 
`` Where are you hastening ? 
The bell calls to service , '' he asked again , but again Alyosha gave no answer . 
`` Are you leaving the hermitage ? 
What , without asking leave , without asking a blessing ? '' 
Alyosha suddenly gave a wry smile , cast a strange , very strange , look at the Father to whom his former guide , the former sovereign of his heart and mind , his beloved elder , had confided him as he lay dying . 
And suddenly , still without speaking , waved his hand , as though not caring even to be respectful , and with rapid steps walked towards the gates away from the hermitage . 
`` You will come back again ! '' 
murmured Father Paissy , looking after him with sorrowful surprise . 
A Critical Moment FATHER PAISSY , of course , was not wrong when he decided that his `` dear boy '' would come back again . 
Perhaps indeed , to some extent , he penetrated with insight into the true meaning of Alyosha 's spiritual condition . 
Yet I must frankly own that it would be very difficult for me to give a clear account of that strange , vague moment in the life of the young hero I love so much . 
To Father Paissy 's sorrowful question , `` Are you too with those of little faith ? '' 
I could , of course , confidently answer for Alyosha , `` No , he is not with those of little faith . 
Quite the contrary . '' 
Indeed , all his trouble came from the fact that he was of great faith . 
But still the trouble was there and was so agonising that even long afterwards Alyosha thought of that sorrowful day as one of the bitterest and most fatal days of his life . 
If the question is asked : `` Could all his grief and disturbance have been only due to the fact that his elder 's body had shown signs of premature decomposition instead of at once performing miracles ? '' 
I must answer without beating about the bush , `` Yes , it certainly was . '' 
I would only beg the reader not to be in too great a hurry to laugh at my young hero 's pure heart . 
I am far from intending to apologise for him or to justify his innocent faith on the ground of his youth , or the little progress he had made in his studies , or any such reason . 
I must declare , on the contrary , that I have genuine respect for the qualities of his heart . 
No doubt a youth who received impressions cautiously , whose love was lukewarm , and whose mind was too prudent for his age and so of little value , such a young man might , I admit , have avoided what happened to my hero . 
But in some cases it is really more creditable to be carried away by an emotion , however unreasonable , which springs from a great love , than to be unmoved . 
And this is even truer in youth , for a young man who is always sensible is to be suspected and is of little worth - that 's my opinion ! 
`` But , '' reasonable people will exclaim perhaps , `` every young man can not believe in such a superstition and your hero is no model for others . '' 
