I found in him no trace of the timidity on which the prosecutor so insisted . 
There was no simplicity about him , either . 
I found in him , on the contrary , an extreme mistrustfulness concealed under a mask of naivete , and an intelligence of considerable range . 
The prosecutor was too simple in taking him for weak-minded . 
He made a very definite impression on me : I left him with the conviction that he was a distinctly spiteful creature , excessively ambitious , vindictive , and intensely envious . 
I made some inquiries : he resented his parentage , was ashamed of it , and would clench his teeth when he remembered that he was the son of ` stinking Lizaveta . ' 
He was disrespectful to the servant Grigory and his wife , who had cared for him in his childhood . 
He cursed and jeered at Russia . 
He dreamed of going to France and becoming a Frenchman . 
He used often to say that he had n't the means to do so . 
I fancy he loved no one but himself and had a strangely high opinion of himself . 
His conception of culture was limited to good clothes , clean shirt-fronts and polished boots . 
Believing himself to be the illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovitch -LRB- there is evidence of this -RRB- , he might well have resented his position , compared with that of his master 's legitimate sons . 
They had everything , he nothing . 
They had all the rights , they had the inheritance , while he was only the cook . 
He told me himself that he had helped Fyodor Pavlovitch to put the notes in the envelope . 
The destination of that sum - a sum which would have made his career - must have been hateful to him . 
Moreover , he saw three thousand roubles in new rainbow-coloured notes . 
-LRB- I asked him about that on purpose . -RRB- 
Oh , beware of showing an ambitious and envious man a large sum of money at once ! 
And it was the first time he had seen so much money in the hands of one man . 
The sight of the rainbow-coloured notes may have made a morbid impression on his imagination , but with no immediate results . 
`` The talented prosecutor , with extraordinary subtlety , sketched for us all the arguments for and against the hypothesis of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and asked us in particular what motive he had in feigning a fit . 
But he may not have been feigning at all , the fit may have happened quite naturally , but it may have passed off quite naturally , and the sick man may have recovered , not completely perhaps , but still regaining consciousness , as happens with epileptics . 
`` The prosecutor asks at what moment could Smerdyakov have committed the murder . 
But it is very easy to point out that moment . 
He might have waked up from deep sleep -LRB- for he was only asleep - an epileptic fit is always followed by a deep sleep -RRB- at that moment when the old Grigory shouted at the top of his voice ` Parricide ! ' 
That shout in the dark and stillness may have waked Smerdyakov whose sleep may have been less sound at the moment : he might naturally have waked up an hour before . 
`` Getting out of bed , he goes almost unconsciously and with no definite motive towards the sound to see what 's the matter . 
His head is still clouded with his attack , his faculties are half asleep ; but , once in the garden , he walks to the lighted windows and he hears terrible news from his master , who would be , of course , glad to see him . 
His mind sets to work at once . 
He hears all the details from his frightened master , and gradually in his disordered brain there shapes itself an idea - terrible , but seductive and irresistibly logical . 
To kill the old man , take the three thousand , and throw all the blame on to his young master . 
A terrible lust of money , of booty , might seize upon him as he realised his security from detection . 
Oh ! 
these sudden and irresistible impulses come so often when there is a favourable opportunity , and especially with murderers who have had no idea of committing a murder beforehand . 
And Smerdyakov may have gone in and carried out his plan . 
With what weapon ? 
Why , with any stone picked up in the garden . 
But what for , with what object ? 
Why , the three thousand which means a career for him . 
Oh , I am not contradicting myself - the money may have existed . 
And perhaps Smerdyakov alone knew where to find it , where his master kept it . 
And the covering of the money - the torn envelope on the floor ? 
`` Just now , when the prosecutor was explaining his subtle theory that only an inexperienced thief like Karamazov would have left the envelope on the floor , and not one like Smerdyakov , who would have avoided leaving a piece of evidence against himself , I thought as I listened that I was hearing something very familiar , and , would you believe it , I have heard that very argument , that very conjecture , of how Karamazov would have behaved , precisely two days before , from Smerdyakov himself . 
What 's more , it struck me at the time . 
I fancied that there was an artificial simplicity about him ; that he was in a hurry to suggest this idea to me that I might fancy it was my own . 
He insinuated it , as it were . 
Did he not insinuate the same idea at the inquiry and suggest it to the talented prosecutor ? 
`` I shall be asked , ` What about the old woman , Grigory 's wife ? 
