He had been all his life unable to get a hearing , and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia . 
`` What , after all , is this Karamazov family , which has gained such an unenviable notoriety throughout Russia ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Perhaps I am exaggerating , but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of the educated class of to-day are reflected in this family picture - only , of course , in miniature , ` like the sun in a drop of water . ' 
Think of that unhappy , vicious , unbridled old man , who has met with such a melancholy end , the head of a family ! 
Beginning life of noble birth , but in a poor dependent position , through an unexpected marriage he came into a small fortune . 
A petty knave , a toady and buffoon , of fairly good , though undeveloped , intelligence , he was , above all , a moneylender , who grew bolder with growing prosperity . 
His abject and servile characteristics disappeared , his , malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained . 
On the spiritual side he was undeveloped , while his vitality was excessive . 
He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure , and he brought his children up to be the same . 
He had no feelings for his duties as a father . 
He ridiculed those duties . 
He left his little children to the servants , and was glad to be rid of them , forgot about them completely . 
The old man 's maxim was Apres moi le deluge . 
* He was an example of everything that is opposed to civic duty , of the most complete and malignant individualism . 
` The world may burn for aught I care , so long as I am all right , ' and he was all right ; he was content , he was eager to go on living in the same way for another twenty or thirty years . 
He swindled his own son and spent his money , his maternal inheritance , on trying to get his mistress from him . 
No , I do n't intend to leave the prisoner 's defence altogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg . 
I will speak the truth myself , I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up in his son 's heart against him . 
* After me , the deluge . 
`` But enough , enough of that unhappy old man ; he has paid the penalty . 
Let us remember , however , that he was a father , and one of the typical fathers of to-day . 
Am I unjust , indeed , in saying that he is typical of many modern fathers ? 
Alas ! 
many of them only differ in not openly professing such cynicism , for they are better educated , more cultured , but their philosophy is essentially the same as his . 
Perhaps I am a pessimist , but you have agreed to forgive me . 
Let us agree beforehand , you need not believe me , but let me speak . 
Let me say what I have to say , and remember something of my words . 
`` Now for the children of this father , this head of a family . 
One of them is the prisoner before us , all the rest of my speech will deal with him . 
Of the other two I will speak only cursorily . 
`` The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education and vigorous intellect , who has lost all faith in everything . 
He has denied and rejected much already , like his father . 
We have all heard him , he was a welcome guest in local society . 
He never concealed his opinions , quite the contrary in fact , which justifies me in speaking rather openly of him now , of course , not as an individual , but as a member of the Karamazov family . 
Another personage closely connected with the case died here by his own hand last night . 
I mean an afflicted idiot , formerly the servant , and possibly the illegitimate son , of Fyodor Pavlovitch , Smerdyakov . 
At the preliminary inquiry , he told me with hysterical tears how the young Ivan Karamazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity . 
` Everything in the world is lawful according to him , and nothing must be forbidden in the future - that is what he always taught me . ' 
I believe that idiot was driven out of his mind by this theory , though , of course , the epileptic attacks from which he suffered , and this terrible catastrophe , have helped to unhinge his faculties . 
But he dropped one very interesting observation , which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer , and that is , indeed , why I 've mentioned it : ` If there is one of the sons that is like Fyodor Pavlovitch in character , it is Ivan Fyodorovitch . ' 
`` With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character , feeling it indelicate to continue further . 
Oh , I do n't want to draw any further conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man 's future . 
We 've seen to-day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young heart , that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith and cynicism , which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the exercise of independent thought . 
`` Then the third son . 
Oh , he is a devout and modest youth , who does not share his elder brother 's gloomy and destructive theory of life . 
He has sought to cling to the ` ideas of the people , ' or to what goes by that name in some circles of our intellectual classes . 
He clung to the monastery , and was within an ace of becoming a monk . 
He seems to me to have betrayed unconsciously , and so early , that timid despair which leads so many in our unhappy society , who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences , and mistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment , to return to their ` native soil , ' as they say , to the bosom , so to speak , of their mother earth , like frightened children , yearning to fall asleep on the withered bosom of their decrepit mother , and to sleep there for ever , only to escape the horrors that terrify them . 
`` For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success ; I trust that youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of the people may never degenerate , as often happens , on the moral side into gloomy mysticism , and on the political into blind chauvinism - two elements which are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay , due to misunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas , from which his elder brother is suffering . '' 
