`` And behold , He deigned to appear for a moment to the people , to the tortured , suffering people , sunk in iniquity , but loving Him like children . 
My story is laid in Spain , in Seville , in the most terrible time of the Inquisition , when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God , and ` in the splendid auto da fe the wicked heretics were burnt . ' 
Oh , of course , this was not the coming in which He will appear , according to His promise , at the end of time in all His heavenly glory , and which will be sudden ` as lightning flashing from east to west . ' 
No , He visited His children only for a moment , and there where the flames were crackling round the heretics . 
In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in that human shape in which He walked among men for thirty-three years fifteen centuries ago . 
He came down to the ` hot pavements ' of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had , ad majorem gloriam Dei , been burnt by the cardinal , the Grand Inquisitor , in a magnificent auto da fe , in the presence of the king , the court , the knights , the cardinals , the most charming ladies of the court , and the whole population of Seville . 
`` He came softly , unobserved , and yet , strange to say , everyone recognised Him . 
That might be one of the best passages in the poem . 
I mean , why they recognised Him . 
The people are irresistibly drawn to Him , they surround Him , they flock about Him , follow Him . 
He moves silently in their midst with a gentle smile of infinite compassion . 
The sun of love burns in His heart , and power shine from His eyes , and their radiance , shed on the people , stirs their hearts with responsive love . 
He holds out His hands to them , blesses them , and a healing virtue comes from contact with Him , even with His garments . 
An old man in the crowd , blind from childhood , cries out , ' O Lord , heal me and I shall see Thee ! ' 
and , as it were , scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him . 
The crowd weeps and kisses the earth under His feet . 
Children throw flowers before Him , sing , and cry hosannah . 
` It is He - it is He ! ' 
repeat . 
` It must be He , it can be no one but Him ! ' 
He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin . 
In it lies a child of seven , the only daughter of a prominent citizen . 
The dead child lies hidden in flowers . 
` He will raise your child , ' the crowd shouts to the weeping mother . 
The priest , coming to meet the coffin , looks perplexed , and frowns , but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail . 
` If it is Thou , raise my child ! ' 
she cries , holding out her hands to Him . 
The procession halts , the coffin is laid on the steps at His feet . 
He looks with compassion , and His lips once more softly pronounce , ` Maiden , arise ! ' 
and the maiden arises . 
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round , smiling with wide-open wondering eyes , holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her hand . 
`` There are cries , sobs , confusion among the people , and at that moment the cardinal himself , the Grand Inquisitor , passes by the cathedral . 
He is an old man , almost ninety , tall and erect , with a withered face and sunken eyes , in which there is still a gleam of light . 
He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal 's robes , as he was the day before , when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church - at this moment he is wearing his coarse , old , monk 's cassock . 
At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the ` holy guard . ' 
He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance . 
He sees everything ; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet , sees the child rise up , and his face darkens . 
He knits his thick grey brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire . 
He holds out his finger and bids the guards take Him . 
And such is his power , so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him , that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards , and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead him away . 
The crowd instantly bows down to the earth , like one man , before the old Inquisitor . 
He blesses the people in silence and passes on ' The guards lead their prisoner to the close , gloomy vaulted prison - in the ancient palace of the Holy , inquisition and shut him in it . 
The day passes and is followed by the dark , burning , ` breathless ' night of Seville . 
The air is ` fragrant with laurel and lemon . ' 
In the pitch darkness the iron door of the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand . 
He is alone ; the door is closed at once behind him . 
He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face . 
At last he goes up slowly , sets the light on the table and speaks . '' 
` Is it Thou ? 
Thou ? ' 
