`` Oh , how you speak ! 
What bold and lofty words '' cried the lady . 
`` You seem to pierce with your words . 
And yet - happiness , happiness - where is it ? 
Who can say of himself that he is happy ? 
Oh , since you have been so good as to let us see you once more to-day , let me tell you what I could not utter last time , what I dared not say , all I am suffering and have been for so long ! 
I am suffering ! 
Forgive me ! 
I am suffering ! '' 
And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him . 
`` From what specially ? '' 
`` I suffer ... from lack of faith . '' 
`` Lack of faith in God ? '' 
`` Oh , no , no ! 
I dare not even think of that . 
But the future life - it is such an enigma And no one , no one can solve it . 
Listen ! 
You are a healer , you are deeply versed in the human soul , and of course I dare not expect you to believe me entirely , but I assure you on my word of honour that I am not speaking lightly now . 
The thought of the life beyond the grave distracts me to anguish , to terror . 
And I do n't know to whom to appeal , and have not dared to all my life . 
And now I am so bold as to ask you . 
Oh , God ! 
What will you think of me now ? '' 
She clasped her hands . 
`` Do n't distress yourself about my opinion of you , '' said the elder . 
`` I quite believe in the sincerity of your suffering . '' 
`` Oh , how thankful I am to you ! 
You see , I shut my eyes and ask myself if everyone has faith , where did it come from ? 
And then they do say that it all comes from terror at the menacing phenomena of nature , and that none of it 's real . 
And I say to myself , ` What if I 've been believing all my life , and when I come to die there 's nothing but the burdocks growing on my grave ? ' 
as I read in some author . 
It 's awful ! 
How - how can I get back my faith ? 
But I only believed when I was a little child , mechanically , without thinking of anything . 
How , how is one to prove it ? 
have come now to lay my soul before you and to ask you about it . 
If I let this chance slip , no one all my life will answer me . 
How can I prove it ? 
How can I convince myself ? 
Oh , how unhappy I am ! 
I stand and look about me and see that scarcely anyone else cares ; no one troubles his head about it , and I 'm the only one who ca n't stand it . 
It 's deadly - deadly ! '' 
`` No doubt . 
But there 's no proving it , though you can be convinced of it . '' 
`` By the experience of active love . 
Strive to love your neighbour actively and indefatigably . 
In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer of the reality of God and of the immortality of your soul . 
If you attain to perfect self-forgetfulness in the love of your neighbour , then you will believe without doubt , and no doubt can possibly enter your soul . 
This has been tried . 
This is certain . '' 
