He drove away any other idea , in fact . 
But for that ending a quite different anxiety arose , a new , incidental , but yet fatal and insoluble difficulty presented itself . 
If she were to say to him : `` I 'm yours ; take me away , '' how could he take her away ? 
Where had he the means , the money to do it ? 
It was just at this time that all sources of revenue from Fyodor Pavlovitch , doles which had gone on without interruption for so many years , ceased . 
Grushenka had money , of course , but with regard to this Mitya suddenly evinced extraordinary pride ; he wanted to carry her away and begin the new life with her himself , at his own expense , not at hers . 
He could not conceive of taking her money , and the very idea caused him a pang of intense repulsion . 
I wo n't enlarge on this fact or analyse it here , but confine myself to remarking that this was his attitude at the moment . 
All this may have arisen indirectly and unconsciously from the secret stings of his conscience for the money of Katerina Ivanovna that he had dishonestly appropriated . 
`` I 've been a scoundrel to one of them , and I shall be a scoundrel again to the other directly , '' was his feeling then , as he explained after : `` and when Grushenka knows , she wo n't care for such a scoundrel . '' 
Where then was he to get the means , where was he to get the fateful money ? 
Without it , all would be lost and nothing could be done , `` and only because I had n't the money . 
Oh , the shame of it ! '' 
To anticipate things : he did , perhaps , know where to get the money , knew , perhaps , where it lay at that moment . 
I will say no more of this here , as it will all be clear later . 
But his chief trouble , I must explain however obscurely , lay in the fact that to have that sum he knew of , to have the right to take it , he must first restore Katerina Ivanovna 's three thousand - if not , `` I 'm a common pick-pocket , I 'm a scoundrel , and I do n't want to begin a new life as a scoundrel , '' Mitya decided . 
And so he made up his mind to move heaven and earth to return Katerina Ivanovna that three thousand , and that first of all . 
The final stage of this decision , so to say , had been reached only during the last hours , that is , after his last interview with Alyosha , two days before , on the high-road , on the evening when Grushenka had insulted Katerina Ivanovna , and Mitya , after hearing Alyosha 's account of it , had admitted that he was a scoundrel , and told him to tell Katerina Ivanovna so , if it could be any comfort to her . 
After parting from his brother on that night , he had felt in his frenzy that it would be better `` to murder and rob someone than fail to pay my debt to Katya . 
I 'd rather everyone thought me a robber and a murderer ; I 'd rather go to Siberia than that Katya should have the right to say that I deceived her and stole her money , and used her money to run away with Grushenka and begin a new life ! 
That I ca n't do ! '' 
So Mitya decided , grinding his teeth , and he might well fancy at times that his brain would give way . 
But meanwhile he went on struggling ... . 
Strange to say , though one would have supposed there was nothing left for him but despair - for what chance had he , with nothing in the world , to raise such a sum ? 
- yet to the very end he persisted in hoping that he would get that three thousand , that the money would somehow come to him of itself , as though it might drop from heaven . 
That is just how it is with people who , like Dmitri , have never had anything to do with money , except to squander what has come to them by inheritance without any effort of their own , and have no notion how money is obtained . 
A whirl of the most fantastic notions took possession of his brain immediately after he had parted with Alyosha two days before , and threw his thoughts into a tangle of confusion . 
This is how it was he pitched first on a perfectly wild enterprise . 
And perhaps to men of that kind in such circumstances the most impossible , fantastic schemes occur first , and seem most practical . 
He suddenly determined to go to Samsonov , the merchant who was Grushenka 's protector , and to propose a `` scheme '' to him , and by means of it to obtain from him at once the whole of the sum required . 
Of the commercial value of his scheme he had no doubt , not the slightest , and was only uncertain how Samsonov would look upon his freak , supposing he were to consider it from any but the commercial point of view . 
Though Mitya knew the merchant by sight , he was not acquainted with him and had never spoken a word to him . 
But for some unknown reason he had long entertained the conviction that the old reprobate , who was lying at death 's door , would perhaps not at all object now to Grushenka 's securing a respectable position , and marrying a man `` to be depended upon . '' 
And he believed not only that he would not object , but that this was what he desired , and , if opportunity arose , that he would be ready to help . 
From some rumour , or perhaps from some stray word of Grushenka 's , he had gathered further that the old man would perhaps prefer him to Fyodor Pavlovitch for Grushenka . 
Possibly many of the readers of my novel will feel that in reckoning on such assistance , and being ready to take his bride , so to speak , from the hands of her protector , Dmitri showed great coarseness and want of delicacy . 
I will only observe that Mitya looked upon Grushenka 's past as something completely over . 
He looked on that past with infinite pity and resolved with all the fervour of his passion that when once Grushenka told him she loved him and would marry him , it would mean the beginning of a new Grushenka and a new Dmitri , free from every vice . 
They would forgive one another and would begin their lives afresh . 
As for Kuzma Samsonov , Dmitri looked upon him as a man who had exercised a fateful influence in that remote past of Grushenka 's , though she had never loved him , and who was now himself a thing of the past , completely done with , and , so to say , non-existent . 
Besides , Mitya hardly looked upon him as a man at all , for it was known to everyone in the town that he was only a shattered wreck , whose relations with Grushenka had changed their character and were now simply paternal , and that this had been so for a long time . 
In any case there was much simplicity on Mitya 's part in all this , for in spite of all his vices , he was a very simple-hearted man . 
It was an instance of this simplicity that Mitya was seriously persuaded that , being on the eve of his departure for the next world , old Kuzma must sincerely repent of his past relations with Grushenka , and that she had no more devoted friend and protector in the world than this , now harmless , old man . 
After his conversation with Alyosha , at the cross-roads , he hardly slept all night , and at ten o'clock next morning , he was at the house of Samsonov and telling the servant to announce him . 
It was a very large and gloomy old house of two stories , with a lodge and outhouses . 
In the lower story lived Samsonov 's two married sons with their families , his old sister , and his unmarried daughter . 
In the lodge lived two of his clerks , one of whom also had a large family . 
Both the lodge and the lower story were overcrowded , but the old man kept the upper floor to himself , and would not even let the daughter live there with him , though she waited upon him , and in spite of her asthma was obliged at certain fixed hours , and at any time he might call her , to run upstairs to him from below . 
This upper floor contained a number of large rooms kept purely for show , furnished in the old-fashioned merchant style , with long monotonous rows of clumsy mahogany chairs along the walls , with glass chandeliers under shades , and gloomy mirrors on the walls . 
All these rooms were entirely empty and unused , for the old man kept to one room , a small , remote bedroom , where he was waited upon by an old servant with a kerchief on her head , and by a lad , who used to sit on the locker in the passage . 
