Was she furious ? '' 
`` No , not that ... . 
There was nothing like that , Mitya . 
There - I found them both there . '' 
`` Both ? 
Whom ? '' 
`` Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna 's . '' 
Dmitri was struck dumb . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You 're raving ! 
Grushenka with her ? '' 
Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in to Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
He was ten minutes telling his story . 
ca n't be said to have told it fluently and consecutively , but he seemed to make it clear , not omitting any word or action of significance , and vividly describing , often in one word , his own sensations . 
Dmitri listened in silence , gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare , but it was clear to Alyosha that he understood it all , and had grasped every point . 
But as the story went on , his face became not merely gloomy , but menacing . 
He scowled , he clenched his teeth , and his fixed stare became still more rigid , more concentrated , more terrible , when suddenly , with incredible rapidity , his wrathful , savage face changed , his tightly compressed lips parted , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled , spontaneous laughter . 
He literally shook with laughter . 
For a long time he could not speak . 
`` So she would n't kiss her hand ! 
So she did n't kiss it ; so she ran away ! '' 
he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight ; insolent delight it might had been called , if it had not been so spontaneous . 
`` So the other one called her tigress ! 
And a tigress she is ! 
So she ought to be flogged on a scaffold ? 
Yes , yes , so she ought . 
That 's just what I think ; she ought to have been long ago . 
It 's like this , brother , let her be punished , but I must get better first . 
I understand the queen of impudence . 
That 's her all over ! 
You saw her all over in that hand-kissing , the she-devil ! 
She 's magnificent in her own line ! 
So she ran home ? 
I 'll go - ah - I 'll run to her ! 
Alyosha , do n't blame me , I agree that hanging is too good for her . '' 
`` But Katerina Ivanovna ! '' 
exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully . 
`` I see her , too ! 
I see right through her , as I 've never done before ! 
It 's a regular discovery of the four continents of the world , that is , of the five ! 
What a thing to do ! 
That 's just like Katya , who was not afraid to face a coarse , unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on a generous impulse to save her father ! 
But the pride , the recklessness , the defiance of fate , the unbounded defiance ! 
You say that aunt tried to stop her ? 
That aunt , you know , is overbearing , herself . 
She 's the sister of the general 's widow in Moscow , and even more stuck-up than she . 
But her husband was caught stealing government money . 
He lost everything , his estate and all , and the proud wife had to lower her colours , and has n't raised them since . 
So she tried to prevent Katya , but she would n't listen to her ! 
