And , indeed , it 's a struggle of three in this business , for it 's fate - that 's a fearful thing , Kuzma Kuzmitch ! 
A tragedy , Kuzma Kuzmitch , a tragedy ! 
And as you 've dropped out long ago , it 's a tug-of-war between two . 
I 'm expressing it awkwardly , perhaps , but I 'm not a literary man . 
You see , I 'm on the one side , and that monster on the other . 
So you must choose . 
It 's either I or the monster . 
It all lies in your hands - . 
the fate of three lives , and the happiness of two ... . 
Excuse me , I 'm making a mess of it , but you understand ... I see from your venerable eyes that you understand ... and if you do n't understand , I 'm done for ... so you see ! '' 
Mitya broke off his clumsy speech with that , `` so you see ! '' 
and jumping up from his seat , awaited the answer to his foolish proposal . 
At the last phrase he had suddenly become hopelessly aware that it had all fallen flat , above all , that he had been talking utter nonsense . 
`` How strange it is ! 
On the way here it seemed all right , and now it 's nothing but nonsense . '' 
The idea suddenly dawned on his despairing mind . 
All the while he had been talking , the old man sat motionless , watching him with an icy expression in his eyes . 
After keeping him for a moment in suspense , Kuzma Kuzmitch pronounced at last in the most positive and chilling tone : `` Excuse me , we do n't undertake such business . '' 
Mitya suddenly felt his legs growing weak under him . 
`` What am I to do now , Kuzma Kuzmitch ? '' 
he muttered , with a pale smile . 
`` I suppose it 's all up with me - what do you think ? '' 
`` Excuse me ... '' Mitya remained standing , staring motionless . 
He suddenly noticed a movement in the old man 's face . 
He started . 
`` You see , sir , business of that sort 's not in our line , '' said the old man slowly . 
`` There 's the court , and the lawyers - it 's a perfect misery . 
But if you like , there is a man here you might apply to . '' 
`` Good heavens ! 
Who is it ? 
You 're my salvation , Kuzma Kuzmitch , '' faltered Mitya . 
`` He does n't live here , and he 's not here just now . 
He is a peasant , he does business in timber . 
His name is Lyagavy . 
He 's been haggling with Fyodor Pavlovitch for the last year , over your copse at Tchermashnya . 
They ca n't agree on the price , maybe you 've heard ? 
Now he 's come back again and is staying with the priest at Ilyinskoe , about twelve versts from the Volovya station . 
He wrote to me , too , about the business of the copse , asking my advice . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch means to go and see him himself . 
So if you were to be beforehand with Fyodor Pavlovitch and to make Lyagavy the offer you 've made me , he might possibly - '' `` A brilliant idea ! '' 
Mitya interrupted ecstatically . 
`` He 's the very man , it would just suit him . 
He 's haggling with him for it , being asked too much , and here he would have all the documents entitling him to the property itself . 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
And Mitya suddenly went off into his short , wooden laugh , startling Samsonov . 
`` How can I thank you , Kuzma Kuzmitch ? '' 
cried Mitya effusively . 
`` Do n't mention it , '' said Samsonov , inclining his head . 
`` But you do n't know , you 've saved me . 
Oh , it was a true presentiment brought me to you ... . 
