Alyosha asked , bewildered . 
`` Not him , damn the monster ! '' 
Ivan shouted , in a frenzy , `` Do you know that he visits me ? 
How did you find out ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Who is he ? 
I do n't know whom you are talking about , '' Alyosha faltered , beginning to be alarmed . 
`` Yes , you do know . 
or how could you - ? 
It 's impossible that you do n't know . '' 
Suddenly he seemed to check himself . 
He stood still and seemed to reflect . 
A strange grin contorted his lips . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha began again , in a shaking voice , `` I have said this to you , because you 'll believe my word , I know that . 
I tell you once and for all , it 's not you . 
You hear , once for all ! 
God has put it into my heart to say this to you , even though it may make you hate me from this hour . '' 
But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self-control . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' he said , with a cold smile , `` I ca n't endure prophets and epileptics - messengers from God especially - and you know that only too well . 
I break off all relations with you from this moment and probably for ever . 
I beg you to leave me at this turning . 
It 's the way to your lodgings , too . 
You 'd better be particularly careful not to come to me to-day ! 
Do you hear ? '' 
He turned and walked on with a firm step , not looking back . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha called after him , `` if anything happens to you to-day , turn to me before anyone ! '' 
But Ivan made no reply . 
Alyosha stood under the lamp-post at the cross roads , till Ivan had vanished into the darkness . 
Then he turned and walked slowly homewards . 
Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings ; neither of them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's empty house . 
Alyosha had a furnished room in the house of some working people . 
Ivan lived some distance from him . 
He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodge attached to a fine house that belonged to a well-to-do lady , the widow of an official . 
But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone who went to bed at six o'clock every evening and got up at six in the morning . 
Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late , and very fond of being alone . 
He did everything for himself in the one room he lived in , and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode . 
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell , when he suddenly stopped . 
He felt that he was trembling all over with anger . 
Suddenly he let go of the bell , turned back with a curse , and walked with rapid steps in the opposite direction . 
He walked a mile and a half to a tiny , slanting , wooden house , almost a hut , where Marya Kondratyevna , the neighbour who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and to whom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar , was now lodging . 
She had sold their little house , and was now living here with her mother . 
Smerdyakov , who was ill - almost dying-had been with them ever since Fyodor Pavlovitch 's death . 
It was to him Ivan was going now , drawn by a sudden and irresistible prompting . 
The First Interview with Smerdyakov THIS was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since his return from Moscow . 
The first time he had seen him and talked to him was on the first day of his arrival , then he had visited him once more , a fortnight later . 
But his visits had ended with that second one , so that it was now over a month since he had seen him . 
And he had scarcely heard anything of him . 
Ivan had only returned five days after his father 's death , so that he was not present at the funeral , which took place the day before he came back . 
The cause of his delay was that Alyosha , not knowing his Moscow address , had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him , and she , not knowing his address either , telegraphed to her sister and aunt , reckoning on Ivan 's going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow . 
But he did not go to them till four days after his arrival . 
