Since he has openly abandoned his betrothed for her , he does n't despise her . 
There 's something here , my dear boy , that you do n't understand yet . 
A man will fall in love with some beauty , with a woman 's body , or even with a part of a woman 's body -LRB- a sensualist can understand that -RRB- , and he 'll abandon his own children for her , sell his father and mother , and his country , Russia , too . 
If he 's honest , he 'll steal ; if he 's humane , he 'll murder ; if he 's faithful , he 'll deceive . 
Pushkin , the poet of women 's feet , sung of their feet in his verse . 
Others do n't sing their praises , but they ca n't look at their feet without a thrill - and it 's not only their feet . 
Contempt 's no help here , brother , even if he did despise Grushenka . 
He does , but he ca n't tear himself away . '' 
`` I understand that , '' Alyosha jerked out suddenly . 
`` Really ? 
Well , I dare say you do understand , since you blurt it out at the first word , '' said Rakitin , malignantly . 
`` That escaped you unawares , and the confession 's the more precious . 
So it 's a familiar subject ; you 've thought about it already , about sensuality , I mean ! 
Oh , you virgin soul ! 
You 're a quiet one , Alyosha , you 're a saint , I know , but the devil only knows what you 've thought about , and what you know already ! 
You are pure , but you 've been down into the depths ... . 
I 've been watching you a long time . 
You 're a Karamazov yourself ; you 're a thorough Karamazov - no doubt birth and selection have something to answer for . 
You 're a sensualist from your father , a crazy saint from your mother . 
Why do you tremble ? 
Is it true , then ? 
Do you know , Grushenka has been begging me to bring you along . 
` I 'll pull off his cassock , ' she says . 
You ca n't think how she keeps begging me to bring you . 
I wondered why she took such an interest in you . 
Do you know , she 's an extraordinary woman , too ! '' 
`` Thank her and say I 'm not coming , '' said Alyosha , with a strained smile . 
`` Finish what you were saying , Misha . 
I 'll tell you . 
my idea after . '' 
`` There 's nothing to finish . 
It 's all clear . 
It 's the same old tune , brother . 
If even you are a sensualist at heart , what of your brother , Ivan ? 
He 's a Karamazov , too . 
What is at the root of all you Karamazovs is that you 're all sensual , grasping and crazy ! 
Your brother Ivan writes theological articles in joke , for some idiotic , unknown motive of his own , though he 's an atheist , and he admits it 's a fraud himself - that 's your brother Ivan . 
He 's trying to get Mitya 's betrothed for himself , and I fancy he 'll succeed , too . 
And what 's more , it 's with Mitya 's consent . 
For Mitya will surrender his betrothed to him to be rid of her , and escape to Grushenka . 
And he 's ready to do that in spite of all his nobility and disinterestedness . 
Observe that . 
Those are the most fatal people ! 
Who the devil can make you out ? 
He recognises his vileness and goes on with it ! 
Let me tell you , too , the old man , your father , is standing in Mitya 's way now . 
He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka . 
His mouth waters at the sight of her . 
It 's simply on her account he made that scene in the cell just now , simply because Miusov called her an ` abandoned creature . ' 
He 's worse than a tom-cat in love . 
