I should have run away from suffering . 
A sign has come , I reject the sign . 
I have a way of salvation and I turn my back on it . 
Ivan says that in America , ` with the goodwill , ' I can be of more use than underground . 
But what becomes of our hymn from underground ? 
What 's America ? 
America is vanity again ! 
And there 's a lot of swindling in America , too , I expect . 
I should have run away from crucifixion ! 
I tell you , you know , Alexey , because you are the only person who can understand this . 
There 's no one else . 
It 's folly , madness to others , all I 've told you of the hymn . 
They 'll say I 'm out of my mind or a fool . 
I am not out of my mind and I am not a fool . 
Ivan understands about the hymn , too . 
He understands , only he does n't answer - he does n't speak . 
He does n't believe in the hymn . 
Do n't speak , do n't speak . 
I see how you look ! 
You have already decided . 
Do n't decide , spare me ! 
I ca n't live without Grusha . 
Wait till after the trial ! '' 
Mitya ended beside himself . 
He held Alyosha with both hands on his shoulders , and his yearning , feverish eyes were fixed on his brother 's . 
`` They do n't let convicts marry , do they ? '' 
he repeated for the third time in a supplicating voice . 
Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved . 
`` Tell me one thing , '' he said . 
`` Is Ivan very keen on it , and whose idea was it ? '' 
`` His , his , and he is very keen on it . 
He did n't come to see me at first , then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight away . 
He is awfully keen on it . 
He does n't ask me , but orders me to escape . 
He does n't doubt of my obeying him , though I showed him all my heart as I have to you , and told him about the hymn , too . 
He told me he 'd arrange it ; he 's found out about everything . 
But of that later . 
He 's simply set on it . 
It 's all a matter of money : he 'll pay ten thousand for escape and give me twenty thousand for America . 
And he says we can arrange a magnificent escape for ten thousand . '' 
`` And he told you on no account to tell me ? '' 
Alyosha asked again . 
`` To tell no one , and especially not you ; on no account to tell you . 
He is afraid , no doubt , that you 'll stand before me as my conscience . 
Do n't tell him I told you . 
Do n't tell him , for anything . '' 
`` You are right , '' Alyosha pronounced ; `` it 's impossible to decide anything before the trial is over . 
After the trial you 'll decide of yourself . 
Then you 'll find that new man in yourself and he will decide . '' 
`` A new man , or a Bernard who 'll decide a la Bernard , for I believe I 'm a contemptible Bernard myself , '' said Mitya , with a bitter grin . 
