`` I earnestly beg you , too , not to disturb yourself , and not to be uneasy , '' the elder said impressively . 
`` Do not trouble . 
Make yourself quite at home . 
And , above all , do not be so ashamed of yourself , for that is at the root of it all . '' 
`` Quite at home ? 
To be my natural self ? 
Oh , that is much too much , but I accept it with grateful joy . 
Do you know , blessed father , you 'd better not invite me to be my natural self . 
Do n't risk it ... . 
I will not go so far as that myself . 
I warn you for your own sake . 
Well , the rest is still plunged in the mists of uncertainty , though there are people who 'd be pleased to describe me for you . 
I mean that for you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
But as for you , holy being , let me tell you , I am brimming over with ecstasy . '' 
He got up , and throwing up his hands , declaimed , `` Blessed be the womb that bare thee , and the paps that gave thee suck - the paps especially . 
When you said just now , ` Do n't be so ashamed of yourself , for that is at the root of it all , ' you pierced right through me by that remark , and read me to the core . 
Indeed , I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than all , and that they all take me for a buffoon . 
So I say , ` Let me really play the buffoon . 
I am not afraid of your opinion , for you are every one of you worse than I am . ' 
That is why I am a buffoon . 
It is from shame , great elder , from shame ; it 's simply over-sensitiveness that makes me rowdy . 
If I had only been sure that everyone would accept me as the kindest and wisest of men , oh , Lord , what a good man I should have been then ! 
Teacher ! '' 
he fell suddenly on his knees , `` what must I do to gain eternal life ? '' 
It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really moved . 
Father Zossima , lifting his eyes , looked at him , and said with a smile : `` You have known for a long time what you must do . 
You have sense enough : do n't give way to drunkenness and incontinence of speech ; do n't give way to sensual lust ; and , above all , to the love of money . 
And close your taverns . 
If you ca n't close all , at least two or three . 
And , above all - do n't lie . '' 
`` You mean about Diderot ? '' 
`` No , not about Diderot . 
Above all , do n't lie to yourself . 
The man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he can not distinguish the truth within him , or around him , and so loses all respect for himself and for others . 
And having no respect he ceases to love , and in order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way to passions and coarse pleasures , and sinks to bestiality in his vices , all from continual lying to other men and to himself . 
The man who lies to himself can be more easily offended than anyone . 
You know it is sometimes very pleasant to take offence , is n't it ? 
A man may know that nobody has insulted him , but that he has invented the insult for himself , has lied and exaggerated to make it picturesque , has caught at a word and made a mountain out of a molehill - he knows that himself , yet he will be the first to take offence , and will revel in his resentment till he feels great pleasure in it , and so pass to genuine vindictiveness . 
But get up , sit down , I beg you . 
All this , too , is deceitful posturing ... '' `` Blessed man ! 
Give me your hand to kiss . '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up , and imprinted a rapid kiss on the elder 's thin hand . 
`` It is , it is pleasant to take offence . 
You said that so well , as I never heard it before . 
Yes , I have been all my life taking offence , to please myself , taking offence on aesthetic grounds , for it is not so much pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted - that you had forgotten , great elder , it is distinguished ! 
I shall make a note of that . 
But I have been lying , lying positively my whole life long , every day and hour of it . 
Of a truth , I am a lie , and the father of lies . 
Though I believe I am not the father of lies . 
I am getting mixed in my texts . 
