Kuzma Samsonov BUT Dmitri , to whom Grushenka , flying away to a new life , had left her last greetings , bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever , knew nothing of what had happened to her , and was at that moment in a condition of feverish agitation and activity . 
For the last two days he had been in such an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen ill with brain fever , as he said himself afterwards . 
Alyosha had not been able to find him the morning before , and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting him at the tavern on the same day . 
The people at his lodgings , by his orders , concealed his movements . 
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions , `` struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself , '' as he expressed it himself afterwards , and for some hours he even made a dash out of the town on urgent business , terrible as it was to him to lose sight of Grushenka for a moment . 
All this was explained afterwards in detail , and confirmed by documentary evidence ; but for the present we will only note the most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediately preceding the awful catastrophe that broke so suddenly upon him . 
Though Grushenka had , it is true , loved him for an hour , genuinely and sincerely , yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly . 
The worst of it was that he could never tell what she meant to do . 
To prevail upon her by force or kindness was also impossible : she would yield to nothing . 
She would only have become angry and turned away from him altogether , he knew that well already . 
He suspected , quite correctly , that she , too , was passing through an inward struggle , and was in a state of extraordinary indecision , that she was making up her mind to something , and unable to determine upon it . 
And so , not without good reason , he divined , with a sinking heart , that at moments she must simply hate him and his passion . 
And so , perhaps , it was , but what was distressing Grushenka he did not understand . 
For him the whole tormenting question lay between him and Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Here , we must note , by the way , one certain fact : he was firmly persuaded that Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer , or perhaps had offered , Grushenka lawful wedlock , and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuary hoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles . 
Mitya had reached this conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character . 
That was how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka 's uneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose , which was most to her advantage . 
Strange to say , during those days it never occurred to him to think of the approaching return of the `` officer , '' that is , of the man who had been such a fatal influence in Grushenka 's life , and whose arrival she was expecting with such emotion and dread . 
It is true that of late Grushenka had been very silent about it . 
Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she had received a month ago from her seducer , and had heard of it from her own lips . 
He partly knew , too , what the letter contained . 
In a moment of spite Grushenka had shown him that letter , but to her astonishment he attached hardly any consequence to it . 
It would be hard to say why this was . 
Perhaps , weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with his own father for this woman , he was incapable of imagining any danger more terrible , at any rate for the time . 
He simply did not believe in a suitor who suddenly turned up again after five years ' disappearance , still less in his speedy arrival . 
Moreover , in the `` officer 's '' first letter which had been shown to Mitya , the possibility of his new rival 's visit was very vaguely suggested . 
The letter was very indefinite , high-flown , and full of sentimentality . 
It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him the last lines of the letter , in which his return was alluded to more definitely . 
He had , besides , noticed at that moment , he remembered afterwards , a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive from Siberia on Grushenka 's face . 
Grushenka told him nothing of what had passed later between her and this rival ; so that by degrees he had completely forgotten the officer 's existence . 
He felt that whatever might come later , whatever turn things might take , his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him , and must be decided before anything else . 
With a sinking heart he was expecting every moment Grushenka 's decision , always believing that it would come suddenly , on the impulse of the moment . 
All of a sudden she would say to him : `` Take me , I 'm yours for ever , '' and it would all be over . 
He would seize her and bear her away at once to the ends of the earth . 
Oh , then he would bear her away at once , as far , far away as possible ; to the farthest end of Russia , if not of the earth , then he would marry her , and settle down with her incognito , so that no one would know anything about them , there , here , or anywhere . 
Then , oh then , a new life would begin at once ! 
Of this different , reformed and `` virtuous '' life -LRB- `` it must , it must be virtuous '' -RRB- he dreamed feverishly at every moment . 
He thirsted for that reformation and renewal . 
The filthy morass , in which he had sunk of his own free will , was too revolting to him , and , like very many men in such cases , he put faith above all in change of place . 
If only it were not for these people , if only it were not for these circumstances , if only he could fly away from this accursed place - he would be altogether regenerated , would enter on a new path . 
That was what he believed in , and what he was yearning for . 
But all this could only be on condition of the first , the happy solution of the question . 
There was another possibility , a different and awful ending . 
Suddenly she might say to him : `` Go away . 
I have just come to terms with Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I am going to marry him and do n't want you '' - and then ... but then ... But Mitya did not know what would happen then . 
Up to the last hour he did n't know . 
That must be said to his credit . 
He had no definite intentions , had planned no crime . 
He was simply watching and spying in agony , while he prepared himself for the first , happy solution of his destiny . 
