We 've everything you have , I am revealing one of our secrets out of friendship for you ; though it 's forbidden . 
This legend is about Paradise . 
There was , they say , here on earth a thinker and philosopher . 
He rejected everything , ` laws , conscience , faith , ' and , above all , the future life . 
He died ; he expected to go straight to darkness and death and he found a future life before him . 
He was astounded and indignant . 
` This is against my principles ! ' 
he said . 
And he was punished for that ... that is , you must excuse me , I am just repeating what I heard myself , it 's only a legend ... he was sentenced to walk a quadrillion kilometres in the dark -LRB- we 've adopted the metric system , you know -RRB- : and when he has finished that quadrillion , the gates of heaven would be opened to him and he 'll be forgiven - '' `` And what tortures have you in the other world besides the quadrillion kilometres ? '' 
asked Ivan , with a strange eagerness . 
`` What tortures ? 
Ah , do n't ask . 
In old days we had all sorts , but now they have taken chiefly to moral punishments - ` the stings of conscience ' and all that nonsense . 
We got that , too , from you , from the softening of your manners . 
And who 's the better for it ? 
Only those who have got no conscience , for how can they be tortured by conscience when they have none ? 
But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honour suffer for it . 
Reforms , when the ground has not been prepared for them , especially if they are institutions copied from abroad , do nothing but mischief ! 
The ancient fire was better . 
Well , this man , who was condemned to the quadrillion kilometres , stood still , looked round and lay down across the road . ' 
I wo n't go , I refuse on principle ! ' 
Take the soul of an enlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the prophet Jonah , who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the whale , and you get the character of that thinker who lay across the road . '' 
`` What did he lie on there ? '' 
`` Well , I suppose there was something to lie on . 
You are not laughing ? '' 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan , still with the same strange eagerness . 
Now he was listening with an unexpected curiosity . 
`` Well , is he lying there now ? '' 
`` That 's the point , that he is n't . 
He lay there almost a thousand years and then he got up and went on . '' 
`` What an ass ! '' 
cried Ivan , laughing nervously and still seeming to be pondering something intently . 
`` Does it make any difference whether he lies there for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometres ? 
It would take a billion years to walk it ? '' 
`` Much more than that . 
I have n't got a pencil and paper or I could work it out . 
But he got there long ago , and that 's where the story begins . '' 
`` What , he got there ? 
But how did he get the billion years to do it ? '' 
`` Why , you keep thinking of our present earth ! 
But our present earth may have been repeated a billion times . 
Why , it 's become extinct , been frozen ; cracked , broken to bits , disintegrated into its elements , again ` the water above the firmament , ' then again a comet , again a sun , again from the sun it becomes earth - and the same sequence may have been repeated endlessly and exactly the same to every detail , most unseemly and insufferably tedious - '' `` Well , well , what happened when he arrived ? '' 
`` Why , the moment the gates of Paradise were open and he walked in ; before he had been there two seconds , by his watch -LRB- though to my thinking his watch must have long dissolved into its elements on the way -RRB- , he cried out that those two seconds were worth walking not a quadrillion kilometres but a quadrillion of quadrillions , raised to the quadrillionth power ! 
In fact , he sang ` hosannah ' and overdid it so , that some persons there of lofty ideas would n't shake hands with him at first - he 'd become too rapidly reactionary , they said . 
The Russian temperament . 
I repeat , it 's a legend . 
I give it for what it 's worth , so that 's the sort of ideas we have on such subjects even now . '' 
`` I 've caught you ! '' 
Ivan cried , with an almost childish delight , as though he had succeeded in remembering something at last . 
