Oh , run , run ! 
... Do n't say another word Save the old man ... run to his father ... run ! '' 
`` Excuse me , madam , then you did not give him money ? 
You remember for a fact that you did not give him any money ? '' 
`` No , I did n't , I did n't ! 
I refused to give it him , for he could not appreciate it . 
He ran out in a fury , stamping . 
He rushed at me , but I slipped away ... . 
And let me tell you , as I wish to hide nothing from you now , that he positively spat at me . 
Can you fancy that ! 
But why are we standing ? 
Ah , sit down . '' 
`` Excuse me , I. . . '' 
`` Or better run , run , you must run and save the poor old man from an awful death ! '' 
`` But if he has killed him already ? '' 
`` Ah , good heavens , yes ! 
Then what are we to do now ? 
What do you think we must do now ? '' 
Meantime she had made Pyotr Ilyitch sit down and sat down herself , facing him briefly , but fairly clearly , Pyotr Ilyitch told her the history of the affair , that part of it at least which he had himself witnessed . 
He described , too , his visit to Fenya , and told her about the pestle . 
All these details produced an overwhelming effect on the distracted lady , who kept uttering shrieks , and covering her face with her hands ... `` Would you believe it , I foresaw all this ! 
I have that special faculty , whatever I imagine comes to pass . 
And how often I 've looked at that awful man and always thought , that man will end by murdering me . 
And now it 's happened ... that is , if he has n't murdered me , but only his own father , it 's only because the finger of God preserved me , and what 's more , he was ashamed to murder me because , in this very place , I put the holy ikon from the relics of the holy martyr , Saint Varvara , on his neck ... . 
And to think how near I was to death at that minute I went close up to him and he stretched out his neck to me ! 
... Do you know , Pyotr Ilyitch -LRB- I think you said your name was Pyotr Ilyitch -RRB- , I do n't believe in miracles , but that ikon and this unmistakable miracle with me now - that shakes me , and I 'm ready to believe in anything you like . 
Have you heard about Father Zossima ? 
... But I do n't know what I 'm saying ... and only fancy , with the ikon on his neck he spat at me ... . 
He only spat , it 's true , he did n't murder me and ... he dashed away ! 
But what shall we do , what must we do now ? 
What do you think ? '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch got up , and announced that he was going straight to the police captain , to tell him all about it , and leave him to do what he thought fit . 
`` Oh , he 's an excellent man , excellent ! 
Mihail Makarovitch , I know him . 
Of course , he 's the person to go to . 
How practical you are , Pyotr Ilyitch ! 
How well you 've thought of everything ! 
I should never have thought of it in your place ! '' 
`` Especially as I know the police captain very well , too , '' observed Pyotr Ilyitch , who still continued to stand , and was obviously anxious to escape as quickly as possible from the impulsive lady , who would not let him say good-bye and go away . 
`` And be sure , be sure , '' she prattled on , `` to come back and tell me what you see there , and what you find out ... what comes to light ... how they 'll try him ... and what he 's condemned to ... . 
Tell me , we have no capital punishment , have we ? 
But be sure to come , even if it 's at three o'clock at night , at four , at half-past four ... . 
Tell them to wake me , to wake me , to shake me , if I do n't get up ... . 
But , good heavens , I sha n't sleep ! 
But wait , had n't I better come with you ? '' 
`` N-no . 
But if you would write three lines with your own hand , stating that you did not give Dmitri Fyodorovitch money , it might , perhaps , be of use ... in case it 's needed ... '' `` To be sure ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov skipped , delighted , to her bureau . 
`` And you know I 'm simply struck , amazed at your resourcefulness , your good sense in such affairs . 
Are you in the service here ? 
