Darkness and destruction ! 
No need to explain . 
You 'll find out in due time . 
The filthy back-alley and the she-devil . 
Good-bye . 
Do n't pray for me , I 'm not worth it . 
And there 's no need , no need at all ... . 
I do n't need it ! 
Away ! '' 
And he suddenly retreated , this time finally . 
Alyosha went towards the monastery . 
`` What ? 
I shall never see him again ! 
What is he saying ? '' 
he wondered wildly . 
`` Why , I shall certainly see him to-morrow . 
I shall look him up . 
I shall make a point of it . 
What does he mean ? '' 
He went round the monastery , and crossed the pine-wood to the hermitage . 
The door was opened to him , though no one was admitted at that hour . 
There was a tremor in his heart as he went into Father Zossima 's cell . 
`` Why , why , had he gone forth ? 
Why had he sent him into the world ? 
Here was peace . 
Here was holiness . 
But there was confusion , there was darkness in which one lost one 's way and went astray at once ... '' In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Paissy , who came every hour to inquire after Father Zossima . 
Alyosha learnt with alarm that he was getting worse and worse . 
Even his usual discourse with the brothers could not take place that day . 
As a rule every evening after service the monks flocked into Father Zossima 's cell , and all confessed aloud their sins of the day , their sinful thoughts and temptations ; even their disputes , if there had been any . 
Some confessed kneeling . 
The elder absolved , reconciled , exhorted , imposed penance , blessed , and dismissed them . 
It was against this general `` confession '' that the opponents of `` elders '' protested , maintaining that it was a profanation of the sacrament of confession , almost a sacrilege , though this was quite a different thing . 
They even represented to the diocesan authorities that such confessions attained no good object , but actually to a large extent led to sin and temptation . 
Many of the brothers disliked going to the elder , and went against their own will because everyone went , and for fear they should be accused of pride and rebellious ideas . 
People said that some of the monks agreed beforehand , saying , `` I 'll confess I lost my temper with you this morning , and you confirm it , '' simply in order to have something to say . 
Alyosha knew that this actually happened sometimes . 
He knew , too , that there were among the monks some who deep resented the fact that letters from relations were habitually taken to the elder , to be opened and read by him before those to whom they were addressed . 
It was assumed , of course , that all this was done freely , and in good faith , by way of voluntary submission and salutary guidance . 
But , in fact , there was sometimes no little insincerity , and much that was false and strained in this practice . 
Yet the older and more experienced of the monks adhered to their opinion , arguing that `` for those who have come within these walls sincerely seeking salvation , such obedience and sacrifice will certainly be salutary and of great benefit ; those , on the other hand , who find it irksome , and repine , are no true monks , and have made a mistake in entering the monastery - their proper place is in the world . 
Even in the temple one can not be safe from sin and the devil . 
So it was no good taking it too much into account . '' 
`` He is weaker , a drowsiness has come over him , '' Father Paissy whispered to Alyosha , as he blessed him . 
`` It 's difficult to rouse him . 
And he must not be roused . 
He waked up for five minutes , sent his blessing to the brothers , and begged their prayers for him at night . 
He intends to take the sacrament again in the morning . 
He remembered you , Alexey . 
He asked whether you had gone away , and was told that you were in the town . ' 
