And who has provided it all ? 
The Russian peasant , the labourer , brings here the farthing earned by his horny hand , wringing it from his family and the tax-gatherer ! 
You bleed the people , you know , holy Fathers . '' 
`` This is too disgraceful ! '' 
said Father Iosif . 
Father Paissy kept obstinately silent . 
Miusov rushed from the room , and Kalgonov after him . 
`` Well , Father , I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch ! 
I am not coming to see you again . 
You may beg me on your knees , I sha n't come . 
I sent you a thousand roubles , so you have begun to keep your eye on me . 
He he he ! 
No , I 'll say no more . 
I am taking my revenge for my youth , for all the humiliation I endured . '' 
He thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysm of simulated feeling . 
`` This monastery has played a great part in my life ! 
It has cost me many bitter tears . 
You used to set my wife , the crazy one , against me . 
You cursed me with bell and book , you spread stories about me all over the place . 
Enough , fathers ! 
This is the age of Liberalism , the age of steamers and railways . 
Neither a thousand , nor a hundred roubles , no , nor a hundred farthings will you get out of me ! '' 
It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any great part in his life , and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it . 
But he was so carried away by his simulated emotion , that he was for one moment almost believing it himself . 
He was so touched he was almost weeping . 
But at that very instant , he felt that it was time to draw back . 
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie , and again spoke impressively : `` It is written again , ` Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonour that cometh upon thee by no act of thine own , be not confounded and hate not him who hath dishonoured thee . ' 
And so will we . '' 
`` Tut , tut , tut ! 
Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole . 
Bethink yourselves Fathers , I will go . 
But I will take my son , Alexey , away from here for ever , on my parental authority . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch , my most dutiful son , permit me to order you to follow me . 
Von Sohn , what have you to stay for ? 
Come and see me now in the town . 
It is fun there . 
It is only one short verst ; instead of lenten oil , I will give you sucking-pig and kasha . 
We will have dinner with some brandy and liqueur to it ... . 
I 've cloudberry wine . 
Hey , von Sohn , do n't lose your chance . '' 
He went out , shouting and gesticulating . 
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to Alyosha . 
`` Alexey ! '' 
his father shouted , from far off , catching sight of him . 
`` You come home to me to-day , for good , and bring your pillow and mattress , and leave no trace behind . '' 
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot , watching the scene in silence . 
Meanwhile , Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage , and Ivan was about to follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good-bye to Alyosha . 
But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesque buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode . 
Maximov suddenly appeared by the side of the carriage . 
He ran up , panting , afraid of being too late . 
