And ever since then I had it in my mind . 
Not long ago I was sitting here as I am now , when I saw that very general come in who came here for Easter , and I asked him : ` Your Excellency , ' said I , ` can a lady 's breath be unpleasant ? ' 
` Yes , ' he answered ; ` you ought to open a window-pane or open the door , for the air is not fresh here . ' 
And they all go on like that ! 
And what is my breath to them ? 
The dead smell worse still ! . ' 
I wo n't spoil the air , ' said I , ` I 'll order some slippers and go away . ' 
My darlings , do n't blame your own mother ! 
Nikolay Ilyitch , how is it I ca n't please you ? 
There 's only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me . 
Yesterday he brought me an apple . 
Forgive your own mother - forgive a poor lonely creature ! 
Why has my breath become unpleasant to you ? '' 
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs , and tears streamed down her cheeks . 
The captain rushed up to her . 
`` Mamma , mamma , my dear , give over ! 
You are not lonely . 
Everyone loves you , everyone adores you . '' 
He began kissing both her hands again and tenderly stroking her face ; taking the dinner-napkin , he began wiping away her tears . 
Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes . 
`` There , you see , you hear ? '' 
he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha , pointing to the poor imbecile . 
`` I see and hear , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Father , father , how can you - with him ! 
Let him alone ! '' 
cried the boy , sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes . 
`` Do give over fooling , showing off your silly antics which never lead to anything ! 
shouted Varvara , stamping her foot with passion . 
`` Your anger is quite just this time , Varvara , and I 'll make haste to satisfy you . 
Come , put on your cap , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and I 'll put on mine . 
We will go out . 
I have a word to say to you in earnest , but not within these walls . 
This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina ; I forgot to introduce her to you . 
She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us mortals , ... if you can understand . '' 
`` There he is shaking all over , as though he is in convulsions ! '' 
Varvara went on indignantly . 
`` And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now , she is a heavenly angel incarnate too , and she has good reason to call me so . 
Come along , Alexey Fyodorovitch , we must make an end . '' 
And , snatching Alyosha 's hand , he drew him out of the room into the street . 
And in the Open Air `` THE air is fresh , but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the word . 
Let us walk slowly , sir . 
I should be glad of your kind interest . '' 
`` I too have something important to say to you , '' observed Alyosha , `` only I do n't know how to begin . '' 
`` To be sure you must have business with me . 
You would never have looked in upon me without some object . 
Unless you come simply to complain of the boy , and that 's hardly likely . 
And , by the way , about the boy : I could not explain to you in there , but here I will describe that scene to you . 
My tow was thicker a week ago - I mean my beard . 
That 's the nickname they give to my beard , the schoolboys most of all . 
Well , your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard , I 'd done nothing , he was in a towering rage and happened to come upon me . 
