The monks , who had gathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima , had all been his devoted friends for many years . 
There were four of them : Father Iosif and Father Paissy , Father Mihail the warden of the hermitage , a man not very old and far from being learned . 
He was of humble origin , of strong will and steadfast faith , of austere appearance , but of deep tenderness , though he obviously concealed it as though he were almost ashamed of it . 
The fourth , Father Anfim , was a very old and humble little monk of the poorest peasant class . 
He was almost illiterate , and very quiet , scarcely speaking to anyone . 
He was the humblest of the humble , and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awful beyond the scope of his intelligence . 
Father Zossima had a great affection for this timorous man , and always treated him with marked respect , though perhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less , in spite of the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him . 
That was very long ago , forty years before , when Father Zossima first began his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma , and when , shortly after , he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage to collect alms for their poor monastery . 
The whole party were in the bedroom which , as we mentioned before , was very small , so that there was scarcely room for the four of them -LRB- in addition to Porfiry , the novice , who stood -RRB- to sit round Father Zossima on chairs brought from the sitting room . 
It was already beginning to get dark , the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before the ikons . 
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway , Father Zossima smiled at him joyfully and held out his hand . 
`` Welcome , my quiet one , welcome , my dear , here you are too . 
I knew you would come . '' 
Alyosha went up to him , bowed down before him to the ground and wept . 
Something surged up from his heart , his soul was quivering , he wanted to sob . 
`` Come , do n't weep over me yet , '' Father Zossima smiled , laying his right hand on his head . 
`` You see I am sitting up talking ; maybe I shall live another twenty years yet , as that dear good woman from Vishegorye , with her little Lizaveta in her arms , wished me yesterday . 
God bless the mother and the little girl Lizaveta , '' he crossed himself . 
`` Porfiry , did you take her offering where I told you ? '' 
He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good-humoured woman to be given `` to someone poorer than me . '' 
Such offerings , always of money gained by personal toil , are made by way of penance voluntarily undertaken . 
The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow , whose house had been burnt down lately , and who after the fire had gone with her children begging alms . 
Porfiry hastened to reply that he had given the money , as he had been instructed , `` from an unknown benefactress . '' 
`` Get up , my dear boy , '' the elder went on to Alyosha . 
`` Let me look at you . 
Have you been home and seen your brother ? '' 
It seemed strange to Alyosha that he asked so confidently and precisely , about one of his brothers only - but which one ? 
Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday and to-day for the sake of that brother . 
`` I have seen one of my brothers , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` I mean the elder one , to whom I bowed down . '' 
`` I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste to find him , go again to-morrow and make haste , leave everything and make haste . 
Perhaps you may still have time to prevent something terrible . 
I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in store for him . '' 
He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering . 
The words were strange . 
Father Iosif , who had witnessed the scene yesterday , exchanged glances with Father Paissy . 
Alyosha could not resist asking : `` Father and teacher , '' he began with extreme emotion , `` your words are too obscure ... . 
What is this suffering in store for him ? '' 
`` Do n't inquire . 
I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as though his whole future were expressed in his eyes . 
A look came into his eyes - so that I was instantly horror-stricken at what that man is preparing for himself . 
Once or twice in my life I 've seen such a look in a man 's face ... reflecting as it were his future fate , and that fate , alas , came to pass . 
I sent you to him , Alexey , for I thought your brotherly face would help him . 
But everything and all our fates are from the Lord . 
` Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone ; but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit . ' 
Remember that . 
You , Alexey , I 've many times silently blessed for your face , know that , '' added the elder with a gentle smile . 
`` This is what I think of you , you will go forth from these walls , but will live like a monk in the world . 
You will have many enemies , but even your foes will love you . 
