But the high road ... The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal , and the sun is at the end of it ... . 
Ah ! 
... What 's being read ? '' 
... `` And when they wanted wine , the mother of Jesus saith unto him , They have no wine '' ... Alyosha heard . 
`` Ah , yes , I was missing that , and I did n't want to miss it , I love that passage : it 's Cana of Galilee , the first miracle ... . 
Ah , that miracle ! 
Ah , that sweet miracle ! 
It was not men 's grief , but their joy Christ visited , He worked His first miracle to help men 's gladness ... ` He who loves men loves their gladness , too ' ... He was always repeating that , it was one of his leading ideas ... ` There 's no living without joy , ' Mitya says ... . 
Yes , Mitya ... ` Everything that is true and good is always full of forgiveness , ' he used to say that , too '' ... `` Jesus saith unto her , Woman , what has it to do with thee or me ? 
Mine hour not yet come . 
`` His mother saith unto the servants , Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it '' ... `` Do it ... . 
Gladness , the gladness of some poor , very poor , people ... . 
Of course they were poor , since they had n't wine enough even at a wedding ... . 
The historians write that , in those days , the people living about the Lake of Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... and another great heart , that other great being , His Mother , knew that He had come not only to make His great terrible sacrifice . 
She knew that His heart was open even to the simple , artless merrymaking of some obscure and unlearned people , who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding . 
` Mine hour is not yet come , ' He said , with a soft smile -LRB- He must have smiled gently to her -RRB- . 
And , indeed , was it to make wine abundant at poor weddings He had come down to earth ? 
And yet He went and did as she asked Him ... . 
Ah , he is reading again '' ... `` Jesus saith unto them , Fill the waterpots with water . 
And they filled them up to the brim . 
`` And he saith unto them , Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the feast . 
And they bear it . 
`` When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine , and knew not whence it was -LRB- but the servants which drew the water knew -RRB- ; the governor of the feast called the bridegroom , `` And saith unto him , Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; and when men have well drunk , that which is worse ; but thou hast kept the good wine until now . '' 
`` But what 's this , what 's this ? 
Why is the room growing wider ? 
... Ah , yes ... It 's the marriage , the wedding ... yes , of course . 
Here are the guests , here are the young couple sitting , and the merry crowd and ... Where is the wise governor of the feast ? 
But who is this ? 
Who ? 
Again the walls are receding ... . 
Who is getting up there from the great table ? 
What ! 
... He here , too ? 
But he 's in the coffin ... but he 's here , too . 
He has stood up , he sees me , he is coming here ... . 
God ! '' 
... Yes , he came up to him , to him , he , the little , thin old man , with tiny wrinkles on his face , joyful and laughing softly . 
There was no coffin now , and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them , when the visitors had gathered about him . 
His face was uncovered , his eyes were shining . 
How was this , then ? 
He , too , had been called to the feast . 
He , too , at the marriage of Cana in Galilee ... `` Yes , my dear , I am called , too , called and bidden , '' he heard a soft voice saying over him . 
`` Why have you hidden yourself here , out of sight ? 
You come and join us too . '' 
It was his voice , the voice of Father Zossima . 
And it must be he , since he called him ! 
The elder raised Alyosha by the hand and he rose from his knees . 
`` We are rejoicing , '' the little , thin old man went on . 
`` We are drinking the new wine , the wine of new , great gladness ; do you see how many guests ? 
Here are the bride and bridegroom , here is the wise governor of the feast , he is tasting the new wine . 
