I am going of myself because I choose to , but you 've all been hauled there by Alexey Karamazov - there 's a difference , you know . 
And how do you know ? 
I may not be going to make it up at all . 
It 's a stupid expression . '' 
`` It 's not Karamazov at all ; it 's not his doing . 
Our fellows began going there of themselves . 
Of course , they went with Karamazov at first . 
And there 's been nothing of that sort of silliness . 
First one went , and then another . 
His father was awfully pleased to see us . 
You know he will simply go out of his mind if Ilusha dies . 
He sees that Ilusha 's dying . 
And he seems so glad we 've made it up with Ilusha . 
Ilusha asked after you , that was all . 
He just asks and says no more . 
His father will go out of his mind or hang himself . 
He behaved like a madman before . 
You know he is a very decent man . 
We made a mistake then . 
It 's all the fault of that murderer who beat him then . '' 
`` Karamazov 's a riddle to me all the same . 
I might have made his acquaintance long ago , but I like to have a proper pride in some cases . 
Besides , I have a theory about him which I must work out and verify . '' 
Kolya subsided into dignified silence . 
Smurov , too , was silent . 
Smurov , of course , worshipped Krassotkin and never dreamed of putting himself on a level with him . 
Now he was tremendously interested at Kolya 's saying that he was `` going of himself '' to see Ilusha . 
He felt that there must be some mystery in Kolya 's suddenly taking it into his head to go to him that day . 
They crossed the market-place , in which at that hour were many loaded wagons from the country and a great number of live fowls . 
The market women were selling rolls , cottons and threads , etc. , in their booths . 
These Sunday markets were naively called `` fairs '' in the town , and there were many such fairs in the year . 
Perezvon ran about in the wildest spirits , sniffing about first one side , then the other . 
When he met other dogs they zealously smelt each other over according to the rules of canine etiquette . 
`` I like to watch such realistic scenes , Smurov , '' said Kolya suddenly . 
`` Have you noticed how dogs sniff at one another when they meet ? 
It seems to be a law of their nature . '' 
`` Yes ; it 's a funny habit . '' 
`` No , it 's not funny ; you are wrong there . 
There 's nothing funny in nature , however funny it may seem to man with his prejudices . 
If dogs could reason and criticise us they 'd be sure to find just as much that would be funny to them , if not far more , in the social relations of men , their masters - far more , indeed . 
I repeat that , because I am convinced that there is far more foolishness among us . 
That 's Rakitin 's idea - a remarkable idea . 
I am a Socialist , Smurov . '' 
`` And what is a Socialist ? '' 
asked Smurov . 
`` That 's when all are equal and all have property in common , there are no marriages , and everyone has any religion and laws he likes best , and all the rest of it . 
You are not old enough to understand that yet . 
It 's cold , though . '' 
`` Yes , twelve degrees of frost . 
Father looked at the thermometer just now . '' 
