He was not running to carry out a programme , to carry out what he had written , that is , not for an act of premeditated robbery , but he ran suddenly , spontaneously , in a jealous fury . 
Yes ! 
I shall be told , but when he got there and murdered him he seized the money , too . 
But did he murder him after all ? 
The charge of robbery I repudiate with indignation . 
A man can not be accused of robbery , if it 's impossible to state accurately what he has stolen ; that 's an axiom . 
But did he murder him without robbery , did he murder him at all ? 
Is that proved ? 
Is n't that , too , a romance ? '' 
And There Was No Murder Either `` ALLOW me , gentlemen of the jury , to remind you that a man 's life is at stake and that you must be careful . 
We have heard the prosecutor himself admit that until to-day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of a full and conscious premeditation of the crime ; he hesitated till he saw that fatal drunken letter which was produced in court to-day . 
` All was done as written . ' 
But , I repeat again , he was running to her , to seek her , solely to find out where she was . 
That 's a fact that ca n't be disputed . 
Had she been at home , he would not have run away , but would have remained at her side , and so would not have done what he promised in the letter . 
He ran unexpectedly and accidentally , and by that time very likely he did not even remember his drunken letter . 
` He snatched up the pestle , ' they say , and you will remember how a whole edifice of psychology was built on that pestle - why he was bound to look at that pestle as a weapon , to snatch it up , and so on , and so on . 
A very commonplace idea occurs to me at this point : What if that pestle had not been in sight , had not been lying on the shelf from which it was snatched by the prisoner , but had been put away in a cupboard ? 
It would not have caught the prisoner 's eye , and he would have run away without a weapon , with empty hands , and then he would certainly not have killed anyone . 
How then can I look upon the pestle as a proof of premeditation ? 
`` Yes , but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father , and two days before , on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter , he was quiet and only quarrelled with a shopman in the tavern , because a Karamazov could not help quarrelling , forsooth ! 
But my answer to that is , that , if he was planning such a murder in accordance with his letter , he certainly would not have quarrelled even with a shopman , and probably would not have gone into the tavern at all , because a person plotting such a crime seeks quiet and retirement , seeks to efface himself , to avoid being seen and heard , and that not from calculation , but from instinct . 
Gentlemen of the jury , the psychological method is a two-edged weapon , and we , too , can use it . 
As for all this shouting in taverns throughout the month , do n't we often hear children , or drunkards coming out of taverns shout , ` I 'll kill you ' ? 
but they do n't murder anyone . 
And that fatal letter - is n't that simply drunken irritability , too ? 
Is n't that simply the shout of the brawler outside the tavern , ` I 'll kill you ! 
I 'll kill the lot of you ! ' 
Why not , why could it not be that ? 
What reason have we to call that letter ` fatal ' rather than absurd ? 
Because his father has been found murdered , because a witness saw the prisoner running out of the garden with a weapon in his hand , and was knocked down by him : therefore , we are told , everything was done as he had planned in writing , and the letter was not ` absurd , ' but ` fatal . ' 
`` Now , thank God ! 
we 've come to the real point : ` since he was in the garden , he must have murdered him . ' 
In those few words : ` since he was , then he must ' lies the whole case for the prosecution . 
He was there , so he must have . 
And what if there is no must about it , even if he was there ? 
Oh , I admit that the chain of evidence - the coincidences - are really suggestive . 
But examine all these facts separately , regardless of their connection . 
Why , for instance , does the prosecution refuse to admit the truth of the prisoner 's statement that he ran away from his father 's window ? 
Remember the sarcasms in which the prosecutor indulged at the expense of the respectful and ` pious ' sentiments which suddenly came over the murderer . 
But what if there were something of the sort , a feeling of religious awe , if not of filial respect ? 
` My mother must have been praying for me at that moment , ' were the prisoner 's words at the preliminary inquiry , and so he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that Madame Svyetlov was not in his father 's house . 
` But he could not convince himself by looking through the window , ' the prosecutor objects . 
But why could n't he ? 
Why ? 
The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner . 
Some word might have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch , some exclamation which showed the prisoner that she was not there . 
Why should we assume everything as we imagine it , as we make up our minds to imagine it ? 
A thousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlest imagination . '' 
` Yes , but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was in the house , therefore he killed him . ' 
