So now to this priest ! 
`` No need of thanks . '' 
`` I 'll make haste and fly there . 
I 'm afraid I 've overtaxed your strength . 
I shall never forget it . 
It 's a Russian says that , Kuzma Kuzmitch , a R-r-russian ! '' 
`` To be sure ! '' 
Mitya seized his hand to press it , but there was a malignant gleam in the old man 's eye . 
Mitya drew back his hand , but at once blamed himself for his mistrustfulness . 
`` It 's because he 's tired , '' he thought . 
`` For her sake ! 
For her sake , Kuzma Kuzmitch ! 
You understand that it 's for her , '' he cried , his voice ringing through the room . 
He bowed , turned sharply round , and with the same long stride walked to the door without looking back . 
He was trembling with delight . 
`` Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved me , '' was the thought in his mind . 
And if such a business man as Samsonov -LRB- a most worthy old man , and what dignity ! -RRB- 
had suggested this course , then ... then success was assured . 
He would fly off immediately . 
`` I will be back before night , I shall be back at night and the thing is done . 
Could the old man have been laughing at me ? '' 
exclaimed Mitya , as he strode towards his lodging . 
He could , of course , imagine nothing but that the advice was practical `` from such a business man '' with an understanding of the business , with an understanding of this Lyagavy -LRB- curious surname ! -RRB- . 
Or - the old man was laughing at him . 
Alas ! 
The second alternative was the correct one . 
Long afterwards , when the catastrophe had happened , old Samsonov himself confessed , laughing , that he had made a fool of the `` captain . '' 
He was a cold , spiteful and sarcastic man , liable to violent antipathies . 
Whether it was the `` captain 's '' excited face , or the foolish conviction of the `` rake and spendthrift , '' that he , Samsonov , could be taken in by such a cock-and-bull story as his scheme , or his jealousy of Grushenka , in whose name this `` scapegrace '' had rushed in on him with such a tale to get money which worked on the old man , I ca n't tell . 
But at the instant when Mitya stood before him , feeling his legs grow weak under him , and frantically exclaiming that he was ruined , at that moment the old man looked at him with intense spite , and resolved to make a laughing-stock of him . 
When Mitya had gone , Kuzma Kuzmitch , white with rage , turned to his son and bade him see to it that that beggar be never seen again , and never admitted even into the yard , or else he 'd - He did not utter his threat . 
But even his son , who often saw him enraged , trembled with fear . 
For a whole hour afterwards , the old man was shaking with anger , and by evening he was worse , and sent for the doctor . 
Lyagavy SO he must drive at full speed , and he had not the money for horses . 
He had forty copecks , and that was all , all that was left after so many years of prosperity ! 
But he had at home an old silver watch which had long ceased to go . 
He snatched it up and carried it to a Jewish watch maker who had a shop in the market-place . 
The Jew gave him six roubles for it . 
`` And I did n't expect that cried Mitya , ecstatically . 
-LRB- He was still in a state of ecstasy . -RRB- 
He seized his six roubles and ran home . 
At home he borrowed three roubles from the people of the house , who loved him so much that they were pleased to give it him , though it was all they had . 
Mitya in his excitement told them on the spot that his fate would be decided that day , and he described , in desperate haste , the whole scheme he had put before Samsonov , the latter 's decision , his own hopes for the future , and so on . 
These people had been told many of their lodger 's secrets before , and so looked upon him as a gentleman who was not at all proud , and almost one of themselves . 
Having thus collected nine roubles Mitya sent for posting-horses to take him to the Volovya station . 
This was how the fact came to be remembered and established that `` at midday , on the day before the event , Mitya had not a farthing , and that he had sold his watch to get money and had borrowed three roubles from his landlord , all in the presence of witnesses . '' 
I note this fact , later on it will be apparent why I do so . 
Though he was radiant with the joyful anticipation that he would at last solve all his difficulties , yet , as he drew near Volovya station , he trembled at the thought of what Grushenka might be doing in his absence . 
What if she made up her mind to-day to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch ? 
This was why he had gone off without telling her and why he left orders with his landlady not to let out where he had gone , if anyone came to inquire for him . 
