Why do you wonder at me ? 
I gave an onion to a beggar , so I , too , am here . 
And many here have given only an onion each - only one little onion ... . 
What are all our deeds ? 
And you , my gentle one , you , my kind boy , you too have known how to give a famished woman an onion to-day . 
Begin your work , dear one , begin it , gentle one ! 
Do you see our Sun , do you see Him ? '' 
`` I am afraid ... I dare not look , '' whispered Alyosha . 
`` Do not fear Him . 
He is terrible in His greatness , awful in His sublimity , but infinitely merciful . 
He has made Himself like unto us from love and rejoices with us . 
He is changing the water into wine that the gladness of the guests may not be cut short . 
He is expecting new guests , He is calling new ones unceasingly for ever and ever ... . 
There they are bringing new wine . 
Do you see they are bringing the vessels ... '' Something glowed in Alyosha 's heart , something filled it till it ached , tears of rapture rose from his soul ... . 
He stretched out his hands , uttered a cry and waked up . 
Again the coffin , the open window , and the soft , solemn , distinct reading of the Gospel . 
But Alyosha did not listen to the reading . 
It was strange , he had fallen asleep on his knees , but now he was on his feet , and suddenly , as though thrown forward , with three firm rapid steps he went right up to the coffin . 
His shoulder brushed against Father Paissy without his noticing it . 
Father Paissy raised his eyes for an instant from his book , but looked away again at once , seeing that something strange was happening to the boy . 
Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin , at the covered , motionless dead man that lay in the coffin , with the ikon on his breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross on his head . 
He had only just been hearing his voice , and that voice was still ringing in his ears . 
He was listening , still expecting other words , but suddenly he turned sharply and went out of the cell . 
He did not stop on the steps either , but went quickly down ; his soul , overflowing with rapture , yearned for freedom , space , openness . 
The vault of heaven , full of soft , shining stars , stretched vast and fathomless above him . 
The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to the horizon . 
The fresh , motionless , still night enfolded the earth . 
The white towers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphire sky . 
The gorgeous autumn flowers , in the beds round the house , were slumbering till morning . 
The silence of earth seemed to melt into the silence of the heavens . 
The mystery of earth was one with the mystery of the stars ... . 
Alyosha stood , gazed , and suddenly threw himself down on the earth . 
He did not know why he embraced it . 
He could not have told why he longed so irresistibly to kiss it , to kiss it all . 
But he kissed it weeping , sobbing , and watering it with his tears , and vowed passionately to love it , to love it for ever and ever . 
`` Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears , '' echoed in his soul . 
What was he weeping over ? 
Oh ! 
in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars , which were shining to him from the abyss of space , and `` he was not ashamed of that ecstasy . '' 
There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of God , linking his soul to them , and it was trembling all over `` in contact with other worlds . '' 
He longed to forgive everyone and for everything , and to beg forgiveness . 
Oh , not for himself , but for all men , for all and for everything . 
`` And others are praying for me too , '' echoed again in his soul . 
But with every instant he felt clearly and , as it were , tangibly , that something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his soul . 
It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his mind - and it was for all his life and for ever and ever . 
He had fallen on the earth a weak boy , but he rose up a resolute champion , and he knew and felt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy . 
And never , never , his life long , could Alyosha forget that minute . 
`` Someone visited my soul in that hour , '' he used to say afterwards , with implicit faith in his words . 
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of his elder , who had bidden him `` sojourn in the world . '' 
