Such heavy burdens are not for all men . 
For some they are impossible . 
These are my thoughts about it , if you want them so much . 
If other men would have to answer for your escape , officers or soldiers , then I would not have ` allowed ' you , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But they declare - the superintendent of that etape * told Ivan himself - that if it 's well managed there will be no great inquiry , and that they can get off easily . 
Of course , bribing is dishonest even in such a case , but I ca n't undertake to judge about it , because if Ivan and Katya commissioned me to act for you , I know I should go and give bribes . 
I must tell you the truth . 
And so I ca n't judge of your own action . 
But let me assure you that I shall never condemn you . 
And it would be a strange thing if I could judge you in this . 
Now I think I 've gone into everything . '' 
* Stockade . 
`` But I do condemn myself ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I shall escape , that was settled apart from you ; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away ? 
But I shall condemn myself , and I will pray for my sin for ever . 
That 's how the Jesuits talk , is n't it ? 
Just as we are doing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything , '' cried Mitya , with a joyful laugh . 
`` So I 've caught my Alyosha being Jesuitical . 
I must kiss you for that . 
Now listen to the rest ; I 'll open the other side of my heart to you . 
This is what I planned and decided . 
If I run away , even with money and a passport , and even to America , I should be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure , not for happiness , but to another exile as bad , perhaps , as Siberia . 
It is as bad , Alyosha , it is ! 
I hate that America , damn it , already . 
Even though Grusha will be with me . 
Just look at her ; is she an American ? 
She is Russian , Russian to the marrow of her bones ; she will be homesick for the mother country , and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for my sake , that she has taken up that cross for me . 
And what harm has she done ? 
And how shall I , too , put up with the rabble out there , though they may be better than I , every one of them ? 
I hate that America already ! 
And though they may be wonderful at machinery , every one of them , damn them , they are not of my soul . 
I love Russia , Alyosha , I love the Russian God , though I am a scoundrel myself . 
I shall choke there ! '' 
he exclaimed , his eyes suddenly flashing . 
His voice was trembling with tears . 
`` So this is what I 've decided , Alyosha , listen , '' he began again , mastering his emotion . 
`` As soon as I arrive there with Grusha , we will set to work at once on the land , in solitude , somewhere very remote , with wild bears . 
There must be some remote parts even there . 
I am told there are still Redskins there , somewhere , on the edge of the horizon . 
So to the country of the Last of the Mohicans , and there we 'll tackle the grammar at once , Grusha and I. Work and grammar - that 's how we 'll spend three years . 
And by that time we shall speak English like any Englishman . 
And as soon as we 've learnt it - good-bye to America ! 
We 'll run here to Russia as American citizens . 
Do n't be uneasy - we would not come to this little town . 
We 'd hide somewhere , a long way off , in the north or in the south . 
I shall be changed by that time , and she will , too , in America . 
