He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speak of and what he must answer . 
And he was not afraid of her simply as a woman . 
Though he knew little of women , he spent his life , from early childhood till he entered the monastery , entirely with women . 
He was afraid of that woman , Katerina Ivanovna . 
He had been afraid of her from the first time he saw her . 
He had only seen her two or three times , and had only chanced to say a few words to her . 
He thought of her as a beautiful , proud , imperious girl . 
It was not her beauty which troubled him , but something else . 
And the vagueness of his apprehension increased the apprehension itself . 
The girl 's aims were of the noblest , he knew that . 
She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity , though he had already behaved badly to her . 
Yet , although Alyosha recognised and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments , a shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house . 
He reflected that he would not find Ivan , who was so intimate a friend , with her , for Ivan was certainly now with his father . 
Dmitri he was even more certain not to find there , and he had a foreboding of the reason . 
And so his conversation would be with her alone . 
He had a great longing to run and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview . 
Without showing him the letter , he could talk to him about it . 
But Dmitri lived a long way off , and he was sure to be away from home too . 
Standing still for a minute , he reached a final decision . 
Crossing himself with a rapid and accustomed gesture , and at once smiling , he turned resolutely in the direction of his terrible lady . 
He knew her house . 
If he went by the High Street and then across the market-place , it was a long way round . 
Though our town is small , it is scattered , and the houses are far apart . 
And meanwhile his father was expecting him , and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command . 
He might be unreasonable , and so he had to make haste to get there and back . 
So he decided to take a short cut by the backway , for he knew every inch of the ground . 
This meant skirting fences , climbing over hurdles , and crossing other people 's back-yards , where everyone he met knew him and greeted him . 
In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time . 
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father 's , and belonging to a little tumbledown house with four windows . 
The owner of this house , as Alyosha knew , was a bedridden old woman , living with her daughter , who had been a genteel maid-servant in generals ' families in Petersburg . 
Now she had been at home a year , looking after her sick mother . 
She always dressed up in fine clothes , though her old mother and she had sunk into such poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and bread , which Marfa gave readily . 
Yet , though the young woman came up for soup , she had never sold any of her dresses , and one of these even had a long train - a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin , who always knew everything that was going on in the town . 
He had forgotten it as soon as he heard it , but now , on reaching the garden , he remembered the dress with the train , raised his head , which had been bowed in thought , and came upon something quite unexpected . 
Over the hurdle in the garden , Dmitri , mounted on something , was leaning forward , gesticulating violently , beckoning to him , obviously afraid to utter a word for fear of being overheard . 
Alyosha ran up to the hurdle . 
`` It 's a good thing you looked up . 
I was nearly shouting to you , '' Mitya said in a joyful , hurried whisper . 
`` Climb in here quickly ! 
How splendid that you 've come ! 
I was just thinking of you '' Alyosha was delighted too , but he did not know how to get over the hurdle . 
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump . 
Tucking up his cassock , Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare-legged street urchin . 
`` Well done ! 
Now come along , '' said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper . 
`` Where ? '' 
whispered Alyosha , looking about him and finding himself in a deserted garden with no one near but themselves . 
The garden was small , but the house was at least fifty paces away . 
`` There 's no one here . 
Why do you whisper ? '' 
