I am in no laughing humour with this fear on me . 
I feel I am going to have a fit . 
I have a presentiment . 
Fright alone will bring it on . '' 
`` Confound it ! 
If you are laid up , Grigory will be on the watch . 
Let Grigory know beforehand ; he will be sure not to let him in . '' 
`` I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals without orders from my master . 
And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him , he has been ill ever since yesterday , and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow . 
They 've just arranged it . 
It 's a very strange remedy of hers . 
Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a preparation and always keeps it . 
It 's a strong thing made from some herb . 
She has the secret of it , and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago 's so bad he is almost paralysed by it . 
Then she takes a towel , wets it with the stuff , and rubs his whole back for half an hour till it 's quite red and swollen , and what 's left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer ; but not quite all , for on such occasions she leaves some for herself , and drinks it herself . 
And as they never take strong drink , I assure you they both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long time . 
And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after it , but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it . 
So , if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow , they wo n't hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 'll be asleep . '' 
`` What a rigmarole ! 
And it all seems to happen at once , as though it were planned . 
You 'll have a fit and they 'll both be unconscious , '' cried Ivan . 
`` But are n't you trying to arrange it so ? '' 
broke from him suddenly , and he frowned threateningly . 
`` How could I ? 
... And why should I , when it all depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans ? 
... If he means to do anything , he 'll do it ; but if not , I sha n't be thrusting him upon his father . '' 
`` And why should he go to father , especially on the sly , if , as you say yourself , Agrafena Alexandrovna wo n't come at all ? '' 
Ivan went on , turning white with anger . 
`` You say that yourself , and all the while I 've been here , I 've felt sure it was all the old man 's fancy , and the creature wo n't come to him . 
Why should Dmitri break in on him if she does n't come ? 
Speak , I want to know what you are thinking ! '' 
`` You know yourself why he 'll come . 
What 's the use of what I think ? 
His honour will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps , and he 'll dash in , as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms , to see whether she has n't escaped him on the sly . 
He is perfectly well aware , too , that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it , tied up with ribbon and sealed with three seals . 
On it is written in his own hand ` To my angel Grushenka , if she will come , ' to which he added three days later , ` for my little chicken . ' 
There 's no knowing what that might do . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
cried Ivan , almost beside himself . 
`` Dmitri wo n't come to steal money and kill my father to do it . 
He might have killed him yesterday on account of Grushenka , like the frantic , savage fool he is , but he wo n't steal . '' 
`` He is in very great need of money now - the greatest need , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
You do n't know in what need he is , '' Smerdyakov explained , with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness . 
`` He looks on that three thousand as his own , too . 
He said so to me himself . 
` My father still owes me just three thousand , ' he said . 
And besides that , consider , Ivan Fyodorovitch , there is something else perfectly true . 
It 's as good as certain , so to say , that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him , if only she cares to , to marry her - the master himself , I mean , Fyodor Pavlovitch - if only she cares to , and of course she may care to . 
All I 've said is that she wo n't come , but maybe she 's looking for more than that - I mean to be mistress here . 
