I blessed him for that work , ' he said , ` his place is there , not here , for awhile . ' 
Those were his words about you . 
He remembered you lovingly , with anxiety ; do you understand how he honoured you ? 
But how is it that he has decided that you shall spend some time in the world ? 
He must have foreseen something in your destiny ! 
Understand , Alexey , that if you return to the world , it must be to do the duty laid upon you by your elder , and not for frivolous vanity and worldly pleasures . '' 
Father Paissy went out . 
Alyosha had no doubt that Father Zossima was dying , though he might live another day or two . 
Alyosha firmly and ardently resolved that in spite of his promises to his father , the Hohlakovs , and Katerina Ivanovna , he would not leave the monastery next day , but would remain with his elder to the end . 
His heart glowed with love , and he reproached himself bitterly for having been able for one instant to forget him whom he had left in the monastery on his death bed , and whom he honoured above everyone in the world . 
He went into Father Zossima 's bedroom , knelt down , and bowed to the ground before the elder , who slept quietly without stirring , with regular , hardly audible breathing and a peaceful face . 
Alyosha returned to the other room , where Father Zossima received his guests in the morning . 
Taking off his boots , he lay down on the hard , narrow , leathern sofa , which he had long used as a bed , bringing nothing but a pillow . 
The mattress , about which his father had shouted to him that morning , he had long forgotten to lie on . 
He took off his cassock , which he used as a covering . 
But before going to bed , he fell on his knees and prayed a long time . 
In his fervent prayer he did not beseech God to lighten his darkness but only thirsted for the joyous emotion , which always visited his soul after the praise and adoration , of which his evening prayer usually consisted . 
That joy always brought him light untroubled sleep . 
As he was praying , he suddenly felt in his pocket the little pink note the servant had handed him as he left Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
He was disturbed , but finished his prayer . 
Then , after some hesitation , he opened the envelope . 
In it was a letter to him , signed by Lise , the young daughter of Madame Hohlakov , who had laughed at him before the elder in the morning . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she wrote , `` I am writing to you without anyone 's knowledge , even mamma 's , and I know how wrong it is . 
But I can not live without telling you the feeling that has sprung up in my heart , and this no one but us two must know for a time . 
But how am I to say what I want so much to tell you ? 
Paper , they say , does not blush , but I assure you it 's not true and that it 's blushing just as I am now , all over . 
Dear Alyosha , I love you , I 've loved you from my childhood , since our Moscow days , when you were very different from what you are now , and I shall love you all my life . 
My heart has chosen you , to unite our lives , and pass them together till our old age . 
Of course , on condition that you will leave the monastery . 
As for our age we will wait for the time fixed by the law . 
By that time I shall certainly be quite strong , I shall be walking and dancing . 
There can be no doubt of that . 
`` You see how I 've thought of everything . 
There 's only one thing I ca n't imagine : what you 'll think of me when you read this . 
I 'm always laughing and being naughty . 
I made you angry this morning , but I assure you before I took up my pen , I prayed before the Image of the Mother of God , and now I 'm praying , and almost crying . 
`` My secret is in your hands . 
When you come to-morrow , I do n't know how I shall look at you . 
Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch , what if I ca n't restrain myself like a silly and laugh when I look at you as I did to-day . 
You 'll think I 'm a nasty girl making fun of you , and you wo n't believe my letter . 
And so I beg you , dear one , if you 've any pity for me , when you come to-morrow , do n't look me straight in the face , for if I meet your eyes , it will be sure to make me laugh , especially as you 'll be in that long gown . 
I feel cold all over when I think of it , so when you come , do n't look at me at all for a time , look at mamma or at the window ... `` Here I 've written you a love-letter . 
Oh , dear , what have I done ? 
Alyosha , do n't despise me , and if I 've done something very horrid and wounded you , forgive me . 
Now the secret of my reputation , ruined perhaps for ever , is in your hands . 
`` I shall certainly cry to-day . 
Good-bye till our meeting , our awful meeting . 
- Lise . 
`` P.S. - Alyosha ! 
You must , must , must come ! 
