The fathers and mothers present applauded . 
Shrieks and exclamations were heard from the gallery , where the ladies were sitting . 
Handkerchiefs were waved . 
The President began ringing his bell with all his might . 
He was obviously irritated by the behaviour of the audience , but did not venture to clear the court as he had threatened . 
Even persons of high position , old men with stars on their breasts , sitting on specially reserved seats behind the judges , applauded the orator and waved their handkerchiefs . 
So that when the noise died down , the President confined himself to repeating his stern threat to clear the court , and Fetyukovitch , excited and triumphant , continued his speech . -RRB- 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , you remember that awful night of which so much has been said to-day , when the son got over the fence and stood face to face with the enemy and persecutor who had begotten him . 
I insist most emphatically it was not for money he ran to his father 's house : the charge of robbery is an absurdity , as I proved before . 
And it was not to murder him he broke into the house , oh , no ! 
If he had had that design he would , at least , have taken the precaution of arming himself beforehand . 
The brass pestle he caught up instinctively without knowing why he did it . 
Granted that he deceived his father by tapping at the window , granted that he made his way in - I 've said already that I do not for a moment believe that legend , but let it be so , let us suppose it for a moment . 
Gentlemen , I swear to you by all that 's holy , if it had not been his father , but an ordinary enemy , he would , after running through the rooms and satisfying himself that the woman was not there , have made off , post-haste , without doing any harm to his rival . 
He would have struck him , pushed him away perhaps , nothing more , for he had no thought and no time to spare for that . 
What he wanted to know was where she was . 
But his father , his father ! 
The mere sight of the father who had hated him from his childhood , had been his enemy , his persecutor , and now his unnatural rival , was enough ! 
A feeling of hatred came over him involuntarily , irresistibly , clouding his reason . 
It all surged up in one moment ! 
It was an impulse of madness and insanity , but also an impulse of nature , irresistibly and unconsciously -LRB- like everything in nature -RRB- avenging the violation of its eternal laws . 
`` But the prisoner even then did not murder him - I maintain that , I cry that aloud ! 
- no , he only brandished the pestle in a burst of indignant disgust , not meaning to kill him , not knowing that he would kill him . 
Had he not had this fatal pestle in his hand , he would have only knocked his father down perhaps , but would not have killed him . 
As he ran away , he did not know whether he had killed the old man . 
Such a murder is not a murder . 
Such a murder is not a parricide . 
No , the murder of such a father can not be called parricide . 
Such a murder can only be reckoned parricide by prejudice . 
`` But I appeal to you again and again from the depths of my soul ; did this murder actually take place ? 
Gentlemen of the jury , if we convict and punish him , he will say to himself : ` These people have done nothing for my bringing up , for my education , nothing to improve my lot , nothing to make me better , nothing to make me a man . 
These people have not given me to eat and to drink , have not visited me in prison and nakedness , and here they have sent me to penal servitude . 
I am quits , I owe them nothing now , and owe no one anything for ever . 
They are wicked and I will be wicked . 
They are cruel and I will be cruel . ' 
That is what he will say , gentlemen of the jury . 
And I swear , by finding him guilty you will only make it easier for him : you will ease his conscience , he will curse the blood he has shed and will not regret it . 
At the same time you will destroy in him the possibility of becoming a new man , for he will remain in his wickedness and blindness all his life . 
`` But do you want to punish him fearfully , terribly , with the most awful punishment that could be imagined , and at the same time to save him and regenerate his soul ? 
If so , overwhelm him with your mercy ! 
You will see , you will hear how he will tremble and be horror-struck . 
` How can I endure this mercy ? 
How can I endure so much love ? 
Am I worthy of it ? ' 
That 's what he will exclaim . 
`` Oh , I know , I know that heart , that wild but grateful heart , gentlemen of the jury ! 
It will bow before your mercy ; it thirsts for a great and loving action , it will melt and mount upwards . 
There are souls which , in their limitation , blame the whole world . 
But subdue such a soul with mercy , show it love , and it will curse its past , for there are many good impulses in it . 
Such a heart will expand and see that God is merciful and that men are good and just . 
