Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm . 
He was aggrieved and annoyed , though he might have reflected that each of them was just passing through a spiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime . 
But though Rakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned himself , he was very obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of others - partly from his youth and inexperience , partly from his intense egoism . 
`` You see , Alyosha , '' Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh . 
`` I was boasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion , but it 's not to boast I tell you about it . 
It 's only a story , but it 's a nice story . 
I used to hear it when I was a child from Matryona , my cook , who is still with me . 
It 's like this . 
Once upon a time there was a peasant woman and a very wicked woman she was . 
And she died and did not leave a single good deed behind . 
The devils caught her and plunged her into the lake of fire . 
So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed of hers he could remember to tell to God ; ` She once pulled up an onion in her garden , ' said he , ` and gave it to a beggar woman . ' 
And God answered : ` You take that onion then , hold it out to her in the lake , and let her take hold and be pulled out . 
And if you can pull her out of the lake , let her come to Paradise , but if the onion breaks , then the woman must stay where she is . ' 
The angel ran to the woman and held out the onion to her . 
` Come , ' said he , ` catch hold and I 'll pull you out . ' 
he began cautiously pulling her out . 
He had just pulled her right out , when the other sinners in the lake , seeing how she was being drawn out , began catching hold of her so as to be pulled out with her . 
But she was a very wicked woman and she began kicking them . 
` I 'm to be pulled out , not you . 
It 's my onion , not yours . ' 
As soon as she said that , the onion broke . 
And the woman fell into the lake and she is burning there to this day . 
So the angel wept and went away . 
So that 's the story , Alyosha ; I know it by heart , for I am that wicked woman myself . 
I boasted to Rakitin that I had given away an onion , but to you I 'll say : ` I 've done nothing but give away one onion all my life , that 's the only good deed I 've done . ' 
do n't praise me , Alyosha , do n't think me good , I am bad , I am a wicked woman and you make me ashamed if you praise me . 
Eh , I must confess everything . 
Listen , Alyosha . 
I was so anxious to get hold of you that I promised Rakitin twenty-five roubles if he would bring you to me . 
Stay , Rakitin , wait ! '' 
She went with rapid steps to the table , opened a drawer , pulled out a purse and took from it a twenty-five rouble note . 
`` What nonsense ! 
What nonsense ! '' 
cried Rakitin , disconcerted . 
`` Take it . 
Rakitin , I owe it you , there 's no fear of your refusing it , you asked for it yourself . '' 
And she threw the note to him . 
`` Likely I should refuse it , '' boomed Rakitin , obviously abashed , but carrying off his confusion with a swagger . 
`` That will come in very handy ; fools are made for wise men 's profit . '' 
`` And now hold your tongue , Rakitin , what I am going to say now is not for your ears . 
Sit down in that corner and keep quiet . 
You do n't like us , so hold your tongue . '' 
`` What should I like you for ? '' 
Rakitin snarled , not concealing his ill-humour . 
He put the twenty-five rouble note in his pocket and he felt ashamed at Alyosha 's seeing it . 
He had reckoned on receiving his payment later , without Alyosha 's knowing of it , and now , feeling ashamed , he lost his temper . 
Till that moment he had thought it discreet not to contradict Grushenka too flatly in spite of her snubbing , since he had something to get out of her . 
But now he , too , was angry : `` One loves people for some reason , but what have either of you done for me ? '' 
`` You should love people without a reason , as Alyosha does . '' 
