Once we went , a whole lot of us , for a picnic , in seven sledges . 
It was dark , it was winter , and I began squeezing a girl 's hand , and forced her to kiss me . 
She was the daughter of an official , a sweet , gentle , submissive creature . 
She allowed me , she allowed me much in the dark . 
She thought , poor thing , that I should come next day to make her an offer -LRB- I was looked upon as a good match , too -RRB- . 
But I did n't say a word to her for five months . 
I used to see her in a corner at dances -LRB- we were always having dances -RRB- , her eyes watching me . 
I saw how they glowed with fire - a fire of gentle indignation . 
This game only tickled that insect lust I cherished in my soul . 
Five months later she married an official and left the town , still angry , and still , perhaps , in love with me . 
Now they live happily . 
Observe that I told no one . 
I did n't boast of it . 
Though I 'm full of low desires , and love what 's low , I 'm not dishonourable . 
You 're blushing ; your eyes flashed . 
Enough of this filth with you . 
And all this was nothing much - wayside blossoms a la Paul de Kock - though the cruel insect had already grown strong in my soul . 
I 've a perfect album of reminiscences , brother . 
God bless them , the darlings . 
I tried to break it off without quarrelling . 
And I never gave them away , I never bragged of one of them . 
But that 's enough . 
You ca n't suppose I brought you here simply to talk of such nonsense . 
No , I 'm going to tell you something more curious ; and do n't be surprised that I 'm glad to tell you , instead of being ashamed . '' 
`` You say that because I blushed , '' Alyosha said suddenly . 
`` I was n't blushing at what you were saying or at what you 've done . 
I blushed because I am the same as you are . '' 
`` You ? 
Come , that 's going a little too far ! '' 
`` No , it 's not too far , '' said Alyosha warmly -LRB- obviously the idea was not a new one -RRB- . 
`` The ladder 's the same . 
I 'm at the bottom step , and you 're above , somewhere about the thirteenth . 
That 's how I see it . 
But it 's all the same . 
Absolutely the same in kind . 
Anyone on the bottom step is bound to go up to the top one . '' 
`` Then one ought not to step on at all . '' 
`` Anyone who can help it had better not . '' 
`` But can you ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` Hush , Alyosha , hush , darling ! 
I could kiss your hand , you touch me so . 
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men . 
She told me once that she 'd devour you one day . 
There , there , I wo n't ! 
From this field of corruption fouled by flies , let 's pass to my tragedy , also befouled by flies , that is , by every sort of vileness . 
Although the old man told lies about my seducing innocence , there really was something of the sort in my tragedy , though it was only once , and then it did not come off . 
The old man who has reproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact ; I never told anyone about it . 
You 're the first , except Ivan , of course - Ivan knows everything . 
He knew about it long before you . 
