Ah , here 's Fenya with a letter ! 
Yes , it 's from the Poles - begging again ! 
Pan Mussyalovitch had indeed sent an extremely long and characteristically eloquent letter in which he begged her to lend him three roubles . 
In the letter was enclosed a receipt for the sum , with a promise to repay it within three months , signed by Pan Vrublevsky as well . 
Grushenka had received many such letters , accompanied by such receipts , from her former lover during the fortnight of her convalescence . 
But she knew that the two Poles had been to ask after her health during her illness . 
The first letter Grushenka got from them was a long one , written on large notepaper and with a big family crest on the seal . 
It was so obscure and rhetorical that Grushenka put it down before she had read half , unable to make head or tail of it . 
She could not attend to letters then . 
The first letter was followed next day by another in which Pan Mussyalovitch begged her for a loan of two thousand roubles for a very short period . 
Grushenka left that letter , too , unanswered . 
A whole series of letters had followed - one every day - all as pompous and rhetorical , but the loan asked for , gradually diminishing , dropped to a hundred roubles , than to twenty-five , to ten , and finally Grushenka received a letter in which both the Poles begged her for only one rouble and included a receipt signed by both . 
Then Grushenka suddenly felt sorry for them , and at dusk she went round herself to their lodging . 
She found the two Poles in great poverty , almost destitution , without food or fuel , without cigarettes , in debt to their landlady . 
The two hundred roubles they had carried off from Mitya at Mokroe had soon disappeared . 
But Grushenka was surprised at their meeting her with arrogant dignity and self-assertion , with the greatest punctilio and pompous speeches . 
Grushenka simply laughed , and gave her former admirer ten roubles . 
Then , laughing , she told Mitya of it and he was not in the least jealous . 
But ever since , the Poles had attached themselves to Grushenka and bombarded her daily with requests for money and she had always sent them small sums . 
And now that day Mitya had taken it into his head to be fearfully jealous . 
`` Like a fool , I went round to him just for a minute , on the way to see Mitya , for he is ill , too , my Pole , '' Grushenka began again with nervous haste . 
`` I was laughing , telling Mitya about it . 
` Fancy , ' I said , ` my Pole had the happy thought to sing his old songs to me to the guitar . 
He thought I would be touched and marry him ! ' 
Mitya leapt up swearing ... . 
So , there , I 'll send them the pies ! 
Fenya , is it that little girl they 've sent ? 
Here , give her three roubles and pack up a dozen pies in a paper and tell her to take them . 
And you , Alyosha , be sure to tell Mitya that I did send them the pies . '' 
`` I would n't tell him for anything , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Ech ! 
You think he is unhappy about it . 
Why , he 's jealous on purpose . 
He does n't care , '' said Grushenka bitterly . 
`` On purpose ? '' 
queried Alyosha . 
`` I tell you you are silly , Alyosha . 
You know nothing about it , with all your cleverness . 
I am not offended that he is jealous of a girl like me . 
I would be offended if he were not jealous . 
I am like that . 
I am not offended at jealousy . 
I have a fierce heart , too . 
I can be jealous myself . 
Only what offends me is that he does n't love me at all . 
I tell you he is jealous now on purpose . 
Am I blind ? 
Do n't I see ? 
He began talking to me just now of that woman , of Katerina , saying she was this and that , how she had ordered a doctor from Moscow for him , to try and save him ; how she had ordered the best counsel , the most learned one , too . 
So he loves her , if he 'll praise her to my face , more shame to him ! 
