All at once an orderly arrives on the scene with the book and the order to ` hand over the battalion money immediately , within two hours . ' 
He signed the book -LRB- I saw the signature in the book afterwards -RRB- , stood up , saying he would put on his uniform , ran to his bedroom , loaded his double-barrelled gun with a service bullet , took the boot off his right foot , fixed the gun against his chest , and began feeling for the trigger with his foot . 
But Agafya , remembering what I had told her , had her suspicions . 
She stole up and peeped into the room just in time . 
She rushed in , flung herself upon him from behind , threw her arms round him , and the gun went off , hit the ceiling , but hurt no one . 
The others ran in , took away the gun , and held him by the arms . 
I heard all about this afterwards . 
I was at home , it was getting dusk , and I was just preparing to go out . 
I had dressed , brushed my hair , scented my handkerchief , and taken up my cap , when suddenly the door opened , and facing me in the room stood Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` It 's strange how things happen sometimes . 
No one had seen her in the street , so that no one knew of it in the town . 
I lodged with two decrepit old ladies , who looked after me . 
They were most obliging old things , ready to do anything for me , and at my request were as silent afterwards as two cast-iron posts . 
Of course I grasped the position at once . 
She walked in and looked straight at me , her dark eyes determined , even defiant , but on her lips and round mouth I saw uncertainty . '' 
` My sister told me , ' she began , ` that you would give me 4500 roubles if I came to you for it - myself . 
I have come ... give me the money ! ' 
`` She could n't keep it up . 
She was breathless , frightened , her voice failed her , and the corners of her mouth and the lines round it quivered . 
Alyosha , are you listening , or are you asleep ? '' 
`` Mitya , I know you will tell the whole truth , said Alyosha in agitation . 
`` I am telling it . 
If I tell the whole truth just as it happened I sha n't spare myself . 
My first idea was a - Karamazov one . 
Once I was bitten by a centipede , brother , and laid up a fortnight with fever from it . 
Well , I felt a centipede biting at my heart then - a noxious insect , you understand ? 
I looked her up and down . 
You 've seen her ? 
She 's a beauty . 
But she was beautiful in another way then . 
At that moment she was beautiful because she was noble , and I was a scoundrel ; she in all the grandeur of her generosity and sacrifice for her father , and I - a bug ! 
And , scoundrel as I was , she was altogether at my mercy , body and soul . 
She was hemmed in . 
I tell you frankly , that thought , that venomous thought , so possessed my heart that it almost swooned with suspense . 
It seemed as if there could be no resisting it ; as though I should act like a bug , like a venomous spider , without a spark of pity . 
I could scarcely breathe . 
Understand , I should have gone next day to ask for her hand , so that it might end honourably , so to speak , and that nobody would or could know . 
For though I 'm a man of base desires , I 'm honest . 
And at that very second some voice seemed to whisper in my ear , ` But when you come to-morrow to make your proposal , that girl wo n't even see you ; she 'll order her coachman to kick you out of the yard . 
`` Publish it through all the town , '' she would say , `` I 'm not afraid of you . '' ' 
I looked at the young lady , my voice had not deceived me . 
That is how it would be , not a doubt of it . 
I could see from her face now that I should be turned out of the house . 
My spite was roused . 
I longed to play her the nastiest swinish cad 's trick : to look at her with a sneer , and on the spot where she stood before me to stun her with a tone of voice that only a shopman could use . '' 
` Four thousand ! 
What do you mean ? 
I was joking . 
You 've been counting your chickens too easily , madam . 
Two hundred , if you like , with all my heart . 
