Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish ; she was probably , indeed , cleverer than her husband , or , at least , more prudent than he in worldly affairs , and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or complaint ever since her marriage , and respected him for his spiritual superiority . 
It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the course of their lives , and only of the most necessary daily affairs . 
The grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone , so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her advice . 
She felt that her husband respected her silence , and took it as a sign of her good sense . 
He had never beaten her but once , and then only slightly . 
Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch 's marriage with Adelaida Ivanovna , the village girls and women - at that time serfs - were called together before the house to sing and dance . 
They were beginning `` In the Green Meadows , '' when Marfa , at that time a young woman , skipped forward and danced `` the Russian Dance , '' not in the village fashion , but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich Miusov family , in their private theatre , where the actors were taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow . 
Grigory saw how his wife danced , and , an hour later , at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson , pulling her hair a little . 
But there it ended : the beating was never repeated , and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing . 
God had not blessed them with children . 
One child was born but it died . 
Grigory was fond of children , and was not ashamed of showing it . 
When Adelaida Ivanovna had run away , Grigory took Dmitri , then a child of three years old , combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands , and looked after him for almost a year . 
Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha , for which the general 's widow had rewarded him with a slap in the face ; but I have already related all that . 
The only happiness his own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth . 
When it was born , he was overwhelmed with grief and horror . 
The baby had six fingers . 
Grigory was so crushed by this , that he was not only silent till the day of the christening , but kept away in the garden . 
It was spring , and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden . 
The third day was fixed for christening the baby : meantime Grigory had reached a conclusion . 
Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived , including Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was to stand godfather , he suddenly announced that the baby `` ought not to be christened at all . '' 
He announced this quietly , briefly , forcing out his words , and gazing with dull intentness at the priest . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the priest with good-humoured surprise . 
`` Because it 's a dragon , '' muttered Grigory . 
`` A dragon ? 
What dragon ? '' 
Grigory did not speak for some time . 
`` It 's a confusion of nature , '' he muttered vaguely , but firmly , and obviously unwilling to say more . 
They laughed , and , of course , christened the poor baby . 
Grigory prayed earnestly at the font , but his opinion of the new-born child remained unchanged . 
Yet he did not interfere in any way . 
As long as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it , tried indeed not to notice it , and for the most part kept out of the cottage . 
But when , at the end of a fortnight , the baby died of thrush , he himself laid the child in its little coffin , looked at it in profound grief , and when they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the earth . 
He did not for years afterwards mention his child , nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him , and , even if Grigory were not present , she never spoke of it above a whisper . 
Marfa observed that , from the day of the burial , he devoted himself to `` religion , '' and took to reading the Lives of the Saints , for the most part sitting alone and in silence , and always putting on his big , round , silver-rimmed spectacles . 
He rarely read aloud , only perhaps in Lent . 
He was fond of the Book of Job , and had somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of `` the God fearing Father Isaac the Syrian , which he read persistently for years together , understanding very little of it , but perhaps prizing and loving it the more for that . 
Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighbourhood . 
He was evidently shaken by them , but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith . 
His habit of theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity . 
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism . 
And the birth of his deformed child , and its death , had , as though by special design , been accompanied by another strange and marvellous event , which , as he said later , had left a `` stamp '' upon his soul . 
It happened that , on the very night after the burial of his child , Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new-born baby . 
She was frightened and waked her husband . 
He listened and said he thought it was more like someone groaning , `` it might be a woman . '' 
He got up and dressed . 
It was a rather warm night in May . 
As he went down the steps , he distinctly heard groans coming from the garden . 
But the gate from the yard into the garden was locked at night , and there was no other way of entering it , for it was enclosed all round by a strong , high fence . 
