`` Father , do n't cry , and when I die get a good boy , another one ... choose one of them all , a good one , call him Ilusha and love him instead of me ... '' `` Hush , old man , you 'll get well , '' Krassotkin cried suddenly , in a voice that sounded angry . 
`` But do n't ever forget me , father , '' Ilusha went on , `` come to my grave ... and father , bury me by our big stone , where we used to go for our walk , and come to me there with Krassotkin in the evening ... and Perezvon ... I shall expect you ... . 
Father , father ! '' 
His voice broke . 
They were all three silent , still embracing . 
Nina was crying , quietly in her chair , and at last seeing them all crying , `` mamma , '' too , burst into tears . 
`` Ilusha ! 
Ilusha ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
Krassotkin suddenly released himself from Ilusha 's embrace . 
`` Good-bye , old man , mother expects me back to dinner , '' he said quickly . 
`` What a pity I did not tell her ! 
She will be dreadfully anxious ... But after dinner I 'll come back to you for the whole day , for the whole evening , and I 'll tell you all sorts of things , all sorts of things . 
And I 'll bring Perezvon , but now I will take him with me , because he will begin to howl when I am away and bother you . 
Good-bye ! 
And he ran out into the passage . 
He did n't want to cry , but in the passage he burst into tears . 
Alyosha found him crying . 
`` Kolya , you must be sure to keep your word and come , or he will be terribly disappointed , '' Alyosha said emphatically . 
`` I will ! 
Oh , how I curse myself for not having come before '' muttered Kolya , crying , and no longer ashamed of it . 
At that moment the captain flew out of the room , and at once closed the door behind him . 
His face looked frenzied , his lips were trembling . 
He stood before the two and flung up his arms . 
`` I do n't want a good boy ! 
I do n't want another boy ! '' 
he muttered in a wild whisper , clenching his teeth . 
`` If I forget thee , knees before the wooden bench . 
Pressing his fists against his head , he began sobbing with absurd whimpering cries , doing his utmost that his cries should not be heard in the room . 
Kolya ran out into the street . 
`` Good-bye , Karamazov ? 
Will you come yourself ? '' 
he cried sharply and angrily to Alyosha . 
`` I will certainly come in the evening . '' 
`` What was that he said about Jerusalem ? 
... What did he mean by that ? '' 
`` It 's from the Bible . 
` If I forget thee , Jerusalem , ' that is , if I forget all that is most precious to me , if I let anything take its place , then may - '' `` I understand , that 's enough ! 
Mind you come ! 
Ici , Perezvon ! '' 
he cried with positive ferocity to the dog , and with rapid strides he went home . 
At Grushenka 's ALYOSHA went towards the cathedral square to the widow Morozov 's house to see Grushenka , who had sent Fenya to him early in the morning with an urgent message begging him to come . 
Questioning Fenya , Alyosha learned that her mistress had been particularly distressed since the previous day . 
During the two months that had passed since Mitya 's arrest , Alyosha had called frequently at the widow Morozov 's house , both from his own inclination and to take messages for Mitya . 
Three days after Mitya 's arrest , Grushenka was taken very ill and was ill for nearly five weeks . 
For one whole week she was unconscious . 
She was very much changed - thinner and a little sallow , though she had for the past fortnight been well enough to go out . 
But to Alyosha her face was even more attractive than before , and he liked to meet her eyes when he went in to her . 
A look of firmness and intelligent purpose had developed in her face . 
There were signs of a spiritual transformation in her , and a steadfast , fine and humble determination that nothing could shake could be discerned in her . 
