Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province , but from several other Russian towns , as well as from Moscow and Petersburg . 
Among them were lawyers , ladies , and even several distinguished personages . 
Every ticket of admission had been snatched up . 
A special place behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for the most distinguished and important of the men visitors ; a row of arm-chairs had been placed there - something exceptional , which had never been allowed before . 
A large proportion not less than half of the public - were ladies . 
There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did not know where to seat them , for every ticket had long since been eagerly sought for and distributed . 
I saw at the end of the room , behind the platform , a special partition hurriedly put up , behind which all these lawyers were admitted , and they thought themselves lucky to have standing room there , for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space , and the crowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed , shoulder to shoulder . 
Some of the ladies , especially those who came from a distance , made their appearance in the gallery very smartly dressed , but the majority of the ladies were oblivious even of dress . 
Their faces betrayed hysterical , intense , almost morbid , curiosity . 
A peculiar fact - established afterwards by many observations - was that almost all the ladies , or , at least the vast majority of them , were on Mitya 's side and in favour of his being acquitted . 
This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conqueror of female hearts . 
It was known that two women rivals were to appear in the case . 
One of them - Katerina Ivanovna - was an object of general interest . 
All sorts of extraordinary tales were told about her , amazing anecdotes of her passion for Mitya , in spite of his crime . 
Her pride and `` aristocratic connections '' were particularly insisted upon -LRB- she had called upon scarcely anyone in the town -RRB- . 
People said she intended to petition the Government for leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to him somewhere in the mines . 
The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaited with no less impatience . 
The public was looking forward with anxious curiosity to the meeting of the two rivals - the proud aristocratic girl and `` the hetaira . '' 
But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies of the district than Katerina Ivanovna . 
They had already seen `` the woman who had ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son , '' and all , almost without exception , wondered how father and son could be so in love with `` such a very common , ordinary Russian girl , who was not even pretty . '' 
In brief , there was a great deal of talk . 
I know for a fact that there were several serious family quarrels on Mitya 's account in our town . 
Many ladies quarrelled violently with their husbands over differences of opinion about the dreadful case , and it was that the husbands of these ladies , far from being favourably disposed to the prisoner , should enter the court bitterly prejudiced against him . 
In fact , one may say pretty certainly that the masculine , as distinguished from the feminine , part of the audience was biased against the prisoner . 
There were numbers of severe , frowning , even vindictive faces . 
Mitya , indeed , had managed to offend many people during his stay in the town . 
Some of the visitors were , of course , in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate of Mitya personally . 
But all were interested in the trial , and the majority of the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal , except perhaps the lawyers , who were more interested in the legal than in the moral aspect of the case . 
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer , Fetyukovitch . 
His talent was well known , and this was not the first time he had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces . 
And if he defended them , such cases became celebrated and long remembered all over Russia . 
There were stories , too , about our prosecutor and about the President of the Court . 
It was said that Ippolit Kirillovitch was in a tremor at meeting Fetyukovitch , and that they had been enemies from the beginning of their careers in Petersburg , that though our sensitive prosecutor , who always considered that he had been aggrieved by someone in Petersburg because his talents had not been properly appreciated , was keenly excited over the Karamazov case , and was even dreaming of rebuilding his flagging fortunes by means of it , Fetyukovitch , they said , was his one anxiety . 
But these rumours were not quite just . 
Our prosecutor was not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger . 
On the contrary , his self-confidence increased with the increase of danger . 
It must be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidly impressionable . 
He would put his whole soul into some case and work at it as though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result . 
This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world , for just by this characteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could have been expected from his modest position . 
People laughed particularly at his passion for psychology . 
In my opinion , they were wrong , and our prosecutor was , I believe , a character of greater depth than was generally supposed . 
But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outset of his career and had never made up for it later . 
As for the President of our Court , I can only say that he was a humane and cultured man , who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressive views . 
He was rather ambitious , but did not concern himself greatly about his future career . 
The great aim of his life was to be a man of advanced ideas . 
He was , too , a man of connections and property . 
He felt , as we learnt afterwards , rather strongly about the Karamazov case , but from a social , not from a personal standpoint . 
He was interested in it as a social phenomenon , in its classification and its character as a product of our social conditions , as typical of the national character , and so on , and so on . 
His attitude to the personal aspect of the case , to its tragic significance and the persons involved in it , including the prisoner , was rather indifferent and abstract , as was perhaps fitting , indeed . 
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made their appearance . 
