In reply to reiterated questions he stated that , after the Poles had been turned out , Mitya 's position with Agrafena Alexandrovna had certainly improved , and that she had said that she loved him . 
He spoke of Agrafena Alexandrovna with reserve and respect , as though she had been a lady of the best society , and did not once allow himself to call her Grushenka . 
In spite of the young man 's obvious repugnance at giving evidence , Ippolit Kirillovitch examined him at great length , and only from him learnt all the details of what made up Mitya 's `` romance , '' so to say , on that night . 
Mitya did not once pull Kalganov up . 
At last they let the young man go , and he left the room with unconcealed indignation . 
The Poles , too , were examined . 
Though they had gone to bed in their room , they had not slept all night , and on the arrival of the police officers they hastily dressed and got ready , realising that they would certainly be sent for . 
They gave their evidence with dignity , though not without some uneasiness . 
The little Pole turned out to be a retired official of the twelfth class , who had served in Siberia as a veterinary surgeon . 
His name was Mussyalovitch . 
Pan Vrubelvsky turned out to be an uncertificated dentist . 
Although Nikolay Parfenovitch asked them questions on entering the room they both addressed their answers to Mihail Makarovitch , who was standing on one side , taking him in their ignorance for the most important person and in command , and addressed him at every word as `` Pan Colonel . '' 
Only after several reproofs from Mihail Makarovitch himself , they grasped that they had to address their answers to Nikolay Parfenovitch only . 
It turned out that they could speak Russian quite correctly except for their accent in some words . 
Of his relations with Grushenka , past and present , Pan Mussyalovitch spoke proudly and warmly , so that Mitya was roused at once and declared that he would not allow the `` scoundrel '' to speak like that in his presence ! 
Pan Mussyalovitch at once called attention to the word `` scoundrel , '' and begged that it should be put down in the protocol . 
Mitya fumed with rage . 
`` He 's a scoundrel ! 
A scoundrel ! 
You can put that down . 
And put down , too , that , in spite of the protocol I still declare that he 's a scoundrel ! '' 
he cried . 
Though Nikolay Parfenovitch did insert this in the protocol , he showed the most praiseworthy tact and management . 
After sternly reprimanding Mitya , he cut short all further inquiry into the romantic aspect of the case , and hastened to pass to what was essential . 
One piece of evidence given by the Poles roused special interest in the lawyers : that was how , in that very room , Mitya had tried to buy off Pan Mussyalovitch , and had offered him three thousand roubles to resign his claims , seven hundred roubles down , and the remaining two thousand three hundred `` to be paid next day in the town . '' 
He had sworn at the time that he had not the whole sum with him at Mokroe , but that his money was in the town . 
Mitya observed hotly that he had not said that he would be sure to pay him the remainder next day in the town . 
But Pan Vrublevsky confirmed the statement , and Mitya , after thinking for a moment admitted , frowning , that it must have been as the Poles stated , that he had been excited at the time , and might indeed have said so . 
The prosecutor positively pounced on this piece of evidence . 
It seemed to establish for the prosecution -LRB- and they did , in fact , base this deduction on it -RRB- that half , or a part of , the three thousand that had come into Mitya 's hands might really have been left somewhere hidden in the town , or even , perhaps , somewhere here , in Mokroe . 
This would explain the circumstance , so baffling for the prosecution , that only eight hundred roubles were to be found in Mitya 's hands . 
This circumstance had been the one piece of evidence which , insignificant as it was , had hitherto told , to some extent , in Mitya 's favour . 
Now this one piece of evidence in his favour had broken down . 
In answer to the prosecutor 's inquiry , where he would have got the remaining two thousand three hundred roubles , since he himself had denied having more than fifteen hundred , Mitya confidently replied that he had meant to offer the `` little chap , '' not money , but a formal deed of conveyance of his rights to the village of Tchermashnya , those rights which he had already offered to Samsonov and Madame Hohlakov . 
The prosecutor positively smiled at the `` innocence of this subterfuge . '' 
`` And you imagine he would have accepted such a deed as a substitute for two thousand three hundred roubles in cash ? '' 
`` He certainly would have accepted it , '' Mitya declared warmly . 
`` Why , look here , he might have grabbed not two thousand , but four or six , for it . 
He would have put his lawyers , Poles and Jews , on to the job , and might have got , not three thousand , but the whole property out of the old man . '' 
The evidence of Pan Mussyalovitch was , of course , entered in the protocol in the fullest detail . 
Then they let the Poles go . 
The incident of the cheating at cards was hardly touched upon . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was too well pleased with them , as it was , and did not want to worry them with trifles , moreover , it was nothing but a foolish , drunken quarrel over cards . 
There had been drinking and disorder enough , that night ... . 
So the two hundred roubles remained in the pockets of the Poles . 
Then old Maximov was summoned . 
He came in timidly , approached with little steps , looking very dishevelled and depressed . 
He had , all this time , taken refuge below with Grushenka , sitting dumbly beside her , and `` now and then he 'd begin blubbering over her and wiping his eyes with a blue check handkerchief , '' as Mihail Makarovitch described afterwards . 
So that she herself began trying to pacify and comfort him . 
The old man at once confessed that he had done wrong , that he had borrowed `` ten roubles in my poverty , '' from Dmitri Fyodorovitch , and that he was ready to pay it back . 
