She was just then expecting the `` message , '' and was much relieved that Mitya had not been to see her that day or the day before . 
She hoped that `` please God he wo n't come till I 'm gone away , '' and he suddenly burst in on her . 
The rest we know already . 
To get him off her hands she suggested at once that he should walk with her to Samsonov 's , where she said she absolutely must go `` to settle his accounts , '' and when Mitya accompanied her at once , she said good-bye to him at the gate , making him promise to come at twelve o'clock to take her home again . 
Mitya , too , was delighted at this arrangement . 
If she was sitting at Samsonov 's she could not be going to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , `` if only she 's not lying , '' he added at once . 
But he thought she was not lying from what he saw . 
He was that sort of jealous man who , in the absence of the beloved woman , at once invents all sorts of awful fancies of what may be happening to her , and how she may be betraying him , but , when shaken , heartbroken , convinced of her faithlessness , he runs back to her , at the first glance at her face , her gay , laughing , affectionate face , he revives at once , lays aside all suspicion and with joyful shame abuses himself for his jealousy . 
After leaving Grushenka at the gate he rushed home . 
Oh , he had so much still to do that day ! 
But a load had been lifted from his heart , anyway . 
`` Now I must only make haste and find out from Smerdyakov whether anything happened there last night , whether , by any chance , she went to Fyodor Pavlovitch ; ough ! '' 
floated through his mind . 
Before he had time to reach his lodging , jealousy had surged up again in his restless heart . 
Jealousy ! 
`` Othello was not jealous , he was trustful , '' observed Pushkin . 
And that remark alone is enough to show the deep insight of our great poet . 
Othello 's soul was shattered and his whole outlook clouded simply because his ideal was destroyed . 
But Othello did not begin hiding , spying , peeping . 
He was trustful , on the contrary . 
He had to be led up , pushed on , excited with great difficulty before he could entertain the idea of deceit . 
The truly jealous man is not like that . 
It is impossible to picture to oneself the shame and moral degradation to which the jealous man can descend without a qualm of conscience . 
And yet it 's not as though the jealous were all vulgar and base souls . 
On the contrary , a man of lofty feelings , whose love is pure and full of self-sacrifice , may yet hide under tables , bribe the vilest people , and be familiar with the lowest ignominy of spying and eavesdropping . 
Othello was incapable of making up his mind to faithlessness - not incapable of forgiving it , but of making up his mind to it - though his soul was as innocent and free from malice as a babe 's . 
It is not so with the really jealous man . 
It is hard to imagine what some jealous men can make up their mind to and overlook , and what they can forgive ! 
The jealous are the readiest of all to forgive , and all women know it . 
The jealous man can forgive extraordinarily quickly -LRB- though , of course , after a violent scene -RRB- , and he is able to forgive infidelity almost conclusively proved , the very kisses and embraces he has seen , if only he can somehow be convinced that it has all been `` for the last time , '' and that his rival will vanish from that day forward , will depart to the ends of the earth , or that he himself will carry her away somewhere , where that dreaded rival will not get near her . 
Of course the reconciliation is only for an hour . 
For , even if the rival did disappear next day , he would invent another one and would be jealous of him . 
And one might wonder what there was in a love that had to be so watched over , what a love could be worth that needed such strenuous guarding . 
But that the jealous will never understand . 
And yet among them are men of noble hearts . 
It is remarkable , too , that those very men of noble hearts , standing hidden in some cupboard , listening and spying , never feel the stings of conscience at that moment , anyway , though they understand clearly enough with their `` noble hearts '' the shameful depths to which they have voluntarily sunk . 
At the sight of Grushenka , Mitya 's jealousy vanished , and , for an instant he became trustful and generous , and positively despised himself for his evil feelings . 
But it only proved that , in his love for the woman , there was an element of something far higher than he himself imagined , that it was not only a sensual passion , not only the `` curve of her body , '' of which he had talked to Alyosha . 
But , as soon as Grushenka had gone , Mitya began to suspect her of all the low cunning of faithlessness , and he felt no sting of conscience at it . 
And so jealousy surged up in him again . 
He had , in any case , to make haste . 
The first thing to be done was to get hold of at least a small , temporary loan of money . 
The nine roubles had almost all gone on his expedition . 
And , as we all know , one ca n't take a step without money . 
But he had thought over in the cart where he could get a loan . 
He had a brace of fine duelling pistols in a case , which he had not pawned till then because he prized them above all his possessions . 
In the Metropolis tavern he had some time since made acquaintance with a young official and had learnt that this very opulent bachelor was passionately fond of weapons . 
He used to buy pistols , revolvers , daggers , hang them on his wall and show them to acquaintances . 
He prided himself on them , and was quite a specialist on the mechanism of the revolver . 
Mitya , without stopping to think , went straight to him , and offered to pawn his pistols to him for ten roubles . 
