I 'm silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps Alyosha 's right , quite right , in not wanting to come and see such a ridiculous girl . '' 
`` I will certainly send him , '' said the elder . 
So Be It ! 
So Be It ! 
THE elder 's absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty-five minutes . 
It was more than half-past twelve , but Dmitri , on whose account they had all met there , had still not appeared . 
But he seemed almost to be forgotten , and when the elder entered the cell again , he found his guests engaged in eager conversation . 
Ivan and the two monks took the leading share in it . 
Miusov , too , was trying to take a part , and apparently very eagerly , in the conversation . 
But he was unsuccessful in this also . 
He was evidently in the background , and his remarks were treated with neglect , which increased his irritability . 
He had had intellectual encounters with Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed him . 
`` Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is progressive in Europe , and here the new generation positively ignores us , '' he thought . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had given his word to sit still and be quiet , had actually been quiet for some time , but he watched his neighbour Miusov with an ironical little smile , obviously enjoying his discomfiture . 
He had been waiting for some time to pay off old scores , and now he could not let the opportunity slip . 
Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper . 
`` Why did n't you go away just now , after the ` courteously kissing ' ? 
Why did you consent to remain in such unseemly company ? 
It was because you felt insulted and aggrieved , and you remained to vindicate yourself by showing off your intelligence . 
Now you wo n't go till you 've displayed your intellect to them . '' 
`` You again ? 
... On the contrary , I 'm just going . '' 
`` You 'll be the last , the last of all to go ! '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered him another thrust , almost at the moment of Father Zossima 's return . 
The discussion died down for a moment , but the elder , seating himself in his former place , looked at them all as though cordially inviting them to go on . 
Alyosha , who knew every expression of his face , saw that he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort . 
Of late he had been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion . 
His face had the pallor that was common before such attacks , and his lips were white . 
But he evidently did not want to break up the party . 
He seemed to have some special object of his own in keeping them . 
What object ? 
Alyosha watched him intently . 
`` We are discussing this gentleman 's most interesting article , '' said Father Iosif , the librarian , addressing the elder , and indicating Ivan . 
`` He brings forward much that is new , but I think the argument cuts both ways . 
It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court , and the scope of its jurisdiction . '' 
`` I 'm sorry I have not read your article , but I 've heard of it , '' said the elder , looking keenly and intently at Ivan . 
`` He takes up a most interesting position , '' continued the Father Librarian . 
`` As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposed to the separation of Church from State . '' 
`` That 's interesting . 
But in what sense ? '' 
Father Zossima asked Ivan . 
The latter , at last , answered him , not condescendingly , as Alyosha had feared , but with modesty and reserve , with evident goodwill and apparently without the slightest arrierepensee `` I start from the position that this confusion of elements , that is , of the essential principles of Church and State , will , of course , go on for ever , in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle , and that the confusion of these elements can not lead to any consistent or even normal results , for there is falsity at the very foundation of it . 
Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as , for instance , jurisdiction , is , to my thinking , impossible in any real sense . 
My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and defined position in the State . 
I maintain , on the contrary , that the Church ought to include the whole State , and not simply to occupy a corner in it , and , if this is , for some reason , impossible at present , then it ought , in reality , to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the future development of Christian society ! '' 
`` Perfectly true , '' Father Paissy , the silent and learned monk , assented with fervour and decision . 
`` The purest Ultramontanism ! '' 
cried Miusov impatiently , crossing and recrossing his legs . 
`` Oh , well , we have no mountains , '' cried Father Iosif , and turning to the elder he continued : `` Observe the answer he makes to the following ` fundamental and essential ' propositions of his opponent , who is , you must note , an ecclesiastic . 
First , that ` no social organisation can or ought to arrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political rights of its members . ' 
