Even Fenya 's evidence went to prove he had done it . 
And the people at the shop , and that official , and at the tavern , too , before , people had heard him say so ! 
They are all , all against him , all crying out against him . '' 
`` Yes , there 's a fearful accumulation of evidence , '' Alyosha observed grimly . 
`` And Grigory - Grigory Vassilyevitch - sticks to his story that the door was open , persists that he saw it - there 's no shaking him . 
I went and talked to him myself . 
He 's rude about it , too . '' 
`` Yes , that 's perhaps the strongest evidence against him , '' said Alyosha . 
`` And as for Mitya 's being mad , he certainly seems like it now , '' Grushenka began with a peculiarly anxious and mysterious air . 
`` Do you know , Alyosha , I 've been wanting to talk to you about it for a long time . 
I go to him every day and simply wonder at him . 
Tell me , now , what do you suppose he 's always talking about ? 
He talks and talks and I can make nothing of it . 
I fancied he was talking of something intellectual that I could n't understand in my foolishness . 
Only he suddenly began talking to me about a babe - that is , about some child . 
` Why is the babe poor ? ' 
he said . 
` It 's for that babe I am going to Siberia now . 
I am not a murderer , but I must go to Siberia ! ' 
What that meant , what babe , I could n't tell for the life of me . 
Only I cried when he said it , because he said it so nicely . 
He cried himself , and I cried , too . 
He suddenly kissed me and made the sign of the cross over me . 
What did it mean , Alyosha , tell me ? 
What is this babe ? '' 
`` It must be Rakitin , who 's been going to see him lately , '' smiled Alyosha , `` though ... that 's not Rakitin 's doing . 
I did n't see Mitya yesterday . 
I 'll see him to-day . '' 
`` No , it 's not Rakitin ; it 's his brother Ivan Fyodorovitch upsetting him . 
It 's his going to see him , that 's what it is , '' Grushenka began , and suddenly broke off . 
Alyosha gazed at her in amazement . 
`` Ivan 's going ? 
Has he been to see him ? 
Mitya told me himself that Ivan has n't been once . '' 
`` There ... there ! 
What a girl I am ! 
Blurting things out ! '' 
exclaimed Grushenka , confused and suddenly blushing . 
`` Stay , Alyosha , hush ! 
Since I 've said so much I 'll tell the whole truth - he 's been to see him twice , the first directly he arrived . 
He galloped here from Moscow at once , of course , before I was taken ill ; and the second time was a week ago . 
He told Mitya not to tell you about it , under any circumstances ; and not to tell anyone , in fact . 
He came secretly . '' 
Alyosha sat plunged in thought , considering something . 
The news evidently impressed him . 
`` Ivan does n't talk to me of Mitya 's case , '' he said slowly . 
`` He 's said very little to me these last two months . 
And whenever I go to see him , he seems vexed at my coming , so I 've not been to him for the last three weeks . 
H 'm ! 
... if he was there a week ago ... there certainly has been a change in Mitya this week . '' 
