That may be believed , that is very possible , that always happens at such moments with criminals . 
On one point they will show diabolical cunning , while another will escape them altogether . 
But he was thinking at that moment of one thing only - where was she ? 
He wanted to find out at once where she was , so he ran to her lodging and learnt an unexpected and astounding piece of news - she had gone off to Mokroe to meet her first lover . '' 
The Galloping Troika . 
The End of the Prosecutor 's Speech IPPOLIT KIRILLOVITCH had chosen the historial method of exposition , beloved by all nervous orators , who find in its limitation a check on their own eager rhetoric . 
At this moment in his speech he went off into a dissertation on Grushenka 's `` first lover , '' and brought forward several interesting thoughts on this theme . 
`` Karamazov , who had been frantically jealous of everyone , collapsed , so to speak , and effaced himself at once before this first lover . 
What makes it all the more strange is that he seems to have hardly thought of this formidable rival . 
But he had looked upon him as a remote danger , and Karamazov always lives in the present . 
Possibly he regarded him as a fiction . 
But his wounded heart grasped instantly that the woman had been concealing this new rival and deceiving him , because he was anything but a fiction to her , because he was the one hope of her life . 
Grasping this instantly , he resigned himself . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , I can not help dwelling on this unexpected trait in the prisoner 's character . 
He suddenly evinces an irresistible desire for justice , a respect for woman and a recognition of her right to love . 
And all this at the very moment when he had stained his hands with his father 's blood for her sake ! 
It is true that the blood he had shed was already crying out for vengeance , for , after having ruined his soul and his life in this world , he was forced to ask himself at that same instant what he was and what he could be now to her , to that being , dearer to him than his own soul , in comparison with that former lover who had returned penitent , with new love , to the woman he had once betrayed , with honourable offers , with the promise of a reformed and happy life . 
And he , luckless man , what could he give her now , what could he offer her ? 
`` Karamazov felt all this , knew that all ways were barred to him by his crime and that he was a criminal under sentence , and not a man with life before him ! 
This thought crushed him . 
And so he instantly flew to one frantic plan , which , to a man of Karamazov 's character , must have appeared the one inevitable way out of his terrible position . 
That way out was suicide . 
He ran for the pistols he had left in pledge with his friend Perhotin and on the way , as he ran , he pulled out of his pocket the money , for the sake of which he had stained his hands with his father 's gore . 
Oh , now he needed money more than ever . 
Karamazov would die , Karamazov would shoot himself and it should be remembered ! 
To be sure , he was a poet and had burnt the candle at both ends all his life . 
` To her , to her ! 
and there , oh , there I will give a feast to the whole world , such as never was before , that will be remembered and talked of long after ! 
In the midst of shouts of wild merriment , reckless gypsy songs and dances I shall raise the glass and drink to the woman I adore and her new-found happiness ! 
And then , on the spot , at her feet , I shall dash out my brains before her and punish myself ! 
She will remember Mitya Karamazov sometimes , she will see how Mitya loved her , she will feel for Mitya ! ' 
`` Here we see in excess a love of effect , a romantic despair and sentimentality , and the wild recklessness of the Karamazovs . 
Yes , but there is something else , gentlemen of the jury , something that cries out in the soul , throbs incessantly in the mind , and poisons the heart unto death - that something is conscience , gentlemen of the jury , its judgment , its terrible torments ! 
The pistol will settle everything , the pistol is the only way out ! 
But beyond - I do n't know whether Karamazov wondered at that moment ` What lies beyond , ' whether Karamazov could , like Hamlet , wonder ` What lies beyond . ' 
No , gentlemen of the jury , they have their Hamlets , but we still have our Karamazovs ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch drew a minute picture of Mitya 's preparations , the scene at Perhotin 's , at the shop , with the drivers . 
He quoted numerous words and actions , confirmed by witnesses , and the picture made a terrible impression on the audience . 
The guilt of this harassed and desperate man stood out clear and convincing , when the facts were brought together . 
`` What need had he of precaution ? 
Two or three times he almost confessed , hinted at it , all but spoke out . '' 
-LRB- Then followed the evidence given by witnesses . -RRB- 
`` He even cried out to the peasant who drove him , ` Do you know , you are driving a murderer ! ' 
But it was impossible for him to speak out , he had to get to Mokroe and there to finish his romance . 
But what was awaiting the luckless man ? 
Almost from the first minute at Mokroe he saw that his invincible rival was perhaps by no means so invincible , that the toast to their new-found happiness was not desired and would not be acceptable . 
But you know the facts , gentlemen of the jury , from the preliminary inquiry . 
Karamazov 's triumph over his rival was complete and his soul passed into quite a new phase , perhaps the most terrible phase through which his soul has passed or will pass . 
`` One may say with certainty , gentlemen of the jury , '' the prosecutor continued , `` that outraged nature and the criminal heart bring their own vengeance more completely than any earthly justice . 
What 's more , justice and punishment on earth positively alleviate the punishment of nature and are , indeed , essential to the soul of the criminal at such moments , as its salvation from despair . 
