Then , they went to greater refinements of cruelty - shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy , and because she did n't ask to be taken up at night -LRB- as though a child of five sleeping its angelic , sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask -RRB- , they smeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement , and it was her mother , her mother did this . 
And that mother could sleep , hearing the poor child 's groans ! 
Can you understand why a little creature , who ca n't even understand what 's done to her , should beat her little aching heart with her tiny fist in the dark and the cold , and weep her meek unresentful tears to dear , kind God to protect her ? 
Do you understand that , friend and brother , you pious and humble novice ? 
Do you understand why this infamy must be and is permitted ? 
Without it , I am told , man could not have existed on earth , for he could not have known good and evil . 
Why should he know that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much ? 
Why , the whole world of knowledge is not worth that child 's prayer to dear , kind God ' ! 
I say nothing of the sufferings of grown-up people , they have eaten the apple , damn them , and the devil take them all ! 
But these little ones ! 
I am making you suffer , Alyosha , you are not yourself . 
I 'll leave off if you like . '' 
`` Nevermind . 
I want to suffer too , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` One picture , only one more , because it 's so curious , so characteristic , and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities . 
I 've forgotten the name . 
I must look it up . 
It was in the darkest days of serfdom at the beginning of the century , and long live the Liberator of the People ! 
There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections , the owner of great estates , one of those men - somewhat exceptional , I believe , even then - who , retiring from the service into a life of leisure , are convinced that they 've earned absolute power over the lives of their subjects . 
There were such men then . 
So our general , settled on his property of two thousand souls , lives in pomp , and domineers over his poor neighbours as though they were dependents and buffoons . 
He has kennels of hundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog-boys - all mounted , and in uniform . 
One day a serf-boy , a little child of eight , threw a stone in play and hurt the paw of the general 's favourite hound . 
` Why is my favourite dog lame ? ' 
He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog 's paw . 
` So you did it . ' 
The general looked the child up and down . 
` Take him . ' 
He was taken - taken from his mother and kept shut up all night . 
Early that morning the general comes out on horseback , with the hounds , his dependents , dog-boys , and huntsmen , all mounted around him in full hunting parade . 
The servants are summoned for their edification , and in front of them all stands the mother of the child . 
The child is brought from the lock-up . 
It 's a gloomy , cold , foggy , autumn day , a capital day for hunting . 
The general orders the child to be undressed ; the child is stripped naked . 
He shivers , numb with terror , not daring to cry ... ` Make him run , ' commands the general . 
` Run ! 
run ! ' 
shout the dog-boys . 
The boy runs ... ` At him ! ' 
yells the general , and he sets the whole pack of hounds on the child . 
The hounds catch him , and tear him to pieces before his mother 's eyes ! 
... I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable of administering his estates . 
Well - what did he deserve ? 
To be shot ? 
To be shot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings ? 
Speak , Alyosha ! 
`` To be shot , '' murmured Alyosha , lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale , twisted smile . 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan delighted . 
`` If even you say so ... You 're a pretty monk ! 
