`` There were reasons which you shall know directly . 
Anyway , I am glad to make your acquaintance . 
I 've long been hoping for an opportunity , and have heard a great deal about you , '' Kolya muttered , a little breathless . 
`` We should have met anyway . 
I 've heard a great deal about you , too ; but you 've been a long time coming here . '' 
`` Tell me , how are things going ? '' 
`` Ilusha is very ill . 
He is certainly dying . '' 
`` How awful ! 
You must admit that medicine is a fraud , Karamazov , '' cried Kolya warmly . 
`` Ilusha has mentioned you often , very often , even in his sleep , in delirium , you know . 
One can see that you used to be very , very dear to him ... before the incident ... with the knife ... . 
Then there 's another reason ... . 
Tell me , is that your dog ? '' 
`` Yes Perezvon . '' 
`` Not Zhutchka ? '' 
Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity . 
`` Is she lost for ever ? '' 
`` I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka . 
I 've heard all about it . '' 
Kolya smiled mysteriously . 
`` Listen , Karamazov , I 'll tell you all about it . 
That 's what I came for ; that 's what I asked you to come out here for , to explain the whole episode to you before we go in , '' he began with animation . 
`` You see , Karamazov , Ilusha came into the preparatory class last spring . 
Well , you know what our preparatory class is - a lot of small boys . 
They began teasing Ilusha at once . 
I am two classes higher up , and , of course , I only look on at them from a distance . 
I saw the boy was weak and small , but he would n't give in to them ; he fought with them . 
I saw he was proud , and his eyes were full of fire . 
I like children like that . 
And they teased him all the more . 
The worst of it was he was horribly dressed at the time , his breeches were too small for him , and there were holes in his boots . 
They worried him about it ; they jeered at him . 
That I ca n't stand . 
I stood up for him at once , and gave it to them hot . 
I beat them , but they adore me , do you know , Karamazov ? '' 
Kolya boasted impulsively ; `` but I am always fond of children . 
I 've two chickens in my hands at home now - that 's what detained me to-day . 
So they left off beating Ilusha and I took him under my protection . 
I saw the boy was proud . 
I tell you that , the boy was proud ; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me : he did my slightest bidding , obeyed me as though I were God , tried to copy me . 
In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once ' and I 'd go about with him . 
On Sundays , too . 
They always laugh when an older boy makes friends with a younger one like that ; but that 's a prejudice . 
If it 's my fancy , that 's enough . 
I am teaching him , developing him . 
Why should n't I develop him if I like him ? 
Here you , Karamazov , have taken up with all these nestlings . 
I see you want to influence the younger generation - to develop them , to be of use to them , and I assure you this trait in your character , which I knew by hearsay , attracted me more than anything . 
Let us get to the point , though . 
