`` Meanwhile , I spent my time in drink and riot , till the lieutenant-colonel put me under arrest for three days . 
Just at that time father sent me six thousand roubles in return for my sending him a deed giving up all claims upon him - settling our accounts , so to speak , and saying that I would n't expect anything more . 
I did n't understand a word of it at the time . 
Until I came here , Alyosha , till the last few days , indeed , perhaps even now , I have n't been able to make head or tail of my money affairs with father . 
But never mind that , we 'll talk of it later . 
`` Just as I received the money , I got a letter from a friend telling me something that interested me immensely . 
The authorities , I learnt , were dissatisfied with our lieutenant-colonel . 
He was suspected of irregularities ; in fact , his enemies were preparing a surprise for him . 
And then the commander of the division arrived , and kicked up the devil of a shindy . 
Shortly afterwards he was ordered to retire . 
I wo n't tell you how it all happened . 
He had enemies certainly . 
Suddenly there was a marked coolness in the town towards him and all his family . 
His friends all turned their backs on him . 
Then I took my first step . 
I met Agafya Ivanovna , with whom I 'd always kept up a friendship , and said , ` Do you know there 's a deficit of 4500 roubles of government money in your father 's accounts ? ' '' 
` What do you mean ? 
What makes you say so ? 
The general was here not long ago , and everything was all right . ' '' 
` Then it was , but now it is n't . ' 
`` She was terribly scared . '' 
` Do n't frighten me ! ' 
she said . 
` Who told you so ? ' '' 
` Do n't be uneasy , ' I said , ' I wo n't tell anyone . 
You know I 'm as silent as the tomb . 
I only wanted , in view of `` possibilities , '' to add , that when they demand that 4500 roubles from your father , and he ca n't produce it , he 'll be tried , and made to serve as a common soldier in his old age , unless you like to send me your young lady secretly . 
I 've just had money paid me . 
I 'll give her four thousand , if you like , and keep the secret religiously . ' '' 
` Ah , you scoundrel ! ' 
- that 's what she said . 
` You wicked scoundrel ! 
How dare you ! ' 
`` She went away furiously indignant , while I shouted after her once more that the secret should be kept sacred . 
Those two simple creatures , Agafya and her aunt , I may as well say at once , behaved like perfect angels all through this business . 
They genuinely adored their ` Katya , ' thought her far above them , and waited on her , hand and foot . 
But Agafya told her of our conversation . 
I found that out afterwards . 
She did n't keep it back , and of course that was all I wanted . 
`` Suddenly the new major arrived to take command of the battalion . 
The old lieutenant-colonel was taken ill at once , could n't leave his room for two days , and did n't hand over the government money . 
Dr. Kravchenko declared that he really was ill . 
But I knew for a fact , and had known for a long time , that for the last four years the money had never been in his hands except when the Commander made his visits of inspection . 
He used to lend it to a trustworthy person , a merchant of our town called Trifonov , an old widower , with a big beard and gold-rimmed spectacles . 
He used to go to the fair , do a profitable business with the money , and return the whole sum to the colonel , bringing with it a present from the fair , as well as interest on the loan . 
But this time -LRB- I heard all about it quite by chance from Trifonov 's son and heir , a drivelling youth and one of the most vicious in the world -RRB- - this time , I say , Trifonov brought nothing back from the fair . 
The lieutenant-colonel flew to him . 
` I 've never received any money from you , and could n't possibly have received any . ' 
That was all the answer he got . 
So now our lieutenant-colonel is confined to the house , with a towel round his head , while they 're all three busy putting ice on it . 
