` Fathers , provoke not your children to wrath , ' the apostle writes , from a heart glowing with love . 
It 's not for the sake of my client that I quote these sacred words , I mention them for all fathers . 
Who has authorised me to preach to fathers ? 
No one . 
But as a man and a citizen I make my appeal - vivos voco ! 
We are not long on earth , we do many evil deeds and say many evil words . 
So let us all catch a favourable moment when we are all together to say a good word to each other . 
That 's what I am doing : while I am in this place I take advantage of my opportunity . 
Not for nothing is this tribune given us by the highest authority - all Russia hears us ! 
I am not speaking only for the fathers here present , I cry aloud to all fathers : ` Fathers , provoke not your children to wrath . ' 
Yes , let us first fulfil Christ 's injunction ourselves and only then venture to expect it of our children . 
Otherwise we are not fathers , but enemies of our children , and they are not our children , but our enemies , and we have made them our enemies ourselves . 
` What measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you again ' - it 's not I who say that , it 's the Gospel precept , measure to others according as they measure to you . 
How can we blame children if they measure us according to our measure ? 
`` Not long ago a servant girl in Finland was suspected of having secretly given birth to a child . 
She was watched , and a box of which no one knew anything was found in the corner of the loft , behind some bricks . 
It was opened and inside was found the body of a new-born child which she had killed . 
In the same box were found the skeletons of two other babies which , according to her own confession , she had killed at the moment of their birth . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , was she a mother to her children ? 
She gave birth to them , indeed ; but was she a mother to them ? 
Would anyone venture to give her the sacred name of mother ? 
Let us be bold , gentlemen , let us be audacious even : it 's our duty to be so at this moment and not to be afraid of certain words and ideas like the Moscow women in Ostrovsky 's play , who are scared at the sound of certain words . 
No , let us prove that the progress of the last few years has touched even us , and let us say plainly , the father is not merely he who begets the child , but he who begets it and does his duty by it . 
`` Oh , of course , there is the other meaning , there is the other interpretation of the word ` father , ' which insists that any father , even though he be a monster , even though he be the enemy of his children , still remains my father simply because he begot me . 
But this is , so to say , the mystical meaning which I can not comprehend with my intellect , but can only accept by faith , or , better to say , on faith , like many other things which I do not understand , but which religion bids me believe . 
But in that case let it be kept outside the sphere of actual life . 
In the sphere of actual life , which has , indeed , its own rights , but also lays upon us great duties and obligations , in that sphere , if we want to be humane - Christian , in fact - we must , or ought to , act only upon convictions justified by reason and experience , which have been passed through the crucible of analysis ; in a word , we must act rationally , and not as though in dream and delirium , that we may not do harm , that we may not ill-treat and ruin a man . 
Then it will be real Christian work , not only mystic , but rational and philanthropic ... '' There was violent applause at this passage from many parts of the court , but Fetyukovitch waved his hands as though imploring them to let him finish without interruption . 
The court relapsed into silence at once . 
The orator went on . 
`` Do you suppose , gentlemen , that our children as they grow up and begin to reason can avoid such questions ? 
No , they can not , and we will not impose on them an impossible restriction . 
The sight of an unworthy father involuntarily suggests tormenting questions to a young creature , especially when he compares him with the excellent fathers of his companions . 
The conventional answer to this question is : ` He begot you , and you are his flesh and blood , and therefore you are bound to love him . ' 
The youth involuntarily reflects : ` But did he love me when he begot me ? ' 
he asks , wondering more and more . 
` Was it for my sake he begot me ? 
He did not know me , not even my sex , at that moment , at the moment of passion , perhaps , inflamed by wine , and he has only transmitted to me a propensity to drunkenness - that 's all he 's done for me ... . 
Why am I bound to love him simply for begetting me when he has cared nothing for me all my life after ? ' 
`` Oh , perhaps those questions strike you as coarse and cruel , but do not expect an impossible restraint from a young mind . 
` Drive nature out of the door and it will fly in at the window , ' and , above all , let us not be afraid of words , but decide the question according to the dictates of reason and humanity and not of mystic ideas . 
How shall it be decided ? 
Why , like this . 
Let the son stand before his father and ask him , ` Father , tell me , why must I love you ? 
Father , show me that I must love you , ' and if that father is able to answer him and show him good reason , we have a real , normal , parental relation , not resting on mystical prejudice , but on a rational , responsible and strictly humanitarian basis . 
But if he does not , there 's an end to the family tie . 
He is not a father to him , and the son has a right to look upon him as a stranger , and even an enemy . 
Our tribune , gentlemen of the jury , ought to be a school of true and sound ideas . '' 
-LRB- Here the orator was interrupted by irrepressible and almost frantic applause . 
Of course , it was not the whole audience , but a good half of it applauded . 
