They worry over their ` wickedness , ' they are tormented by pangs of conscience , often entirely without cause ; they exaggerate and often invent all sorts of faults and crimes . 
And here we have a man of that type who had really been driven to wrongdoing by terror and intimidation . 
`` He had , besides , a strong presentiment that something terrible would be the outcome of the situation that was developing before his eyes . 
When Ivan Fyodorovitch was leaving for Moscow , just before the catastrophe , Smerdyakov besought him to remain , though he was too timid to tell him plainly what he feared . 
He confined himself to hints , but his hints were not understood . 
`` It must be observed that he looked on Ivan Fyodorovitch as a protector , whose presence in the house was a guarantee that no harm would come to pass . 
Remember the phrase in Dmitri Karamazov 's drunken letter , ' I shall kill the old man , if only Ivan goes away . ' 
So Ivan Fyodorovitch 's presence seemed to everyone a guarantee of peace and order in the house . 
`` But he went away , and within an hour of his young master 's departure Smerdyakov was taken with an epileptic fit . 
But that 's perfectly intelligible . 
Here I must mention that Smerdyakov , oppressed by terror and despair of a sort , had felt during those last few days that one of the fits from which he had suffered before at moments of strain , might be coming upon him again . 
The day and hour of such an attack can not , of course , be foreseen , but every epileptic can feel beforehand that he is likely to have one . 
So the doctors tell us . 
And so , as soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch had driven out of the yard , Smerdyakov , depressed by his lonely and unprotected position , went to the cellar . 
He went down the stairs wondering if he would have a fit or not , and what if it were to come upon him at once . 
And that very apprehension , that very wonder , brought on the spasm in his throat that always precedes such attacks , and he fell unconscious into the cellar . 
And in this perfectly natural occurrence people try to detect a suspicion , a hint that he was shamming an attack on purpose . 
But , if it were on purpose , the question arises at once , what was his motive ? 
What was he reckoning on ? 
What was he aiming at ? 
I say nothing about medicine : science , I am told , may go astray : the doctors were not able to discriminate between the counterfeit and the real . 
That may be so , but answer me one question : what motive had he for such a counterfeit ? 
Could he , had he been plotting the murder , have desired to attract the attention of the household by having a fit just before ? 
`` You see , gentlemen of the jury , on the night of the murder , there were five persons in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's - Fyodor Pavlovitch himself -LRB- but he did not kill himself , that 's evident -RRB- ; then his servant , Grigory , but he was almost killed himself ; the third person was Grigory 's wife , Marfa Ignatyevna , but it would be simply shameful to imagine her murdering her master . 
Two persons are left - the prisoner and Smerdyakov . 
But , if we are to believe the prisoner 's statement that he is not the murderer , then Smerdyakov must have been , for there is no other alternative , no one else can be found . 
That is what accounts for the artful , astounding accusation against the unhappy idiot who committed suicide yesterday . 
Had a shadow of suspicion rested on anyone else , had there been any sixth person , I am persuaded that even the prisoner would have been ashamed to accuse Smerdyakov , and would have accused that sixth person , for to charge Smerdyakov with that murder is perfectly absurd . 
`` Gentlemen , let us lay aside psychology , let us lay aside medicine , let us even lay aside logic , let us turn only to the facts and see what the facts tell us . 
If Smerdyakov killed him , how did he do it ? 
Alone or with the assistance of the prisoner ? 
Let us consider the first alternative - that he did it alone . 
If he had killed him it must have been with some object , for some advantage to himself . 
But not having a shadow of the motive that the prisoner had for the murder - hatred , jealousy , and so on - Smerdyakov could only have murdered him for the sake of gain , in order to appropriate the three thousand roubles he had seen his master put in the envelope . 
And yet he tells another person - and a person most closely interested , that is , the prisoner - everything about the money and the signals , where the envelope lay , what was written on it , what it was tied up with , and , above all , told him of those signals by which he could enter the house . 
Did he do this simply to betray himself , or to invite to the same enterprise one who would be anxious to get that envelope for himself ? 
` Yes , ' I shall be told , ` but he betrayed it from fear . ' 
But how do you explain this ? 
A man who could conceive such an audacious , savage act , and carry it out , tells facts which are known to no one else in the world , and which , if he held his tongue , no one would ever have guessed ! 
`` No , however cowardly he might be , if he had plotted such a crime , nothing would have induced him to tell anyone about the envelope and the signals , for that was as good as betraying himself beforehand . 
He would have invented something , he would have told some lie if he had been forced to give information , but he would have been silent about that . 
For , on the other hand , if he had said nothing about the money , but had committed the murder and stolen the money , no one in the world could have charged him with murder for the sake of robbery , since no one but he had seen the money , no one but he knew of its existence in the house . 
Even if he had been accused of the murder , it could only have been thought that he had committed it from some other motive . 
But since no one had observed any such motive in him beforehand , and everyone saw , on the contrary , that his master was fond of him and honoured him with his confidence , he would , of course , have been the last to be suspected . 
People would have suspected first the man who had a motive , a man who had himself declared he had such motives , who had made no secret of it ; they would , in fact , have suspected the son of the murdered man , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Had Smerdyakov killed and robbed him , and the son been accused of it , that would , of course , have suited Smerdyakov . 
Yet are we to believe that , though plotting the murder , he told that son , Dmitri , about the money , the envelope , and the signals ? 
Is that logical ? 
Is that clear ? 
`` When the day of the murder planned by Smerdyakov came , we have him falling downstairs in a feigned fit - with what object ? 
