`` His teaching was false ; he taught that life is a great joy and not a vale of tears , '' said some of the more unreasonable . 
`` He followed the fashionable belief , he did not recognise material fire in hell , '' others , still more unreasonable , added . 
`` He was not strict in fasting , allowed himself sweet things , ate cherry jam with his tea , ladies used to send it to him . 
Is it for a monk of strict rule to drink tea ? '' 
could be heard among some of the envious . 
`` He sat in pride , '' the most malignant declared vindictively ; `` he considered himself a saint and he took it as his due when people knelt before him . '' 
`` He abused the sacrament of confession , '' the fiercest opponents of the institution of elders added in a malicious whisper . 
And among these were some of the oldest monks , strictest in their devotion , genuine ascetics , who had kept silent during the life of the deceased elder , but now suddenly unsealed their lips . 
And this was terrible , for their words had great influence on young monks who were not yet firm in their convictions . 
The monk from Obdorsk heard all this attentively , heaving deep sighs and nodding his head . 
`` Yes , clearly Father Ferapont was right in his judgment yesterday , '' and at that moment Father Ferapont himself made his appearance , as though on purpose to increase the confusion . 
I have mentioned already that he rarely left his wooden cell by the apiary . 
He was seldom even seen at church and they overlooked this neglect on the ground of his craziness , and did not keep him to the rules binding on all the rest . 
But if the whole truth is to be told , they hardly had a choice about it . 
For it would have been discreditable to insist on burdening with the common regulations so great an ascetic , who prayed day and night -LRB- he even dropped asleep on his knees -RRB- . 
If they had insisted , the monks would have said , `` He is holier than all of us and he follows a rule harder than ours . 
And if he does not go to church , it 's because he knows when he ought to ; he has his own rule . '' 
It was to avoid the chance of these sinful murmurs that Father Ferapont was left in peace . 
As everyone was aware , Father Ferapont particularly disliked Father Zossima . 
And now the news had reached him in his hut that `` God 's judgment is not the same as man 's , '' and that something had happened which was `` in excess of nature . '' 
It may well be supposed that among the first to run to him with the news was the monk from Obdorsk , who had visited him the evening before and left his cell terror-stricken . 
I have mentioned above , that though Father Paissy standing firm and immovable reading the Gospel over the coffin , could not hear nor see what was passing outside the cell , he gauged most of it correctly in his heart , for he knew the men surrounding him well . 
He was not shaken by it , but awaited what would come next without fear , watching with penetration and insight for the outcome of the general excitement . 
Suddenly an extraordinary uproar in the passage in open defiance of decorum burst on his ears . 
The door was flung open and Father Ferapont appeared in the doorway . 
Behind him there could be seen accompanying him a crowd of monks , together with many people from the town . 
They did not , however , enter the cell , but stood at the bottom of the steps , waiting to see what Father Ferapont would say or do . 
For they felt with a certain awe , in spite of their audacity , that he had not come for nothing . 
Standing in the doorway , Father Ferapont raised his arms , and under his right arm the keen inquisitive little eyes of the monk from Obdorsk peeped in . 
He alone , in his intense curiosity , could not resist running up the steps after Father Ferapont . 
The others , on the contrary , pressed farther back in sudden alarm when the door was noisily flung open . 
Holding his hands aloft , Father Ferapont suddenly roared : `` Casting out I cast out ! '' 
and , turning in all directions , he began at once making the sign of the cross at each of the four walls and four corners of the cell in succession . 
All who accompanied Father Ferapont immediately understood his action . 
For they knew he always did this wherever he went , and that he would not sit down or say a word , till he had driven out the evil spirits . 
`` Satan , go hence ! 
Satan , go hence ! '' 
he repeated at each sign of the cross . 
`` Casting out I cast out , '' he roared again . 
He was wearing his coarse gown girt with a rope . 
His bare chest , covered with grey hair , could be seen under his hempen shirt . 
His feet were bare . 
As soon as he began waving his arms , the cruel irons he wore under his gown could be heard clanking . 
Father Paissy paused in his reading , stepped forward and stood before him waiting `` What have you come for , worthy Father ? 
Why do you offend against good order ? 
Why do you disturb the peace of the flock ? '' 
he said at last , looking sternly at him . 
`` What have I come for ? 
You ask why ? 
What is your faith ? '' 
