Mihail Makarovitch was by no means very efficient in his work , though he performed his duties no worse than many others . 
To speak plainly , he was a man of rather narrow education . 
His understanding of the limits of his administrative power could not always be relied upon . 
It was not so much that he failed to grasp certain reforms enacted during the present reign , as that he made conspicuous blunders in his interpretation of them . 
This was not from any special lack of intelligence , but from carelessness , for he was always in to great a hurry to go into the subject . 
`` I have the heart of a soldier rather than of a civilian , '' he used to say of himself . 
He had not even formed a definite idea of the fundamental principles of the reforms connected with the emancipation of the serfs , and only picked it up , so to speak , from year to year , involuntarily increasing his knowledge by practice . 
And yet he was himself a landowner . 
Pyotr Ilyitch knew for certain that he would meet some of Mihail Makarovitch 's visitors there that evening , but he did n't know which . 
As it happened , at that moment the prosecutor , and Varvinsky , our district doctor , a young man , who had only just come to us from Petersburg after taking a brilliant degree at the Academy of Medicine , were playing whist at the police captain 's . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch , the prosecutor -LRB- he was really the deputy prosecutor , but we always called him the prosecutor -RRB- , was rather a peculiar man , of about five and thirty , inclined to be consumptive , and married to a fat and childless woman . 
He was vain and irritable , though he had a good intellect , and even a kind heart . 
It seemed that all that was wrong with him was that he had a better opinion of himself than his ability warranted . 
And that made him seem constantly uneasy . 
He had , moreover , certain higher , even artistic , leanings , towards psychology , for instance , a special study of the human heart , a special knowledge of the criminal and his crime . 
He cherished a grievance on this ground , considering that he had been passed over in the service , and being firmly persuaded that in higher spheres he had not been properly appreciated , and had enemies . 
In gloomy moments he even threatened to give up his post , and practise as a barrister in criminal cases . 
The unexpected Karamazov case agitated him profoundly : `` It was a case that might well be talked about all over Russia . '' 
But I am anticipating . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov , the young investigating lawyer , who had only come from Petersburg two months before , was sitting in the next room with the young ladies . 
People talked about it afterwards and wondered that all the gentlemen should , as though intentionally , on the evening of `` the crime '' have been gathered together at the house of the executive authority . 
Yet it was perfectly simple and happened quite naturally . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch 's wife had had toothache for the last two days , and he was obliged to go out to escape from her groans . 
The doctor , from the very nature of his being , could not spend an evening except at cards . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov had been intending for three days past to drop in that evening at Mihail Makarovitch 's , so to speak casually , so as slyly to startle the eldest granddaughter , Olga Mihailovna , by showing that he knew her secret , that he knew it was her birthday , and that she was trying to conceal it on purpose , so as not to be obliged to give a dance . 
He anticipated a great deal of merriment , many playful jests about her age , and her being afraid to reveal it , about his knowing her secret and telling everybody , and so on . 
The charming young man was a great adept at such teasing ; the ladies had christened him `` the naughty man , '' and he seemed to be delighted at the name . 
He was extremely well-bred , however , of good family , education and feelings , and , though leading a life of pleasure , his sallies were always innocent and in good taste . 
He was short , and delicate-looking . 
On his white , slender , little fingers he always wore a number of big , glittering rings . 
When he was engaged in his official duties , he always became extraordinarily grave , as though realising his position and the sanctity of the obligations laid upon him . 
He had a special gift for mystifying murderers and other criminals of the peasant class during interrogation , and if he did not win their respect , he certainly succeeded in arousing their wonder . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was simply dumbfounded when he went into the police captain 's . 
He saw instantly that everyone knew . 
They had positively thrown down their cards , all were standing up and talking . 
Even Nikolay Parfenovitch had left the young ladies and run in , looking strenuous and ready for action . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was met with the astounding news that old Fyodor Pavlovitch really had been murdered that evening in his own house , murdered and robbed . 
The news had only just reached them in the following manner : Marfa Ignatyevna , the wife of old Grigory , who had been knocked senseless near the fence , was sleeping soundly in her bed and might well have slept till morning after the draught she had taken . 
But , all of a sudden she waked up , no doubt roused by a fearful epileptic scream from Smerdyakov , who was lying in the next room unconscious . 
That scream always preceded his fits , and always terrified and upset Marfa Ignatyevna . 
She could never get accustomed to it . 
She jumped up and ran half-awake to Smerdyakov 's room . 
But it was dark there , and she could only hear the invalid beginning to gasp and struggle . 
Then Marfa Ignatyevna herself screamed out and was going to call her husband , but suddenly realised that when she had got up , he was not beside her in bed . 
She ran back to the bedstead and began groping with her hands , but the bed was really empty . 
Then he must have gone out where ? 
She ran to the steps and timidly called him . 
She got no answer , of course , but she caught the sound of groans far away in the garden in the darkness . 
She listened . 
The groans were repeated , and it was evident they came from the garden . 
