`` I believe that is it . '' 
`` And , if so , he 's not altogether lost . 
I can still save him . 
Stay ! 
Did he not tell you anything about money - about three thousand roubles ? '' 
`` He did speak about it , and it 's that more than anything that 's crushing him . 
He said he had lost his honour and that nothing matters now , '' Alyosha answered warmly , feeling a rush of hope in his heart and believing that there really might be a way of escape and salvation for his brother . 
`` But do you know about the money ? '' 
he added , and suddenly broke off . 
`` I 've known of it a long time ; I telegraphed to Moscow to inquire , and heard long ago that the money had not arrived . 
He had n't sent the money , but I said nothing . 
Last week I learnt that he was still in need of money . 
My only object in all this was that he should know to whom to turn , and who was his true friend . 
No , he wo n't recognise that I am his truest friend ; he wo n't know me , and looks on me merely as a woman . 
I 've been tormented all the week , trying to think how to prevent him from being ashamed to face me because he spent that three thousand . 
Let him feel ashamed of himself , let him be ashamed of other people 's knowing , but not of my knowing . 
He can tell God everything without shame . 
Why is it he still does not understand how much I am ready to bear for his sake ? 
Why , why does n't he know me ? 
How dare he not know me after all that has happened ? 
I want to save him for ever . 
Let him forget me as his betrothed . 
And here he fears that he is dishonoured in my eyes . 
Why , he was n't afraid to be open with you , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
How is it that I do n't deserve the same ? '' 
The last words she uttered in tears . 
Tears gushed from her eyes . 
`` I must tell you , '' Alyosha began , his voice trembling too , `` what happened just now between him and my father . '' 
And he described the whole scene , how Dmitri had sent him to get the money , how he had broken in , knocked his father down , and after that had again specially and emphatically begged him to take his compliments and farewell . 
`` He went to that woman , '' Alyosha added softly . 
`` And do you suppose that I ca n't put up with that woman ? 
Does he think I ca n't ? 
But he wo n't marry her , '' she suddenly laughed nervously . 
`` Could such a passion last for ever in a Karamazov ? 
It 's passion , not love . 
He wo n't marry her because she wo n't marry him . '' 
Again Katerina Ivanovna laughed strangely . 
`` He may marry her , '' said Alyosha mournfully , looking down . 
`` He wo n't marry her , I tell you . 
That girl is an angel . 
Do you know that ? 
Do you know that ? '' 
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly with extraordinary warmth . 
`` She is one of the most fantastic of fantastic creatures . 
I know how bewitching she is , but I know too that she is kind , firm , and noble . 
Why do you look at me like that , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? 
Perhaps you are wondering at my words , perhaps you do n't believe me ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , my angel ! '' 
she cried suddenly to someone , peeping into the next room , `` come in to us . 
This is a friend . 
