They might kill him . 
They are children and stupid . 
A stone may be thrown and break somebody 's head . '' 
`` That 's just what has happened . 
He has been bruised by a stone to-day . 
Not on the head but on the chest , just above the heart . 
He came home crying and groaning and now he is ill . '' 
`` And you know he attacks them first . 
He is bitter against them on your account . 
They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a penknife not long ago . '' 
`` I 've heard about that too , it 's dangerous . 
Krassotkin is an official here , we may hear more about it . '' 
`` I would advise you , '' Alyosha went on warmly , `` not to send him to school at all for a time till he is calmer . 
and his anger is passed . '' 
`` Anger ! '' 
the captain repeated , `` that 's just what it is . 
He is a little creature , but it 's a mighty anger . 
You do n't know all , sir . 
Let me tell you more . 
Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the ` wisp of tow . ' 
Schoolboys are a merciless race , individually they are angels , but together , especially in schools , they are often merciless . 
Their teasing has stiffed up a gallant spirit in Ilusha . 
An ordinary boy , a weak son , would have submitted , have felt ashamed of his father , sir , but he stood up for his father against them all . 
For his father and for truth and justice . 
For what he suffered when he kissed your brother 's hand and cried to him ` Forgive father , forgive him , ' - that only God knows - and I , his father . 
For our children - not your children , but ours - the children of the poor gentlemen looked down upon by everyone - know what justice means , sir , even at nine years old . 
How should the rich know ? 
They do n't explore such depths once in their lives . 
But at that moment in the square when he kissed his hand , at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justice means . 
That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever , sir , '' the captain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy , and he struck his right fist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how `` the truth '' crushed Ilusha . 
`` That very day , sir , he fell ill with fever and was delirious all night . 
All that day he hardly said a word to me , but I noticed he kept watching me from the corner , though he turned to the window and pretended to be learning his lessons . 
But I could see his mind was not on his lessons . 
Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles , sinful man as I am , and I do n't remember much . 
Mamma began crying , too - I am very fond of mamma - well , I spent my last penny drowning my troubles . 
Do n't despise me for that , sir , in Russia men who drink are the best . 
The best men amongst us are the greatest drunkards . 
I lay down and I do n't remember about Ilusha , though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at school . 
` Wisp of tow , ' they shouted , ` your father was pulled out of the tavern by his wisp of tow , you ran by and begged forgiveness . ' 
`` On the third day when he came back from school , I saw he looked pale and wretched . 
` What is it ? ' 
I asked . 
He would n't answer . 
Well , there 's no talking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it . 
What 's more , the girls had heard about it the very first day . 
Varvara had begun snarling . 
` You fools and buffoons , can you ever do anything rational ? ' 
` Quite so , ' I said , ` can we ever do anything rational ? ' 
For the time I turned it off like that . 
So in the evening I took the boy out for a walk , for you must know we go for a walk every evening , always the same way , along which we are going now - from our gate to that great stone which lies alone in the road under the hurdle , which marks the beginning of the town pasture . 
