`` Do n't dare to do such a thing ! '' 
cried Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` I wo n't have it in my house , it 's a bad , demoralising habit . 
Put your money away . 
Here , put it here , why waste it ? 
It would come in handy to-morrow , and I dare say you 'll be coming to me to borrow ten roubles again . 
Why do you keep putting the notes in your side pocket ? 
Ah , you 'll lose them ! '' 
`` I say , my dear fellow , let 's go to Mokroe together . '' 
`` What should I go for ? '' 
`` I say , let 's open a bottle at once , and drink to life ! 
I want to drink , and especially to drink with you . 
I 've never drunk with you , have I ? '' 
`` Very well , we can go to the Metropolis . 
I was just going there . '' 
`` I have n't time for that . 
Let 's drink at the Plotnikovs ' , in the back room . 
Shall I ask you a riddle ? '' 
`` Ask away . '' 
Mitya took the piece of paper out of his waistcoat pocket , unfolded it and showed it . 
In a large , distinct hand was written : `` I punish myself for my whole life ; my whole life I punish ! '' 
`` I will certainly speak to someone . 
I 'll go at once , '' said Pyotr Ilyitch , after reading the paper . 
`` You wo n't have time , dear boy , come and have a drink . 
March ! '' 
Plotnikov 's shop was at the corner of the street , next door but one to Pyotr Ilyitch 's . 
It was the largest grocery shop in our town , and by no means a bad one , belonging to some rich merchants . 
They kept everything that could be got in a Petersburg shop , grocery of all sort , wines `` bottled by the brothers Eliseyev , '' fruits , cigars , tea , coffee , sugar , and so on . 
There were three shop-assistants and two errand boys always employed . 
Though our part of the country had grown poorer , the landowners had gone away , and trade had got worse , yet the grocery stores flourished as before , every year with increasing prosperity ; there were plenty of purchasers for their goods . 
They were awaiting Mitya with impatience in the shop . 
They had vivid recollections of how he had bought , three or four weeks ago , wine and goods of all sorts to the value of several hundred roubles , paid for in cash -LRB- they would never have let him have anything on credit , of course -RRB- . 
They remembered that then , as now , he had had a bundle of hundred-rouble notes in his hand , and had scattered them at random , without bargaining , without reflecting , or caring to reflect what use so much wine and provisions would be to him . 
The story was told all over the town that , driving off then with Grushenka to Mokroe , he had `` spent three thousand in one night and the following day , and had come back from the spree without a penny . '' 
He had picked up a whole troop of gypsies -LRB- encamped in our neighbourhood at the time -RRB- , who for two days got money without stint out of him while he was drunk , and drank expensive wine without stint . 
People used to tell , laughing at Mitya , how he had given champagne to grimy-handed peasants , and feasted the village women and girls on sweets and Strasburg pies . 
Though to laugh at Mitya to his face was rather a risky proceeding , there was much laughter behind his back , especially in the tavern , at his own ingenuous public avowal that all he had got out of Grushenka by this `` escapade '' was `` permission to kiss her foot , and that was the utmost she had allowed him . '' 
By the time Mitya and Pyotr Ilyitch reached the shop , they found a cart with three horses harnessed abreast with bells , and with Andrey , the driver , ready waiting for Mitya at the entrance . 
In the shop they had almost entirely finished packing one box of provisions , and were only waiting for Mitya 's arrival to nail it down and put it in the cart . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was astounded . 
`` Where did this cart come from in such a hurry ? '' 
he asked Mitya . 
`` I met Andrey as I ran to you , and told him to drive straight here to the shop . 
There 's no time to lose . 
Last time I drove with Timofey , but Timofey now has gone on before me with the witch . 
Shall we be very late , Andrey ? '' 
`` They 'll only get there an hour at most before us , not even that maybe . 
I got Timofey ready to start . 
I know how he 'll go . 
Their pace wo n't be ours , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
