But without giving the terror-stricken Fenya time to utter a word , he fell all of a heap at her feet . 
`` Fenya , for Christ 's sake , tell me , where is she ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , my dear , I do n't know . 
You may kill me but I ca n't tell you . '' 
Fenya swore and protested . 
`` You went out with her yourself not long ago - '' `` She came back ! '' 
`` Indeed she did n't . 
By God I swear she did n't come back . '' 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
shouted Mitya . 
`` From your terror I know where she is . '' 
He rushed away . 
Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily . 
But she knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste , or she might not have fared so well . 
But as he ran , he surprised both Fenya and old Matryona by an unexpected action . 
On the table stood a brass mortar , with a pestle in it , a small brass pestle , not much more than six inches long . 
Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when , with the other , he snatched up the pestle , and thrust it in his side-pocket . 
`` Oh Lord ! 
He 's going to murder someone ! '' 
cried Fenya , flinging up her hands . 
In the Dark WHERE was he running ? 
`` Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
She must have run straight to him from Samsonov 's , that was clear now . 
The whole intrigue , the whole deceit was evident . '' 
... It all rushed whirling through his mind . 
He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna 's . 
`` There was no need to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ... they would run and tell directly ... . 
Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in the plot , Smerdyakov too , he too , all had been bought over ! '' 
He formed another plan of action : he ran a long way round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house , crossing the lane , running down Dmitrovsky Street , then over the little bridge , and so came straight to the deserted alley at the back , which was empty and uninhabited , with , on one side the hurdle fence of a neighbour 's kitchen-garden , on the other the strong high fence that ran all round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
Here he chose a spot , apparently the very place , where according to the tradition , he knew Lizaveta had once climbed over it : `` If she could climb over it , '' the thought , God knows why , occurred to him , `` surely I can . '' 
He did in fact jump up , and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence . 
Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it . 
Close by , in the garden stood the bathhouse , but from the fence he could see the lighted windows of the house too . 
`` Yes , the old man 's bedroom is lighted up . 
She 's there ! 
and he leapt from the fence into the garden . 
Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely Smerdyakov , too , and that there was no one to hear him , he instinctively hid himself , stood still , and began to listen . 
But there was dead silence on all sides and , as though of design , complete stillness , not the slightest breath of wind . 
`` And naught but the whispering silence , '' the line for some reason rose to his mind . 
`` If only no one heard me jump over the fence ! 
I think not . '' 
Standing still for a minute , he walked softly over the grass in the garden , avoiding the trees and shrubs . 
He walked slowly , creeping stealthily at every step , listening to his own footsteps . 
It took him five minutes to reach the lighted window . 
He remembered that just under the window there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam . 
The door from the house into the garden on the left-hand side was shut ; he had carefully looked on purpose to see , in passing . 
At last he reached the bushes and hid behind them . 
He held his breath . 
`` I must wait now , '' he thought , `` to reassure them , in case they heard my footsteps and are listening ... if only I do n't cough or sneeze . '' 
