If he had n't looked after him there would have been no one even to change the baby 's little shirt . 
It happened moreover that the child 's relations on his mother 's side forgot him too at first . 
His grandfather was no longer living , his widow , Mitya 's grandmother , had moved to Moscow , and was seriously ill , while his daughters were married , so that Mitya remained for almost a whole year in old Grigory 's charge and lived with him in the servant 's cottage . 
But if his father had remembered him -LRB- he could not , indeed , have been altogether unaware of his existence -RRB- he would have sent him back to the cottage , as the child would only have been in the way of his debaucheries . 
But a cousin of Mitya 's mother , Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov , happened to return from Paris . 
He lived for many years afterwards abroad , but was at that time quite a young . 
man , and distinguished among the Miusovs as a man of enlightened ideas and of European culture , who had been in the capitals and abroad . 
Towards the end of his life he became a Liberal of the type common in the forties and fifties . 
In the course of his career he had come into contact with many of the most Liberal men of his epoch , both in Russia and abroad . 
He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally , and in his declining years was very fond of describing the three days of the Paris Revolution of February , 1848 , hinting that he himself had almost taken part in the fighting on the barricades . 
This was one of the most grateful recollections of his youth . 
He had an independent property of about a thousand souls , to reckon in the old style . 
His splendid estate lay on the outskirts of our little town and bordered on the lands of our famous monastery , with which Pyotr Alexandrovitch began an endless lawsuit , almost as soon as he came into the estate , concerning the rights of fishing in the river or wood-cutting in the forest , I do n't know exactly which . 
He regarded it as his duty as a citizen and a man of culture to open an attack upon the `` clericals . '' 
Hearing all about Adelaida Ivanovna , whom he , of course , remembered , and in whom he had at one time been interested , and learning of the existence of Mitya , he intervened , in spite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He made the latter 's acquaintance for the first time , and told him directly that he wished to undertake the child 's education . 
He used long afterwards to tell as a characteristic touch , that when he began to speak of Mitya , Fyodor Pavlovitch looked for some time as though he did not understand what child he was talking about , and even as though he was surprised to hear that he had a little son in the house . 
The story may have been exaggerated , yet it must have been something like the truth . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting , of suddenly playing an unexpected part , sometimes without any motive for doing so , and even to his own direct disadvantage , as , for instance , in the present case . 
This habit , however , is characteristic of a very great number of people , some of them very clever ones , not like Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Pyotr Alexandrovitch carried the business through vigorously , and was appointed , with Fyodor Pavlovitch , joint guardian of the child , who had a small property , a house and land , left him by his mother . 
Mitya did , in fact , pass into this cousin 's keeping , but as the latter had no family of his own , and after securing the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at once to Paris , he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins , a lady living in Moscow . 
It came to pass that , settling permanently in Paris he , too , forgot the child , especially when the Revolution of February broke out , making an impression on his mind that he remembered all the rest of his life . 
The Moscow lady died , and Mitya passed into the care of one of her married daughters . 
I believe he changed his home a fourth time later on . 
I wo n't enlarge upon that now , as I shall have much to tell later of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's firstborn , and must confine myself now to the most essential facts about him , without which I could not begin my story . 
In the first place , this Mitya , or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch , was the only one of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's three sons who grew up in the belief that he had property , and that he would be independent on coming of age . 
He spent an irregular boyhood and youth . 
He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium , he got into a military school , then went to the Caucasus , was promoted , fought a duel , and was degraded to the ranks , earned promotion again , led a wild life , and spent a good deal of money . 
He did not begin to receive any income from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age , and until then got into debt . 
He saw and knew his father , Fyodor Pavlovitch , for the first time on coming of age , when he visited our neighbourhood on purpose to settle with him about his property . 
He seems not to have liked his father . 
He did not stay long with him , and made haste to get away , having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of money , and entering into an agreement for future payments from the estate , of the revenues and value of which he was unable -LRB- a fact worthy of note -RRB- , upon this occasion , to get a statement from his father . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first time then -LRB- this , too , should be noted -RRB- that Mitya had a vague and exaggerated idea of his property . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with this , as it fell in with his own designs . 
He gathered only that the young man was frivolous , unruly , of violent passions , impatient , and dissipated , and that if he could only obtain ready money he would be satisfied , although only , of course , a short time . 
So Fyodor Pavlovitch began to take advantage of this fact , sending him from time to time small doles , instalments . 
In the end , when four years later , Mitya , losing patience , came a second time to our little town to settle up once for all with his father , it turned out to his amazement that he had nothing , that it was difficult to get an account even , that he had received the whole value of his property in sums of money from Fyodor Pavlovitch , and was perhaps even in debt to him , that by various agreements into which he had , of his own desire , entered at various previous dates , he had no right to expect anything more , and so on , and so on . 
The young man was overwhelmed , suspected deceit and cheating , and was almost beside himself . 
And , indeed , this circumstance led to the catastrophe , the account of which forms the subject of my first introductory story , or rather the external side of it . 
But before I pass to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's other two sons , and of their origin . 
The Second Marriage and the Second Family VERY shortly after getting his four-year-old Mitya off his hands Fyodor Pavlovitch married a second time . 
His second marriage lasted eight years . 
He took this second wife , Sofya Ivanovna , also a very young girl , from another province , where he had gone upon some small piece of business in company with a Jew . 
Though Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a vicious debauchee he never neglected investing his capital , and managed his business affairs very successfully , though , no doubt , not over-scrupulously . 
Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon , and was left from childhood an orphan without relations . 
She grew up in the house of a general 's widow , a wealthy old lady of good position , who was at once her benefactress and tormentor . 
I do not know the details , but I have only heard that the orphan girl , a meek and gentle creature , was once cut down from a halter in which she was hanging from a nail in the loft , so terrible were her sufferings from the caprice and everlasting nagging of this old woman , who was apparently not bad-hearted but had become an insufferable tyrant through idleness . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer ; inquiries were made about him and he was refused . 
But again , as in his first marriage , he proposed an elopement to the orphan girl . 
