It is written : `` Give all that thou hast to the poor and follow Me , if thou wouldst be perfect . '' 
Alyosha said to himself : `` I ca n't give two roubles instead of ` all , ' and only go to mass instead of ` following Him . ' '' 
Perhaps his memories of childhood brought back our monastery , to which his mother may have taken him to mass . 
Perhaps the slanting sunlight and the holy image to which his poor `` crazy '' mother had held him up still acted upon his imagination . 
Brooding on these things he may have come to us perhaps only to see whether here he could sacrifice all or only `` two roubles , '' and in the monastery he met this elder . 
I must digress to explain what an `` elder '' is in Russian monasteries , and I am sorry that I do not feel very competent to do so . 
I will try , however , to give a superficial account of it in a few words . 
Authorities on the subject assert that the institution of `` elders '' is of recent date , not more than a hundred years old in our monasteries , though in the orthodox East , especially in Sinai and Athos , it has existed over a thousand years . 
It is maintained that it existed in ancient times in Russia also , but through the calamities which overtook Russia - the Tartars , civil war , the interruption of relations with the East after the destruction of Constantinople - this institution fell into oblivion . 
It was revived among us towards the end of last century by one of the great `` ascetics , '' as they called him , Paissy Velitchkovsky , and his disciples . 
But to this day it exists in few monasteries only , and has sometimes been almost persecuted as an innovation in Russia . 
It flourished especially in the celebrated Kozelski Optin Monastery . 
When and how it was introduced into our monastery I can not say . 
There had already been three such elders and Zossima was the last of them . 
But he was almost dying of weakness and disease , and they had no one to take his place . 
The question for our monastery was an important one , for it had not been distinguished by anything in particular till then : they had neither relics of saints , nor wonder - working ikons , nor glorious traditions , nor historical exploits . 
It had flourished and been glorious all over Russia through its elders , to see and hear whom pilgrims had flocked for thousands of miles from all parts . 
What was such an elder ? 
An elder was one who took your soul , your will , into his soul and his will . 
When you choose an elder , you renounce your own will and yield it to him in complete submission , complete self-abnegation . 
This novitiate , this terrible school of abnegation , is undertaken voluntarily , in the hope of self-conquest , of self-mastery , in order , after a life of obedience , to attain perfect freedom , that is , from self ; to escape the lot of those who have lived their whole life without finding their true selves in themselves . 
This institution of elders is not founded on theory , but was established in the East from the practice of a thousand years . 
The obligations due to an elder are not the ordinary `` obedience '' which has always existed in our Russian monasteries . 
The obligation involves confession to the elder by all who have submitted themselves to him , and to the indissoluble bond between him and them . 
The story is told , for instance , that in the early days of Christianity one such novice , failing to fulfil some command laid upon him by his elder , left his monastery in Syria and went to Egypt . 
There , after great exploits , he was found worthy at last to suffer torture and a martyr 's death for the faith . 
When the Church , regarding him as a saint , was burying him , suddenly , at the deacon 's exhortation , `` Depart all ye unbaptised , '' the coffin containing the martyr 's body left its place and was cast forth from the church , and this took place three times . 
And only at last they learnt that this holy man had broken his vow of obedience and left his elder , and , therefore , could not be forgiven without the elder 's absolution in spite of his great deeds . 
Only after this could the funeral take place . 
This , of course , is only an old legend . 
But here is a recent instance . 
A monk was suddenly commanded by his elder to quit Athos , which he loved as a sacred place and a haven of refuge , and to go first to Jerusalem to do homage to the Holy Places and then to go to the north to Siberia : `` There is the place for thee and not here . '' 
The monk , overwhelmed with sorrow , went to the Oecumenical Patriarch at Constantinople and besought him to release him from his obedience . 
But the Patriarch replied that not only was he unable to release him , but there was not and could not be on earth a power which could release him except the elder who had himself laid that duty upon him . 
In this way the elders are endowed in certain cases with unbounded and inexplicable authority . 
That is why in many of our monasteries the institution was at first resisted almost to persecution . 
Meantime the elders immediately began to be highly esteemed among the people . 
Masses of the ignorant people as well as of distinction flocked , for instance , to the elders of our monastery to confess their doubts , their sins , and their sufferings , and ask for counsel and admonition . 
Seeing this , the opponents of the elders declared that the sacrament of confession was being arbitrarily and frivolously degraded , though the continual opening of the heart to the elder by the monk or the layman had nothing of the character of the sacrament . 
In the end , however , the institution of elders has been retained and is becoming established in Russian monasteries . 
It is true , perhaps , that this instrument which had stood the test of a thousand years for the moral regeneration of a man from slavery to freedom and to moral perfectibility may be a two-edged weapon and it may lead some not to humility and complete self-control but to the most Satanic pride , that is , to bondage and not to freedom . 
The elder Zossima was sixty-five . 
He came of a family of landowners , had been in the army in early youth , and served in the Caucasus as an officer . 
He had , no doubt , impressed Alyosha by some peculiar quality of his soul . 
Alyosha lived in the cell of the elder , who was very fond of him and let him wait upon him . 
It must be noted that Alyosha was bound by no obligation and could go where he pleased and be absent for whole days . 
Though he wore the monastic dress it was voluntarily , not to be different from others . 
No doubt he liked to do so . 
Possibly his youthful imagination was deeply stirred by the power and fame of his elder . 
It was said that so many people had for years past come to confess their sins to Father Zossima and to entreat him for words of advice and healing , that he had acquired the keenest intuition and could tell from an unknown face what a new-comer wanted , and what was the suffering on his conscience . 
