Yes , Alyosha , tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened the day before yesterday ... . 
Nobody in the whole world knows what I am going through now , and no one ever can know ... . 
For perhaps I shall take a knife with me to-day , I ca n't make up my mind ... '' And at this `` tragic '' phrase Grushenka broke down , hid her face in her hands , flung herself on the sofa pillows , and sobbed like a little child . 
Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin . 
`` Misha , '' he said , `` do n't be angry . 
She wounded you , but do n't be angry . 
You heard what she said just now ? 
You must n't ask too much of human endurance , one must be merciful . '' 
Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart . 
He felt obliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin . 
If Rakitin had not been there , he would have spoken to the air . 
But Rakitin looked at him ironically and Alyosha stopped short . 
`` You were so primed up with your elder 's reading last night that now you have to let it off on me , Alexey , man of God ! '' 
said Rakitin , with a smile of hatred . 
`` Do n't laugh , Rakitin , do n't smile , do n't talk of the dead - he was better than anyone in the world ! '' 
cried Alyosha , with tears in his voice . 
`` I did n't speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the judged . 
What am I beside her ? 
I came here seeking my ruin , and said to myself , ` What does it matter ? ' 
in my cowardliness , but she , after five years in torment , as soon as anyone says a word from the heart to her - it makes her forget everything , forgive everything , in her tears ! 
The man who has wronged her has come back , he sends for her and she forgives him everything , and hastens joyfully to meet him and she wo n't take a knife with her . 
She wo n't ! 
No , I am not like that . 
I do n't know whether you are , Misha , but I am not like that . 
It 's a lesson to me ... . 
She is more loving than we ... . 
Have you heard her speak before of what she has just told us ? 
No , you have n't ; if you had , you 'd have understood her long ago ... and the person insulted the day before yesterday must forgive her , too ! 
She will , when she knows ... and she shall know ... . 
This soul is not yet at peace with itself , one must be tender with ... there may be a treasure in that soul ... '' Alyosha stopped , because he caught his breath . 
In spite of his ill-humour Rakitin looked at him with astonishment . 
He had never expected such a tirade from the gentle Alyosha . 
`` She 's found someone to plead her cause ! 
Why , are you in love with her ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , our monk 's really in love with you , you 've made a conquest ! '' 
he cried , with a coarse laugh . 
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a tender smile shining on her tear-stained face . 
`` Let him alone , Alyosha , my cherub ; you see what he is , he is not a person for you to speak to . 
Mihail Osipovitch , '' she turned to Rakitin , `` I meant to beg your pardon for being rude to you , but now I do n't want to . 
Alyosha , come to me , sit down here . '' 
She beckoned to him with a happy smile . 
`` That 's right , sit here . 
Tell me , '' she took him by the hand and peeped into his face , smiling , `` tell me , do I love that man or not ? 
The man who wronged me , do I love him or not ? 
Before you came , I lay here in the dark , asking my heart whether I loved him . 
Decide for me , Alyosha , the time has come , it shall be as you say . 
Am I to forgive him or not ? '' 
`` But you have forgiven him already , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Yes , I really have forgiven him , '' Grushenka murmured thoughtfully . 
`` What an abject heart ! 
