there 's a difference between eight thousand and eleven thousand . 
It 's as good as picking up three thousand ; it 's not so easy to find a purchaser , and I 'm in desperate need of money . 
Only let me know it 's serious , and I 'll run over and fix it up . 
I 'll snatch the time somehow . 
But what 's the good of my galloping over , if it 's all a notion of the priest 's ? 
Come , will you go ? '' 
* i.e. setter dog . 
`` Oh , I ca n't spare the time . 
You must excuse me . '' 
`` Come , you might oblige your father . 
I sha n't forget it . 
You 've no heart , any of you that 's what it is ! 
What 's a day or two to you ? 
Where are you going now - to Venice ? 
Your Venice will keep another two days . 
I would have sent Alyosha , but what use is Alyosha in a thing like that ? 
I send you just because you are a clever fellow . 
Do you suppose I do n't see that ? 
You know nothing about timber , but you 've got an eye . 
All that is wanted is to see whether the man is in earnest . 
I tell you , watch his beard - if his beard shakes you know he is in earnest . '' 
`` You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself , then ? '' 
cried Ivan , with a malignant smile . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch , or would not catch , the malignancy , but he caught the smile . 
`` Then you 'll go , you 'll go ? 
I 'll scribble the note for you at once . '' 
`` I do n't know whether I shall go . 
I do n't know . 
I 'll decide on the way . '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
Decide at once . 
My dear fellow , decide ! 
If you settle the matter , write me a line ; give it to the priest and he 'll send it on to me at once . 
And I wo n't delay you more than that . 
You can go to Venice . 
The priest will give you horses back to Volovya station . '' 
The old man was quite delighted . 
He wrote the note , and sent for the horses . 
A light lunch was brought in , with brandy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch was pleased , he usually became expansive , but to-day he seemed to restrain himself . 
Of Dmitri , for instance , he did not say a word . 
He was quite unmoved by the parting , and seemed , in fact , at a loss for something to say . 
Ivan noticed this particularly . 
`` He must be bored with me , '' he thought . 
Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps , the old man began to fuss about . 
He would have kissed him , but Ivan made haste to hold out his hand , obviously avoiding the kiss . 
His father saw it at once , and instantly pulled himself up . 
`` Well , good luck to you , good luck to you ! '' 
he repeated from the steps . 
`` You 'll come again some time or other ? 
