He had even begun to notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature . 
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came to the neighbourhood he had felt quite differently . 
Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov , and had even thought him very original . 
He had encouraged him to talk to him , although he had always wondered at a certain incoherence , or rather restlessness , in his mind , and could not understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon the brain of `` the contemplative . '' 
They discussed philosophical questions and even how there could have been light on the first day when the sun , moon , and stars were only created on the fourth day , and how that was to be understood . 
But Ivan soon saw that , though the sun , moon , and stars might be an interesting subject , yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov , and that he was looking for something altogether different . 
In one way and another , he began to betray a boundless vanity , and a wounded vanity , too , and that Ivan disliked . 
It had first given rise to his aversion . 
Later on , there had been trouble in the house . 
Grushenka had come on the scene , and there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri - they discussed that , too . 
But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement , it was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it . 
There was , in fact , something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of his desires , accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed . 
Smerdyakov was always inquiring , putting certain indirect but obviously premeditated questions , but what his object was he did not explain , and usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject . 
But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar , revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly . 
Not that he forgot himself and was rude ; on the contrary , he always spoke very respectfully , yet he had obviously begun to consider - goodness knows why ! 
- that there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact , some secret between them , that had at some time been expressed on both sides , only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around them . 
But for a long while Ivan did not recognise the real cause of his growing dislike and he had only lately realised what was at the root of it . 
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov . 
But Smerdyakov rose from the bench , and from that action alone , Ivan knew instantly that he wanted particularly to talk to him . 
Ivan looked at him and stopped , and the fact that he did stop , instead of passing by , as he meant to the minute before , drove him to fury . 
With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov 's emasculate , sickly face , with the little curls combed forward on his forehead . 
His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say , `` Where are you going ? 
You wo n't pass by ; you see that we two clever people have something to say to each other . '' 
Ivan shook . 
`` Get away , miserable idiot . 
What have I to do with you ? '' 
was on the tip of his tongue , but to his profound astonishment he heard himself say , `` Is my father still asleep , or has he waked ? '' 
He asked the question softly and meekly , to his own surprise , and at once , again to his own surprise , sat down on the bench . 
For an instant he felt almost frightened ; he remembered it afterwards . 
Smerdyakov stood facing him , his hands behind his back , looking at him with assurance and almost severity . 
`` His honour is still asleep , '' he articulated deliberately -LRB- `` You were the first to speak , not I , '' he seemed to say -RRB- . 
`` I am surprised at you , sir , '' he added , after a pause , dropping his eyes affectedly , setting his right foot forward , and playing with the tip of his polished boot . 
`` Why are you surprised at me ? '' 
Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly , doing his utmost to restrain himself , and suddenly realising , with disgust , that he was feeling intense curiosity and would not , on any account , have gone away without satisfying it . 
`` Why do n't you go to Tchermashnya , sir ? '' 
Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly . 
`` Why I smile you must understand of yourself , if you are a clever man , '' his screwed-up left eye seemed to say . 
`` Why should I go to Tchermashnya ? '' 
Ivan asked in surprise . 
Smerdyakov was silent again . 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to , '' he said at last , slowly and apparently attaching no significance to his answer . 
`` I put you off with a secondary reason , '' he seemed to suggest , `` simply to say something . '' 
`` Damn you ! 
Speak out what you want ! '' 
Ivan cried angrily at last , passing from meekness to violence . 
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left , pulled himself up , but still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile . 
`` Substantially nothing - but just by way of conversation . '' 
Another silence followed . 
They did not speak for nearly a minute . 
