I 'll prove it ... . 
Would you believe it , holy Father , he has captivated the heart of the most honourable of young ladies of good family and fortune , daughter of a gallant colonel , formerly his superior officer , who had received many honours and had the Anna Order on his breast . 
He compromised the girl by his promise of marriage , now she is an orphan and here ; she is betrothed to him , yet before her very eyes he is dancing attendance on a certain enchantress . 
And although this enchantress has lived in , so to speak , civil marriage with a respectable man , yet she is of an independent character , an unapproachable fortress for everybody , just like a legal wife - for she is virtuous , yes , holy Fathers , she is virtuous . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch wants to open this fortress with a golden key , and that 's why he is insolent to me now , trying to get money from me , though he has wasted thousands on this enchantress already . 
He 's continually borrowing money for the purpose . 
From whom do you think ? 
Shall I say , Mitya ? '' 
`` Be silent ! '' 
cried Dmitri , `` wait till I 'm gone . 
Do n't dare in my presence to asperse the good name of an honourable girl ! 
That you should utter a word about her is an outrage , and I wo n't permit it ! '' 
He was breathless . 
He was breathless . 
`` Mitya ! 
Mitya ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically , squeezing out a tear . 
`` And is your father 's blessing nothing to you ? 
If I curse you , what then ? '' 
`` Shameless hypocrite ! 
`` exclaimed Dmitri furiously . 
`` He says that to his father ! 
his father What would he be with others ? 
Gentlemen , only fancy ; there 's a poor but honourable man living here , burdened with a numerous family , a captain who got into trouble and was discharged from the army , but not publicly , not by court-martial , with no slur on his honour . 
And three weeks ago , Dmitri seized him by the beard in a tavern , dragged him out into the street and beat him publicly , and all because he is an agent in a little business of mine . '' 
`` It 's all a lie ! 
Outwardly it 's the truth , but inwardly a lie ! '' 
Dmitri was trembling with rage . 
`` Father , I do n't justify my action . 
Yes , I confess it publicly , I behaved like a brute to that captain , and I regret it now , and I 'm disgusted with myself for my brutal rage . 
But this captain , this agent of yours , went to that lady whom you call an enchantress , and suggested to her from you , that she should take I.O.U.s of mine which were in your possession , and should sue me for the money so as to get me into prison by means of them , if I persisted in claiming an account from you of my property . 
Now you reproach me for having a weakness for that lady when you yourself incited her to captivate me ! 
She told me so to my face ... . 
She told me the story and laughed at you ... . 
You wanted to put me in prison because you are jealous of me with her , because you 'd begun to force your attentions upon her ; and I know all about that , too ; she laughed at you for that as well - you hear - she laughed at you as she described it . 
So here you have this man , this father who reproaches his profligate son ! 
Gentlemen , forgive my anger , but I foresaw that this crafty old man would only bring you together to create a scandal . 
I had come to forgive him if he held out his hand ; to forgive him , and ask forgiveness ! 
But as he has just this minute insulted not only me , but an honourable young lady , for whom I feel such reverence that I dare not take her name in vain , I have made up my mind to show up his game , though he is my father ... '' He could not go on . 
His eyes were glittering and he breathed with difficulty . 
But everyone in the cell was stirred . 
All except Father Zossima got up from their seats uneasily . 
The monks looked austere but waited for guidance from the elder . 
He sat still , pale , not from excitement but from the weakness of disease . 
An imploring smile lighted up his face ; from time to time he raised his hand , as though to check the storm , and , of course , a gesture from him would have been enough to end the scene ; but he seemed to be waiting for something and watched them intently as though trying to make out something which was not perfectly clear to him . 
At last Miusov felt completely humiliated and disgraced . 
`` We are all to blame for this scandalous scene , '' he said hotly . 
`` But I did not foresee it when I came , though I knew with whom I had to deal . 
This must be stopped at once ! 
Believe me , your reverence , I had no precise knowledge of the details that have just come to light , I was unwilling to believe them , and I learn for the first time ... . 
