He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase . 
`` Come , read . 
You shall be my librarian . 
You 'll be better sitting reading than hanging about the courtyard . 
Come , read this , '' and Fyodor Pavlovitch gave him Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka . 
He read a little but did n't like it . 
He did not once smile , and ended by frowning . 
`` Why ? 
Is n't it funny ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Smerdyakov did not speak . 
`` Answer stupid ! '' 
`` It 's all untrue , '' mumbled the boy , with a grin . 
`` Then go to the devil ! 
You have the soul of a lackey . 
Stay , here 's Smaragdov 's Universal History . 
That 's all true . 
Read that . '' 
But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov . 
He thought it dull . 
So the bookcase was closed again . 
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary fastidiousness . 
He would sit before his soup , take up his spoon and look into the soup , bend over it , examine it , take a spoonful and hold it to the light . 
`` What is it ? 
A beetle ? '' 
Grigory would ask . 
`` A fly , perhaps , '' observed Marfa . 
The squeamish youth never answered , but he did the same with his bread , his meat , and everything he ate . 
He would hold a piece on his fork to the light , scrutinise it microscopically , and only after long deliberation decide to put it in his mouth . 
`` Ach ! 
What fine gentlemen 's airs ! '' 
Grigory muttered , looking at him . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he determined to make him his cook , and sent him to Moscow to be trained . 
He spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance . 
He looked extraordinarily old for his age . 
His face had grown wrinkled , yellow , and strangely emasculate . 
In character he seemed almost exactly the same as before he went away . 
He was just as unsociable , and showed not the slightest inclination for any companionship . 
In Moscow , too , as we heard afterwards , he had always been silent . 
Moscow itself had little interest for him ; he saw very little there , and took scarcely any notice of anything . 
He went once to the theatre , but returned silent and displeased with it . 
On the other hand , he came back to us from Moscow well dressed , in a clean coat and clean linen . 
He brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day invariably , and was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a special English polish , so that they shone like mirrors . 
He turned out a first rate cook . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary , almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes , pomade , perfumes , and such things . 
But he seemed to have as much contempt for the female sex as for men ; he was discreet , almost unapproachable , with them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently . 
His fits were becoming more frequent , and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked , which did not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all . 
`` Why are your fits getting worse ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , looking askance at his new cook . 
