And before that Grigory Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and came out , and he suddenly gave a scream , and then all was silence and darkness . 
I lay there waiting , my heart beating ; I could n't bear it . 
I got up at last , went out . 
I saw the window open on the left into the garden , and I stepped to the left to listen whether he was sitting there alive , and I heard the master moving about , sighing , so I knew he was alive . 
` Ech ! ' 
I thought . 
I went to the window and shouted to the master , ` It 's I. ' And he shouted to me , ` He 's been , he 's been ; he 's run away . ' 
He meant Dmitri Fyodorovitch had been . 
` He 's killed Grigory ! 
`` Where ? ' 
I whispered . 
` There , in the corner , ' he pointed . 
He was whispering , too . 
` Wait a bit , '' I said . 
I went to the corner of the garden to look , and there I came upon Grigory Vassilyevitch lying by the wall , covered with blood , senseless . 
So it 's true that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here , was the thought that came into my head , and I determined on the spot to make an end of it , as Grigory Vassilyevitch , even if he were alive , would see nothing of it , as he lay there senseless . 
The only risk was that Marfa Ignatyevna might wake up . 
I felt that at the moment , but the longing to get it done came over me , till I could scarcely breathe . 
I went back to the window to the master and said , ` She 's here , she 's come ; Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , wants to be let in . ' 
And he started like a baby . 
` Where is she ? ' 
he fairly gasped , but could n't believe it . 
` She 's standing there , ' said I. ` Open . ' 
He looked out of the window at me , half believing and half distrustful , but afraid to open . 
` Why , he is afraid of me now , ' I thought . 
And it was funny . 
I bethought me to knock on the window-frame those taps we 'd agreed upon as a signal that Grushenka had come , in his presence , before his eyes . 
He did n't seem to believe my word , but as soon as he heard the taps , he ran at once to open the door . 
He opened it . 
I would have gone in , but he stood in the way to prevent me passing . 
` Where is she ? 
Where is she ? ' 
He looked at me , all of a tremble . 
` Well , ' thought I , ` if he 's so frightened of me as all that , it 's a bad lookout ! ' 
And my legs went weak with fright that he would n't let me in or would call out , or Marfa Ignatyevna would run up , or something else might happen . 
I do n't remember now , but I must have stood pale , facing him . 
I whispered to him , ` Why , she 's there , there , under the window ; how is it you do n't see her ? ' 
I said . 
` Bring her then , bring her . ' 
` She 's afraid , ' said I ; ` she was frightened at the noise , she 's hidden in the bushes ; go and call to her yourself from the study . ' 
He ran to the window , put the candle in the window . 
` Grushenka , ' he cried , ` Grushenka , are you here ? ' 
Though he cried that , he did n't want to lean out of the window , he did n't want to move away from me , for he was panic-stricken ; he was so frightened he did n't dare to turn his back on me . 
` Why , here she is , ' said I. I went up to the window and leaned right out of it . 
` Here she is ; she 's in the bush , laughing at you , do n't you see her ? ' 
He suddenly believed it ; he was all of a shake - he was awfully crazy about her - and he leaned right out of the window . 
I snatched up that iron paper-weight from his table ; do you remember , weighing about three pounds ? 
I swung it and hit him on the top of the skull with the corner of it . 
He did n't even cry out . 
He only sank down suddenly , and I hit him again and a third time . 
