` You were there , too , ' they said , ` you helped , you 're known all over the market ! ' 
And , for some reason , I really am known all over the market , '' Kolya added conceitedly . 
`` We all went off to the justice 's , they brought the goose , too . 
The fellow was crying in a great funk , simply blubbering like a woman . 
And the farmer kept shouting that you could kill any number of geese like that . 
Well , of course , there were witnesses . 
The justice of the peace settled it in a minute , that the farmer was to be paid a rouble for the goose , and the fellow to have the goose . 
And he was warned not to play such pranks again . 
And the fellow kept blubbering like a woman . 
` It was n't me , ' he said , ` it was he egged me on , ' and he pointed to me . 
I answered with the utmost composure that I had n't egged him on , that I simply stated the general proposition , had spoken hypothetically . 
The justice of the peace smiled and was vexed with himself once for having smiled . 
` I 'll complain to your masters of you , so that for the future you may n't waste your time on such general propositions , instead of sitting at your books and learning your lessons . ' 
He did n't complain to the masters , that was a joke , but the matter noised abroad and came to the ears of the masters . 
Their ears are long , you know ! 
The classical master , Kolbasnikov , was particularly shocked about it , but Dardanelov got me off again . 
But Kolbasnikov is savage with everyone now like a green ass . 
Did you know , Ilusha , he is just married , got a dowry of a thousand roubles , and his bride 's a regular fright of the first rank and the last degree . 
The third-class fellows wrote an epigram on it : Astounding news has reached the class , Kolbasnikov has been an ass . 
And so on , awfully funny , I 'll bring it to you later on . 
I say nothing against Dardanelov , he is a learned man , there 's no doubt about it . 
I respect men like that and it 's not because he stood up for me . '' 
`` But you took him down about the founders of Troy ! '' 
Smurov put in suddenly , proud of Krassotkin at such a moment . 
He was particularly pleased with the story of the goose . 
`` Did you really take him down ? '' 
the captain inquired , in a flattering way . 
`` On the question who founded Troy ? 
We heard of it , Ilusha told me about it at the time . '' 
`` He knows everything , father , he knows more than any of us ! '' 
put in Ilusha ; `` he only pretends to be like that , but really he is top in every subject ... '' Ilusha looked at Kolya with infinite happiness . 
`` Oh , that 's all nonsense about Troy , a trivial matter . 
I consider this an unimportant question , '' said Kolya with haughty humility . 
He had by now completely recovered his dignity , though he was still a little uneasy . 
He felt that he was greatly excited and that he had talked about the goose , for instance , with too little reserve , while Alyosha had looked serious and had not said a word all the time . 
And the vain boy began by degrees to have a rankling fear that Alyosha was silent because he despised him , and thought he was showing off before him . 
If he dared to think anything like that , Kolya would - `` I regard the question as quite a trivial one , '' he rapped out again , proudly . 
`` And I know who founded Troy , '' a boy , who had not spoken before , said suddenly , to the surprise of everyone . 
He was silent and seemed to be shy . 
He was a pretty boy of about eleven , called Kartashov . 
He was sitting near the door . 
Kolya looked at him with dignified amazement . 
The fact was that the identity of the founders of Troy had become a secret for the whole school , a secret which could only be discovered by reading Smaragdov , and no one had Smaragdov but Kolya . 
One day , when Kolya 's back was turned , Kartashov hastily opened Smaragdov , which lay among Kolya 's books , and immediately lighted on the passage relating to the foundation of Troy . 
This was a good time ago , but he felt uneasy and could not bring himself to announce publicly that he too knew who had founded Troy , afraid of what might happen and of Krassotkin 's somehow putting him to shame over it . 
But now he could n't resist saying it . 
For weeks he had been longing to . 
`` Well , who did found it ? '' 
Kolya , turning to him with haughty superciliousness . 
He saw from his face that he really did know and at once made up his mind how to take it . 
