cried Alyosha . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna will send you as much more as you need , and you know , I have money too , take what you want , as you would from a brother , from a friend , you can give it back later ... -LRB- You 'll get rich . 
you 'll get rich ! -RRB- 
And you know you could n't have a better idea than to move to another province ! 
It would be the saving of you , especially of your boy and you ought to go quickly , before the winter , before the cold . 
You must write to us when you are there , and we will always be brothers ... No , it 's not a dream ! '' 
Alyosha could have hugged him , he was so pleased . 
But glancing at him he stopped short . 
The man was standing with his neck outstretched and his lips protruding , with a pale and frenzied face . 
His lips were moving as though trying to articulate something ; no sound came , but still his lips moved . 
It was uncanny . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Alyosha , startled . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch ... I. . . 
you , '' muttered the captain , faltering , looking at him with a strange , wild , fixed stare , and an air of desperate resolution . 
At the same time there was a sort of grin on his lips . 
`` I. . . 
you , sir ... would n't you like me to show you a little trick I know ? '' 
he murmured , suddenly , in a firm rapid whisper , his voice no longer faltering . 
`` What trick ? '' 
`` A pretty trick , '' whispered the captain . 
His mouth was twisted on the left side , his left eye was screwed up . 
He still stared at Alyosha . 
`` What is the matter ? 
What trick ? '' 
Alyosha cried , now thoroughly alarmed . 
`` Why , look , '' squealed the captain suddenly , and showing him the two notes which he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefinger during the conversation , he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed them tight in his right hand . 
`` Do you see , do you see ? '' 
he shrieked , pale and infuriated . 
And suddenly flinging up his hand , he threw the crumpled notes on the sand . 
`` Do you see ? '' 
he shrieked again , pointing to them . 
`` Look there ! '' 
And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel , gasping and exclaiming as he did so : `` So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! '' 
Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha , and his whole figure expressed unutterable pride . 
`` Tell those who sent you that the wisp of tow does not sell his honour , '' he cried , raising his arm in the air . 
Then he turned quickly and began to run ; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round and kissed his hand to Alyosha . 
He ran another five paces and then turned round for the last time . 
This time his face was not contorted with laughter , but quivering all over with tears . 
In a tearful , faltering , sobbing voice he cried : `` What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame ? '' 
And then he ran on without turning . 
Alyosha looked after him , inexpressibly grieved . 
Oh , he saw that till the very last moment the man had not known he would crumple up and fling away the notes . 
He did not turn back . 
Alyosha knew he would not . 
He would not follow him and call him back , he knew why . 
When he was out of sight , Alyosha picked up the two notes . 
