There was a small vertical line between her brows which gave her charming face a look of concentrated thought , almost austere at the first glance . 
There was scarcely a trace of her former frivolity . 
It seemed strange to Alyosha , too , that in spite of the calamity that had overtaken the poor girl , betrothed to a man who had been arrested for a terrible crime , almost at the instant of their betrothal , in spite of her illness and the almost inevitable sentence hanging over Mitya , Grushenka had not yet lost her youthful cheerfulness . 
There was a soft light in the once proud eyes , though at times they gleamed with the old vindictive fire when she was visited by one disturbing thought stronger than ever in her heart . 
The object of that uneasiness was the same as ever - Katerina Ivanovna , of whom Grushenka had even raved when she lay in delirium . 
Alyosha knew that she was fearfully jealous of her . 
Yet Katerina Ivanovna had not once visited Mitya in his prison , though she might have done it whenever she liked . 
All this made a difficult problem for Alyosha , for he was the only person to whom Grushenka opened her heart and from whom she was continually asking advice . 
Sometimes he was unable to say anything . 
Full of anxiety he entered her lodging . 
She was at home . 
She had returned from seeing Mitya half an hour before , and from the rapid movement with which she leapt up from her chair to meet him he saw that she had been expecting him with great impatience . 
A pack of cards dealt for a game of `` fools '' lay on the table . 
A bed had been made up on the leather sofa on the other side and Maximov lay , half reclining , on it . 
He wore a dressing-gown and a cotton nightcap , and was evidently ill and weak , though he was smiling blissfully . 
When the homeless old man returned with Grushenka from Mokroe two months before , he had simply stayed on and was still staying with her . 
He arrived with her in rain and sleet , sat down on the sofa , drenched and scared , and gazed mutely at her with a timid , appealing smile . 
Grushenka , who was in terrible grief and in the first stage of fever , almost forgot his existence in all she had to do the first half hour after her arrival . 
Suddenly she chanced to look at him intently : he laughed a pitiful , helpless little laugh . 
She called Fenya and told her to give him something to eat . 
All that day he sat in the same place , almost without stirring . 
When it got dark and the shutters were closed , Fenya asked her mistress : `` Is the gentleman going to stay the night , mistress ? '' 
`` Yes ; make him a bed on the sofa , '' answered Grushenka . 
Questioning him more in detail , Grushenka learned from him that he had literally nowhere to go , and that `` Mr. Kalganov , my benefactor , told me straight that he would n't receive me again and gave me five roubles . '' 
`` Well , God bless you , you 'd better stay , then , '' Grushenka decided in her grief , smiling compassionately at him . 
Her smile wrung the old man 's heart and his lips twitched with grateful tears . 
And so the destitute wanderer had stayed with her ever since . 
He did not leave the house even when she was ill . 
Fenya and her grandmother , the cook , did not turn him out , but went on serving him meals and making up his bed on the sofa . 
Grushenka had grown used to him , and coming back from seeing Mitya -LRB- whom she had begun to visit in prison before she was really well -RRB- she would sit down and begin talking to `` Maximushka '' about trifling matters , to keep her from thinking of her sorrow . 
The old man turned out to be a good story-teller on occasions , so that at last he became necessary to her . 
Grushenka saw scarcely anyone else beside Alyosha , who did not come every day and never stayed long . 
Her old merchant lay seriously ill at this time , `` at his last gasp '' as they said in the town , and he did , in fact , die a week after Mitya 's trial . 
Three weeks before his death , feeling the end approaching , he made his sons , their wives and children , come upstairs to him at last and bade them not leave him again . 
From that moment he gave strict orders to his servants not to admit Grushenka and to tell her if she came , `` The master wishes you long life and happiness and tells you to forget him . '' 
But Grushenka sent almost every day to inquire after him . 
`` You 've come at last ! '' 
she cried , flinging down the cards and joyfully greeting Alyosha , `` and Maximushka 's been scaring me that perhaps you would n't come . 
Ah , how I need you ! 
Sit down to the table . 
What will you have coffee ? '' 
`` Yes , please , '' said Alyosha , sitting down at the table . 
`` I am very hungry . '' 
`` That 's right . 
Fenya , Fenya , coffee , '' cried Grushenka . 
`` It 's been made a long time ready for you . 
And bring some little pies , and mind they are hot . 
Do you know , we 've had a storm over those pies to-day . 
I took them to the prison for him , and would you believe it , he threw them back to me : he would not eat them . 
He flung one of them on the floor and stamped on it . 
