And such a man says , `` I am fighting for the cause of humanity . '' 
How can such a one fight ? 
What is he fit for ? 
He is capable perhaps of some action quickly over , but he can not hold out long . 
And it 's no wonder that instead of gaining freedom they have sunk into slavery , and instead of serving , the cause of brotherly love and the union of humanity have fallen , on the contrary , into dissension and isolation , as my mysterious visitor and teacher said to me in my youth . 
And therefore the idea of the service of humanity , of brotherly love and the solidarity of mankind , is more and more dying out in the world , and indeed this idea is sometimes treated with derision . 
For how can a man shake off his habits ? 
What can become of him if he is in such bondage to the habit of satisfying the innumerable desires he has created for himself ? 
He is isolated , and what concern has he with the rest of humanity ? 
They have succeeded in accumulating a greater mass of objects , but the joy in the world has grown less . 
The monastic way is very different . 
Obedience , fasting , and prayer are laughed at , yet only through them lies the way to real , true freedom . 
I cut off my superfluous and unnecessary desires , I subdue my proud and wanton will and chastise it with obedience , and with God 's help I attain freedom of spirit and with it spiritual joy . 
Which is most capable of conceiving a great idea and serving it - the rich in his isolation or the man who has freed himself from the tyranny of material things and habits ? 
The monk is reproached for his solitude , `` You have secluded yourself within the walls of the monastery for your own salvation , and have forgotten the brotherly service of humanity ! '' 
But we shall see which will be most zealous in the cause of brotherly love . 
For it is not we , but they , who are in isolation , though they do n't see that . 
Of old , leaders of the people came from among us , and why should they not again ? 
The same meek and humble ascetics will rise up and go out to work for the great cause . 
The salvation of Russia comes from the people . 
And the Russian monk has always been on the side of the people . 
We are isolated only if the people are isolated . 
The people believe as we do , and an unbelieving reformer will never do anything in Russia , even if he is sincere in heart and a genius . 
Remember that ! 
The people will meet the atheist and overcome him , and Russia will be one and orthodox . 
Take care of the peasant and guard his heart . 
Go on educating him quietly . 
That 's your duty as monks , for the peasant has God in his heart . 
-LRB- f -RRB- Of Masters and Servants , and of whether it is possible for them to be Brothers in the Spirit . 
Of course , I do n't deny that there is sin in the peasants too . 
And the fire of corruption is spreading visibly , hourly , working from above downwards . 
The spirit of isolation is coming upon the people too . 
Money-lenders and devourers of the commune are rising up . 
Already the merchant grows more and more eager for rank , and strives to show himself cultured though he has not a trace of culture , and to this end meanly despises his old traditions , and is even ashamed of the faith of his fathers . 
He visits princes , though he is only a peasant corrupted . 
The peasants are rotting in drunkenness and can not shake off the habit . 
And what cruelty to their wives , to their children even ! 
All from drunkenness ! 
I 've seen in the factories children of nine years old , frail , rickety , bent and already depraved . 
The stuffy workshop , the din of machinery , work all day long , the vile language and the drink , the drink - is that what a little child 's heart needs ? 
He needs sunshine , childish play , good examples all about him , and at least a little love . 
There must be no more of this , monks , no more torturing of children , rise up and preach that , make haste , make haste ! 
But God will save Russia , for though the peasants are corrupted and can not renounce their filthy sin , yet they know it is cursed by God and that they do wrong in sinning . 
So that our people still believe in righteousness , have faith in God and weep tears of devotion . 
It is different with the upper classes . 
They , following science , want to base justice on reason alone , but not with Christ , as before , and they have already proclaimed that there is no crime , that there is no sin . 
And that 's consistent , for if you have no God what is the meaning of crime ? 
In Europe the people are already rising up against the rich with violence , and the leaders of the people are everywhere leading them to bloodshed , and teaching them that their wrath is righteous . 
But their `` wrath is accursed , for it is cruel . '' 
But God will save Russia as He has saved her many times . 
