There is silent and long-suffering sorrow to be met with among the peasantry . 
It withdraws into itself and is still . 
But there is a grief that breaks out , and from that minute it bursts into tears and finds vent in wailing . 
This is particularly common with women . 
But it is no lighter a grief than the silent . 
Lamentations comfort only by lacerating the heart still more . 
Such grief does not desire consolation . 
It feeds on the sense of its hopelessness . 
Lamentations spring only from the constant craving to re-open the wound . 
`` You are of the tradesman class ? '' 
said Father Zossima , looking curiously at her . 
`` Townfolk we are , Father , townfolk . 
Yet we are peasants though we live in the town . 
I have come to see you , O Father ! 
We heard of you , Father , we heard of you . 
I have buried my little son , and I have come on a pilgrimage . 
I have been in three monasteries , but they told me , ` Go , Nastasya , go to them ' - that is to you . 
I have come ; I was yesterday at the service , and to-day I have come to you . '' 
`` What are you weeping for ? '' 
`` It 's my little son I 'm grieving for , Father . 
he was three years old - three years all but three months . 
For my little boy , Father , I 'm in anguish , for my little boy . 
He was the last one left . 
We had four , my Nikita and I , and now we 've no children , our dear ones have all gone I buried the first three without grieving overmuch , and now I have buried the last I ca n't forget him . 
He seems always standing before me . 
He never leaves me . 
He has withered my heart . 
I look at his little clothes , his little shirt , his little boots , and I wail . 
I lay out all that is left of him , all his little things . 
I look at them and wail . 
I say to Nikita , my husband , ` let me go on a pilgrimage , master . ' 
He is a driver . 
We 're not poor people , Father , not poor ; he drives our own horse . 
It 's all our own , the horse and the carriage . 
And what good is it all to us now ? 
My Nikita has begun drinking while I am away . 
He 's sure to . 
It used to be so before . 
As soon as I turn my back he gives way to it . 
But now I do n't think about him . 
It 's three months since I left home . 
I 've forgotten him . 
I 've forgotten everything . 
I do n't want to remember . 
And what would our life be now together ? 
I 've done with him , I 've done . 
I 've done with them all . 
I do n't care to look upon my house and my goods . 
I do n't care to see anything at all ! '' 
`` Listen , mother , '' said the elder . 
