`` You are mistaken , my good Alyosha , '' he said , with an expression Alyosha had never seen in his face before - an expression of youthful sincerity and strong , irresistibly frank feeling . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has never cared for me ! 
She has known all the time that I cared for her - though I never said a word of my love to her - she knew , but she did n't care for me . 
I have never been her friend either , not for one moment ; she is too proud to need my friendship . 
She kept me at her side as a means of revenge . 
She revenged with me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receiving from Dmitri ever since their first meeting . 
For even that first meeting has rankled in her heart as an insult - that 's what her heart is like ! 
She has talked to me of nothing but her love for him . 
I am going now ; but , believe me , Katerina Ivanovna , you really love him . 
And the more he insults you , the more you love him - that 's your ` laceration . ' 
You love him just as he is ; you love him for insulting you . 
If he reformed , you 'd give him up at once and cease to love him . 
But you need him so as to contemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for infidelity . 
And it all comes from your pride . 
Oh , there 's a great deal of humiliation and self-abasement about it , but it all comes from pride ... . 
I am too young and I 've loved you too much . 
I know that I ought not to say this , that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you , and it would be less offensive for you . 
But I am going far away , and shall never come back ... . 
It is for ever . 
I do n't want to sit beside a ` laceration . ' 
... But I do n't know how to speak now . 
I 've said everything ... . 
Good-bye , Katerina Ivanovna ; you ca n't be angry with me , for I am a hundred times more severely punished than you , if only by the fact that I shall never see you again . 
Good-bye ! 
I do n't want your hand . 
You have tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at this moment . 
I shall forgive you later , but now I do n't want your hand . 
Den Dank , Dame , begehr ich nicht , '' * he added , with a forced smile , showing , however , that he could read Schiller , and read him till he knew him by heart - which Alyosha would never have believed . 
He went out of the room without saying good-bye even to his hostess , Madame Hohlakov . 
Alyosha clasped his hands . 
* Thank you , madam , I want nothing . 
`` Ivan ! '' 
he cried desperately after him . 
`` Come back , Ivan ! 
No , nothing will induce him to come back now ! '' 
he cried again , regretfully realising it ; `` but it 's my fault , my fault . 
I began it ! 
Ivan spoke angrily , wrongly . 
Unjustly and angrily . 
He must come back here , come back , '' Alyosha kept exclaiming frantically . 
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room . 
`` You have done no harm . 
You behaved beautifully , like an angel , '' Madame Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha . 
`` I will do my utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going . '' 
Her face beamed with delight , to the great distress of Alyosha , but Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned . 
She had two hundred-rouble notes in her hand . 
`` I have a great favour to ask of you , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she began , addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice , as though nothing had happened . 
`` A week - yes , I think it was a week ago - Dmitri Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action - a very ugly action . 
There is a low tavern here , and in it he met that discharged officer , that captain , whom your father used to employ in some business . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain , seized him by the beard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it , in that insulting fashion . 
