The kind , silent man used often on our wanderings to spend the farthings given us on sweets and cakes for the children . 
He could not pass by a child without emotion . 
That 's the nature of the man . 
At some thoughts one stands perplexed , especially at the sight of men 's sin , and wonders whether one should use force or humble love . 
Always decide to use humble love . 
If you resolve on that once for all , you may subdue the whole world . 
Loving humility is marvellously strong , the strongest of all things , and there is nothing else like it . 
Every day and every hour , every minute , walk round yourself and watch yourself , and see that your image is a seemly one . 
You pass by a little child , you pass by , spiteful , with ugly words , with wrathful heart ; you may not have noticed the child , but he has seen you , and your image , unseemly and ignoble , may remain in his defenceless heart . 
You do n't know it , but you may have sown an evil seed in him and it may grow , and all because you were not careful before the child , because you did not foster in yourself a careful , actively benevolent love . 
Brothers , love is a teacher ; but one must know how to acquire it , for it is hard to acquire , it is dearly bought , it is won slowly by long labour . 
For we must love not only occasionally , for a moment , but for ever . 
Everyone can love occasionally , even the wicked can . 
My brother asked the birds to forgive him ; that sounds senseless , but it is right ; for all is like an ocean , all is flowing and blending ; a touch in one place sets up movement at the other end of the earth . 
It may be senseless to beg forgiveness of the birds , but birds would be happier at your side - a little happier , anyway - and children and all animals , if you were nobler than you are now . 
It 's all like an ocean , I tell you . 
Then you would pray to the birds too , consumed by an all-embracing love , in a sort of transport , and pray that they too will forgive you your sin . 
Treasure this ecstasy , however senseless it may seem to men . 
My friends , pray to God for gladness . 
Be glad as children , as the birds of heaven . 
And let not the sin of men confound you in your doings . 
Fear not that it will wear away your work and hinder its being accomplished . 
Do not say , `` Sin is mighty , wickedness is mighty , evil environment is mighty , and we are lonely and helpless , and evil environment is wearing us away and hindering our good work from being done . '' 
Fly from that dejection , children ! 
There is only one means of salvation , then take yourself and make yourself responsible for all men 's sins , that is the truth , you know , friends , for as soon as you sincerely make yourself responsible for everything and for all men , you will see at once that it is really so , and that you are to blame for everyone and for all things . 
But throwing your own indolence and impotence on others you will end by sharing the pride of Satan and murmuring against God . 
Of the pride of Satan what I think is this : it is hard for us on earth to comprehend it , and therefore it is so easy to fall into error and to share it , even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine . 
Indeed , many of the strongest feelings and movements of our nature we can not comprehend on earth . 
Let not that be a stumbling-block , and think not that it may serve as a justification to you for anything . 
For the Eternal judge asks of you what you can comprehend and not what you can not . 
You will know that yourself hereafter , for you will behold all things truly then and will not dispute them . 
On earth , indeed , we are , as it were , astray , and if it were not for the precious image of Christ before us , we should be undone and altogether lost , as was the human race before the flood . 
Much on earth is hidden from us , but to make up for that we have been given a precious mystic sense of our living bond with the other world , with the higher heavenly world , and the roots of our thoughts and feelings are not here but in other worlds . 
That is why the philosophers say that we can not apprehend the reality of things on earth . 
God took seeds from different worlds and sowed them on this earth , and His garden grew up and everything came up that could come up , but what grows lives and is alive only through the feeling of its contact with other mysterious worlds . 
If that feeling grows weak or is destroyed in you , the heavenly growth will die away in you . 
Then you will be indifferent to life and even grow to hate it . 
That 's what I think . 
-LRB- h -RRB- Can a Man judge his Fellow Creatures ? 
Faith to the End . 
Remember particularly that you can not be a judge of anyone . 
For no one can judge a criminal until he recognises that he is just such a criminal as the man standing before him , and that he perhaps is more than all men to blame for that crime . 
When he understands that , he will be able to be a judge . 
Though that sounds absurd , it is true . 
If I had been righteous myself , perhaps there would have been no criminal standing before me . 
If you can take upon yourself the crime of the criminal your heart is judging , take it at once , suffer for him yourself , and let him go without reproach . 
And even if the law itself makes you his judge , act in the same spirit so far as possible , for he will go away and condemn himself more bitterly than you have done . 
If , after your kiss , he goes away untouched , mocking at you , do not let that be a stumbling-block to you . 
It shows his time has not yet come , but it will come in due course . 
And if it come not , no Matter ; if not he , then another in his place will understand and suffer , and judge and condemn himself , and the truth will be fulfilled . 
