I noticed that there was a sort of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy , and you know I have a positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality , and I have had it from a baby . 
There were contradictions in him , too : he was proud , but he was slavishly devoted to me , and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he 'd refuse to agree with me ; he 'd argue , fly into a rage . 
I used sometimes to propound certain ideas ; I could see that it was not so much that he disagreed with the ideas , but that he was simply rebelling against me , because I was cool in responding to his endearments . 
And so , in order to train him properly , the tenderer he was , the colder I became . 
I did it on purpose : that was my idea . 
My object was to form his character , to lick him into shape , to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt , you understand me at a word . 
Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession he was downcast and dejected , not because of my coldness , but for something else , something more important . 
I wondered what the tragedy was . 
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know Smerdyakov , who was footman to your late father - it was before his death , of course - and he taught the little fool a silly trick - that is , a brutal , nasty trick . 
He told him to take a piece of bread , to stick a pin in it , and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without biting it , and then to watch and see what would happen . 
So they prepared a piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka , that shaggy dog there 's been such a fuss about . 
The people of the house it belonged to never fed it at all , though it barked all day . 
-LRB- Do you like that stupid barking , Karamazov ? 
I ca n't stand it . -RRB- 
So it rushed at the bread , swallowed it , and began to squeal ; it turned round and round and ran away , squealing as it ran out of sight . 
That was Ilusha 's own account of it . 
He confessed it to me , and cried bitterly . 
He hugged me , shaking all over . 
He kept on repeating ` He ran away squealing ' : the sight of that haunted him . 
He was tormented by remorse , I could see that . 
I took it seriously . 
I determined to give him a lesson for other things as well . 
So I must confess I was n't quite straightforward , and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I was . 
` You 've done a nasty thing , ' I said , ` you are a scoundrel . 
I wo n't tell of it , of course , but I shall have nothing more to do with you for a time . 
I 'll think it over and let you know through Smurov ' - that 's the boy who 's just come with me ; he 's always ready to do anything for me - ` whether I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up for good as a scoundrel . ' 
He was tremendously upset . 
I must own I felt I 'd gone too far as I spoke , but there was no help for it . 
I did what I thought best at the time . 
A day or two after , I sent Smurov to tell him that I would not speak to him again . 
That 's what we call it when two schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another . 
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then , if I saw signs of repentance , to hold out my hand to him again . 
That was my intention . 
But what do you think happened ? 
He heard Smurov 's message , his eyes flashed . 
` Tell Krassotkin for me , ' he cried , ` that I will throw bread with pins to all the dogs - all - all of them ! ' 
` So he 's going in for a little temper . 
We must smoke it out of him . ' 
And I began to treat him with contempt ; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically . 
And just then that affair with his father happened . 
You remember ? 
You must realise that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already . 
The boys , seeing I 'd given him up , set on him and taunted him , shouting , ` Wisp of tow , wisp of tow ! ' 
And he had soon regular skirmishes with them , which I am very sorry for . 
They seem to have given him one very bad beating . 
One day he flew at them all as they were coming out of school . 
I stood a few yards off , looking on . 
And , I swear , I do n't remember that I laughed ; it was quite the other way , I felt awfully sorry for him ; in another minute I would have run up to take his part . 
But he suddenly met my eyes . 
I do n't know what he fancied ; but he pulled out a penknife , rushed at me , and struck at my thigh , here in my right leg . 
