`` Stay , did you tell the prosecutor and the investigating lawyer about those knocks ? '' 
`` I told them everything just as it was . '' 
Ivan wondered inwardly again . 
`` If I thought of anything then , '' he began again , `` it was solely of some wickedness on your part . 
Dmitri might kill him , but that he would steal - I did not believe that then ... . 
But I was prepared for any wickedness from you . 
You told me yourself you could sham a fit . 
What did you say that for ? '' 
`` It was just through my simplicity , and I never have shammed a fit on purpose in my life . 
And I only said so then to boast to you . 
It was just foolishness . 
I liked you so much then , and was open-hearted with you . '' 
`` My brother directly accuses you of the murder and theft . '' 
`` What else is left for him to do ? '' 
said Smerdyakov , with a bitter grin . 
`` And who will believe him with all the proofs against him ? 
Grigory Vassilyevitch saw the door open . 
What can he say after that ? 
But never mind him ! 
He is trembling to save himself . '' 
He slowly ceased speaking ; then suddenly , as though on reflection , added : `` And look here again . 
He wants to throw it on me and make out that it is the work of my hands - I 've heard that already . 
But as to my being clever at shamming a fit : should I have told you beforehand that I could sham one , if I really had had such a design against your father ? 
If I had been planning such a murder could I have been such a fool as to give such evidence against myself beforehand ? 
And to his son , too ! 
Upon my word ! 
Is that likely ? 
As if that could be ; such a thing has never happened . 
No one hears this talk of ours now , except Providence itself , and if you were to tell of it to the prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch you might defend me completely by doing so , for who would be likely to be such a criminal , if he is so open-hearted beforehand ? 
Anyone can see that . '' 
`` Well , '' and Ivan got up to cut short the conversation , struck by Smerdyakov 's last argument . 
`` I do n't suspect you at all , and I think it 's absurd , indeed , to suspect you . 
On the contrary , I am grateful to you for setting my mind at rest . 
Now I am going , but I 'll come again . 
Meanwhile , good-bye . 
Get well . 
Is there anything you want ? '' 
`` I am very thankful for everything . 
Marfa Ignatyevna does not forget me , and provides me anything I want , according to her kindness . 
Good people visit me every day . '' 
`` Good-bye . 
But I sha n't say anything of your being able to sham a fit , and I do n't advise you to , either , '' something made Ivan say suddenly . 
`` I quite understand . 
And if you do n't speak of that , I shall say nothing of that conversation of ours at the gate . '' 
Then it happened that Ivan went out , and only when he had gone a dozen steps along the corridor , he suddenly felt that there was an insulting significance in Smerdyakov 's last words . 
He was almost on the point of turning back , but it was only a passing impulse , and muttering , `` Nonsense ! '' 
he went out of the hospital . 
His chief feeling was one of relief at the fact that it was not Smerdyakov , but Mitya , who had committed the murder , though he might have been expected to feel the opposite . 
He did not want to analyse the reason for this feeling , and even felt a positive repugnance at prying into his sensations . 
He felt as though he wanted to make haste to forget something . 
