But as he flew through the night , he felt no envy , no hostility even , for the man who had been her first lover ... . 
It is true he had not yet seen him . 
`` Here there was no room for dispute : it was her right and his ; this was her first love which , after five years , she had not forgotten ; so she had loved him only for those five years , and I , how do I come in ? 
What right have I ? 
Step aside , Mitya , and make way ! 
What am I now ? 
Now everything is over apart from the officer even if he had not appeared , everything would be over ... '' These words would roughly have expressed his feelings , if he had been capable of reasoning . 
But he could not reason at that moment . 
His present plan of action had arisen without reasoning . 
At Fenya 's first words , it had sprung from feeling , and been adopted in a flash , with all its consequences . 
And yet , in spite of his resolution , there was confusion in his soul , an agonising confusion : his resolution did not give him peace . 
There was so much behind that tortured him . 
And it seemed strange to him , at moments , to think that he had written his own sentence of death with pen and paper : `` I punish myself , '' and the paper was lying there in his pocket , ready ; the pistol was loaded ; he had already resolved how , next morning , he would meet the first warm ray of `` golden-haired Phoebus . '' 
And yet he could not be quit of the past , of all that he had left behind and that tortured him . 
He felt that miserably , and the thought of it sank into his heart with despair . 
There was one moment when he felt an impulse to stop Andrey , to jump out of the cart , to pull out his loaded pistol , and to make an end of everything without waiting for the dawn . 
But that moment flew by like a spark . 
The horses galloped on , `` devouring space , '' and as he drew near his goal , again the thought of her , of her alone , took more and more complete possession of his soul , chasing away the fearful images that had been haunting it . 
Oh , how he longed to look upon her , if only for a moment , if only from a distance ! 
`` She 's now with him , '' he thought , `` now I shall see what she looks like with him , her first love , and that 's all I want . '' 
Never had this woman , who was such a fateful influence in his life , aroused such love in his breast , such new and unknown feeling , surprising even to himself , a feeling tender to devoutness , to self-effacement before her ! 
`` I will efface myself ! '' 
he said , in a rush of almost hysterical ecstasy . 
They had been galloping nearly an hour . 
Mitya was silent , and though Andrey was , as a rule , a talkative peasant , he did not utter a word , either . 
He seemed afraid to talk , he only whipped up smartly his three lean , but mettlesome , bay horses . 
Suddenly Mitya cried out in horrible anxiety : `` Andrey ! 
What if they 're asleep ? '' 
This thought fell upon him like a blow . 
It had not occurred to him before . 
`` It may well be that they 're gone to bed by now , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
Mitya frowned as though in pain . 
Yes , indeed ... he was rushing there ... with such feelings ... while they were asleep ... she was asleep , perhaps , there too ... . 
An angry feeling surged up in his heart . 
`` Drive on , Andrey ! 
Whip them up ! 
Look alive ! '' 
he cried , beside himself . 
`` But maybe they 're not in bed ! '' 
Andrey went on after a pause . 
`` Timofey said they were a lot of them there - . '' 
`` At the station ? '' 
`` Not at the posting-station , but at Plastunov 's , at the inn , where they let out horses , too . '' 
`` I know . 
So you say there are a lot of them ? 
How 's that ? 
Who are they ? '' 
cried Mitya , greatly dismayed at this unexpected news . 
`` Well , Timofey was saying they 're all gentlefolk . 
Two from our town - who they are I ca n't say - and there are two others , strangers , maybe more besides . 
