She thinks she can overcome everything , that everything will give way to her . 
She thought she could bewitch Grushenka if she liked , and she believed it herself : she plays a part to herself , and whose fault is it ? 
Do you think she kissed Grushenka 's hand first , on purpose , with a motive ? 
No , she really was fascinated by Grushenka , that 's to say , not by Grushenka , but by her own dream , her own delusion - because it was her dream , her delusion ! 
Alyosha , darling , how did you escape from them , those women ? 
Did you pick up your cassock and run ? 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
`` Brother , you do n't seem to have noticed how you 've insulted Katerina Ivanovna by telling Grushenka about that day . 
And she flung it in her face just now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her beauty ! 
Brother , what could be worse than that insult ? '' 
What worried Alyosha more than anything was that , incredible as it seemed , his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna 's humiliation . 
`` Bah ! '' 
Dmitri frowned fiercely , and struck his forehead with his hand . 
He only now realised it , though Alyosha had just told him of the insult , and Katerina Ivanovna 's cry : `` Your brother is a scoundrel '' `` Yes , perhaps , I really did tell Grushenka about that ` fatal day , ' as Katya calls it . 
Yes , I did tell her , I remember ! 
It was that time at Mokroe . 
I was drunk , the Gypsies were singing ... But I was sobbing . 
I was sobbing then , kneeling and praying to Katya 's image , and Grushenka understood it . 
She understood it all then . 
I remember , she cried herself ... . 
Damn it all ! 
But it 's bound to be so now ... . 
Then she cried , but now ` the dagger in the heart ' ! 
That 's how women are . '' 
He looked down and sank into thought . 
`` Yes , I am a scoundrel , a thorough scoundrel '' he said suddenly , in a gloomy voice . 
`` It does n't matter whether I cried or not , I 'm a scoundrel ! 
Tell her I accept the name , if that 's any comfort . 
Come , that 's enough . 
Good-bye . 
It 's no use talking ! 
It 's not amusing . 
You go your way and I mine . 
And I do n't want to see you again except as a last resource . 
Good-bye , Alexey ! '' 
He warmly pressed Alyosha 's hand , and still looking down , without raising his head , as though tearing himself away , turned rapidly towards the town . 
Alyosha looked after him , unable to believe he would go away so abruptly . 
`` Stay , Alexey , one more confession to you alone '' cried Dmitri , suddenly turning back . 
`` Look at me . 
Look at me well . 
You see here , here - there 's terrible disgrace in store for me . '' 
-LRB- As he said `` here , '' Dmitri struck his chest with his fist with a strange air , as though the dishonour lay precisely on his chest , in some spot , in a pocket , perhaps , or hanging round his neck . -RRB- 
`` You know me now , a scoundrel , an avowed scoundrel , but let me tell you that I 've never done anything before and never shall again , anything that can compare in baseness with the dishonour which I bear now at this very minute on my breast , here , here , which will come to pass , though I 'm perfectly free to stop it . 
I can stop it or carry it through , note that . 
Well , let me tell you , I shall carry it through . 
I sha n't stop it . 
I told you everything just now , but I did n't tell you this , because even I had not brass enough for it . 
I can still pull up ; if I do , I can give back the full half of my lost honour to-morrow . 
But I sha n't pull up . 
I shall carry out my base plan , and you can bear witness that I told so beforehand . 
