Seeing a light in the little house to the right he went up , knocked at the shutters , and asked the man to whom the house belonged to help him carry the peasant to the police station , promising him three roubles . 
The man got ready and came out . 
I wo n't describe in detail how Ivan succeeded in his object , bringing the peasant to the police-station and arranging for a doctor to see him at once , providing with a liberal hand for the expenses . 
I will only say that this business took a whole hour , but Ivan was well content with it . 
His mind wandered and worked incessantly . 
`` If I had not taken my decision so firmly for to-morrow , '' he reflected with satisfaction , `` I should not have stayed a whole hour to look after the peasant , but should have passed by , without caring about his being frozen . 
I am quite capable of watching myself , by the way , '' he thought at the same instant , with still greater satisfaction , `` although they have decided that I am going out of my mind ! '' 
Just as he reached his own house he stopped short , asking himself suddenly had n't he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell him everything . 
He decided the question by turning back to the house . 
`` Everything together to-morrow ! '' 
he whispered to himself , and , strange to say , almost all his gladness and selfsatisfaction passed in one instant . 
As he entered his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on his heart , like a recollection or , more exactly , a reminder , of something agonising and revolting that was in that room now , at that moment , and had been there before . 
He sank wearily on his sofa . 
The old woman brought him a samovar ; he made tea , but did not touch it . 
He sat on the sofa and felt giddy . 
He felt that he was ill and helpless . 
He was beginning to drop asleep , but got up uneasily and walked across the room to shake off his drowsiness . 
At moments he fancied he was delirious , but it was not illness that he thought of most . 
Sitting down again , he began looking round , as though searching for something . 
This happened several times . 
At last his eyes were fastened intently on one point . 
Ivan smiled , but an angry flush suffused his face . 
He sat a long time in his place , his head propped on both arms , though he looked sideways at the same point , at the sofa that stood against the opposite wall . 
There was evidently something , some object , that irritated him there , worried him and tormented him . 
The Devil . 
Ivan 's Nightmare I AM NOT a doctor , but yet I feel that the moment has come when I must inevitably give the reader some account of the nature of Ivan 's illness . 
Anticipating events I can say at least one thing : he was at that moment on the very eve of an attack of brain fever . 
Though his health had long been affected , it had offered a stubborn resistance to the fever which in the end gained complete mastery over it . 
Though I know nothing of medicine , I venture to hazard the suggestion that he really had perhaps , by a terrible effort of will , succeeded in delaying the attack for a time , hoping , of course , to check it completely . 
He knew that he was unwell , but he loathed the thought of being ill at that fatal time , at the approaching crisis in his life , when he needed to have all his wits about him , to say what he had to say boldly and resolutely and `` to justify himself to himself . '' 
He had , however , consulted the new doctor , who had been brought from Moscow by a fantastic notion of Katerina Ivanovna 's to which I have referred already . 
After listening to him and examining him the doctor came to the conclusion that he was actually suffering from some disorder of the brain , and was not at all surprised by an admission which Ivan had reluctantly made him . 
`` Hallucinations are quite likely in your condition , '' the doctor opined , ` though it would be better to verify them ... you must take steps at once , without a moment 's delay , or things will go badly with you . '' 
But Ivan did not follow this judicious advice and did not take to his bed to be nursed . 
`` I am walking about , so I am strong enough , if I drop , it 'll be different then , anyone may nurse me who likes , '' he decided , dismissing the subject . 
And so he was sitting almost conscious himself of his delirium and , as I have said already , looking persistently at some object on the sofa against the opposite wall . 
Someone appeared to be sitting there , though goodness knows how he had come in , for he had not been in the room when Ivan came into it , on his return from Smerdyakov . 
This was a person or , more accurately speaking , a Russian gentleman of a particular kind , no longer young , qui faisait la cinquantaine , * as the French say , with rather long , still thick , dark hair , slightly streaked with grey and a small pointed beard . 
He was wearing a brownish reefer jacket , rather shabby , evidently made by a good tailor though , and of a fashion at least three years old , that had been discarded by smart and well-to-do people for the last two years . 
His linen and his long scarf-like neck-tie were all such as are worn by people who aim at being stylish , but on closer inspection his linen was not overclean and his wide scarf was very threadbare . 
The visitor 's check trousers were of excellent cut , but were too light in colour and too tight for the present fashion . 
His soft fluffy white hat was out of keeping with the season . 
* Fiftyish . 
In brief there was every appearance of gentility on straitened means . 
It looked as though the gentleman belonged to that class of idle landowners who used to flourish in the times of serfdom . 
He had unmistakably been , at some time , in good and fashionable society , had once had good connections , had possibly preserved them indeed , but , after a gay youth , becoming gradually impoverished on the abolition of serfdom , he had sunk into the position of a poor relation of the best class , wandering from one good old friend to another and received by them for his companionable and accommodating disposition and as being , after all , a gentleman who could be asked to sit down with anyone , though , of course , not in a place of honour . 
Such gentlemen of accommodating temper and dependent position , who can tell a story , take a hand at cards , and who have a distinct aversion for any duties that may be forced upon them , are usually solitary creatures , either bachelors or widowers . 
Sometimes they have children , but if so , the children are always being brought up at a distance , at some aunt 's , to whom these gentlemen never allude in good society , seeming ashamed of the relationship . 
They gradually lose sight of their children altogether , though at intervals they receive a birthday or Christmas letter from them and sometimes even answer it . 
The countenance of the unexpected visitor was not so much good-natured , as accommodating and ready to assume any amiable expression as occasion might arise . 
