`` What is the matter ? '' 
cried Lise , in a tone of real anxiety . 
`` Mamma , I shall be having hysterics , and not she ! '' 
`` Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream , do n't persecute me . 
At your age one ca n't know everything that grown-up people know . 
I 'll come and tell you everything you ought to know . 
Oh , mercy on us ! 
I am coming , I am coming ... . 
Hysterics is a good sign , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; it 's an excellent thing that she is hysterical . 
That 's just as it ought to be . 
In such cases I am always against the woman , against all these feminine tears and hysterics . 
Run and say , Yulia , that I 'll fly to her . 
As for Ivan Fyodorovitch 's going away like that , it 's her own fault . 
But he wo n't go away . 
Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream ! 
Oh , yes ; you are not screaming . 
It 's I am screaming . 
Forgive your mamma ; but I am delighted , delighted , delighted ! 
Did you notice , Alexey Fyodorovitch , how young , how young Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out , when he said all that and went out ? 
I thought he was so learned , such a savant , and all of a sudden he behaved so warmly , openly , and youthfully , with such youthful inexperience , and it was all so fine , like you ... . 
And the way he repeated that German verse , it was just like you ! 
But I must fly , I must fly ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , make haste to carry out her commission , and then make haste back . 
Lise , do you want anything now ? 
For mercy 's sake , do n't keep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute . 
He will come back to you at once . '' 
Madame Hohlakov at last ran off . 
Before leaving , Alyosha would have opened the door to see Lise . 
`` On no account , '' cried Lise . 
`` On no account now . 
Speak through the door . 
How have you come to be an angel ? 
That 's the only thing I want to know . '' 
`` For an awful piece of stupidity , Lise ! 
Goodbye ! '' 
`` Do n't dare to go away like that ! '' 
Lise was beginning . 
`` Lise , I have a real sorrow ! 
I 'll be back directly , but I have a great , great sorrow ! 
And he ran out of the room . 
A Laceration in the Cottage HE certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before . 
He had rushed in like a fool , and meddled in what ? 
In a love-affair . 
`` But what do I know about it ? 
What can I tell about such things ? '' 
he repeated to himself for the hundredth time , flushing crimson . 
`` Oh , being ashamed would be nothing ; shame is only the punishment I deserve . 
The trouble is I shall certainly have caused more unhappiness ... . 
And Father Zossima sent me to reconcile and bring them together . 
Is this the way to bring them together ? '' 
