And there 's a whole life in that , in knowing that the sun is there . 
Alyosha , my angel , all these philosophies are the death of me . 
Damn them ! 
Brother Ivan - '' `` What of brother Ivan ? '' 
interrupted Alyosha , but Mitya did not hear . 
`` You see , I never had any of these doubts before , but it was all hidden away in me . 
It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand were surging up in me , that I used to drink and fight and rage . 
It was to stifle them in myself , to still them , to smother them . 
Ivan is not Rakitin , there is an idea in him . 
Ivan is a sphinx and is silent ; he is always silent . 
It 's God that 's worrying me . 
That 's the only thing that 's worrying me . 
What if He does n't exist ? 
What if Rakitin 's right - that it 's an idea made up by men ? 
Then if He does n't exist , man is the chief of the earth , of the universe . 
Magnificent ! 
Only how is he going to be good without God ? 
That 's the question . 
I always come back to that . 
For whom is man going to love then ? 
To whom will he be thankful ? 
To whom will he sing the hymn ? 
Rakitin laughs . 
Rakitin says that one can love humanity without God . 
Well , only a snivelling idiot can maintain that . 
I ca n't understand it . 
Life 's easy for Rakitin . 
` You 'd better think about the extension of civic rights , or even of keeping down the price of meat . 
You will show your love for humanity more simply and directly by that , than by philosophy . ' 
I answered him , ` Well , but you , without a God , are more likely to raise the price of meat , if it suits you , and make a rouble on every copeck . ' 
He lost his temper . 
But after all , what is goodness ? 
Answer me that , Alexey . 
Goodness is one thing with me and another with a Chinaman , so it 's a relative thing . 
Or is n't it ? 
Is it not relative ? 
A treacherous question ! 
You wo n't laugh if I tell you it 's kept me awake two nights . 
I only wonder now how people can live and think nothing about it . 
Vanity ! 
Ivan has no God . 
He has an idea . 
It 's beyond me . 
But he is silent . 
I believe he is a Freemason . 
I asked him , but he is silent . 
I wanted to drink from the springs of his soul - he was silent . 
But once he did drop a word . '' 
`` What did he say ? '' 
Alyosha took it up quickly . 
