Ah , I love such fierce hearts , though I ca n't bear anyone 's being jealous of me . 
I ca n't endure it . 
We shall fight . 
But I shall love her , I shall love her infinitely . 
Will they marry us ? 
Do they let convicts marry ? 
That 's the question . 
And without her I ca n't exist ... '' Mitya walked frowning across the room . 
It was almost dark . 
He suddenly seemed terribly worried . 
`` So there 's a secret , she says , a secret ? 
We have got up a plot against her , and Katya is mixed up in it , she thinks . 
No , my good Grushenka , that 's not it . 
You are very wide of the mark , in your foolish feminine way . 
Alyosha , darling , well , here goes ! 
I 'll tell you our secret ! '' 
He looked round , went close up quickly to Alyosha , who was standing before him , and whispered to him with an air of mystery , though in reality no one could hear them : the old warder was dozing in the corner , and not a word could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard . 
`` I will tell you all our secret , '' Mitya whispered hurriedly . 
`` I meant to tell you later , for how could I decide on anything without you ? 
You are everything to me . 
Though I say that Ivan is superior to us , you are my angel . 
It 's your decision will decide it . 
Perhaps it 's you that is superior and not Ivan . 
You see , it 's a question of conscience , question of the higher conscience - the secret is so important that I ca n't settle it myself , and I 've put it off till I could speak to you . 
But anyway it 's too early to decide now , for we must wait for the verdict . 
As soon as the verdict is given , you shall decide my fate . 
Do n't decide it now . 
I 'll tell you now . 
You listen , but do n't decide . 
Stand and keep quiet . 
I wo n't tell you everything . 
I 'll only tell you the idea , without details , and you keep quiet . 
Not a question , not a movement . 
You agree ? 
But , goodness , what shall I do with your eyes ? 
I 'm afraid your eyes will tell me your decision , even if you do n't speak . 
Oo ! 
I 'm afraid ! 
Alyosha , listen ! 
Ivan suggests my escaping . 
I wo n't tell you the details : it 's all been thought out : it can all be arranged . 
Hush , do n't decide . 
I should go to America with Grusha . 
You know I ca n't live without Grusha ! 
What if they wo n't let her follow me to Siberia ? 
Do they let convicts get married ? 
Ivan thinks not . 
And without Grusha what should I do there underground with a hammer ? 
I should only smash my skull with the hammer ! 
But , on the other hand , my conscience ? 
