I believe that there can be none more miserable than they . 
They tell us that it is a sin to pray for them and outwardly the Church , as it were , renounces them , but in my secret heart I believe that we may pray even for them . 
Love can never be an offence to Christ . 
For such as those I have prayed inwardly all my life , I confess it , fathers and teachers , and even now I pray for them every day . 
Oh , there are some who remain proud and fierce even in hell , in spite of their certain knowledge and contemplation of the absolute truth ; there are some fearful ones who have given themselves over to Satan and his proud spirit entirely . 
For such , hell is voluntary and ever consuming ; they are tortured by their own choice . 
For they have cursed themselves , cursing God and life . 
They live upon their vindictive pride like a starving man in the desert sucking blood out of his own body . 
But they are never satisfied , and they refuse forgiveness , they curse God Who calls them . 
They can not behold the living God without hatred , and they cry out that the God of life should be annihilated , that God should destroy Himself and His own creation . 
And they will burn in the fire of their own wrath for ever and yearn for death and annihilation . 
But they will not attain to death ... . 
Here Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov 's manuscript ends . 
I repeat , it is incomplete and fragmentary . 
Biographical details , for instance , cover only Father Zossima 's earliest youth . 
Of his teaching and opinions we find brought together sayings evidently uttered on very different occasions . 
His utterances during the last few hours have not been kept separate from the rest , but their general character can be gathered from what we have in Alexey Fyodorovitch 's manuscript . 
The elder 's death came in the end quite unexpectedly . 
For although those who were gathered about him that last evening realised that his death was approaching , yet it was difficult to imagine that it would come so suddenly . 
On the contrary , his friends , as I observed already , seeing him that night apparently so cheerful and talkative , were convinced that there was at least a temporary change for the better in his condition . 
Even five minutes before his death , they said afterwards wonderingly , it was impossible to foresee it . 
He seemed suddenly to feel an acute pain in his chest , he turned pale and pressed his hands to his heart . 
All rose from their seats and hastened to him . 
But though suffering , he still looked at them with a smile , sank slowly from his chair on to his knees , then bowed his face to the ground , stretched out his arms and as though in joyful ecstasy , praying and kissing the ground , quietly and joyfully gave up his soul to God . 
The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached the monastery . 
The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it was from their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancient ritual , and all the monks gathered together in the church . 
And before dawn the news of the death reached the town . 
By the morning all the town was talking of the event , and crowds were flocking from the town to the monastery . 
But this subject will be treated in the next book ; I will only add here that before a day had passed something happened so unexpected , so strange , upsetting , and bewildering in its effect on the monks and the townspeople , that after all these years , that day of general suspense is still vividly remembered in the town . 
The Breath of Corruption THE body of Father Zossima was prepared for burial according to the established Ritual . 
As is well known , the bodies of dead monks and hermits are not washed . 
In the words of the Church Ritual : `` If any one of the monks depart in the Lord , the monk designated -LRB- that is , whose office it is -RRB- shall wipe the body with warm water , making first the sign of the cross with a sponge on the forehead of the deceased , on the breast , on the hands and feet and on the knees , and that is enough . '' 
All this was done by Father Paissy , who then clothed the deceased in his monastic garb and wrapped him in his cloak , which was , according to custom , somewhat slit to allow of its being folded about him in the form of a cross . 
On his head he put a hood with an eight-cornered cross . 
The hood was left open and the dead man 's face was covered with black gauze . 
In his hands was put an ikon of the Saviour . 
Towards morning he was put in the coffin which had been made ready long before . 
It was decided to leave the coffin all day in the cell , in the larger room in which the elder used to receive his visitors and fellow monks . 
As the deceased was a priest and monk of the strictest rule , the Gospel , not the Psalter , had to be read over his body by monks in holy orders . 
The reading was begun by Father Iosif immediately after the requiem service . 
Father Paissy desired later on to read the Gospel all day and night over his dead friend , but for the present he , as well as the Father Superintendent of the Hermitage , was very busy and occupied , for something extraordinary , an unheard-of , even `` unseemly '' excitement and impatient expectation began to be apparent in the monks , and the visitors from the monastery hostels , and the crowds of people flocking from the town . 
And as time went on , this grew more and more marked . 
Both the Superintendent and Father Paissy did their utmost to calm the general bustle and agitation . 
When it was fully daylight , some people began bringing their sick , in most cases children , with them from the town - as though they had been waiting expressly for this moment to do so , evidently persuaded that the dead elder 's remains had a power of healing , which would be immediately made manifest in accordance with their faith . 
It was only then apparent how unquestionably everyone in our town had accepted Father Zossima during his lifetime as a great saint . 
And those who came were far from being all of the humbler classes . 
This intense expectation on the part of believers displayed with such haste , such openness , even with impatience and almost insistence , impressed Father Paissy as unseemly . 
Though he had long foreseen something of the sort , the actual manifestation of the feeling was beyond anything he had looked for . 
When he came across any of the monks who displayed this excitement , Father Paissy began to reprove them . 
`` Such immediate expectation of something extraordinary , '' he said , `` shows a levity , possible to worldly people but unseemly in us . '' 
