They all walked on , however . 
The monk listened in silence . 
On the road through the copse he made one observation however - that the Father Superior had been waiting a long time , and that they were more than half an hour late . 
He received no answer . 
Miusov looked with hatred at Ivan . 
`` Here he is , going to the dinner as though nothing had happened , '' he thought . 
`` A brazen face , and the conscience of a Karamazov ! '' 
A Young Man Bent on a Career ALYOSHA helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated him on his bed . 
It was a little room furnished with the bare necessities . 
There was a narrow iron bedstead , with a strip of felt for a mattress . 
In the corner , under the ikons , was a reading-desk with a cross and the Gospel lying on it . 
The elder sank exhausted on the bed . 
His eyes glittered and he breathed hard . 
He looked intently at Alyosha , as though considering something . 
`` Go , my dear boy , go . 
Porfiry is enough for me . 
Make haste , you are needed there , go and wait at the Father Superior 's table . '' 
`` Let me stay here , '' Alyosha entreated . 
`` You are more needed there . 
There is no peace there . 
You will wait , and be of service . 
If evil spirits rise up , repeat a prayer . 
And remember , my son '' - the elder liked to call him that - `` this is not the place for you in the future . 
When it is God 's will to call me , leave the monastery . 
Go away for good . '' 
Alyosha started . 
`` What is it ? 
This is not your place for the time . 
I bless you for great service in the world . 
Yours will be a long pilgrimage . 
And you will have to take a wife , too . 
You will have to bear all before you come back . 
There will be much to do . 
But I do n't doubt of you , and so I send you forth . 
Christ is with you . 
Do not abandon Him and He will not abandon you . 
You will see great sorrow , and in that sorrow you will be happy . 
This is my last message to you : in sorrow seek happiness . 
Work , work unceasingly . 
Remember my words , for although I shall talk with you again , not only my days but my hours are numbered . '' 
Alyosha 's face again betrayed strong emotion . 
The corners of his mouth quivered . 
`` What is it again ? '' 
Father Zossima asked , smiling gently . 
`` The worldly may follow the dead with tears , but here we rejoice over the father who is departing . 
We rejoice and pray for him . 
Leave me , I must pray . 
Go , and make haste . 
Be near your brothers . 
And not near one only , but near both . '' 
