Yes , his foreboding had not deceived him . 
He recognised him ; it was he , the `` monster , '' the `` parricide . '' 
`` Parricide ! 
the old man shouted so that the whole neighbourhood could hear , but he had not time to shout more , he fell at once , as though struck by lightning . 
Mitya jumped back into the garden and bent over the fallen man . 
In Mitya 's hands was a brass pestle , and he flung it mechanically in the grass . 
The pestle fell two paces from Grigory , not in the grass but on the path , in a most conspicuous place . 
For some seconds he examined the prostrate figure before him . 
The old man 's head was covered with blood . 
Mitya put out his hand and began feeling it . 
He remembered afterwards clearly that he had been awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man 's skull , or simply stunned him with the pestle . 
But the blood was flowing horribly ; and in a moment Mitya 's fingers were drenched with the hot stream . 
He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white handkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame Hohlakov , and putting it to the old man 's head , senselessly trying to wipe the blood from his face and temples . 
But the handkerchief was instantly soaked with blood . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What am I doing it for ? '' 
thought Mitya , suddenly pulling himself together . 
`` If I have broken his skull , how can I find out now ? 
And what difference does it make now ? '' 
he added , hopelessly . 
`` If I 've killed him , I 've killed him ... . 
You 've come to grief , old man , so there you must lie ! '' 
he said aloud . 
And suddenly turning to the fence , he vaulted over it into the lane and fell to running - the handkerchief soaked with blood he held , crushed up in his right fist , and as he ran he thrust it into the back pocket of his coat . 
He ran headlong , and the few passers-by who met him in the dark , in the streets , remembered afterwards that they had met a man running that night . 
He flew back again to the widow Morozov 's house . 
Immediately after he had left it that evening , Fenya had rushed to the chief porter , Nazar Ivanovitch , and besought him , for Christ 's sake , `` not to let the captain in again to-day or to-morrow . '' 
Nazar Ivanovitch promised , but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him , and meeting his nephew , a boy of twenty , who had recently come from the country , on the way up told him to take his place , but forgot to mention `` the captain . '' 
Mitya , running up to the gate , knocked . 
The lad instantly recognised him , for Mitya had more than once tipped him . 
Opening the gate at once , he let him in , and hastened to inform him with a good-humoured smile that `` Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now , you know . '' 
`` Where is she then , Prohor ? '' 
asked Mitya , stopping short . 
`` She set off this evening , some two hours ago , with Timofey , to Mokroe . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` That I ca n't say . 
To see some officer . 
Someone invited her and horses were sent to fetch her . '' 
Mitya left him , and ran like a madman to Fenya . 
A Sudden Resolution SHE was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother ; they were both just going to bed . 
Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch , they had not locked themselves in . 
Mitya ran in , pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat . 
`` Speak at once ! 
Where is she ? 
With whom is she now , at Mokroe ? '' 
he roared furiously . 
Both the women squealed . 
`` Aie ! 
I 'll tell you . 
