Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense , not expressly for Ilusha , but for another object of which more will be said in its place hereafter . 
But , as he had come , she had asked him to see Ilusha as well , and the captain had been told to expect him . 
He had n't the slightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming , though he had long wished for a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting . 
At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room , the captain and all the boys were round Ilusha 's bed , looking at a tiny mastiff pup , which had only been born the day before , though the captain had bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha , who was still fretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka . 
Ilusha , who had heard three days before that he was to be presented with a puppy , not an ordinary puppy , but a pedigree mastiff -LRB- a very important point , of course -RRB- , tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased . 
But his father and the boys could not help seeing that the puppy only served to recall to his little heart the thought of the unhappy dog he had killed . 
The puppy lay beside him feebly moving and he , smiling sadly , stroked it with his thin , pale , wasted hand . 
Clearly he liked the puppy , but ... it was n't Zhutchka ; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy , too , then he would have been completely happy . 
`` Krassotkin ! '' 
cried one of the boys suddenly . 
He was the first to see him come in . 
Krassotkin 's entrance made a general sensation ; the boys moved away and stood on each side of the bed , so that he could get a full view of Ilusha . 
The captain ran eagerly to meet Kolya . 
`` Please come in ... you are welcome ! '' 
he said hurriedly . 
`` Ilusha , Mr. Krassotkin has come to see you ! 
But Krassotkin , shaking hands with him hurriedly , instantly showed his complete knowledge of the manners of good society . 
He turned first to the captain 's wife sitting in her armchair , who was very ill-humoured at the moment , and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha 's bed and did not let her see the new puppy . 
With the greatest courtesy he made her a bow , scraping his foot , and turning to Nina , he made her , as the only other lady present , a similar bow . 
This polite behaviour made an extremely favourable impression on the deranged lady . 
`` There , . 
you can see at once he is a young man that has been well brought up , '' she commented aloud , throwing up her hands ; `` But as for our other visitors they come in one on the top of another . '' 
`` How do you mean , mamma , one on the top of another , how is that ? '' 
muttered the captain affectionately , though a little anxious on her account . 
`` That 's how they ride in . 
They get on each other 's shoulders in the passage and prance in like that on a respectable family . 
Strange sort of visitors ! '' 
`` But who 's come in like that , mamma ? '' 
`` Why , that boy came in riding on that one 's back and this one on that one 's . '' 
Kolya was already by Ilusha 's bedside . 
The sick boy turned visibly paler . 
He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya . 
Kolya had not seen his little friend for two months , and he was overwhelmed at the sight of him . 
He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted , yellow face , such enormous , feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands . 
He saw , with grieved surprise , Ilusha 's rapid , hard breathing and dry lips . 
He stepped close to him , held out his hand , and almost overwhelmed , he said : `` Well , old man ... how are you ? '' 
But his voice failed him , he could n't achieve an appearance of ease ; his face suddenly twitched and the corners of his mouth quivered . 
Ilusha smiled a pitiful little smile , still unable to utter a word . 
Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it over Ilusha 's hair . 
`` Never mind ! '' 
he murmured softly to him to cheer him up , or perhaps not knowing why he said it . 
For a minute they were silent again . 
`` Hallo , so you 've got a new puppy ? '' 
Kolya said suddenly , in a most callous voice . 
`` Ye-es , '' answered Ilusha in a long whisper , gasping for breath . 
`` A black nose , that means he 'll be fierce , a good house-dog , '' Kolya observed gravely and stolidly , as if the only thing he cared about was the puppy and its black nose . 
But in reality he still had to do his utmost to control his feelings not to burst out crying like a child , and do what he would he could not control it . 
`` When it grows up , you 'll have to keep it on the chain , I 'm sure . '' 
`` He 'll be a huge dog ! '' 
cried one of the boys . 
