It was the first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall . 
Waiters were continually darting to and fro in it . 
The only customer in the room was an old retired military man drinking tea in a corner . 
But there was the usual bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern ; there were shouts for the waiters , the sound of popping corks , the click of billiard balls , the drone of the organ . 
Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this tavern and disliked taverns in general . 
So he must have come here , he reflected , simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement . 
Yet Dmitri was not there . 
`` Shall I order you fish , soup , or anything . 
You do n't live on tea alone , I suppose , '' cried Ivan , apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha . 
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea . 
`` Let me have soup , and tea afterwards , I am hungry , '' said Alyosha gaily . 
`` And cherry jam ? 
They have it here . 
You remember how you used to love cherry jam when you were little ? '' 
`` You remember that ? 
Let me have jam too , I like it still . '' 
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup , jam , and tea . 
`` I remember everything , Alyosha , I remember you till you were eleven , I was nearly fifteen . 
There 's such a difference between fifteen and eleven that brothers are never companions at those ages . 
I do n't know whether I was fond of you even . 
When I went away to Moscow for the first few years I never thought of you at all . 
Then , when you came to Moscow yourself , we only met once somewhere , I believe . 
And now I 've been here more than three months , and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other . 
To-morrow I am going away , and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you to say good-bye and just then you passed . '' 
`` Were you very anxious to see me , then ? '' 
`` Very . 
I want to get to know you once for all , and I want you to know me . 
And then to say good-bye . 
I believe it 's always best to get to know people just before leaving them . 
I 've noticed how you 've been looking at me these three months . 
There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes , and I ca n't endure that . 
That 's how it is I 've kept away from you . 
But in the end I have learned to respect you . 
The little man stands firm , I thought . 
Though I am laughing , I am serious . 
You do stand firm , do n't you ? 
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by , even if they are such little fellows as you . 
Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy me , I grew fond of them in the end , those expectant eyes . 
You seem to love me for some reason , Alyosha ? '' 
`` I do love you , Ivan . 
Dmitri says of you - Ivan is a tomb ! 
I say of you , Ivan is a riddle . 
You are a riddle to me even now . 
But I understand something in you , and I did not understand it till this morning . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` You wo n't be angry ? '' 
Alyosha laughed too . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty , that you are just a young and fresh and nice boy , green in fact ! 
