I nearly sent for a doctor to look after him . 
He was driven home in my carriage . 
And on the top of it all , you and this letter ! 
It 's true nothing can happen for a year and a half . 
In the name of all that 's holy , in the name of your dying elder , show me that letter , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm her mother . 
Hold it in your hand , if you like , and I will read it so . '' 
`` No , I wo n't show it to you . 
Even if she sanctioned it , I would n't . 
I am coming to-morrow , and if you like , we can talk over many things , but now good-bye ! '' 
And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street . 
Smerdyakov with a Guitar HE had no time to lose indeed . 
Even while he was saying good-bye to Lise , the thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to find his brother Dmitri , who was evidently keeping out of his way . 
It was getting late , nearly three o'clock . 
Alyosha 's whole soul turned to the monastery , to his dying saint , but the necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighed everything . 
The conviction that a great inevitable catastrophe was about to happen grew stronger in Alyosha 's mind with every hour . 
What that catastrophe was , and what he would say at that moment to his brother , he could perhaps not have said definitely . 
`` Even if my benefactor must die without me , anyway I wo n't have to reproach myself all my life with the thought that I might have saved something and did not , but passed by and hastened home . 
If I do as I intend , I shall be following his great precept . '' 
His plan was to catch his brother Dmitri unawares , to climb over the fence , as he had the day before , get into the garden and sit in the summer-house . 
If Dmitri were not there , thought Alyosha , he would not announce himself to Foma or the women of the house , but would remain hidden in the summer-house , even if he had to wait there till evening . 
If , as before , Dmitri were lying in wait for Grushenka to come , he would be very likely to come to the summer-house . 
Alyosha did not , however , give much thought to the details of his plan , but resolved to act upon it , even if it meant not getting back to the monastery that day . 
Everything happened without hindrance , he climbed over the hurdle almost in the same spot as the day before , and stole into the summer-house unseen . 
He did not want to be noticed . 
The woman of the house and Foma too , if he were here , might be loyal to his brother and obey his instructions , and so refuse to let Alyosha come into the garden , or might warn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for . 
There was no one in the summer-house . 
Alyosha sat down and began to wait . 
He looked round the summer-house , which somehow struck him as a great deal more ancient than before . 
Though the day was just as fine as yesterday , it seemed a wretched little place this time . 
There was a circle on the table , left no doubt from the glass of brandy having been spilt the day before . 
Foolish and irrelevant ideas strayed about his mind , as they always do in a time of tedious waiting . 
He wondered , for instance , why he had sat down precisely in the same place as before , why not in the other seat . 
At last he felt very depressed - depressed by suspense and uncertainty . 
But he had not sat there more than a quarter of an hour , when he suddenly heard the thrum of a guitar somewhere quite close . 
People were sitting , or had only just sat down , somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away . 
Alyosha suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer-house the day before , he had caught a glimpse of an old green low garden-seat among the bushes on the left , by the fence . 
The people must be sitting on it now . 
Who were they ? 
A man 's voice suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto , accompanying himself on the guitar : With invincible force I am bound to my dear . 
O Lord , have mercy On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
The voice ceased . 
It was a lackey 's tenor and a lackey 's song . 
Another voice , a woman 's , suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully , though with mincing affectation : `` Why have n't you been to see us for so long , Pavel Fyodorovitch ? 
Why do you always look down upon us ? '' 
`` Not at all answered a man 's voice politely , but with emphatic dignity . 
It was clear that the man had the best of the position , and that the woman was making advances . 
`` I believe the man must be Smerdyakov , '' thought Alyosha , `` from his voice . 
