Owing to his swollen legs , the old man could hardly walk at all , and was only rarely lifted from his leather armchair , when the old woman supporting him led him up and down the room once or twice . 
He was morose and taciturn even with this old woman . 
When he was informed of the arrival of the `` captain , '' he at once refused to see him . 
But Mitya persisted and sent his name up again . 
Samsonov questioned the lad minutely : What he looked like ? 
Whether he was drunk ? 
Was he going to make a row ? 
The answer he received was : that he was sober , but would n't go away . 
The old man again refused to see him . 
Then Mitya , who had foreseen this , and purposely brought pencil and paper with him , wrote clearly on the piece of paper the words : `` On most important business closely concerning Agrafena Alexandrovna , '' and sent it up to the old man . 
After thinking a little Samsonov told the lad to take the visitor to the drawing-room , and sent the old woman downstairs with a summons to his younger son to come upstairs to him at once . 
This younger son , a man over six foot and of exceptional physical strength , who was closely-shaven and dressed in the European style , though his father still wore a kaftan and a beard , came at once without a comment . 
All the family trembled before the father . 
The old man had sent for this giant , not because he was afraid of the `` captain '' -LRB- he was by no means of a timorous temper -RRB- , but in order to have a witness in case of any emergency . 
Supported by his son and the servant lad , he waddled at last into the drawing-room . 
It may be assumed that he felt considerable curiosity . 
The drawing-room in which Mitya was awaiting him was a vast , dreary room that laid a weight of depression on the heart . 
It had a double row of windows , a gallery , marbled walls , and three immense chandeliers with glass lustres covered with shades . 
Mitya was sitting on a little chair at the entrance , awaiting his fate with nervous impatience . 
When the old man appeared at the opposite door , seventy feet away , Mitya jumped up at once , and with his long , military stride walked to meet him . 
Mitya was well dressed , in a frock-coat , buttoned up , with a round hat and black gloves in his hands , just as he had been three days before at the elder 's , at the family meeting with his father and brothers . 
The old man waited for him , standing dignified and unbending , and Mitya felt at once that he had looked him through and through as he advanced . 
Mitya was greatly impressed , too , with Samsonov 's immensely swollen face . 
His lower lip , which had always been thick , hung down now , looking like a bun . 
He bowed to his guest in dignified silence , motioned him to a low chair by the sofa , and , leaning on his son 's arm he began lowering himself on to the sofa opposite , groaning painfully , so that Mitya , seeing his painful exertions , immediately felt remorseful and sensitively conscious of his insignificance in the presence of the dignified person he had ventured to disturb . 
`` What is it you want of me , sir ? '' 
said the old man , deliberately , distinctly , severely , but courteously , when he was at last seated . 
Mitya started , leapt up , but sat down again . 
Then he began at once speaking with loud , nervous haste , gesticulating , and in a positive frenzy . 
He was unmistakably a man driven into a corner , on the brink of ruin , catching at the last straw , ready to sink if he failed . 
Old Samsonov probably grasped all this in an instant , though his face remained cold and immovable as a statue 's . 
`` Most honoured sir , Kuzma Kuzmitch , you have no doubt heard more than once of my disputes with my father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , who robbed me of my inheritance from my mother ... seeing the whole town is gossiping about it ... for here everyone 's gossiping of what they should n't ... and besides , it might have reached you through Grushenka ... I beg your pardon , through Agrafena Alexandrovna ... Agrafena Alexandrovna , the lady of whom I have the highest respect and esteem ... '' So Mitya began , and broke down at the first sentence . 
We will not reproduce his speech word for word , but will only summarise the gist of it . 
Three months ago , he said , he had of express intention -LRB- Mitya purposely used these words instead of `` intentionally '' -RRB- consulted a lawyer in the chief town of the province , `` a distinguished lawyer , Kuzma Kuzmitch , Pavel Pavlovitch Korneplodov . 
You have perhaps heard of him ? 
A man of vast intellect , the mind of a statesman ... he knows you , too ... spoke of you in the highest terms ... '' Mitya broke down again . 
But these breaks did not deter him . 
He leapt instantly over the gaps , and struggled on and on . 
This Korneplodov , after questioning him minutely , and inspecting the documents he was able to bring him -LRB- Mitya alluded somewhat vaguely to these documents , and slurred over the subject with special haste -RRB- , reported that they certainly might take proceedings concerning the village of Tchermashnya , which ought , he said , to have come to him , Mitya , from his mother , and so checkmate the old villain , his father ... `` because every door was not closed and justice might still find a loophole . '' 
In fact , he might reckon on an additional sum of six or even seven thousand roubles from Fyodor Pavlovitch , as Tchermashnya was worth , at least , twenty-five thousand , he might say twenty-eight thousand , in fact , `` thirty , thirty , Kuzma Kuzmitch , and would you believe it , I did n't get seventeen from that heartless man ! '' 
So he , Mitya , had thrown the business up for the time , knowing nothing about the law , but on coming here was struck dumb by a cross - claim made upon him -LRB- here Mitya went adrift again and again took a flying leap forward -RRB- , `` so will not you , excellent and honoured Kuzma Kuzmitch , be willing to take up all my claims against that unnatural monster , and pay me a sum down of only three thousand ? 
... You see , you can not , in any case , lose over it . 
On my honour , my honour , I swear that . 
Quite the contrary , you may make six or seven thousand instead of three . '' 
Above all , he wanted this concluded that very day . 
`` I 'll do the business with you at a notary 's , or whatever it is ... in fact , I 'm ready to do anything . . . 
I 'll hand over all the deeds ... whatever you want , sign anything ... and we could draw up the agreement at once ... and if it were possible , if it were only possible , that very morning ... . 
You could pay me that three thousand , for there is n't a capitalist in this town to compare with you , and so would save me from ... save me , in fact ... for a good , I might say an honourable action ... . 
For I cherish the most honourable feelings for a certain person , whom you know well , and care for as a father . 
I would not have come , indeed , if it had not been as a father . 
