Many of the audience , of course , had not heard of the sudden suicide . 
What struck people most was Mitya 's sudden outburst . 
As soon as the statement of Smerdyakov 's death was made , he cried out aloud from his place : `` He was a dog and died like a dog ! '' 
I remember how his counsel rushed to him , and how the President addressed him , threatening to take stern measures , if such an irregularity were repeated . 
Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several times abruptly to his counsel , with no show of regret : `` I wo n't again , I wo n't . 
It escaped me . 
I wo n't do it again . '' 
And , of course , this brief episode did him no good with the jury or the public . 
His character was displayed , and it spoke for itself . 
It was under the influence of this incident that the opening statement was read . 
It was rather short , but circumstantial . 
It only stated the chief reasons why he had been arrested , why he must be tried , and so on . 
Yet it made a great impression on me . 
The clerk read it loudly and distinctly . 
The whole tragedy was suddenly unfolded before us , concentrated , in bold relief , in a fatal and pitiless light . 
I remember how , immediately after it had been read , the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice : `` Prisoner , do you plead guilty ? '' 
Mitya suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation , '' he exclaimed , again in a startling , almost frenzied , voice , `` to idleness and debauchery . 
I meant to become an honest man for good , just at the moment when I was struck down by fate . 
But I am not guilty of the death of that old man , my enemy and my father . 
No , no , I am not guilty of robbing him ! 
I could not be . 
Dmitri Karamazov is a scoundrel , but not a thief . '' 
He sat down again , visibly trembling all over . 
The President again briefly , but impressively , admonished him to answer only what was asked , and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations . 
Then he ordered the case to proceed . 
All the witnesses were led up to take the oath . 
Then I saw them all together . 
The brothers of the prisoner were , however , allowed to give evidence without taking the oath . 
After an exhortation from the priest and the President , the witnesses were led away and were made to sit as far as possible apart from one another . 
Then they began calling them up one by one . 
Dangerous Witnesses I DO NOT know whether the witnesses for the defence and for the prosecution were separated into groups by the President , and whether it was arranged to call them in a certain order . 
But no doubt it was so . 
I only know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first . 
I repeat I do n't intend to describe all the questions step by step . 
Besides , my account would be to some extent superfluous , because in the speeches for the prosecution and for the defence the whole course of the evidence was brought together and set in a strong and significant light , and I took down parts of those two remarkable speeches in full , and will quote them in due course , together with one extraordinary and quite unexpected episode , which occurred before the final speeches , and undoubtedly influenced the sinister and fatal outcome of the trial . 
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiar characteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all , that is , the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with the arguments the defence had to rely upon . 
Everyone realised it from the first moment that the facts began to group themselves round a single point , and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed . 
Everyone , perhaps , felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute , that there was no doubt about it , that there could be really no discussion , and that the defence was only a matter of form , and that the prisoner was guilty , obviously and conclusively guilty . 
I imagine that even the ladies , who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of the interesting prisoner , were at the same time , without exception , convinced of his guilt . 
What 's more , I believe they would have been mortified if his guilt had not been so firmly established , as that would have lessened the effect of the closing scene of the criminal 's acquittal . 
That he would be acquitted , all the ladies , strange to say , were firmly persuaded up to the very last moment . 
`` He is guilty , but he will be acquitted , from motives of humanity , in accordance with the new ideas , the new sentiments that had come into fashion , '' and so on , and so on . 
And that was why they had crowded into the court so impatiently . 
The men were more interested in the contest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch . 
All were wondering and asking themselves what could even a talent like Fetyukovitch 's make of such a desperate case ; and so they followed his achievements , step by step , with concentrated attention . 
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end , up to his speech . 
Persons of experience suspected that he had some design , that he was working towards some object , but it was almost impossible to guess what it was . 
His confidence and self-reliance were unmistakable , however . 
Everyone noticed with pleasure , moreover , that he , after so short a stay , not more than three days , perhaps , among us , had so wonderfully succeeded in mastering the case and `` had studied it to a nicety . '' 
