`` He 's alone , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Where are you ? '' 
cried the old man again ; and he thrust his head out farther , thrust it out to the shoulders , gazing in all directions , right and left . 
`` Come here , I 've a little present for you . 
Come , I 'll show you ... '' `` He means the three thousand , '' thought Mitya . 
`` But where are you ? 
Are you at the door ? 
I 'll open it directly . '' 
And the old man almost climbed out of the window , peering out to the right , where there was a door into the garden , trying to see into the darkness . 
In another second he would certainly have run out to open the door without waiting for Grushenka 's answer . 
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring . 
The old man 's profile that he loathed so , his pendent Adam 's apple , his hooked nose , his lips that smiled in greedy expectation , were all brightly lighted up by the slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room . 
A horrible fury of hatred suddenly surged up in Mitya 's heart : `` There he was , his rival , the man who had tormented him , had ruined his life ! '' 
It was a rush of that sudden , furious , revengeful anger of which he had spoken , as though foreseeing it , to Alyosha , four days ago in the arbour , when , in answer to Alyosha 's question , `` How can you say you 'll kill our father ? '' 
`` I do n't know , I do n't know , '' he had said then . 
`` Perhaps I shall not kill him , perhaps I shall . 
I 'm afraid he 'll suddenly be so loathsome to me at that moment . 
I hate his double chin , his nose , his eyes , his shameless grin . 
I feel a personal repulsion . 
That 's what I 'm afraid of , that 's what may be too much for me . '' 
... This personal repulsion was growing unendurable . 
Mitya was beside himself , he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his pocket . 
`` God was watching over me then , '' Mitya himself said afterwards . 
At that very moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness . 
Earlier in the evening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described to Ivan . 
He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret , very strong decoction , had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife repeated a `` certain prayer '' over him , after which he had gone to bed . 
Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff , too , and , being unused to strong drink , slept like the dead beside her husband . 
But Grigory waked up in the night , quite suddenly , and , after a moment 's reflection , though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back , he sat up in bed . 
Then he deliberated again , got up and dressed hurriedly . 
Perhaps his conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house was unguarded `` in such perilous times . '' 
Smerdyakov , exhausted by his fit , lay motionless in the next room . 
Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir . 
`` The stuff 's been too much for the woman , '' Grigory thought , glancing at her , and groaning , he went out on the steps . 
No doubt he only intended to look out from the steps , for he was hardly able to walk , the pain in his back and his right leg was intolerable . 
But he suddenly remembered that he had not locked the little gate into the garden that evening . 
He was the most punctual and precise of men , a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine , and habits that lasted for years . 
Limping and writhing with pain he went down the steps and towards the garden . 
Yes , the gate stood wide open . 
Mechanically he stepped into the garden . 
Perhaps he fancied something , perhaps caught some sound , and , glancing to the left he saw his master 's window open . 
No one was looking out of it then . 
`` What 's it open for ? 
It 's not summer now , '' thought Grigory , and suddenly , at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary before him in the garden . 
Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be running in the dark , a sort of shadow was moving very fast . 
`` Good Lord ! '' 
cried Grigory beside himself , and forgetting the pain in his back , he hurried to intercept the running figure . 
He took a short cut , evidently he knew the garden better ; the flying figure went towards the bath-house , ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence . 
Grigory followed , not losing sight of him , and ran , forgetting everything . 
He reached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it . 
Grigory cried out , beside himself , pounced on him , and clutched his leg in his two hands . 
