Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor , and his hands pressed to his ears , but he began trembling all over . 
The voice continued . 
`` The question now is , my young thinker reflected , is it possible that such a period will ever come ? 
If it does , everything is determined and humanity is settled for ever . 
But as , owing to man 's inveterate stupidity , this can not come about for at least a thousand years , everyone who recognises the truth even now may legitimately order his life as he pleases , on the new principles . 
In that sense , ` all things are lawful ' for him . 
What 's more , even if this period never comes to pass , since there is anyway no God and no immortality , the new man may well become the man-god , even if he is the only one in the whole world , and promoted to his new position , he may lightheartedly overstep all the barriers of the old morality of the old slaveman , if necessary . 
There is no law for God . 
Where God stands , the place is holy . 
Where I stand will be at once the foremost place ... ` all things are lawful ' and that 's the end of it ! 
That 's all very charming ; but if you want to swindle why do you want a moral sanction for doing it ? 
But that 's our modern Russian all over . 
He ca n't bring himself to swindle without a moral sanction . 
He is so in love with truth - '' The visitor talked , obviously carried away by his own eloquence , speaking louder and louder and looking ironically at his host . 
But he did not succeed in finishing ; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the table and flung it at the orator . 
`` Ah , mais c'est bete enfin , '' * cried the latter , jumping up from the sofa and shaking the drops of tea off himself . 
`` He remembers Luther 's inkstand ! 
He takes me for a dream and throws glasses at a dream ! 
It 's like a woman ! 
I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your ears . '' 
* But after all , that 's stupid . 
A loud , persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window . 
Ivan jumped up from the sofa . 
`` Do you hear ? 
You 'd better open , '' cried the visitor ; `` it 's your brother Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising news , I 'll be bound ! '' 
`` Be silent , deceiver , I knew it was Alyosha , I felt he was coming , and of course he has not come for nothing ; of course he brings ` news , ' '' Ivan exclaimed frantically . 
`` Open , open to him . 
There 's a snowstorm and he is your brother . 
Monsieur sait-il le temps qu'il fait ? 
C'est a ne pas mettre un chien dehors . '' 
* * Does the gentleman know the weather he 's making ? 
It 's not weather for a dog . 
The knocking continued . 
Ivan wanted to rush to the window , but something seemed to fetter his arms and legs . 
He strained every effort to break his chains , but in vain . 
The knocking at the window grew louder and louder . 
At last the chains were broken and Ivan leapt up from the sofa . 
He looked round him wildly . 
Both candles had almost burnt out , the glass he had just thrown at his visitor stood before him on the table , and there was no one on the sofa opposite . 
The knocking on the window frame went on persistently , but it was by no means so loud as it had seemed in his dream ; on the contrary , it was quite subdued . 
`` It was not a dream ! 
No , I swear it was not a dream , it all happened just now ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
He rushed to the window and opened the movable pane . 
`` Alyosha , I told you not to come , '' he cried fiercely to his brother . 
`` In two words , what do you want ? 
In two words , do you hear ? '' 
`` An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself , '' Alyosha answered from the yard . 
`` Come round to the steps , I 'll open at once , '' said Ivan , going to open the door to Alyosha . 
`` It Was He Who Said That '' ALYOSHA coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken his own life . 
