`` Yes , she sent for me , and I am just going to her . '' 
Alyosha got up resolutely . 
`` Oh , my dear , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , perhaps that 's what 's most important , '' Madame Hohlakov cried , suddenly bursting into tears . 
`` God knows I trust Lise to you with all my heart , and it 's no matter her sending for you on the sly , without telling her mother . 
But forgive me , I ca n't trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch , though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man . 
But only fancy , he 's been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it ! '' 
`` How ? 
What ? 
When ? '' 
Alyosha was exceedingly surprised . 
He had not sat down again and listened standing . 
`` I will tell you ; that 's perhaps why I asked you to come , for I do n't know now why I did ask you to come . 
Well , Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see me twice , since he came back from Moscow . 
First time he came as a friend to call on me , and the second time Katya was here and he came because he heard she was here . 
I did n't , of course , expect him to come often , knowing what a lot he has to do as it is , vous comprenez , cette affaire et la mort terrible de votre papa . 
-LRB- You know , this affair and your father 's terrible death . -RRB- 
But I suddenly heard he 'd been here again , not to see me but to see Lise . 
That 's six days ago now . 
He came , stayed five minutes , and went away . 
And I did n't hear of it till three days afterwards , from Glafira , so it was a great shock to me . 
I sent for Lise directly . 
She laughed . 
` He thought you were asleep , ' she said , ` and came in to me to ask after your health . ' 
Of course , that 's how it happened . 
But Lise , Lise , mercy on us , how she distresses me ! 
Would you believe it , one night , four days ago , just after you saw her last time , and had gone away , she suddenly had a fit , screaming , shrieking , hysterics ! 
Why is it I never have hysterics ? 
Then , next day another fit , and the same thing on the third , and yesterday too , and then yesterday that aberration . 
She suddenly screamed out , ' I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I insist on your never letting him come to the house again . ' 
I was struck dumb at these amazing words , and answered , ` On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent young man , a young man of such learning too , and so unfortunate ? ' 
- for all this business is a misfortune , is n't it ? ' 
She suddenly burst out laughing at my words , and so rudely , you know . 
Well , I was pleased ; I thought I had amused her and the fits would pass off , especially as I wanted to refuse to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits without my knowledge , and meant to ask him for an explanation . 
But early this morning Lise waked up and flew into a passion with Yulia and , would you believe it , slapped her in the face . 
That 's monstrous ; I am always polite to my servants . 
And an hour later she was hugging Yulia 's feet and kissing them . 
She sent a message to me that she was n't coming to me at all , and would never come and see me again , and when I dragged myself down to her , she rushed to kiss me , crying , and as she kissed me , she pushed me out of the room without saying a word , so I could n't find out what was the matter . 
Now , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , I rest all my hopes on you , and , of course , my whole life is in your hands . 
I simply beg you to go to Lise and find out everything from her , as you alone can , and come back and tell me - me , her mother , for you understand it will be the death of me , simply the death of me , if this goes on , or else I shall run away . 
I can stand no more . 
I have patience ; but I may lose patience , and then ... then something awful will happen . 
Ah , dear me ! 
At last , Pyotr Ilyitch ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room . 
`` You are late , you are late ! 
Well , sit down , speak , put us out of suspense . 
What does the counsel say . 
Where are you off to , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` To Lise . '' 
