Bring them here , '' she said , pointing to the portmanteaus and not greeting anyone . 
`` The young ladies ' ? 
There to the left . 
Now what are you dawdling for ? '' 
she cried to the maids . 
`` Get the samovar ready ! 
... You 've grown plumper and prettier , '' she remarked , drawing Natasha -LRB- whose cheeks were glowing from the cold -RRB- to her by the hood . 
`` Foo ! 
You are cold ! 
Now take off your things , quick ! '' 
she shouted to the count who was going to kiss her hand . 
`` You 're half frozen , I 'm sure ! 
Bring some rum for tea ! 
... Bonjour , Sonya dear ! '' 
she added , turning to Sonya and indicating by this French greeting her slightly contemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her . 
When they came in to tea , having taken off their outdoor things and tidied themselves up after their journey , Marya Dmitrievna kissed them all in due order . 
`` I 'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me . 
It was high time , '' she said , giving Natasha a significant look . 
`` The old man is here and his son 's expected any day . 
You 'll have to make his acquaintance . 
But we 'll speak of that later on , '' she added , glancing at Sonya with a look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence . 
`` Now listen , '' she said to the count . 
`` What do you want tomorrow ? 
Whom will you send for ? 
Shinshin ? '' 
she crooked one of her fingers . 
`` The sniveling Anna Mikhaylovna ? 
That 's two . 
She 's here with her son . 
The son is getting married ! 
Then Bezukhov , eh ? 
He is here too , with his wife . 
He ran away from her and she came galloping after him . 
He dined with me on Wednesday . 
As for them '' -- and she pointed to the girls -- `` tomorrow I 'll take them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God , and then we 'll drive to the Super-Rogue 's . 
I suppose you 'll have everything new . 
Do n't judge by me : sleeves nowadays are this size ! 
The other day young Princess Irina Vasilevna came to see me ; she was an awful sight -- looked as if she had put two barrels on her arms . 
You know not a day passes now without some new fashion ... . 
And what have you to do yourself ? '' 
she asked the count sternly . 
`` One thing has come on top of another : her rags to buy , and now a purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house . 
If you will be so kind , I 'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a day , and leave my lassies with you . '' 
`` All right . 
All right . 
They 'll be safe with me , as safe as in Chancery ! 
I 'll take them where they must go , scold them a bit , and pet them a bit , '' said Marya Dmitrievna , touching her goddaughter and favorite , Natasha , on the cheek with her large hand . 
Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet , who was so afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a loss merely to get rid of her . 
Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the whole trousseau . 
When they got home she turned everybody out of the room except Nataisha , and then called her pet to her armchair . 
