he thought . 
`` No , probably he wo n't make his entry into Moscow before noon . '' 
Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him , but hastened to act . 
After arranging his clothes , he took the pistol and was about to go out . 
But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly could not carry the weapon in his hand through the streets . 
It was difficult to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat . 
He could not carry it unnoticed in his belt or under his arm . 
Besides , it had been discharged , and he had not had time to reload it . 
`` No matter , dagger will do , '' he said to himself , though when planning his design he had more than once come to the conclusion that the chief mistake made by the student in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger . 
But as his chief aim consisted not in carrying out his design , but in proving to himself that he would not abandon his intention and was doing all he could to achieve it , Pierre hastily took the blunt jagged dagger in a green sheath which he had bought at the Sukharev market with the pistol , and hid it under his waistcoat . 
Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head , Pierre went down the corridor , trying to avoid making a noise or meeting the captain , and passed out into the street . 
The conflagration , at which he had looked with so much indifference the evening before , had greatly increased during the night . 
Moscow was on fire in several places . 
The buildings in Carriage Row , across the river , in the Bazaar and the Povarskoy , as well as the barges on the Moskva River and the timber yards by the Dorogomilov Bridge , were all ablaze . 
Pierre 's way led through side streets to the Povarskoy and from there to the church of St. Nicholas on the Arbat , where he had long before decided that the deed should should be done . 
The gates of most of the houses were locked and the shutters up . 
The streets and lanes were deserted . 
The air was full of smoke and the smell of burning . 
Now and then he met Russians with anxious and timid faces , and Frenchmen with an air not of the city but of the camp , walking in the middle of the streets . 
Both the Russians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise . 
Besides his height and stoutness , and the strange morose look of suffering in his face and whole figure , the Russians stared at Pierre because they could not make out to what class he could belong . 
The French followed him with astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre , unlike all the other Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity , paid no attention to them . 
At the gate of one house three Frenchmen , who were explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them , stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French . 
Pierre shook his head and went on . 
In another side street a sentinel standing beside a green caisson shouted at him , but only when the shout was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man 's musket as he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other side of the street . 
He heard nothing and saw nothing of what went on around him . 
He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste , like something dreadful and alien to him , for , after the previous night 's experience , he was afraid of losing it . 
But he was not destined to bring his mood safely to his destination . 
And even had he not been hindered by anything on the way , his intention could not now have been carried out , for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than four hours previously on his way from the Dorogomilov suburb to the Kremlin , and was now sitting in a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Kremlin , giving detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately to extinguish the fire , to prevent looting , and to reassure the inhabitants . 
But Pierre did not know this ; he was entirely absorbed in what lay before him , and was tortured -- as those are who obstinately undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures -- by the fear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem . 
Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinct and did not go wrong in the side streets that led to the Povarskoy . 
As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser - he even felt the heat of the fire . 
Occasionally curly tongues of flame rose from under the roofs of the houses . 
He met more people in the streets and they were more excited . 
But Pierre , though he felt that something unusual was happening around him , did not realize that he was approaching the fire . 
As he was going along a foot path across a wide-open space adjoining the Povarskoy on one side and the gardens of Prince Gruzinski 's house on the other , Pierre suddenly heard the desperate weeping of a woman close to him . 
He stopped as if awakening from a dream and lifted his head . 
By the side of the path , on the dusty dry grass , all sorts of household goods lay in a heap : featherbeds , a samovar , icons , and trunks . 
On the ground , beside the trunks , sat a thin woman no longer young , with long , prominent upper teeth , and wearing a black cloak and cap . 
This woman , swaying to and fro and muttering something , was choking with sobs . 
Two girls of about ten and twelve , dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks , were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale frightened faces . 
The youngest child , a boy of about seven , who wore an overcoat and an immense cap evidently not his own , was crying in his old nurse 's arms . 
A dirty , barefooted maid was sitting on a trunk , and , having undone her pale-colored plait , was pulling it straight and sniffing at her singed hair . 
The woman 's husband , a short , round-shouldered man in the undress uniform of a civilian official , with sausage-shaped whiskers and showing under his square-set cap the hair smoothly brushed forward over his temples , with expressionless face was moving the trunks , which were placed one on another , and was dragging some garments from under them . 
As soon as she saw Pierre , the woman almost threw herself at his feet . 
`` Dear people , good Christians , save me , help me , dear friends ... help us , somebody , '' she muttered between her sobs . 
`` My girl ... My daughter ! 
My youngest daughter is left behind . 
She 's burned ! 
Ooh ! 
