`` Dunyasha , send Alpatych , or Dronushka , or somebody to me ! '' 
she said , `` and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me , '' she added , hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne 's voice . 
`` We must go at once , at once ! '' 
she said , appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French . 
`` If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French ! 
That I , the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski , asked General Rameau for protection and accepted his favor ! '' 
This idea horrified her , made her shudder , blush , and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never experienced before . 
All that was distressing , and especially all that was humiliating , in her position rose vividly to her mind . 
`` They , the French , would settle in this house : M. le General Rameau would occupy Prince Andrew 's study and amuse himself by looking through and reading his letters and papers . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of Bogucharovo for him . 
I should be given a small room as a favor , the soldiers would violate my father 's newly dug grave to steal his crosses and stars , they would tell me of their victories over the Russians , and would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow ... '' thought Princess Mary , not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father and her brother . 
For herself she did not care where she remained or what happened to her , but she felt herself the representative of her dead father and of Prince Andrew . 
Involuntarily she thought their thoughts and felt their feelings . 
What they would have said and what they would have done she felt bound to say and do . 
She went into Prince Andrew 's study , trying to enter completely into his ideas , and considered her position . 
The demands of life , which had seemed to her annihilated by her father 's death , all at once rose before her with a new , previously unknown force and took possession of her . 
Agitated and flushed she paced the room , sending now for Michael Ivanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron . 
Dunyasha , the nurse , and the other maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne 's statement was correct . 
Alpatych was not at home , he had gone to the police . 
Neither could the architect Michael Ivanovich , who on being sent for came in with sleepy eyes , tell Princess Mary anything . 
With just the same smile of agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to answer the old prince without expressing views of his own , he now replied to Princess Mary , so that nothing definite could be got from his answers . 
The old valet Tikhon , with sunken , emaciated face that bore the stamp of inconsolable grief , replied : `` Yes , Princess '' to all Princess Mary 's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing as he looked at her . 
At length Dron , the village Elder , entered the room and with a deep bow to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost . 
Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him . 
`` Dronushka , '' she said , regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who always used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to the fair at Vyazma every year and smilingly offer it to her , `` Dronushka , now since our misfortune ... '' she began , but could not go on . 
`` We are all in God 's hands , '' said he , with a sigh . 
They were silent for a while . 
`` Dronushka , Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn to . 
Is true , as they tell me , that I ca n't even go away ? '' 
`` Why should n't you go away , your excellency ? 
You can go , '' said Dron . 
`` I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy . 
Dear friend , I can do nothing . 
I understand nothing . 
I have nobody ! 
I want to go away tonight or early tomorrow morning . '' 
Dron paused . 
He looked askance at Princess Mary and said : `` There are no horses ; I told Yakov Alpatych so . '' 
`` Why are there none ? '' 
asked the princess . 
`` It 's all God 's scourge , '' said Dron . 
`` What horses we had have been taken for the army or have died -- this is such a year ! 
It 's not a case of feeding horses -- we may die of hunger ourselves ! 
As it is , some go three days without eating . 
We 've nothing , we 've been ruined . '' 
Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her . 
`` The peasants are ruined ? 
They have no bread ? '' 
she asked . 
`` They 're dying of hunger , '' said Dron . 
