At these parties his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found out at any moment . 
But whether because stupidity was just what was needed to run such a salon , or because those who were deceived found pleasure in the deception , at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene Bezukhova 's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a profound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception . 
* `` That 's a superb animal . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` Of a charming woman , as witty as she is lovely . '' 
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman . 
He was that absent-minded crank , a grand seigneur husband who was in no one 's way , and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the drawing room , he served , by the contrast he presented to her , as an advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife . 
Pierre during the last two years , as a result of his continual absorption in abstract interests and his sincere contempt for all else , had acquired in his wife 's circle , which did not interest him , that air of unconcern , indifference , and benevolence toward all , which can not be acquired artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect . 
He entered his wife 's drawing room as one enters a theater , was acquainted with everybody , equally pleased to see everyone , and equally indifferent to them all . 
Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him and , regardless of whether any `` gentlemen of the embassy '' were present or not , lispingly expressed his views , which were sometimes not at all in accord with the accepted tone of the moment . 
But the general opinion concerning the queer husband of `` the most distinguished woman in Petersburg '' was so well established that no one took his freaks seriously . 
Among the many young men who frequented her house every day , Boris Drubetskoy , who had already achieved great success in the service , was the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene 's return from Erfurt . 
Helene spoke of him as `` mon page '' and treated him like a child . 
Her smile for him was the same as for everybody , but sometimes that smile made Pierre uncomfortable . 
Toward him Boris behaved with a particularly dignified and sad deference . 
This shade of deference also disturbed Pierre . 
He had suffered so painfully three years before from the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now protected himself from the danger of its repetition , first by not being a husband to his wife , and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect . 
`` No , now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced her former infatuations , '' he told himself . 
`` There has never been an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the heart '' -- a statement which , though gathered from an unknown source , he believed implicitly . 
Yet strange to say Boris ' presence in his wife 's drawing room -LRB- and he was almost always there -RRB- had a physical effect upon Pierre ; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and freedom of his movements . 
`` What a strange antipathy , '' thought Pierre , `` yet I used to like him very much . '' 
In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman , the rather blind and absurd husband of a distinguished wife , a clever crank who did nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate , good-natured fellow . 
But a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place all this time in Pierre 's soul , revealing much to him and causing him many spiritual doubts and joys . 
Pierre went on with his diary , and this is what he wrote in it during that time : 24th November Got up at eight , read the Scriptures , then went to my duties . 
-LSB- By Joseph Alexeevich 's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and served on one of the committees . -RSB- 
Returned home for dinner and dined alone -- the countess had many visitors I do not like . 
I ate and drank moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers . 
In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about B. , and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody laughed loudly at it . 
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind . 
Great God , help me to walk in Thy paths , -LRB- 1 -RRB- to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation , -LRB- 2 -RRB- to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion , -LRB- 3 -RRB- to withdraw from worldliness , but not avoid -LRB- a -RRB- the service of the state , -LRB- b -RRB- family duties , -LRB- c -RRB- relations with my friends , and the management of my affairs . 
27th November I got up late . 
On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth . 
O God , help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways ! 
Read the Scriptures , but without proper feeling . 
Brother Urusov came and we talked about worldly vanities . 
He told me of the Emperor 's new projects . 
I began to criticize them , but remembered my rules and my benefactor 's words -- that a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist . 
My tongue is my enemy . 
Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary talk about the reception of a new Brother . 
They laid on me the duty of Rhetor . 
I feel myself weak and unworthy . 
Then our talk turned to the interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple , the seven sciences , the seven virtues , the seven vices , and the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit . 
Brother O. was very eloquent . 
In the evening the admission took place . 
The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the magnificence of the spectacle . 
It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted . 
I nominated him and was the Rhetor . 
A strange feeling agitated me all the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber . 
I caught myself harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to overcome . 
That is why I should really like to save him from evil and lead him into the path of truth , but evil thoughts of him did not leave me . 
It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge . 
