but she says , ` No , he 's laughing . ' 
And she was right , '' said Countess Mary with a happy smile . 
`` Yes , yes . '' 
And Nicholas , taking his little daughter in his strong hand , lifted her high , placed her on his shoulder , held her by the legs , and paced the room with her . 
There was an expression of carefree happiness on the faces of both father and daughter . 
`` But you know you may be unfair . 
You are too fond of this one , '' his wife whispered in French . 
`` Yes , but what am I to do ? 
... I try not to show ... '' At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in the hall and anteroom , as if someone had arrived . 
`` Somebody has come . '' 
`` I am sure it is Pierre . 
I will go and see , '' said Countess Mary and left the room . 
In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a gallop round the room . 
Out of breath , he took the laughing child quickly from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart . 
His capers reminded him of dancing , and looking at the child 's round happy little face he thought of what she would be like when he was an old man , taking her into society and dancing the mazurka with her as his old father had danced Daniel Cooper with his daughter . 
`` It is he , it is he , Nicholas ! '' 
said Countess Mary , re-entering the room a few minutes later . 
`` Now our Natasha has come to life . 
You should have seen her ecstasy , and how he caught it for having stayed away so long . 
Well , come along now , quick , quick ! 
It 's time you two were parted , '' she added , looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father . 
Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand . 
Countess Mary remained in the sitting room . 
`` I should never , never have believed that one could be so happy , '' she whispered to herself . 
A smile lit up her face but at the same time she sighed , and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as though she felt , through her happiness , that there is another sort of happiness unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thought at that instant . 
Natasha had married in the early spring of 1813 , and in 1820 already had three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was now nursing . 
She had grown stouter and broader , so that it was difficult to recognize in this robust , motherly woman the slim , lively Natasha of former days . 
Her features were more defined and had a calm , soft , and serene expression . 
In her face there was none of the ever-glowing animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm . 
Now her face and body were of all that one saw , and her soul was not visible at all . 
All that struck the eye was a strong , handsome , and fertile woman . 
The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now . 
That happened only when , as was the case that day , her husband returned home , or a sick child was convalescent , or when she and Countess Mary spoke of Prince Andrew -LRB- she never mentioned him to her husband , who she imagined was jealous of Prince Andrew 's memory -RRB- , or on the rare occasions when something happened to induce her to sing , a practice she had quite abandoned since her marriage . 
At the rare moments when the old fire did kindle in her handsome , fully developed body she was even more attractive than in former days . 
Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow , in Petersburg , on their estate near Moscow , or with her mother , that is to say , in Nicholas ' house . 
The young Countess Bezukhova was not often seen in society , and those who met her there were not pleased with her and found her neither attractive nor amiable . 
Not that Natasha liked solitude -- she did not know whether she liked it or not , she even thought that she did not -- but with her pregnancies , her confinements , the nursing of her children , and sharing every moment of her husband 's life , she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing society . 
All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at the change in her as at something extraordinary . 
Only the old countess with her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha 's outbursts had been due to her need of children and a husband -- as she herself had once exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest -- and her mother was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never understood Natasha , and she kept saying that she had always known that Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother . 
`` Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all bounds , '' said the countess , `` so that it even becomes absurd . '' 
Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk , especially by the French , which says that a girl should not let herself go when she marries , should not neglect her accomplishments , should be even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried , and should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her husband . 
Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery , of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part . 
She gave it up just because it was so powerfully seductive . 
She took no pains with her manners or with of speech , or with her toilet , or to show herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes , or to avoid inconveniencing him by being too exacting . 
She acted in contradiction to all those rules . 
She felt that the allurements instinct had formerly taught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of her husband , to whom she had from the first moment given herself up entirely -- that is , with her whole soul , leaving no corner of it hidden from him . 
She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her , but by something else -- indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul . 
To fluff out her curls , put on fashionable dresses , and sing romantic songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn herself to attract herself . 
To adorn herself for others might perhaps have been agreeable -- she did not know -- but she had no time at all for it . 
The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing , to dress , or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for these things . 
