The convicts stopped when they reached the post and , while sacks were being brought , looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching huntsman . 
One crossed himself continually , the other scratched his back and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile . 
With hurried hands the soldiers blindfolded them , drawing the sacks over their heads , and bound them to the post . 
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm regular tread and halted eight paces from the post . 
Pierre turned away to avoid seeing what was going to happen . 
Suddenly a crackling , rolling noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific thunder , and he looked round . 
There was some smoke , and the Frenchmen were doing something near the pit , with pale faces and trembling hands . 
Two more prisoners were led up . 
In the same way and with similar looks , these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for protection in their eyes , evidently unable to understand or believe what was going to happen to them . 
They could not believe it because they alone knew what their life meant to them , and so they neither understood nor believed that it could be taken from them . 
Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away ; but again the sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear , and at the same moment he saw smoke , blood , and the pale , scared faces of the Frenchmen who were again doing something by the post , their trembling hands impeding one another . 
Pierre , breathing heavily , looked around as if asking what it meant . 
The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his . 
On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers without exception , he read the same dismay , horror , and conflict that were in his own heart . 
`` But who , after all , is doing this ? 
They are all suffering as I am . 
Who then is it ? 
Who ? '' 
flashed for an instant through his mind . 
`` Sharpshooters of the 86th , forward ! '' 
shouted someone . 
The fifth prisoner , the one next to Pierre , was led away -- alone . 
Pierre did not understand that he was saved , that he and the rest had been brought there only to witness the execution . 
With ever-growing horror , and no sense of joy or relief , he gazed at what was taking place . 
The fifth man was the factory lad in the loose cloak . 
The moment they laid hands on him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre . 
-LRB- Pierre shuddered and shook himself free . -RRB- 
The lad was unable to walk . 
They dragged him along , holding him up under the arms , and he screamed . 
When they got him to the post he grew quiet , as if he suddenly understood something . 
Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought it incredible that men should kill him , at any rate he took his stand at the post , waiting to be blindfolded like the others , and like a wounded animal looked around him with glittering eyes . 
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes . 
His curiosity and agitation , like that of the whole crowd , reached the highest pitch at this fifth murder . 
Like the others this fifth man seemed calm ; he wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other . 
When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which hurt the back of his head ; then when they propped him against the bloodstained post , he leaned back and , not being comfortable in that position , straightened himself , adjusted his feet , and leaned back again more comfortably . 
Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss his slightest movement . 
Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of eight muskets ; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember having heard the slightest sound of the shots . 
He only saw how the workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him , how blood showed itself in two places , how the ropes slackened under the weight of the hanging body , and how the workman sat down , his head hanging unnaturally and one leg bent under him . 
Pierre ran up to the post . 
No one hindered him . 
Pale , frightened people were doing something around the workman . 
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he untied the ropes . 
The body collapsed . 
The soldiers dragged it awkwardly from the post and began pushing it into the pit . 
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible . 
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other . 
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively , but spadefuls of earth were already being thrown over the whole body . 
One of the soldiers , evidently suffering , shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to go back . 
But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post , and no one drove him away . 
When the pit had been filled up a command was given . 
