`` I bet on Dolokhov ! '' 
cried a third . 
`` Kuragin , you part our hands . '' 
`` There , leave Bruin alone ; here 's a bet on . '' 
`` At one draught , or he loses ! '' 
shouted a fourth . 
`` Jacob , bring a bottle ! '' 
shouted the host , a tall , handsome fellow who stood in the midst of the group , without a coat , and with his fine linen shirt unfastened in front . 
`` Wait a bit , you fellows ... . 
Here is Petya ! 
Good man ! '' 
cried he , addressing Pierre . 
Another voice , from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes , particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring , cried from the window : `` Come here ; part the bets ! '' 
This was Dolokhov , an officer of the Semenov regiment , a notorious gambler and duelist , who was living with Anatole . 
Pierre smiled , looking about him merrily . 
`` I do n't understand . 
What 's it all about ? '' 
`` Wait a bit , he is not drunk yet ! 
A bottle here , '' said Anatole , taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre . 
`` First of all you must drink ! '' 
Pierre drank one glass after another , looking from under his brows at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window , and listening to their chatter . 
Anatole kept on refilling Pierre 's glass while explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens , an English naval officer , that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out . 
`` Go on , you must drink it all , '' said Anatole , giving Pierre the last glass , `` or I wo n't let you go ! '' 
`` No , I wo n't , '' said Pierre , pushing Anatole aside , and he went up to the window . 
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman 's hand and clearly and distinctly repeating the terms of the bet , addressing himself particularly to Anatole and Pierre . 
Dolokhov was of medium height , with curly hair and light-blue eyes . 
He was about twenty-five . 
Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache , so that his mouth , the most striking feature of his face , was clearly seen . 
The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved . 
The middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm lower one , and something like two distinct smiles played continually round the two corners of the mouth ; this , together with the resolute , insolent intelligence of his eyes , produced an effect which made it impossible not to notice his face . 
Dolokhov was a man of small means and no connections . 
Yet , though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles , Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them , including Anatole himself , respected him more than they did Anatole . 
Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won . 
However much he drank , he never lost his clearheadedness . 
Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg . 
The bottle of rum was brought . 
The window frame which prevented anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen , who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of the gentlemen around . 
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window . 
He wanted to smash something . 
Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame , but could not move it . 
He smashed a pane . 
`` You have a try , Hercules , '' said he , turning to Pierre . 
Pierre seized the crossbeam , tugged , and wrenched the oak frame out with a crash . 
`` Take it right out , or they 'll think I 'm holding on , '' said Dolokhov . 
`` Is the Englishman bragging ? 
... Eh ? 
Is it all right ? '' 
said Anatole . 
`` First-rate , '' said Pierre , looking at Dolokhov , who with a bottle of rum in his hand was approaching the window , from which the light of the sky , the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset , was visible . 
Dolokhov , the bottle of rum still in his hand , jumped onto the window sill . 
