We can get a view from there and in our battery it is still bearable , '' said the adjutant . 
`` Will you come ? '' 
`` Yes , I 'll come with you , '' replied Pierre , looking round for his groom . 
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being carried on stretchers . 
On that very meadow he had ridden over the day before , a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay , with his head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off . 
`` Why have n't they carried him away ? '' 
Pierre was about to ask , but seeing the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way , he checked himself . 
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the adjutant to Raevski 's Redoubt . 
His horse lagged behind the adjutant 's and jolted him at every step . 
`` You do n't seem to be used to riding , Count ? '' 
remarked the adjutant . 
`` No it 's not that , but her action seems so jerky , '' said Pierre in a puzzled tone . 
`` Why ... she 's wounded ! '' 
said the adjutant . 
`` In the off foreleg above the knee . 
A bullet , no doubt . 
I congratulate you , Count , on your baptism of fire ! '' 
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps , behind the artillery which had been moved forward and was in action , deafening them with the noise of firing , they came to a small wood . 
There it was cool and quiet , with a scent of autumn . 
Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up the hill on foot . 
`` Is the general here ? '' 
asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll . 
`` He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way , '' someone told him , pointing to the right . 
The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now . 
`` Do n't trouble about me , '' said Pierre . 
`` I 'll go up onto the knoll if I may ? '' 
`` Yes , do . 
You 'll see everything from there and it 's less dangerous , and I 'll come for you . '' 
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on . 
They did not meet again , and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that day . 
The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski 's Redoubt , and to the French as la grande redoute , la fatale redoute , la redoute du centre , around which tens of thousands fell , and which the French regarded as the key to the whole position . 
This redoubt consisted of a knoll , on three sides of which trenches had been dug . 
Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired through openings in the earthwork . 
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired incessantly . 
A little behind the guns stood infantry . 
When ascending that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot , on which small trenches had been dug and from which a few guns were firing , was the most important point of the battle . 
On the contrary , just because he happened to be there he thought it one of the least significant parts of the field . 
Having reached the knoll , Pierre sat down at one end of a trench surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with an unconsciously happy smile . 
Occasionally he rose and walked about the battery still with that same smile , trying not to obstruct the soldiers who were loading , hauling the guns , and continually running past him with bags and charges . 
The guns of that battery were being fired continually one after another with a deafening roar , enveloping the whole neighborhood in powder smoke . 
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support , here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were separated from the rest by a trench , everyone experienced a common and as it were family feeling of animation . 
The intrusion of Pierre 's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an unpleasant impression at first . 
The soldiers looked askance at him with surprise and even alarm as they went past him . 
The senior artillery officer , a tall , long-legged , pockmarked man , moved over to Pierre as if to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity . 
A young round-faced officer , quite a boy still and evidently only just out of the Cadet College , who was zealously commanding the two guns entrusted to him , addressed Pierre sternly . 
`` Sir , '' he said , `` permit me to ask you to stand aside . 
You must not be here . '' 
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre . 
But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat was doing no harm , but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench with a shy smile or , politely making way for the soldiers , paced up and down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard , their feeling of hostile distrust gradually began to change into a kindly and bantering sympathy , such as soldiers feel for their dogs , cocks , goats , and in general for the animals that live with the regiment . 
The men soon accepted Pierre into their family , adopted him , gave him a nickname -LRB- `` our gentleman '' -RRB- , and made kindly fun of him among themselves . 
