This man , bent double , rushed past the tradesman and the officer . 
The officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops , but at that moment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskva bridge and the officer ran out into the square . 
`` What is it ? 
What is it ? '' 
he asked , but his comrade was already galloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which the screams came . 
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him . 
When he reached the bridge he saw two unlimbered guns , the infantry crossing the bridge , several overturned carts , and frightened and laughing faces among the troops . 
Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which two horses were harnessed . 
Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels . 
The cart was loaded high , and at the very top , beside a child 's chair with its legs in the air , sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and desperate shrieks . 
He was told by his fellow officers that the screams of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that General Ermolov , coming up to the crowd and learning that soldiers were dispersing among the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge , had ordered two guns to be unlimbered and made a show of firing at the bridge . 
The crowd , crushing one another , upsetting carts , and shouting and squeezing desperately , had cleared off the bridge and the troops were now moving forward . 
Meanwhile , the city itself was deserted . 
There was hardly anyone in the streets . 
The gates and shops were all closed , only here and there round the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard . 
Nobody drove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard . 
The Povarskaya was quite still and deserted . 
The huge courtyard of the Rostovs ' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from the horses , and not a soul was to be seen there . 
In the great drawing room of the house , which had been left with all it contained , were two people . 
They were the yard porter Ignat , and the page boy Mishka , Vasilich 's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather . 
Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with one finger . 
The yard porter , his arms akimbo , stood smiling with satisfaction before the large mirror . 
`` Is n't it fine , eh , Uncle Ignat ? '' 
said the boy , suddenly beginning to strike the keyboard with both hands . 
`` Only fancy ! '' 
answered Ignat , surprised at the broadening grin on his face in the mirror . 
`` Impudence ! 
Impudence ! '' 
they heard behind them the voice of Mavra Kuzminichna who had entered silently . 
`` How he 's grinning , the fat mug ! 
Is that what you 're here for ? 
Nothing 's cleared away down there and Vasilich is worn out . 
Just you wait a bit ! '' 
Ignat left off smiling , adjusted his belt , and went out of the room with meekly downcast eyes . 
`` Aunt , I did it gently , '' said the boy . 
`` I 'll give you something gently , you monkey you ! '' 
cried Mavra Kuzminichna , raising her arm threateningly . 
`` Go and get the samovar to boil for your grandfather . '' 
Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it , and with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door . 
Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go next -- to drink tea in the servants ' wing with Vasilich , or into the storeroom to put away what still lay about . 
She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street . 
Someone stopped at the gate , and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it . 
Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate . 
`` Who do you want ? '' 
`` The count -- Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov . '' 
`` And who are you ? '' 
`` An officer , I have to see him , '' came the reply in a pleasant , well-bred Russian voice . 
Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen , with the round face of a Rostov , entered the yard . 
`` They have gone away , sir . 
Went away yesterday at vespertime , '' said Mavra Kuzminichna cordially . 
