Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes to the countess ' cruel words , without understanding what was required of her . 
She was ready to sacrifice everything for her benefactors . 
Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could not see what she ought to sacrifice , or for whom . 
She could not help loving the countess and the whole Rostov family , but neither could she help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that love . 
She was silent and sad and did not reply . 
Nicholas felt the situation to be intolerable and went to have an explanation with his mother . 
He first implored her to forgive him and Sonya and consent to their marriage , then he threatened that if she molested Sonya he would at once marry her secretly . 
The countess , with a coldness her son had never seen in her before , replied that he was of age , that Prince Andrew was marrying without his father 's consent , and he could do the same , but that she would never receive that intriguer as her daughter . 
Exploding at the word intriguer , Nicholas , raising his voice , told his mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his feelings , but if that were so , he would say for the last time ... . 
But he had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face caused his mother to await with terror , and which would perhaps have forever remained a cruel memory to them both . 
He had not time to say it , for Natasha , with a pale and set face , entered the room from the door at which she had been listening . 
`` Nicholas , you are talking nonsense ! 
Be quiet , be quiet , be quiet , I tell you ! 
... '' she almost screamed , so as to drown his voice . 
`` Mamma darling , it 's not at all so ... my poor , sweet darling , '' she said to her mother , who conscious that they had been on the brink of a rupture gazed at her son with terror , but in the obstinacy and excitement of the conflict could not and would not give way . 
`` Nicholas , I 'll explain to you . 
Go away ! 
Listen , Mamma darling , '' said Natasha . 
Her words were incoherent , but they attained the purpose at which she was aiming . 
The countess , sobbing heavily , hid her face on her daughter 's breast , while Nicholas rose , clutching his head , and left the room . 
Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation , and so far succeeded that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should not be troubled , while he on his side promised not to undertake anything without his parents ' knowledge . 
Firmly resolved , after putting his affairs in order in the regiment , to retire from the army and return and marry Sonya , Nicholas , serious , sorrowful , and at variance with his parents , but , as it seemed to him , passionately in love , left at the beginning of January to rejoin his regiment . 
After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household were more depressing than ever , and the countess fell ill from mental agitation . 
Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting toward her . 
The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his affairs , which called for some decisive action . 
Their town house and estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold , and for this they had to go to Moscow . 
But the countess ' health obliged them to delay their departure from day to day . 
Natasha , who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothed lightly and even cheerfully , now grew more agitated and impatient every day . 
The thought that her best days , which she would have employed in loving him , were being vainly wasted , with no advantage to anyone , tormented her incessantly . 
His letters for the most part irritated her . 
It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thought of him , he was living a real life , seeing new places and new people that interested him . 
The more interesting his letters were the more vexed she felt . 
Her letters to him , far from giving her any comfort , seemed to her a wearisome and artificial obligation . 
She could not write , because she could not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in a letter even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice , smile , and glance . 
She wrote to him formal , monotonous , and dry letters , to which she attached no importance herself , and in the rough copies of which the countess corrected her mistakes in spelling . 
There was still no improvement in the countess ' health , but it was impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer . 
Natasha 's trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold . 
Moreover , Prince Andrew was expected in Moscow , where old Prince Bolkonski was spending the winter , and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived . 
So the countess remained in the country , and the count , taking Sonya and Natasha with him , went to Moscow at the end of January . 
After Prince Andrews engagement to Natasha , Pierre without any apparent cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before . 
Firmly convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor , and happy as he had been in perfecting his inner man , to which he had devoted himself with such ardor -- all the zest of such a life vanished after the engagement of Andrew and Natasha and the death of Joseph Alexeevich , the news of which reached him almost at the same time . 
Only the skeleton of life remained : his house , a brilliant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very important personage , acquaintance with all Petersburg , and his court service with its dull formalities . 
And this life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome . 
He ceased keeping a diary , avoided the company of the Brothers , began going to the Club again , drank a great deal , and came once more in touch with the bachelor sets , leading such a life that the Countess Helene thought it necessary to speak severely to him about it . 
Pierre felt that she right , and to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow . 
In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded and fading princesses still lived , with its enormous retinue ; as soon as , driving through the town , he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons , the Kremlin Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles , the sleigh drivers and hovels of the Sivtsev Vrazhok , those old Moscovites who desired nothing , hurried nowhere , and were ending their days leisurely ; when he saw those old Moscow ladies , the Moscow balls , and the English Club , he felt himself at home in a quiet haven . 
In Moscow he felt at peace , at home , warm and dirty as in an old dressing gown . 
Moscow society , from the old women down to the children , received Pierre like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him . 
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest , kindest , most intellectual , merriest , and most magnanimous of cranks , a heedless , genial nobleman of the old Russian type . 
His purse was always empty because it was open to everyone . 
