The count had devised this diplomatic ruse -LRB- as he afterwards told his daughter -RRB- to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk to one another freely , but another motive was to avoid the danger of encountering the old prince , of whom he was afraid . 
He did not mention this to his daughter , but Natasha noticed her father 's nervousness and anxiety and felt mortified by it . 
She blushed for him , grew still angrier at having blushed , and looked at the princess with a bold and defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody . 
The princess told the count that she would be delighted , and only begged him to stay longer at Anna Semenovna 's , and he departed . 
Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary -- who wished to have a tete-a-tete with Natasha -- Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters . 
Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom , by her father 's nervousness , and by the unnatural manner of the princess who -- she thought -- was making a favor of receiving her , and so everything displeased her . 
She did not like Princess Mary , whom she thought very plain , affected , and dry . 
Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still more . 
After five minutes of irksome , constrained conversation , they heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approaching . 
Princess Mary looked frightened . 
The door opened and the old prince , in a dress , ing gown and a white nightcap , came in . 
`` Ah , madam ! '' 
he began . 
`` Madam , Countess ... Countess Rostova , if I am not mistaken ... I beg you to excuse me , to excuse me ... I did not know , madam . 
God is my witness , I did not know you had honored us with a visit , and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter . 
I beg you to excuse me ... God is my witness , I did n't know - '' he repeated , stressing the word `` God '' so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that Princess Mary stood with downcast eyes not daring to look either at her father or at Natasha . 
Nor did the latter , having risen and curtsied , know what to do . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably . 
`` I beg you to excuse me , excuse me ! 
God is my witness , I did not know , '' muttered the old man , and after looking Natasha over from head to foot he went out . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this apparition and began speaking about the prince 's indisposition . 
Natasha and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence , and the longer they did so without saying what they wanted to say , the greater grew their antipathy to one another . 
When the count returned , Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened to get away : at that moment she hated the stiff , elderly princess , who could place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an hour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew . 
`` I could n't begin talking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman , '' thought Natasha . 
The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary . 
She knew what she ought to have said to Natasha , but she had been unable to say it because Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way , and because , without knowing why , she felt it very difficult to speak of the marriage . 
When the count was already leaving the room , Princess Mary went up hurriedly to Natasha , took her by the hand , and said with a deep sigh : `` Wait , I must ... '' Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why . 
`` Dear Natalie , '' said Princess Mary , `` I want you to know that I am glad my brother has found happiness ... '' She paused , feeling that she was not telling the truth . 
Natasha noticed this and guessed its reason . 
`` I think , Princess , it is not convenient to speak of that now , '' she said with external dignity and coldness , though she felt the tears choking her . 
`` What have I said and what have I done ? '' 
thought she , as soon as she was out of the room . 
They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day . 
She sat in her room crying like a child , blowing her nose and sobbing . 
Sonya stood beside her , kissing her hair . 
`` Natasha , what is it about ? '' 
she asked . 
`` What do they matter to you ? 
It will all pass , Natasha . '' 
`` But if you only knew how offensive it was ... as if I. . . '' 
`` Do n't talk about it , Natasha . 
It was n't your fault so why should you mind ? 
Kiss me , '' said Sonya . 
Natasha raised her head and , kissing her friend on the lips , pressed her wet face against her . 
`` I ca n't tell you , I do n't know . 
No one 's to blame , '' said Natasha - `` It 's my fault . 
But it all hurts terribly . 
Oh , why does n't he come ? 
... '' She came in to dinner with red eyes . 
Marya Dmitrievna , who knew how the prince had received the Rostovs , pretended not to notice how upset Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and the other guests . 
