The Emperor looked smilingly down the room . 
A minute passed but no one had yet begun dancing . 
An aide-de-camp , the Master of Ceremonies , went up to Countess Bezukhova and asked her to dance . 
She smilingly raised her hand and laid it on his shoulder without looking at him . 
The aide-de-camp , an adept in his art , grasping his partner firmly round her waist , with confident deliberation started smoothly , gliding first round the edge of the circle , then at the corner of the room he caught Helene 's left hand and turned her , the only sound audible , apart from the ever-quickening music , being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his rapid , agile feet , while at every third beat his partner 's velvet dress spread out and seemed to flash as she whirled round . 
Natasha gazed at them and was ready to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn of the waltz . 
Prince Andrew , in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel , wearing stockings and dancing shoes , stood looking animated and bright in the front row of the circle not far from the Rostovs . 
Baron Firhoff was talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to be held next day . 
Prince Andrew , as one closely connected with Speranski and participating in the work of the legislative commission , could give reliable information about that sitting , concerning which various rumors were current . 
But not listening to what Firhoff was saying , he was gazing now at the sovereign and now at the men intending to dance who had not yet gathered courage to enter the circle . 
Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor 's presence , and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance . 
Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm . 
`` You always dance . 
I have a protegee , the young Rostova , here . 
Ask her , '' he said . 
`` Where is she ? '' 
asked Bolkonski . 
`` Excuse me ! '' 
he added , turning to the baron , `` we will finish this conversation elsewhere -- at a ball one must dance . '' 
He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated . 
The despairing , dejected expression of Natasha 's face caught his eye . 
He recognized her , guessed her feelings , saw that it was her debut , remembered her conversation at the window , and with an expression of pleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova . 
`` Allow me to introduce you to my daughter , '' said the countess , with heightened color . 
`` I have the pleasure of being already acquainted , if the countess remembers me , '' said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quite belying Peronskaya 's remarks about his rudeness , and approaching Natasha he held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completed his invitation . 
He asked her to waltz . 
That tremulous expression on Natasha 's face , prepared either for despair or rapture , suddenly brightened into a happy , grateful , childlike smile . 
`` I have long been waiting for you , '' that frightened happy little girl seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears , as she raised her hand to Prince Andrew 's shoulder . 
They were the second couple to enter the circle . 
Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of his day and Natasha danced exquisitely . 
Her little feet in their white satin dancing shoes did their work swiftly , lightly , and independently of herself , while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness . 
Her slender bare arms and neck were not beautiful -- compared to Helene 's her shoulders looked thin and her bosom undeveloped . 
But Helene seemed , as it were , hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned her person , while Natasha was like a girl exposed for the first time , who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that this was absolutely necessary . 
Prince Andrew liked dancing , and wishing to escape as quickly as possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed to him , wishing also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked , caused by the Emperor 's presence , he danced , and had chosen Natasha because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first pretty girl who caught his eye ; but scarcely had he embraced that slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head , and he felt himself revived and rejuvenated when after leaving her he stood breathing deeply and watching the other dancers . 
After Prince Andrew , Boris came up to ask Natasha for dance , and then the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball , and several other young men , so that , flushed and happy , and passing on her superfluous partners to Sonya , she did not cease dancing all the evening . 
She noticed and saw nothing of what occupied everyone else . 
Not only did she fail to notice that the Emperor talked a long time with the French ambassador , and how particularly gracious he was to a certain lady , or that Prince So-and-so and So-and-so did and said this and that , and that Helene had great success and was honored was by the special attention of So-and-so , but she did not even see the Emperor , and only noticed that he had gone because the ball became livelier after his departure . 
For one of the merry cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner . 
He reminded her of their first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue , and how she had been unable to sleep that moonlight night , and told her how he had involuntarily overheard her . 
Natasha blushed at that recollection and tried to excuse herself , as if there had been something to be ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard . 
Like all men who have grown up in society , Prince Andrew liked meeting someone there not of the conventional society stamp . 
And such was Natasha , with her surprise , her delight , her shyness , and even her mistakes in speaking French . 
With her he behaved with special care and tenderness , sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and most unimportant matters ; he admired her shy grace . 
In the middle of the cotillion , having completed one of the figures , Natasha , still out of breath , was returning to her seat when another dancer chose her . 
She was tired and panting and evidently thought of declining , but immediately put her hand gaily on the man 's shoulder , smiling at Prince Andrew . 
`` I 'd be glad to sit beside you and rest : I 'm tired ; but you see how they keep asking me , and I 'm glad of it , I 'm happy and I love everybody , and you and I understand it all , '' and much , much more was said in her smile . 
When her partner left her Natasha ran across the room to choose two ladies for the figure . 
`` If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady , she will be my wife , '' said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise , as he watched her . 
She did go first to her cousin . 
`` What rubbish sometimes enters one 's head ! '' 
thought Prince Andrew , `` but what is certain is that that girl is so charming , so original , that she wo n't be dancing here a month before she will be married ... . 
