Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and with a happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face . 
Their box was pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew so well and liked so much . 
She turned away and suddenly remembered all that had been so humiliating in her morning 's visit . 
`` What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family ? 
Oh , better not think of it -- not till he comes back ! '' 
she told herself , and began looking at the faces , some strange and some familiar , in the stalls . 
In the front , in the very center , leaning back against the orchestra rail , stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress , his curly hair brushed up into a huge shock . 
He stood in full view of the audience , well aware that he was attracting everyone 's attention , yet as much at ease as though he were in his own room . 
Around him thronged Moscow 's most brilliant young men , whom he evidently dominated . 
The count , laughing , nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her former adorer . 
`` Do you recognize him ? '' 
said he . 
`` And where has he sprung from ? '' 
he asked , turning to Shinshin . 
`` Did n't he vanish somewhere ? '' 
`` He did , '' replied Shinshin . 
`` He was in the Caucasus and ran away from there . 
They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling prince in Persia , where he killed the Shah 's brother . 
Now all the Moscow ladies are mad about him ! 
It 's ` Dolokhov the Persian ' that does it ! 
We never hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned . 
They swear by him , they offer him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet . 
Dolokhov and Anatole Kuragin have turned all our ladies ' heads . '' 
A tall , beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed plump white shoulders and neck , round which she wore a double string of large pearls , entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dress and took a long time settling into her place . 
Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck , those shoulders , and pearls and coiffure , and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls . 
While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time the lady looked round and , meeting the count 's eyes , nodded to him and smiled . 
She was the Countess Bezukhova , Pierre 's wife , and the count , who knew everyone in society , leaned over and spoke to her . 
`` Have you been here long , Countess ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` I 'll call , I 'll call to kiss your hand . 
I 'm here on business and have brought my girls with me . 
They say Semenova acts marvelously . 
Count Pierre never used to forget us . 
Is he here ? '' 
`` Yes , he meant to look in , '' answered Helene , and glanced attentively at Natasha . 
Count Rostov resumed his seat . 
`` Handsome , is n't she ? '' 
he whispered to Natasha . 
`` Wonderful ! '' 
answered Natasha . 
`` She 's a woman one could easily fall in love with . '' 
Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor tapped with his stick . 
Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls , and the curtain rose . 
As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent , and all the men , old and young , in uniform and evening dress , and all the women with gems on their bare flesh , turned their whole attention with eager curiosity to the stage . 
Natasha too began to look at it . 
The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards , at the sides was some painted cardboard representing trees , and at the back was a cloth stretched over boards . 
In the center of the stage sat some girls in red bodices and white skirts . 
One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat apart on a low bench , to the back of which a piece of green cardboard was glued . 
They all sang something . 
When they had finished their song the girl in white went up to the prompter 's box and a man with tight silk trousers over his stout legs , and holding a plume and a dagger , went up to her and began singing , waving his arms about . 
