referred to much that they both understood without naming . 
The princess , who had a straight , rigid body , abnormally long for her legs , looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in her prominent gray eyes . 
Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons with a sigh . 
This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and devotion , or of weariness and hope of resting before long . 
Prince Vasili understood it as an expression of weariness . 
`` And I ? '' 
he said ; `` do you think it is easier for me ? 
I am as worn out as a post horse , but still I must have a talk with you , Catiche , a very serious talk . '' 
Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously , now on one side , now on the other , giving his face an unpleasant expression which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room . 
His eyes too seemed strange ; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next glanced round in alarm . 
The princess , holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony hands , looked attentively into Prince Vasili 's eyes evidently resolved not to be the first to break silence , if she had to wait till morning . 
`` Well , you see , my dear princess and cousin , Catherine Semenovna , '' continued Prince Vasili , returning to his theme , apparently not without an inner struggle ; `` at such a moment as this one must think of everything . 
One must think of the future , of all of you ... I love you all , like children of my own , as you know . '' 
The princess continued to look at him without moving , and with the same dull expression . 
`` And then of course my family has also to be considered , '' Prince Vasili went on , testily pushing away a little table without looking at her . 
`` You know , Catiche , that we -- you three sisters , Mamontov , and my wife -- are the count 's only direct heirs . 
I know , I know how hard it is for you to talk or think of such matters . 
It is no easier for me ; but , my dear , I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything . 
Do you know I have sent for Pierre ? 
The count , '' pointing to his portrait , `` definitely demanded that he should be called . '' 
Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess , but could not make out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was simply looking at him . 
`` There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant , mon cousin , '' she replied , `` and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his noble soul peacefully to leave this ... '' `` Yes , yes , of course , '' interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently , rubbing his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table that he had pushed away . 
`` But ... in short , the fact is ... you know yourself that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his property , not to us his direct heirs , but to Pierre . '' 
`` He has made wills enough ! '' 
quietly remarked the princess . 
`` But he can not leave the estate to Pierre . 
Pierre is illegitimate . '' 
`` But , my dear , '' said Prince Vasili suddenly , clutching the little table and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly : `` what if a letter has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre 's legitimation ? 
Do you understand that in consideration of the count 's services , his request would be granted ? 
... '' The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the subject under discussion than those they are talking with . 
`` I can tell you more , '' continued Prince Vasili , seizing her hand , `` that letter was written , though it was not sent , and the Emperor knew of it . 
The only question is , has it been destroyed or not ? 
If not , then as soon as all is over , '' and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant by the words all is over , `` and the count 's papers are opened , the will and letter will be delivered to the Emperor , and the petition will certainly be granted . 
Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son . '' 
`` And our share ? '' 
asked the princess smiling ironically , as if anything might happen , only not that . 
`` But , my poor Catiche , it is as clear as daylight ! 
He will then be the legal heir to everything and you wo n't get anything . 
You must know , my dear , whether the will and letter were written , and whether they have been destroyed or not . 
And if they have somehow been overlooked , you ought to know where they are , and must find them , because ... '' `` What next ? '' 
the princess interrupted , smiling sardonically and not changing the expression of her eyes . 
`` I am a woman , and you think we are all stupid ; but I know this : an illegitimate son can not inherit ... un batard ! '' 
* she added , as if supposing that this translation of the word would effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of his contention . 
* A bastard . 
`` Well , really , Catiche ! 
Ca n't you understand ! 
You are so intelligent , how is it you do n't see that if the count has written a letter to the Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate , it follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov , and will then inherit everything under the will ? 
And if the will and letter are not destroyed , then you will have nothing but the consolation of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s ` ensuit ! 
* That 's certain . '' 
* And all that follows therefrom . 
