He regarded his whole life as a continual round of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him . 
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly heiress in the same way . 
All this might , he thought , turn out very well and amusingly . 
`` And why not marry her if she really has so much money ? 
That never does any harm , '' thought Anatole . 
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had become habitual to him and , his handsome head held high , entered his father 's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him . 
Prince Vasili 's two valets were busy dressing him , and he looked round with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter entered , as if to say : `` Yes , that 's how I want you to look . '' 
`` I say , Father , joking apart , is she very hideous ? '' 
Anatole asked , as if continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned during the journey . 
`` Enough ! 
What nonsense ! 
Above all , try to be respectful and cautious with the old prince . '' 
`` If he starts a row I 'll go away , '' said Prince Anatole . 
`` I ca n't bear those old men ! 
Eh ? '' 
`` Remember , for you everything depends on this . '' 
In the meantime , not only was it known in the maidservants ' rooms that the minister and his son had arrived , but the appearance of both had been minutely described . 
Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room , vainly trying to master her agitation . 
`` Why did they write , why did Lise tell me about it ? 
It can never happen ! '' 
she said , looking at herself in the glass . 
`` How shall I enter the drawing room ? 
Even if I like him I ca n't now be myself with him . '' 
The mere thought of her father 's look filled her with terror . 
The little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha , the lady 's maid , the necessary report of how handsome the minister 's son was , with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows , and with what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him like an eagle , three steps at a time . 
Having received this information , the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne , whose chattering voices had reached her from the corridor , went into Princess Mary 's room . 
`` You know they 've come , Marie ? '' 
said the little princess , waddling in , and sinking heavily into an armchair . 
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning , but had on one of her best dresses . 
Her hair was carefully done and her face was animated , which , however , did not conceal its sunken and faded outlines . 
Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society , it was still more noticeable how much plainer she had become . 
Some unobtrusive touch had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne 's toilet which rendered her fresh and pretty face yet more attractive . 
`` What ! 
Are you going to remain as you are , dear princess ? '' 
she began . 
`` They 'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we shall have to go down , and you have not smartened yourself up at all ! '' 
The little princess got up , rang for the maid , and hurriedly and merrily began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be dressed . 
Princess Mary 's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the arrival of a suitor agitated her , and still more so by both her companions ' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise . 
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to betray her agitation , while to decline their offers to dress her would prolong their banter and insistence . 
She flushed , her beautiful eyes grew dim , red blotches came on her face , and it took on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore , as she submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise . 
Both these women quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty . 
She was so plain that neither of them could think of her as a rival , so they began dressing her with perfect sincerity , and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress can make a face pretty . 
`` No really , my dear , this dress is not pretty , '' said Lise , looking sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance . 
`` You have a maroon dress , have it fetched . 
Really ! 
You know the fate of your whole life may be at stake . 
But this one is too light , it 's not becoming ! '' 
It was not the dress , but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary that was not pretty , but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little princess felt this ; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed in the hair , the hair combed up , and the blue scarf arranged lower on the best maroon dress , and so on , all would be well . 
They forgot that the frightened face and the figure could not be altered , and that however they might change the setting and adornment of that face , it would still remain piteous and plain . 
After two or three changes to which Princess Mary meekly submitted , just as her hair had been arranged on the top of her head -LRB- a style that quite altered and spoiled her looks -RRB- and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf , the little princess walked twice round her , now adjusting a fold of the dress with her little hand , now arranging the scarf and looking at her with her head bent first on one side and then on the other . 
