Anna Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise , she only smiled faintly and sighed , as if to say that this was no more than she had expected . 
`` Be a man , my friend . 
I will look after your interests , '' said she in reply to his look , and went still faster along the passage . 
Pierre could not make out what it was all about , and still less what `` watching over his interests '' meant , but he decided that all these things had to be . 
From the passage they went into a large , dimly lit room adjoining the count 's reception room . 
It was one of those sumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach , but even in this room there now stood an empty bath , and water had been spilled on the carpet . 
They were met by a deacon with a censer and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them . 
They went into the reception room familiar to Pierre , with two Italian windows opening into the conservatory , with its large bust and full length portrait of Catherine the Great . 
The same people were still sitting here in almost the same positions as before , whispering to one another . 
All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she entered , and at the big stout figure of Pierre who , hanging his head , meekly followed her . 
Anna Mikhaylovna 's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive moment had arrived . 
With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now , keeping Pierre close beside her , entered the room even more boldly than that afternoon . 
She felt that as she brought with her the person the dying man wished to see , her own admission was assured . 
Casting a rapid glance at all those in the room and noticing the count 's confessor there , she glided up to him with a sort of amble , not exactly bowing yet seeming to grow suddenly smaller , and respectfully received the blessing first of one and then of another priest . 
`` God be thanked that you are in time , '' said she to one of the priests ; `` all we relatives have been in such anxiety . 
This young man is the count 's son , '' she added more softly . 
`` What a terrible moment ! '' 
Having said this she went up to the doctor . 
`` Dear doctor , '' said she , `` this young man is the count 's son . 
Is there any hope ? '' 
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his shoulders . 
Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her shoulders and eyes , almost closing the latter , sighed , and moved away from the doctor to Pierre . 
To him , in a particularly respectful and tenderly sad voice , she said : `` Trust in His mercy ! '' 
and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit and wait for her , she went silently toward the door that everyone was watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it . 
Pierre , having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly , moved toward the sofa she had indicated . 
As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him with something more than curiosity and sympathy . 
He noticed that they whispered to one another , casting significant looks at him with a kind of awe and even servility . 
A deference such as he had never before received was shown him . 
A strange lady , the one who had been talking to the priests , rose and offered him her seat ; an aide-de-camp picked up and returned a glove Pierre had dropped ; the doctors became respectfully silent as he passed by , and moved to make way for him . 
At first Pierre wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady , and also to pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not even in his way ; but all at once he felt that this would not do , and that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful rite which everyone expected of him , and that he was therefore bound to accept their services . 
He took the glove in silence from the aide-de-camp , and sat down in the lady 's chair , placing his huge hands symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue , and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be , and that in order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his own ideas tonight , but must yield himself up entirely to the will of those who were guiding him . 
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect majestically entered the room . 
He was wearing his long coat with three stars on his breast . 
He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning ; his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed Pierre . 
He went up to him , took his hand -LRB- a thing he never used to do -RRB- , and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly fixed on . 
`` Courage , courage , my friend ! 
He has asked to see you . 
That is well ! '' 
and he turned to go . 
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask : `` How is ... '' and hesitated , not knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man `` the count , '' yet ashamed to call him `` father . '' 
`` He had another stroke about half an hour ago . 
Courage , my friend ... '' Pierre 's mind was in such a confused state that the word `` stroke '' suggested to him a blow from something . 
He looked at Prince Vasili in perplexity , and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of illness . 
Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went through the door on tiptoe . 
He could not walk well on tiptoe and his whole body jerked at each step . 
The eldest princess followed him , and the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door . 
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about , and at last Anna Mikhaylovna , still with the same expression , pale but resolute in the discharge of duty , ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the arm said : `` The divine mercy is inexhaustible ! 
Unction is about to be administered . 
Come . '' 
Pierre went in at the door , stepping on the soft carpet , and noticed that the strange lady , the aide-de-camp , and some of the servants , all followed him in , as if there were now no further need for permission to enter that room . 
