`` Listen ! '' 
cried he , standing there and addressing those in the room . 
All were silent . 
`` I bet fifty imperials '' -- he spoke French that the Englishman might understand him , but he did , not speak it very well -- `` I bet fifty imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred ? '' 
added he , addressing the Englishman . 
`` No , fifty , '' replied the latter . 
`` All right . 
Fifty imperials ... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum without taking it from my mouth , sitting outside the window on this spot '' -LRB- he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window -RRB- `` and without holding on to anything . 
Is that right ? '' 
`` Quite right , '' said the Englishman . 
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of his coat and looking down at him -- the Englishman was short - began repeating the terms of the wager to him in English . 
`` Wait ! '' 
cried Dolokhov , hammering with the bottle on the window sill to attract attention . 
`` Wait a bit , Kuragin . 
Listen ! 
If anyone else does the same , I will pay him a hundred imperials . 
Do you understand ? '' 
The Englishman nodded , but gave no indication whether he intended to accept this challenge or not . 
Anatole did not release him , and though he kept nodding to show that he understood , Anatole went on translating Dolokhov 's words into English . 
A thin young lad , an hussar of the Life Guards , who had been losing that evening , climbed on the window sill , leaned over , and looked down . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
he muttered , looking down from the window at the stones of the pavement . 
`` Shut up ! '' 
cried Dolokhov , pushing him away from the window . 
The lad jumped awkwardly back into the room , tripping over his spurs . 
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily , Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his legs . 
Pressing against both sides of the window , he adjusted himself on his seat , lowered his hands , moved a little to the right and then to the left , and took up the bottle . 
Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill , though it was already quite light . 
Dolokhov 's back in his white shirt , and his curly head , were lit up from both sides . 
Everyone crowded to the window , the Englishman in front . 
Pierre stood smiling but silent . 
One man , older than the others present , suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov 's shirt . 
`` I say , this is folly ! 
He 'll be killed , '' said this more sensible man . 
Anatole stopped him . 
`` Do n't touch him ! 
You 'll startle him and then he 'll be killed . 
Eh ? 
... What then ? 
... Eh ? '' 
Dolokhov turned round and , again holding on with both hands , arranged himself on his seat . 
`` If anyone comes meddling again , '' said he , emitting the words separately through his thin compressed lips , `` I will throw him down there . 
Now then ! '' 
Saying this he again turned round , dropped his hands , took the bottle and lifted it to his lips , threw back his head , and raised his free hand to balance himself . 
One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov 's back . 
Anatole stood erect with staring eyes . 
The Englishman looked on sideways , pursing up his lips . 
The man who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall . 
