What I want is that our children should not have to go begging . 
I must put our affairs in order while I am alive , that 's all . 
And to do that , order and strictness are essential ... . 
That 's all about it ! '' 
said he , clenching his vigorous fist . 
`` And fairness , of course , '' he added , `` for if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse , he can do no good either for himself or for me . '' 
And all Nicholas did was fruitful -- probably just because he refused to allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue 's sake . 
His means increased rapidly ; serfs from neighboring estates came to beg him to buy them , and long after his death the memory of his administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs . 
`` He was a master ... the peasants ' affairs first and then his own . 
Of course he was not to be trifled with either -- in a word , he was a real master ! '' 
One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas , and that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making free use of his fists . 
At first he saw nothing reprehensible in this , but in the second year of his marriage his view of that form of punishment suddenly changed . 
Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Bogucharovo , a man who had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accused of dishonesty and various irregularities . 
Nicholas went out into the porch to question him , and immediately after the elder had given a few replies the sound of cries and blows were heard . 
On returning to lunch Nicholas went up to his wife , who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery frame , and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing that morning . 
Among other things he spoke of the Bogucharovo elder . 
Countess Mary turned red and then pale , but continued to sit with head bowed and lips compressed and gave her husband no reply . 
`` Such an insolent scoundrel ! '' 
he cried , growing hot again at the mere recollection of him . 
`` If he had told me he was drunk and did not see ... But what is the matter with you , Mary ? '' 
he suddenly asked . 
Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak , but hastily looked down again and her lips puckered . 
`` Why , whatever is the matter , my dearest ? '' 
The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was in tears . 
She never cried from pain or vexation , but always from sorrow or pity , and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm . 
The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself and began to cry . 
`` Nicholas , I saw it ... he was to blame , but why do you ... Nicholas ! '' 
and she covered her face with her hands . 
Nicholas said nothing . 
He flushed crimson , left her side , and paced up and down the room . 
He understood what she was weeping about , but could not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong . 
`` Is it just sentimentality , old wives ' tales , or is she right ? '' 
he asked himself . 
Before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled with love and pain , and he suddenly realized that she was right and that he had long been sinning against himself . 
`` Mary , '' he said softly , going up to her , `` it will never happen again ; I give you my word . 
Never , '' he repeated in a trembling voice like a boy asking for forgiveness . 
The tears flowed faster still from the countess ' eyes . 
She took his hand and kissed it . 
`` Nicholas , when did you break your cameo ? '' 
she asked to change the subject , looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with a cameo of Laocoon 's head . 
`` Today -- it was the same affair . 
Oh , Mary , do n't remind me of it ! '' 
and again he flushed . 
`` I give you my word of honor it sha n't occur again , and let this always be a reminder to me , '' and he pointed to the broken ring . 
After that , when in discussions with his village elders or stewards the blood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench , Nicholas would turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before the man who was making him angry . 
But he did forget himself once or twice within a twelvemonth , and then he would go and confess to his wife , and would again promise that this should really be the very last time . 
`` Mary , you must despise me ! '' 
he would say . 
`` I deserve it . '' 
`` You should go , go away at once , if you do n't feel strong enough to control yourself , '' she would reply sadly , trying to comfort her husband . 
