When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket , she sat down with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on the floor , jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front , and began replaiting it . 
Her long , thin , practiced fingers rapidly unplaited , replaited , and tied up her plait . 
Her head moved from side to side from habit , but her eyes , feverishly wide , looked fixedly before her . 
When her toilet for the night was finished she sank gently onto the sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door . 
`` Natasha , you 'd better lie in the middle , '' said Sonya . 
`` I 'll stay here , '' muttered Natasha . 
`` Do lie down , '' she added crossly , and buried her face in the pillow . 
The countess , Madame Schoss , and Sonya undressed hastily and lay down . 
The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light left in the room . 
But in the yard there was a light from the fire at Little Mytishchi a mile and a half away , and through the night came the noise of people shouting at a tavern Mamonov 's Cossacks had set up across the street , and the adjutant 's unceasing moans could still be heard . 
For a long time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds that reached her from inside and outside the room and did not move . 
First she heard her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under her , then Madame Schoss ' familiar whistling snore and Sonya 's gentle breathing . 
Then the countess called to Natasha . 
Natasha did not answer . 
`` I think she 's asleep , Mamma , '' said Sonya softly . 
After short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one replied . 
Soon after that Natasha heard her mother 's even breathing . 
Natasha did not move , though her little bare foot , thrust out from under the quilt , was growing cold on the bare floor . 
As if to celebrate a victory over everybody , a cricket chirped in a crack in the wall . 
A cock crowed far off and another replied near by . 
The shouting in the tavern had died down ; only the moaning of the adjutant was heard . 
Natasha sat up . 
`` Sonya , are you asleep ? 
Mamma ? '' 
she whispered . 
No one replied . 
Natasha rose slowly and carefully , crossed herself , and stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim , supple , bare feet . 
The boards of the floor creaked . 
Stepping cautiously from one foot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door and grasped the cold door handle . 
It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmically against all the walls of the room : it was her own heart , sinking with alarm and terror and overflowing with love . 
She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold , damp earthen floor of the passage . 
The cold she felt refreshed her . 
With her bare feet she touched a sleeping man , stepped over him , and opened the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay . 
It was dark in there . 
In the farthest corner , on a bench beside a bed on which something was lying , stood a tallow candle with a long , thick , and smoldering wick . 
From the moment she had been told that of Prince Andrew 's wound and his presence there , Natasha had resolved to see him . 
She did not know why she had to , she knew the meeting would be painful , but felt the more convinced that it was necessary . 
All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night . 
But now that the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she might see . 
How was he maimed ? 
What was left of him ? 
Was he like that incessant moaning of the adjutant 's ? 
Yes , he was altogether like that . 
In her imagination he was that terrible moaning personified . 
When she saw an indistinct shape in the corner , and mistook his knees raised under the quilt for his shoulders , she imagined a horrible body there , and stood still in terror . 
But an irresistible impulse drew her forward . 
She cautiously took one step and then another , and found herself in the middle of a small room containing baggage . 
Another man - Timokhin -- was lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons , and two others -- the doctor and a valet -- lay on the floor . 
The valet sat up and whispered something . 
Timokhin , kept awake by the pain in his wounded leg , gazed with wide-open eyes at this strange apparition of a girl in a white chemise , dressing jacket , and nightcap . 
