`` Inform the prince that labor has begun , '' said Mary Bogdanovna , giving the messenger a significant look . 
Tikhon went and told the prince . 
`` Very good ! '' 
said the prince closing the door behind him , and Tikhon did not hear the slightest sound from the study after that . 
After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles , and , seeing the prince was lying on the sofa , looked at him , noticed his perturbed face , shook his head , and going up to him silently kissed him on the shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he had entered . 
The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course . 
Evening passed , night came , and the feeling of suspense and softening of heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased . 
No one slept . 
It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury . 
A relay of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from Moscow who was expected every moment , and men on horseback with lanterns were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with its hollows and snow-covered pools of water . 
Princess Mary had long since put aside her book : she sat silent , her luminous eyes fixed on her nurse 's wrinkled face -LRB- every line of which she knew so well -RRB- , on the lock of gray hair that escaped from under the kerchief , and the loose skin that hung under her chin . 
Nurse Savishna , knitting in hand , was telling in low tones , scarcely hearing or understanding her own words , what she had told hundreds of times before : how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a midwife . 
`` God is merciful , doctors are never needed , '' she said . 
Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the window , from which the double frame had been removed -LRB- by order of the prince , one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks returned -RRB- , and , forcing open a loosely closed latch , set the damask curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill , snowy draft . 
Princess Mary shuddered ; her nurse , putting down the stocking she was knitting , went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open casement . 
The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose locks of gray hair . 
`` Princess , my dear , there 's someone driving up the avenue ! '' 
she said , holding the casement and not closing it . 
`` With lanterns . 
Most likely the doctor . '' 
`` Oh , my God ! 
thank God ! '' 
said Princess Mary . 
`` I must go and meet him , he does not know Russian . '' 
Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer . 
As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage with lanterns , standing at the entrance . 
She went out on the stairs . 
On a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft . 
On the landing below , Philip , the footman , stood looking scared and holding another candle . 
Still lower , beyond the turn of the staircase , one could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots , and a voice that seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something . 
`` Thank God ! '' 
said the voice . 
`` And Father ? '' 
`` Gone to bed , '' replied the voice of Demyan the house steward , who was downstairs . 
Then the voice said something more , Demyan replied , and the steps in the felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly . 
`` It 's Andrew ! '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
`` No it ca n't be , that would be too extraordinary , '' and at the very moment she thought this , the face and figure of Prince Andrew , in a fur cloak the deep collar of which covered with snow , appeared on the landing where the footman stood with the candle . 
Yes , it was he , pale , thin , with a changed and strangely softened but agitated expression on his face . 
He came up the stairs and embraced his sister . 
`` You did not get my letter ? '' 
he asked , and not waiting for a reply -- which he would not have received , for the princess was unable to speak -- he turned back , rapidly mounted the stairs again with the doctor who had entered the hall after him -LRB- they had met at the last post station -RRB- , and again embraced his sister . 
`` What a strange fate , Masha darling ! '' 
And having taken off his cloak and felt boots , he went to the little princess ' apartment . 
The little princess lay supported by pillows , with a white cap on her head -LRB- the pains had just left her -RRB- . 
Strands of her black hair lay round her inflamed and perspiring cheeks , her charming rosy mouth with its downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully . 
Prince Andrew entered and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying . 
Her glittering eyes , filled with childlike fear and excitement , rested on him without changing their expression . 
`` I love you all and have done no harm to anyone ; why must I suffer so ? 
Help me ! '' 
