Napoleon 's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile . 
Alexander was saying something affable to him . 
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes ' horses , which were pushing back the crowd , Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of Alexander and Bonaparte . 
It struck him as a surprise that Alexander treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with the Tsar , as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matter to him . 
Alexander and Napoleon , with the long train of their suites , approached the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up to the crowd standing there . 
The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close to the Emperors that Rostov , standing in the front row , was afraid he might be recognized . 
`` Sire , I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the bravest of your soldiers , '' said a sharp , precise voice , articulating every letter . 
This was said by the undersized Napoleon , looking up straight into Alexander 's eyes . 
Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him and , bending his head , smiled pleasantly . 
`` To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war , '' added Napoleon , accentuating each syllable , as with a composure and assurance exasperating to Rostov , he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn up before him , who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their Emperor . 
`` Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel ? '' 
said Alexander and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski , the commander of the battalion . 
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand , tore it in doing so , and threw it away . 
An aide-de-camp behind him rushed forward and picked it up . 
`` To whom shall it be given ? '' 
the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski , in Russian in a low voice . 
`` To whomever Your Majesty commands . '' 
The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and , glancing back , remarked : `` But we must give him an answer . '' 
Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in his scrutiny . 
`` Can it be me ? '' 
thought Rostov . 
`` Lazarev ! '' 
the colonel called , with a frown , and Lazarev , the first soldier in the rank , stepped briskly forward . 
`` Where are you off to ? 
Stop here ! '' 
voices whispered to Lazarev who did not know where to go . 
Lazarev stopped , casting a sidelong look at his colonel in alarm . 
His face twitched , as often happens to soldiers called before the ranks . 
Napoleon slightly turned his head , and put his plump little hand out behind him as if to take something . 
The members of his suite , guessing at once what he wanted , moved about and whispered as they passed something from one to another , and a page -- the same one Rostov had seen the previous evening at Boris ' -- ran forward and , bowing respectfully over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a moment , laid in it an Order on a red ribbon . 
Napoleon , without looking , pressed two fingers together and the badge was between them . 
Then he approached Lazarev -LRB- who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch -RRB- , looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now doing was done for the sake of his ally , and the small white hand holding the Order touched one of Lazarev 's buttons . 
It was as if Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch that soldier 's breast for the soldier to be forever happy , rewarded , and distinguished from everyone else in the world . 
Napoleon merely laid the cross on Lazarev 's breast and , dropping his hand , turned toward Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there . 
And it really did . 
Officious hands , Russian and French , immediately seized the cross and fastened it to the uniform . 
Lazarev glanced morosely at the little man with white hands who was doing something to him and , still standing motionless presenting arms , looked again straight into Alexander 's eyes , as if asking whether he should stand there , or go away , or do something else . 
But receiving no orders , he remained for some time in that rigid position . 
The Emperors remounted and rode away . 
The Preobrazhensk battalion , breaking rank , mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables prepared for them . 
Lazarev sat in the place of honor . 
Russian and French officers embraced him , congratulated him , and pressed his hands . 
Crowds of officers and civilians drew near merely to see him . 
A rumble of Russian and French voices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square . 
Two officers with flushed faces , looking cheerful and happy , passed by Rostov . 
`` What d'you think of the treat ? 
All on silver plate , '' one of them was saying . 
`` Have you seen Lazarev ? '' 
`` I have . '' 
`` Tomorrow , I hear , the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner . '' 
