`` If only it were possible for me to see her once more ! 
Just once , looking into those eyes to say ... '' `` Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom ! '' 
flopped the fly ... And his attention was suddenly carried into another world , a world of reality and delirium in which something particular was happening . 
In that world some structure was still being erected and did not fall , something was still stretching out , and the candle with its red halo was still burning , and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door ; but besides all this something creaked , there was a whiff of fresh air , and a new white sphinx appeared , standing at the door . 
And that sphinx had the pale face and shining eyes of the very Natasha of whom he had just been thinking . 
`` Oh , how oppressive this continual delirium is , '' thought Prince Andrew , trying to drive that face from his imagination . 
But the face remained before him with the force of reality and drew nearer . 
Prince Andrew wished to return that former world of pure thought , but he could not , and delirium drew him back into its domain . 
The soft whispering voice continued its rhythmic murmur , something oppressed him and stretched out , and the strange face was before him . 
Prince Andrew collected all his strength in an effort to recover his senses , he moved a little , and suddenly there was a ringing in his ears , a dimness in his eyes , and like a man plunged into water he lost consciousness . 
When he came to himself , Natasha , that same living Natasha whom of all people he most longed to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to him , was kneeling before him . 
He realized that it was the real living Natasha , and he was not surprised but quietly happy . 
Natasha , motionless on her knees -LRB- she was unable to stir -RRB- , with frightened eyes riveted on him , was restraining her sobs . 
Her face was pale and rigid . 
Only in the lower part of it something quivered . 
Prince Andrew sighed with relief , smiled , and held out his hand . 
`` You ? '' 
he said . 
`` How fortunate ! '' 
With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him on her knees and , taking his hand carefully , bent her face over it and began kissing it , just touching it lightly with her lips . 
`` Forgive me ! '' 
she whispered , raising her head and glancing at him . 
`` Forgive me ! '' 
`` I love you , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Forgive ... ! '' 
`` Forgive what ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne ! '' 
faltered Natasha in a scarcely audible , broken whisper , and began kissing his hand more rapidly , just touching it with her lips . 
`` I love you more , better than before , '' said Prince Andrew , lifting her face with his hand so as to look into her eyes . 
Those eyes , filled with happy tears , gazed at him timidly , compassionately , and with joyous love . 
Natasha 's thin pale face , with its swollen lips , was more than plain -- it was dreadful . 
But Prince Andrew did not see that , he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful . 
They heard the sound of voices behind them . 
Peter the valet , who was now wide awake , had roused the doctor . 
Timokhin , who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg , had long been watching all that was going on , carefully covering his bare body with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench . 
`` What 's this ? '' 
said the doctor , rising from his bed . 
`` Please go away , madam ! '' 
At that moment a maid sent by the countess , who had noticed her daughter 's absence , knocked at the door . 
Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of the room and , returning to her hut , fell sobbing on her bed . 
From that time , during all the rest of the Rostovs ' journey , at every halting place and wherever they spent a night , Natasha never left the wounded Bolkonski , and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected from a young girl either such firmness or such skill in nursing a wounded man . 
Dreadful as the countess imagined it would be should Prince Andrew die in her daughter 's arms during the journey -- as , judging by what the doctor said , it seemed might easily happen -- she could not oppose Natasha . 
Though with the intimacy now established between the wounded man and Natasha the thought occurred that should he recover their former engagement would be renewed , no one -- least of all Natasha and Prince Andrew -- spoke of this : the unsettled question of life and death , which hung not only over Bolkonski but over all Russia , shut out all other considerations . 
On the third of September Pierre awoke late . 
His head was aching , the clothes in which he had slept without undressing felt uncomfortable on his body , and his mind had a dim consciousness of something shameful he had done the day before . 
That something shameful was his yesterday 's conversation with Captain Ramballe . 
It was eleven by the clock , but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors . 
Pierre rose , rubbed his eyes , and seeing the pistol with an engraved stock which Gerasim had replaced on the writing table , he remembered where he was and what lay before him that very day . 
`` Am I not too late ? '' 
