`` Well , now we 'll talk . 
I congratulate you on your betrothed . 
You 've hooked a fine fellow ! 
I am glad for your sake and I 've known him since he was so high . '' 
She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground . 
Natasha blushed happily . 
`` I like him and all his family . 
Now listen ! 
You know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son 's marrying . 
The old fellow 's crotchety ! 
Of course Prince Andrew is not a child and can shift without him , but it 's not nice to enter a family against a father 's will . 
One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly . 
You 're a clever girl and you 'll know how to manage . 
Be kind , and use your wits . 
Then all will be well . '' 
Natasha remained silent , from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed , but really because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her love of Prince Andrew , which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs that no one could understand it . 
She loved and knew Prince Andrew , he loved her only , and was to come one of these days and take her . 
She wanted nothing more . 
`` You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary , your future sister-in-law . 
` Husbands ' sisters bring up blisters , ' but this one would n't hurt a fly . 
She has asked me to bring you two together . 
Tomorrow you 'll go with your father to see her . 
Be very nice and affectionate to her : you 're younger than she . 
When he comes , he 'll find you already know his sister and father and are liked by them . 
Am I right or not ? 
Wo n't that be best ? '' 
`` Yes , it will , '' Natasha answered reluctantly . 
Next day , by Marya Dmitrievna 's advice , Count Rostov took Natasha to call on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski . 
The count did not set out cheerfully on this visit , at heart he felt afraid . 
He well remembered the last interview he had had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment , when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of men . 
Natasha , on the other hand , having put on her best gown , was in the highest spirits . 
`` They ca n't help liking me , '' she thought . 
`` Everybody always has liked me , and I am so willing to do anything they wish , so ready to be fond of him -- for being his father -- and of her -- for being his sister -- that there is no reason for them not to like me ... '' They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and entered the vestibule . 
`` Well , the Lord have mercy on us ! '' 
said the count , half in jest , half in earnest ; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on entering the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the prince and princess were at home . 
When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among the servants . 
The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped by another in the large hall and they whispered to one another . 
Then a maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something , mentioning the princess . 
At last an old , cross looking footman came and announced to the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving , but that the princess begged them to walk up . 
The first person who came to meet the visitors was Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
She greeted the father and daughter with special politeness and showed them to the princess ' room . 
The princess , looking excited and nervous , her face flushed in patches , ran in to meet the visitors , treading heavily , and vainly trying to appear cordial and at ease . 
From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Natasha . 
She thought her too fashionably dressed , frivolously gay and vain . 
She did not at all realize that before having seen her future sister-in-law she was prejudiced against her by involuntary envy of her beauty , youth , and happiness , as well as by jealousy of her brother 's love for her . 
Apart from this insuperable antipathy to her , Princess Mary was agitated just then because on the Rostovs ' being announced , the old prince had shouted that he did not wish to see them , that Princess Mary might do so if she chose , but they were not to be admitted to him . 
She had decided to receive them , but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in some freak , as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs ' visit . 
`` There , my dear princess , I 've brought you my songstress , '' said the count , bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince might appear . 
`` I am so glad you should get to know one another ... very sorry the prince is still ailing , '' and after a few more commonplace remarks he rose . 
`` If you 'll allow me to leave my Natasha in your hands for a quarter of an hour , Princess , I 'll drive round to see Anna Semenovna , it 's quite near in the Dogs ' Square , and then I 'll come back for her . '' 
