`` It 's all this mania for opposition , '' he went on . 
`` And who for ? 
It is all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites , '' Prince Vasili continued , forgetting for a moment that though at Helene 's one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm , at Anna Pavlovna 's one had to be ecstatic about it . 
But he retrieved his mistake at once . 
`` Now , is it suitable that Count Kutuzov , the oldest general in Russia , should preside at that tribunal ? 
He will get nothing for his pains ! 
How could they make a man commander in chief who can not mount a horse , who drops asleep at a council , and has the very worst morals ! 
A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest ! 
I do n't speak of his capacity as a general , but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit , blind old man , positively blind ? 
A fine idea to have a blind general ! 
He ca n't see anything . 
To play blindman 's bluff ? 
He ca n't see at all ! '' 
No one replied to his remarks . 
This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July . 
But on the twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince . 
This might indicate a wish to get rid of him , and therefore Prince Vasili 's opinion continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express it . 
But on the eighth of August a committee , consisting of Field Marshal Saltykov , Arakcheev , Vyazmitinov , Lopukhin , and Kochubey met to consider the progress of the war . 
This committee came to the conclusion that our failures were due to a want of unity in the command and though the members of the committee were aware of the Emperor 's dislike of Kutuzov , after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as commander in chief . 
That same day Kutuzov was appointed commander in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region occupied by them . 
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna 's again met the `` man of great merit . '' 
The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational establishments for young ladies . 
Prince Vasili entered the room with the air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires . 
`` Well , have you heard the great news ? 
Prince Kutuzov is field marshal ! 
All dissensions are at an end ! 
I am so glad , so delighted ! 
At last we have a man ! '' 
said he , glancing sternly and significantly round at everyone in the drawing room . 
The `` man of great merit , '' despite his desire to obtain the post of director , could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former opinion . 
Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room , and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the news with delight , he could not resist the temptation . 
`` But , Prince , they say he is blind ! '' 
said he , reminding Prince Vasili of his own words . 
`` Eh ? 
Nonsense ! 
He sees well enough , '' said Prince Vasili rapidly , in a deep voice and with a slight cough -- the voice and cough with which he was wont to dispose of all difficulties . 
`` He sees well enough , '' he added . 
`` And what I am so pleased about , '' he went on , `` is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all the armies and the whole region -- powers no commander in chief ever had before . 
He is a second autocrat , '' he concluded with a victorious smile . 
`` God grant it ! 
God grant it ! '' 
said Anna Pavlovna . 
The `` man of great merit , '' who was still a novice in court circles , wishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on this question , observed : `` It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers . 
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read , when he said to Kutuzov : ` Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor . ' '' 
`` Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech , '' said Anna Pavlovna . 
`` Oh , no , no ! '' 
warmly rejoined Prince Vasili , who would not now yield Kutuzov to anyone ; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable himself , but was adored by everybody . 
`` No , that 's impossible , '' said he , `` for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before . '' 
`` God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel , '' observed Anna Pavlovna . 
Understanding at once to whom she alluded , Prince Vasili said in a whisper : `` I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the Tsarevich should not be with the army . 
