Kutuzov was silent for a few seconds and then , submitting with evident reluctance to the duty imposed by his position , raised his head and began to speak . 
A throng of officers surrounded him . 
He looked attentively around at the circle of officers , recognizing several of them . 
`` I thank you all ! '' 
he said , addressing the soldiers and then again the officers . 
In the stillness around him his slowly uttered words were distinctly heard . 
`` I thank you all for your hard and faithful service . 
The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you ! 
Honor to you forever . '' 
He paused and looked around . 
`` Lower its head , lower it ! '' 
he said to a soldier who had accidentally lowered the French eagle he was holding before the Preobrazhensk standards . 
`` Lower , lower , that 's it . 
Hurrah lads ! '' 
he added , addressing the men with a rapid movement of his chin . 
`` Hur-r-rah ! '' 
roared thousands of voices . 
While the soldiers were shouting Kutuzov leaned forward in his saddle and bowed his head , and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic gleam . 
`` You see , brothers ... '' said he when the shouts had ceased ... and all at once his voice and the expression of his face changed . 
It was no longer the commander in chief speaking but an ordinary old man who wanted to tell his comrades something very important . 
There was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks of the soldiers , who moved that they might hear better what he was going to say . 
`` You see , brothers , I know it 's hard for you , but it ca n't be helped ! 
Bear up ; it wo n't be for long now ! 
We 'll see our visitors off and then we 'll rest . 
The Tsar wo n't forget your service . 
It is hard for you , but still you are at home while they -- you see what they have come to , '' said he , pointing to the prisoners . 
`` Worse off than our poorest beggars . 
While they were strong we did n't spare ourselves , but now we may even pity them . 
They are human beings too . 
Is n't it so , lads ? '' 
He looked around , and in the direct , respectful , wondering gaze fixed upon him he read sympathy with what he had said . 
His face grew brighter and brighter with an old man 's mild smile , which drew the corners of his lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles . 
He ceased speaking and bowed his head as if in perplexity . 
`` But after all who asked them here ? 
Serves them right , the bloody bastards ! '' 
he cried , suddenly lifting his head . 
And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first time during the whole campaign , and left the broken ranks of the soldiers laughing joyfully and shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
Kutuzov 's words were hardly understood by the troops . 
No one could have repeated the field marshal 's address , begun solemnly and then changing into an old man 's simplehearted talk ; but the hearty sincerity of that speech , the feeling of majestic triumph combined with pity for the foe and consciousness of the justice of our cause , exactly expressed by that old man 's good-natured expletives , was not merely understood but lay in the soul of every soldier and found expression in their joyous and long-sustained shouts . 
Afterwards when one of the generals addressed Kutuzov asking whether he wished his caleche to be sent for , Kutuzov in answering unexpectedly gave a sob , being evidently greatly moved . 
When the troops reached their night 's halting place on the eighth of November , the last day of the Krasnoe battles , it was already growing dusk . 
All day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lightly falling snow and toward evening it began to clear . 
Through the falling snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grew keener . 
An infantry regiment which had left Tarutino three thousand strong but now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that night at its halting place -- a village on the highroad . 
The quartermasters who met the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead Frenchmen , cavalrymen , and members of the staff . 
There was only one hut available for the regimental commander . 
The commander rode up to his hut . 
The regiment passed through the village and stacked its arms in front of the last huts . 
Like some huge many-limbed animal , the regiment began to prepare its lair and its food . 
One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep through the snow into a birch forest to the right of the village , and immediately the sound of axes and swords , the crashing of branches , and merry voices could be heard from there . 
