Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor 's order about the rice , but Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that his order had been executed . 
An attendant came in with punch . 
Napoleon ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp , and silently sipped his own . 
`` I have neither taste nor smell , '' he remarked , sniffing at his glass . 
`` This cold is tiresome . 
They talk about medicine -- what is the good of medicine when it ca n't cure a cold ! 
Corvisart gave me these lozenges but they do n't help at all . 
What can doctors cure ? 
One ca n't cure anything . 
Our body is a machine for living . 
It is organized for that , it is its nature . 
Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself , it will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies . 
Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time ; watchmaker can not open it , he can only adjust it by fumbling , and that blindfold ... . 
Yes , our body is just a machine for living , that is all . '' 
And having entered on the path of definition , of which he was fond , Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one . 
`` Do you know , Rapp , what military art is ? '' 
asked he . 
`` It is the art of being stronger than the enemy at a given moment . 
That 's all . '' 
Rapp made no reply . 
`` Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov ! '' 
said Napoleon . 
`` We shall see ! 
Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments ... . 
We shall see ! '' 
He looked at his watch . 
It was still only four o'clock . 
He did not feel sleepy . 
The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do . 
He rose , walked to and fro , put on a warm overcoat and a hat , and went out of the tent . 
The night was dark and damp , a scarcely perceptible moisture was descending from above . 
Near by , the campfires were dimly burning among the French Guards , and in the distance those of the Russian line shone through the smoke . 
The weather was calm , and the rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take up their positions were clearly audible . 
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent , looked at the fires and listened to these sounds , and as he was passing a tall guardsman in a shaggy cap , who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor , Napoleon stopped in front of him . 
`` What year did you enter the service ? '' 
he asked with that affectation of military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the soldiers . 
The man answered the question . 
`` Ah ! 
One of the old ones ! 
Has your regiment had its rice ? '' 
`` It has , Your Majesty . '' 
Napoleon nodded and walked away . 
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino . 
It was growing light , the sky was clearing , only a single cloud lay in the east . 
The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the faint morning light . 
On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in the prevailing silence . 
Some minutes passed . 
A second and a third report shook the air , then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the right . 
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another . 
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he dismounted . 
