`` I will not tell you who I am . 
I am your prisoner -- take me ! '' 
Pierre suddenly replied in French . 
`` Ah , ah ! '' 
muttered the officer with a frown . 
`` Well then , march ! '' 
A crowd had collected round the Uhlans . 
Nearest to Pierre stood the pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl , and when the patrol started she moved forward . 
`` Where are they taking you to , you poor dear ? '' 
said she . 
`` And the little girl , the little girl , what am I to do with her if she 's not theirs ? '' 
said the woman . 
`` What does that woman want ? '' 
asked the officer . 
Pierre was as if intoxicated . 
His elation increased at the sight of the little girl he had saved . 
`` What does she want ? '' 
he murmured . 
`` She is bringing me my daughter whom I have just saved from the flames , '' said he . 
`` Good-by ! '' 
And without knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him , he went along with resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers . 
The French patrol was one of those sent out through the various streets of Moscow by Durosnel 's order to put a stop to the pillage , and especially to catch the incendiaries who , according to the general opinion which had that day originated among the higher French officers , were the cause of the conflagrations . 
After marching through a number of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects : a small shopkeeper , two seminary students , a peasant , and a house serf , besides several looters . 
But of all these various suspected characters , Pierre was considered to be the most suspicious of all . 
When they had all been brought for the night to a large house on the Zubov Rampart that was being used as a guardhouse , Pierre was placed apart under strict guard . 
In Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was being carried on with greater heat than ever in the highest circles , between the parties of Rumyantsev , the French , Marya Fedorovna , the Tsarevich , and others , drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones . 
But the calm , luxurious life of Petersburg , concerned only about phantoms and reflections of real life , went on in its old way and made it hard , except by a great effort , to realize the danger and the difficult position of the Russian people . 
There were the same receptions and balls , the same French theater , the same court interests and service interests and intrigues as usual . 
Only in the very highest circles were attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position . 
Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved in these difficult circumstances . 
The Empress Marya , concerned for the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her patronage , had given directions that they should all be removed to Kazan , and the things belonging to these institutions had already been packed up . 
The Empress Elisabeth , however , when asked what instructions she would be pleased to give -- with her characteristic Russian patriotism had replied that she could give no directions about state institutions for that was the affair of the sovereign , but as far as she personally was concerned she would be the last to quit Petersburg . 
At Anna Pavlovna 's on the twenty-sixth of August , the very day of the battle of Borodino , there was a soiree , the chief feature of which was to be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sending the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius . 
It was regarded as a model of ecclesiastical , patriotic eloquence . 
Prince Vasili himself , famed for his elocution , was to read it . 
-LRB- He used to read at the Empress ' . -RRB- 
The art of his reading was supposed to lie in rolling out the words , quite independently of their meaning , in a loud and singsong voice alternating between a despairing wail and a tender murmur , so that the wail fell quite at random on one word and the murmur on another . 
This reading , as was always the case at Anna Pavlovna 's soirees , had a political significance . 
That evening she expected several important personages who had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused to a patriotic temper . 
A good many people had already arrived , but Anna Pavlovna , not yet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room , did not let the reading begin but wound up the springs of a general conversation . 
The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezukhova . 
She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously , had missed several gatherings of which she was usually ornament , and was said to be receiving no one , and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors who usually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who was treating her in some new and unusual way . 
They all knew very well that the enchanting countess ' illness arose from an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time , and that the Italian 's cure consisted in removing such inconvenience ; but in Anna Pavlovna 's presence no one dared to think of this or even appear to know it . 
`` They say the poor countess is very ill . 
The doctor says it is angina pectoris . '' 
`` Angina ? 
Oh , that 's a terrible illness ! '' 
`` They say that the rivals are reconciled , thanks to the angina ... '' and the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction . 
`` The count is pathetic , they say . 
He cried like a child when the doctor told him the case was dangerous . '' 
