Napoleon 's proclamation was as follows : Soldiers ! 
The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the Austrian army of Ulm . 
They are the same battalions you broke at Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place . 
The position we occupy is a strong one , and while they are marching to go round me on the right they will expose a flank to me . 
Soldiers ! 
I will myself direct your battalions . 
I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy 's ranks , but should victory be in doubt , even for a moment , you will see your Emperor exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy , for there must be no doubt of victory , especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of the French infantry , so necessary to the honor of our nation . 
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded ! 
Let every man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings of England , inspired by such hatred of our nation ! 
This victory will conclude our campaign and we can return to winter quarters , where fresh French troops who are being raised in France will join us , and the peace I shall conclude will be worthy of my people , of you , and of myself . 
NAPOLEON At five in the morning it was still quite dark . 
The troops of the center , the reserves , and Bagration 's right flank had not yet moved , but on the left flank the columns of infantry , cavalry , and artillery , which were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French right flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan , were already up and astir . 
The smoke of the campfires , into which they were throwing everything superfluous , made the eyes smart . 
It was cold and dark . 
The officers were hurriedly drinking tea and breakfasting , the soldiers , munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to warm themselves , gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the remains of sheds , chairs , tables , wheels , tubs , and everything that they did not want or could not carry away with them . 
Austrian column guides were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds of the advance . 
As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a commanding officer 's quarters , the regiment began to move : the soldiers ran from the fires , thrust their pipes into their boots , their bags into the carts , got their muskets ready , and formed rank . 
The officers buttoned up their coats , buckled on their swords and pouches , and moved along the ranks shouting . 
The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and packed the wagons and tied on the loads . 
The adjutants and battalion and regimental commanders mounted , crossed themselves , gave final instructions , orders , and commissions to the baggage men who remained behind , and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded . 
The column moved forward without knowing where and unable , from the masses around them , the smoke and the increasing fog , to see either the place they were leaving or that to which they were going . 
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as much as a sailor is by his ship . 
However far he has walked , whatever strange , unknown , and dangerous places he reaches , just as a sailor is always surrounded by the same decks , masts , and rigging of his ship , so the soldier always has around him the same comrades , the same ranks , the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich , the same company dog Jack , and the same commanders . 
The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which his ship is sailing , but on the day of battle -- heaven knows how and whence -- a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral atmosphere of an army , announcing the approach of something decisive and solemn , and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity . 
On the day of battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their regiment , they listen intently , look about , and eagerly ask concerning what is going on around them . 
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could not see ten paces ahead . 
Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level ground like cliffs and slopes . 
Anywhere , on any side , one might encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off . 
But the columns advanced for a long time , always in the same fog , descending and ascending hills , avoiding gardens and enclosures , going over new and unknown ground , and nowhere encountering the enemy . 
On the contrary , the soldiers became aware that in front , behind , and on all sides , other Russian columns were moving in the same direction . 
Every soldier felt glad to know that to the unknown place where he was going , many more of our men were going too . 
`` There now , the Kurskies have also gone past , '' was being said in the ranks . 
`` It 's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered , lads ! 
Last night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them . 
A regular Moscow ! '' 
Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to the men -LRB- the commanders , as we saw at the council of war , were out of humor and dissatisfied with the affair , and so did not exert themselves to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders -RRB- , yet the troops marched gaily , as they always do when going into action , especially to an attack . 
But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog , the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks . 
How such a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define , but it certainly is communicated very surely , and flows rapidly , imperceptibly , and irrepressibly , as water does in a creek . 
Had the Russian army been alone without any allies , it might perhaps have been a long time before this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction , but as it was , the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid Germans , and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been occasioned by the sausage eaters . 
`` Why have we stopped ? 
Is the way blocked ? 
Or have we already come up against the French ? '' 
`` No , one ca n't hear them . 
They 'd be firing if we had . '' 
`` They were in a hurry enough to start us , and now here we stand in the middle of a field without rhyme or reason . 
It 's all those damned Germans ' muddling ! 
What stupid devils ! '' 
`` Yes , I 'd send them on in front , but no fear , they 're crowding up behind . 
And now here we stand hungry . '' 
`` I say , shall we soon be clear ? 
