Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to think over what had happened to her , and suddenly remembering Prince Andrew she was horrified , and at tea to which all had sat down after the opera , she gave a loud exclamation , flushed , and ran out of the room . 
`` O God ! 
I am lost ! '' 
she said to herself . 
`` How could I let him ? '' 
She sat for a long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realize what had happened to her , but was unable either to understand what had happened or what she felt . 
Everything seemed dark , obscure , and terrible . 
There in that enormous , illuminated theater where the bare-legged Duport , in a tinsel-decorated jacket , jumped about to the music on wet boards , and young girls and old men , and the nearly naked Helene with her proud , calm smile , rapturously cried `` bravo ! '' 
-- there in the presence of that Helene it had all seemed clear and simple ; but now , alone by herself , it was incomprehensible . 
`` What is it ? 
What was that terror I felt of him ? 
What is this gnawing of conscience I am feeling now ? '' 
she thought . 
Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told all she was feeling . 
She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views would either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a confession . 
So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her by herself . 
`` Am I spoiled for Andrew 's love or not ? '' 
she asked herself , and with soothing irony replied : `` What a fool I am to ask that ! 
What did happen to me ? 
Nothing ! 
I have done nothing , I did n't lead him on at all . 
Nobody will know and I shall never see him again , '' she told herself . 
`` So it is plain that nothing has happened and there is nothing to repent of , and Andrew can love me still . 
But why ` still ? ' 
O God , why is n't he here ? '' 
Natasha quieted herself for a moment , but again some instinct told her that though all this was true , and though nothing had happened , yet the former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished . 
And again in imagination she went over her whole conversation with Kuragin , and again saw the face , gestures , and tender smile of that bold handsome man when he pressed her arm . 
Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent him away from Petersburg , where he had been spending twenty thousand rubles a year in cash , besides running up debts for as much more , which his creditors demanded from his father . 
His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for the last time , but only on condition that he went to Moscow as adjutant to the commander in chief -- a post his father had procured for him -- and would at last try to make a good match there . 
He indicated to him Princess Mary and Julie Karagina . 
Anatole consented and went to Moscow , where he put up at Pierre 's house . 
Pierre received him unwillingly at first , but got used to him after a while , sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals , and gave him money under the guise of loans . 
As Shinshin had remarked , from the time of his arrival Anatole had turned the heads of the Moscow ladies , especially by the fact that he slighted them and plainly preferred the gypsy girls and French actresses -- with the chief of whom , Mademoiselle George , he was said to be on intimate relations . 
He had never missed a carousal at Danilov 's or other Moscow revelers ' , drank whole nights through , outvying everyone else , and was at all the balls and parties of the best society . 
There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies , and he flirted with a few of them at the balls . 
But he did not run after the unmarried girls , especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain . 
There was a special reason for this , as he had got married two years before -- a fact known only to his most intimate friends . 
At that time while with his regiment in Poland , a Polish landowner of small means had forced him to marry his daughter . 
Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and , for a payment which he agreed to send to his father-in-law , had arranged to be free to pass himself off as a bachelor . 
Anatole was always content with his position , with himself , and with others . 
He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that was impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had never in his life done anything base . 
He was incapable of considering how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or that action of his might be . 
He was convinced that , as a duck is so made that it must live in water , so God had made him such that he must spend thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position in society . 
He believed this so firmly that others , looking at him , were persuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leading place in society or money , which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and evidently would not repay . 
He was not a gambler , at any rate he did not care about winning . 
He was not vain . 
He did not mind what people thought of him . 
Still less could he be accused of ambition . 
More than once he had vexed his father by spoiling his own career , and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds . 
He was not mean , and did not refuse anyone who asked of him . 
