`` It was the officer , your honor , stained it , '' answered the artilleryman , wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve , as if apologizing for the state of his gun . 
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the infantry , and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted . 
It had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces off , and the firing had begun to subside . 
Suddenly , near by on the right , shouting and firing were again heard . 
Flashes of shot gleamed in the darkness . 
This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers who had sheltered in the village houses . 
They all rushed out of the village again , but Tushin 's guns could not move , and the artillerymen , Tushin , and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited their fate . 
The firing died down and soldiers , talking eagerly , streamed out of a side street . 
`` Not hurt , Petrov ? '' 
asked one . 
`` We 've given it 'em hot , mate ! 
They wo n't make another push now , '' said another . 
`` You could n't see a thing . 
How they shot at their own fellows ! 
Nothing could be seen . 
Pitch-dark , brother ! 
Is n't there something to drink ? '' 
The French had been repulsed for the last time . 
And again and again in the complete darkness Tushin 's guns moved forward , surrounded by the humming infantry as by a frame . 
In the darkness , it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing always in one direction , humming with whispers and talk and the sound of hoofs and wheels . 
Amid the general rumble , the groans and voices of the wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness of the night . 
The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their groans , which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night . 
After a while the moving mass became agitated , someone rode past on a white horse followed by his suite , and said something in passing : `` What did he say ? 
Where to , now ? 
Halt , is it ? 
Did he thank us ? '' 
came eager questions from all sides . 
The whole moving mass began pressing closer together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt : evidently those in front had halted . 
All remained where they were in the middle of the muddy road . 
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible . 
Captain Tushin , having given orders to his company , sent a soldier to find a dressing station or a doctor for the cadet , and sat down by a bonfire the soldiers had kindled on the road . 
Rostov , too , dragged himself to the fire . 
From pain , cold , and damp , a feverish shivering shook his whole body . 
Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him , but he kept awake by an excruciating pain in his arm , for which he could find no satisfactory position . 
He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire , which seemed to him dazzlingly red , and at the feeble , round-shouldered figure of Tushin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him . 
Tushin 's large , kind , intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and commiseration on Rostov , who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wished to help him but could not . 
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry , who were walking , driving past , and settling down all around . 
The sound of voices , the tramping feet , the horses ' hoofs moving in mud , the crackling of wood fires near and afar , merged into one tremulous rumble . 
It was no longer , as before , a dark , unseen river flowing through the gloom , but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm . 
Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and around him . 
An infantryman came to the fire , squatted on his heels , held his hands to the blaze , and turned away his face . 
`` You do n't mind your honor ? '' 
he asked Tushin . 
`` I 've lost my company , your honor . 
I do n't know where ... such bad luck ! '' 
With the soldier , an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to the bonfire , and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved a trifle to let a wagon go past . 
After he had gone , two soldiers rushed to the campfire . 
They were quarreling and fighting desperately , each trying to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to . 
`` You picked it up ? 
... I dare say ! 
