Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edge of the fire and a soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat , lit up by the fire , was kneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod . 
`` Oh , he 's a hard nut to crack , '' said one of the officers who was sitting in the shadow at the other side of the fire . 
`` He 'll make them get a move on , those fellows ! '' 
said another , laughing . 
Both fell silent , peering out through the darkness at the sound of Dolokhov 's and Petya 's steps as they advanced to the fire leading their horses . 
`` Bonjour , messieurs ! '' 
* said Dolokhov loudly and clearly . 
* `` Good day , gentlemen . '' 
There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire , and one tall , long-necked officer , walking round the fire , came up to Dolokhov . 
`` Is that you , Clement ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Where the devil ... ? '' 
But , noticing his mistake , he broke off short and , with a frown , greeted Dolokhov as a stranger , asking what he could do for him . 
Dolokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake their regiment , and addressing the company in general asked whether they knew anything of the 6th Regiment . 
None of them knew anything , and Petya thought the officers were beginning to look at him and Dolokhov with hostility and suspicion . 
For some seconds all were silent . 
`` If you were counting on the evening soup , you have come too late , '' said a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh . 
Dolokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push on farther that night . 
He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the pot and squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the long neck . 
That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov and again asked to what regiment he belonged . 
Dolokhov , as if he had not heard the question , did not reply , but lighting a short French pipe which he took from his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before them was safe from Cossacks . 
`` Those brigands are everywhere , '' replied an officer from behind the fire . 
Dolokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglers such as his companion and himself , `` but probably they would not dare to attack large detachments ? '' 
he added inquiringly . 
No one replied . 
`` Well , now he 'll come away , '' Petya thought every moment as he stood by the campfire listening to the talk . 
But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and began putting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion , how many battalions , and how many prisoners . 
Asking about the Russian prisoners with that detachment , Dolokhov said : `` A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one ! 
It would be better to shoot such rabble , '' and burst into loud laughter , so strange that Petya thought the French would immediately detect their disguise , and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire . 
No one replied a word to Dolokhov 's laughter , and a French officer whom they could not see -LRB- he lay wrapped in a greatcoat -RRB- rose and whispered something to a companion . 
Dolokhov got up and called to the soldier who was holding their horses . 
`` Will they bring our horses or not ? '' 
thought Petya , instinctively drawing nearer to Dolokhov . 
The horses were brought . 
`` Good evening , gentlemen , '' said Dolokhov . 
Petya wished to say `` Good night '' but could not utter a word . 
The officers were whispering together . 
Dolokhov was a long time mounting his horse which would not stand still , then he rode out of the yard at a footpace . 
Petya rode beside him , longing to look round to see whether or no the French were running after them , but not daring to . 
Coming out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across the open country , but through the village . 
At one spot he stopped and listened . 
`` Do you hear ? '' 
he asked . 
Petya recognized the sound of Russian voices and saw the dark figures of Russian prisoners round their campfires . 
When they had descended to the bridge Petya and Dolokhov rode past the sentinel , who without saying a word paced morosely up and down it , then they descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them . 
`` Well now , good-by . 
Tell Denisov , ` at the first shot at daybreak , ' '' said Dolokhov and was about to ride away , but Petya seized hold of him . 
`` Really ! '' 
he cried , `` you are such a hero ! 
Oh , how fine , how splendid ! 
