`` Only , for Christ 's sake ... '' the girl went on , as Natasha , without thinking , mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter from Anatole , of which , without taking in a word , she understood only that it was a letter from him -- from the man she loved . 
Yes , she loved him , or else how could that have happened which had happened ? 
And how could she have a love letter from him in her hand ? 
With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter which Dolokhov had composed for Anatole , and as she read it she found in it an echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling . 
`` Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed ; to be loved by you or to die . 
There is no other way for me , '' the letter began . 
Then he went on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him -- for this there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her -- but that if she loved him she need only say the word yes , and no human power could hinder their bliss . 
Love would conquer all . 
He would steal her away and carry her off to the ends of the earth . 
`` Yes , yes ! 
I love him ! '' 
thought Natasha , reading the letter for the twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word of it . 
That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs ' and proposed to take the girls with her . 
Natasha , pleading a headache , remained at home . 
On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha 's room , and to her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa . 
Open on the table , beside her lay Anatole 's letter . 
Sonya picked it up and read it . 
As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha , trying to find in her face an explanation of what she was reading , but did not find it . 
Her face was calm , gentle , and happy . 
Clutching her breast to keep herself from choking , Sonya , pale and trembling with fear and agitation , sat down in an armchair and burst into tears . 
`` How was it I noticed nothing ? 
How could it go so far ? 
Can she have left off loving Prince Andrew ? 
And how could she let Kuragin go to such lengths ? 
He is a deceiver and a villain , that 's plain ! 
What will Nicholas , dear noble Nicholas , do when he hears of it ? 
So this is the meaning of her excited , resolute , unnatural look the day before yesterday , yesterday , and today , '' thought Sonya . 
`` But it ca n't be that she loves him ! 
She probably opened the letter without knowing who it was from . 
Probably she is offended by it . 
She could not do such a thing ! '' 
Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha , again scanning her face . 
`` Natasha ! '' 
she said , just audibly . 
Natasha awoke and saw Sonya . 
`` Ah , you 're back ? '' 
And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment of awakening , she embraced her friend , but noticing Sonya 's look of embarrassment , her own face expressed confusion and suspicion . 
`` Sonya , you 've read that letter ? '' 
she demanded . 
`` Yes , '' answered Sonya softly . 
Natasha smiled rapturously . 
`` No , Sonya , I ca n't any longer ! '' 
she said . 
`` I ca n't hide it from you any longer . 
You know , we love one another ! 
Sonya , darling , he writes ... Sonya ... '' Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha , unable to believe her ears . 
`` And Bolkonski ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Ah , Sonya , if you only knew how happy I am ! '' 
cried Natasha . 
