He alone did not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted , sleeping castle . 
But though externally all remained as of old , the inner relations of all these people had changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last . 
The household was divided into two alien and hostile camps , who changed their habits for his sake and only met because he was there . 
To the one camp belonged the old prince , Madmoiselle Bourienne , and the architect ; to the other Princess Mary , Dessalles , little Nicholas , and all the old nurses and maids . 
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together , but they were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose sake an exception was being made and that his presence made them all feel awkward . 
Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day , he was taciturn , and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb and retired to his apartments directly after dinner . 
In the evening , when Prince Andrew went to him and , trying to rouse him , began to tell him of the young Count Kamensky 's campaign , the old prince began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary , blaming her for her superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne , who , he said , was the only person really attached to him . 
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess Mary : that she purposely worried and irritated him , and that by indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas . 
The old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that her life was very hard , but he also knew that he could not help tormenting her and that she deserved it . 
`` Why does Prince Andrew , who sees this , say nothing to me about his sister ? 
Does he think me a scoundrel , or an old fool who , without any reason , keeps his own daughter at a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself ? 
He does n't understand , so I must explain it , and he must hear me out , '' thought the old prince . 
And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter 's unreasonable character . 
`` If you ask me , '' said Prince Andrew , without looking up -LRB- he was censuring his father for the first time in his life -RRB- , `` I did not wish to speak about it , but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion . 
If there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary , I ca n't blame her for it at all . 
I know how she loves and respects you . 
Since you ask me , '' continued Prince Andrew , becoming irritable -- as he was always liable to do of late -- `` I can only say that if there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman , who is not fit to be my sister 's companion . '' 
The old man at first stared fixedly at his son , and an unnatural smile disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could not get accustomed . 
`` What companion , my dear boy ? 
Eh ? 
You 've already been talking it over ! 
Eh ? '' 
`` Father , I did not want to judge , '' said Prince Andrew , in a hard and bitter tone , `` but you challenged me , and I have said , and always shall say , that Mary is not to blame , but those to blame -- the one to blame -- is that Frenchwoman . '' 
`` Ah , he has passed judgment ... passed judgement ! '' 
said the old man in a low voice and , as it seemed to Prince Andrew , with some embarrassment , but then he suddenly jumped up and cried : `` Be off , be off ! 
Let not a trace of you remain here ! 
... '' Prince Andrew wished to leave at once , but Princess Mary persuaded him to stay another day . 
That day he did not see his father , who did not leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and Tikhon , but asked several times whether his son had gone . 
Next day , before leaving , Prince Andrew went to his son 's rooms . 
The boy , curly-headed like his mother and glowing with health , sat on his knee , and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard , but fell into a reverie without finishing the story . 
He thought not of this pretty child , his son whom he held on his knee , but of himself . 
He sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him , and was horrified to find neither . 
What meant still more to him was that he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on his knee . 
`` Well , go on ! '' 
said his son . 
Prince Andrew , without replying , put him down from his knee and went out of the room . 
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations , and especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had been happy , weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity , and he hastened to escape from these memories and to find some work as soon as possible . 
`` So you 've decided to go , Andrew ? '' 
asked his sister . 
`` Thank God that I can , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` I am very sorry you ca n't . '' 
`` Why do you say that ? '' 
replied Princess Mary . 
`` Why do you say that , when you are going to this terrible war , and he is so old ? 
Mademoiselle Bourienne says he has been asking about you ... '' As soon as she began to speak of that , her lips trembled and her tears began to fall . 
Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room . 
`` Ah , my God ! 
my God ! 
When one thinks who and what -- what trash -- can cause people misery ! '' 
he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary . 
