`` Anybody can shove , '' said the footman , and also began working his elbows to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of the gateway . 
Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the damp collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man 's . 
He felt that he no longer looked presentable , and feared that if he were now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not be admitted to the Emperor . 
But it was impossible to smarten oneself up or move to another place , because of the crowd . 
One of the generals who drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs ' , and Petya thought of asking his help , but came to the conclusion that that would not be a manly thing to do . 
When the carriages had all passed in , the crowd , carrying Petya with it , streamed forward into the Kremlin Square which was already full of people . 
There were people not only in the square , but everywhere -- on the slopes and on the roofs . 
As soon as Petya found himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin . 
For a while the crowd was less dense , but suddenly all heads were bared , and everyone rushed forward in one direction . 
Petya was being pressed so that he could scarcely breathe , and everybody shouted , `` Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! 
hurrah ! '' 
Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched , but could see nothing except the people about him . 
All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm . 
A tradesman 's wife standing beside Petya sobbed , and the tears ran down her cheeks . 
`` Father ! 
Angel ! 
Dear one ! '' 
she kept repeating , wiping away her tears with her fingers . 
`` Hurrah ! '' 
was heard on all sides . 
For a moment the crowd stood still , but then it made another rush forward . 
Quite beside himself , Petya , clinching his teeth and rolling his eyes ferociously , pushed forward , elbowing his way and shouting `` hurrah ! '' 
as if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else , but on both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushed forward and everybody shouted `` hurrah ! '' 
`` So this is what the Emperor is ! '' 
thought Petya . 
`` No , I ca n't petition him myself -- that would be too bold . '' 
But in spite of this he continued to struggle desperately forward , and from between the backs of those in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth spread out on it ; but just then the crowd swayed back -- the police in front were pushing back those who had pressed too close to the procession : the Emperor was passing from the palace to the Cathedral of the Assumption -- and Petya unexpectedly received such a blow on his side and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly everything grew dim before his eyes and he lost consciousness . 
When he came to himself , a man of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of his head and wearing a shabby blue cassock -- probably a church clerk and chanter -- was holding him under the arm with one hand while warding off the pressure of the crowd with the other . 
`` You 've crushed the young gentleman ! '' 
said the clerk . 
`` What are you up to ? 
Gently ! 
... They 've crushed him , crushed him ! '' 
The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption . 
The crowd spread out again more evenly , and the clerk led Petya -- pale and breathless -- to the Tsar-cannon . 
Several people were sorry for Petya , and suddenly a crowd turned toward him and pressed round him . 
Those who stood nearest him attended to him , unbuttoned his coat , seated him on the raised platform of the cannon , and reproached those others -LRB- whoever they might be -RRB- who had crushed him . 
`` One might easily get killed that way ! 
What do they mean by it ? 
Killing people ! 
Poor dear , he 's as white as a sheet ! '' 
-- various voices were heard saying . 
Petya soon came to himself , the color returned to his face , the pain had passed , and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who would be returning that way . 
Petya no longer thought of presenting his petition . 
If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy ! 
While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption - it was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor 's arrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the Turks -- the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared , selling kvas , gingerbread , and poppyseed sweets -LRB- of which Petya was particularly fond -RRB- , and ordinary conversation could again be heard . 
A tradesman 's wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the shawl had cost ; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear . 
The clerk who had rescued Petya was talking to a functionary about the priests who were officiating that day with the bishop . 
The clerk several times used the word `` plenary '' -LRB- of the service -RRB- , a word Petya did not understand . 
