In 1810 he received letters from his parents , in which they told him of Natasha 's engagement to Bolkonski , and that the wedding would be in a year 's time because the old prince made difficulties . 
This letter grieved and mortified Nicholas . 
In the first place he was sorry that Natasha , for whom he cared more than for anyone else in the family , should be lost to the home ; and secondly , from his hussar point of view , he regretted not to have been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him was no such great honor after all , and that if he loved Natasha he might dispense with permission from his dotard father . 
For a moment he hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natasha before she was married , but then came the maneuvers , and considerations about Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs , and Nicholas again put it off . 
But in the spring of that year , he received a letter from his mother , written without his father 's knowledge , and that letter persuaded him to return . 
She wrote that if he did not come and take matters in hand , their whole property would be sold by auction and they would all have to go begging . 
The count was so weak , and trusted Mitenka so much , and was so good-natured , that everybody took advantage of him and things were going from bad to worse . 
`` For God 's sake , I implore you , come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family wretched , '' wrote the countess . 
This letter touched Nicholas . 
He had that common sense of a matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do . 
The right thing now was , if not to retire from the service , at any rate to go home on leave . 
Why he had to go he did not know ; but after his after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars , an extremely vicious gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time , and when he returned with the horse all in a lather , he informed Lavrushka -LRB- Denisov 's servant who had remained with him -RRB- and his comrades who turned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was going home . 
Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he would go away without having heard from the staff -- and this interested him extremely -- whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers ; strange as it was to think that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish Count Golukhovski , who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted he would sell for two thousand rubles ; incomprehensible as it seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish Mademoiselle Przazdziecka -LRB- out of rivalry to the Uhlans who had given one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska -RRB- would take place without him -- he knew he must go away from this good , bright world to somewhere where everything was stupid and confused . 
A week later he obtained his leave . 
His hussar comrades -- not only those of his own regiment , but the whole brigade -- gave Rostov a dinner to which the subscription was fifteen rubles a head , and at which there were two bands and two choirs of singers . 
Rostov danced the Trepak with Major Basov ; the tipsy officers tossed , embraced , and dropped Rostov ; the soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too , and shouted `` hurrah ! '' 
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first post station . 
During the first half of the journey -- from Kremenchug to Kiev -- all Rostov 's thoughts , as is usual in such cases , were behind him , with the squadron ; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget his three roans and Dozhoyveyko , his quartermaster , and to wonder anxiously how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there . 
Thoughts of home grew stronger the nearer he approached it -- far stronger , as though this feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force of attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance . 
At the last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble tip , and on arriving he ran breathlessly , like a boy , up the steps of his home . 
After the rapture of meeting , and after that odd feeling of unsatisfied expectation -- the feeling that `` everything is just the same , so why did I hurry ? '' 
-- Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world . 
His father and mother were much the same , only a little older . 
What was new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord , which there used not to be , and which , as Nicholas soon found out , was due to the bad state of their affairs . 
Sonya was nearly twenty ; she had stopped growing prettier and promised nothing more than she was already , but that was enough . 
She exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned , and the faithful , unalterable love of this girl had a gladdening effect on him . 
Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most . 
Petya was a big handsome boy of thirteen , merry , witty , and mischievous , with a voice that was already breaking . 
As for Natasha , for a long while Nicholas wondered and laughed whenever he looked at her . 
`` You 're not the same at all , '' he said . 
`` How ? 
Am I uglier ? '' 
`` On the contrary , but what dignity ? 
A princess ! '' 
he whispered to her . 
`` Yes , yes , yes ! '' 
cried Natasha , joyfully . 
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to Otradnoe and showed him his last letter . 
`` Well , are you glad ? '' 
Natasha asked . 
`` I am so tranquil and happy now . '' 
`` Very glad , '' answered Nicholas . 
`` He is an excellent fellow ... . 
And are you very much in love ? '' 
`` How shall I put it ? '' 
replied Natasha . 
`` I was in love with Boris , with my teacher , and with Denisov , but this is quite different . 
I feel at peace and settled . 
I know that no better man than he exists , and I am calm and contented now . 
Not at all as before . '' 
