Pierre hid his face , from which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and fear . 
All were still . 
Pierre took his hands from his eyes . 
Dolokhov still sat in the same position , only his head was thrown further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar , and the hand holding the bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort . 
The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting yet further back . 
`` Why is it so long ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
It seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed . 
Suddenly Dolokhov made a backward movement with his spine , and his arm trembled nervously ; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge . 
As he began slipping down , his head and arm wavered still more with the strain . 
One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill , but refrained from touching it . 
Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he would never never them again . 
Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around . 
He looked up : Dolokhov was standing on the window sill , with a pale but radiant face . 
`` It 's empty . '' 
He threw the bottle to the Englishman , who caught it neatly . 
Dolokhov jumped down . 
He smelt strongly of rum . 
`` Well done ! 
... Fine fellow ! 
... There 's a bet for you ! 
... Devil take you ! '' 
came from different sides . 
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money . 
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak . 
Pierre jumped upon the window sill . 
`` Gentlemen , who wishes to bet with me ? 
I 'll do the same thing ! '' 
he suddenly cried . 
`` Even without a bet , there ! 
Tell them to bring me a bottle . 
I 'll do it ... . 
Bring a bottle ! '' 
`` Let him do it , let him do it , '' said Dolokhov , smiling . 
`` What next ? 
Have you gone mad ? 
... No one would let you ! 
... Why , you go giddy even on a staircase , '' exclaimed several voices . 
`` I 'll drink it ! 
Let 's have a bottle of rum ! '' 
shouted Pierre , banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out of the window . 
They seized him by his arms ; but he was so strong that everyone who touched him was sent flying . 
`` No , you 'll never manage him that way , '' said Anatole . 
`` Wait a bit and I 'll get round him ... . 
Listen ! 
I 'll take your bet tomorrow , but now we are all going to -- 's . '' 
`` Come on then , '' cried Pierre . 
`` Come on ! 
... And we 'll take Bruin with us . '' 
And he caught the bear , took it in his arms , lifted it from the ground , and began dancing round the room with it . 
