It was a hot July day . 
Even at ten o'clock , when the Rostovs got out of their carriage at the chapel , the sultry air , the shouts of hawkers , the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd , the dusty leaves of the trees on the boulevard , the sounds of the band and the white trousers of a battalion marching to parade , the rattling of wheels on the cobblestones , and the brilliant , hot sunshine were all full of that summer languor , that content and discontent with the present , which is most strongly felt on a bright , hot day in town . 
All the Moscow notabilities , all the Rostovs ' acquaintances , were at the Razumovskis ' chapel , for , as if expecting something to happen , many wealthy families who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that summer . 
As Natasha , at her mother 's side , passed through the crowd behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them , she heard a young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper . 
`` That 's Rostova , the one who ... '' `` She 's much thinner , but all the same she 's pretty ! '' 
She heard , or thought she heard , the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski . 
But she was always imagining that . 
It always seemed to her that everyone who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her . 
With a sinking heart , wretched as she always was now when she found herself in a crowd , Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked -- as women can walk -- with the more repose and stateliness the greater the pain and shame in her soul . 
She knew for certain that she was pretty , but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to . 
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late , and particularly so on this bright , hot summer day in town . 
`` It 's Sunday again -- another week past , '' she thought , recalling that she had been here the Sunday before , `` and always the same life that is no life , and the same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live . 
I 'm pretty , I 'm young , and I know that now I am good . 
I used to be bad , but now I know I am good , '' she thought , `` but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good to anyone . '' 
She stood by her mother 's side and exchanged nods with acquaintances near her . 
From habit she scrutinized the ladies ' dresses , condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not crossing herself properly but in a cramped manner , and again she thought with vexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others , and suddenly , at the sound of the service , she felt horrified at her own vileness , horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost to her . 
A comely , fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the souls of the worshipers . 
The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed , the curtain was slowly drawn , and from behind it a soft mysterious voice pronounced some words . 
Tears , the cause of which she herself did not understand , made Natasha 's breast heave , and a joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her . 
`` Teach me what I should do , how to live my life , how I may grow good forever , forever ! '' 
she pleaded . 
The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and , holding his thumb extended , drew his long hair from under his dalmatic and , making the sign of the cross on his breast , began in a loud and solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer ... `` In peace let us pray unto the Lord . '' 
`` As one community , without distinction of class , without enmity , united by brotherly love -- let us pray ! '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` For the peace that is from above , and for the salvation of our souls . '' 
`` For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us , '' prayed Natasha . 
When they prayed for the warriors , she thought of her brother and Denisov . 
When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea , she remembered Prince Andrew , prayed for him , and asked God to forgive her all the wrongs she had done him . 
When they prayed for those who love us , she prayed for the members of her own family , her father and mother and Sonya , realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward them , and feeling all the strength of her love for them . 
When they prayed for those who hate us , she tried to think of her enemies and people who hated her , in order to pray for them . 
She included among her enemies the creditors and all who had business dealings with her father , and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm -- and though he did not hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy . 
Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole , as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and devotion to God . 
When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod , she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross , saying to herself that even if she did not understand , still she could not doubt , and at any rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it . 
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his breast and said , `` Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ the Lord ! '' 
`` Commit ourselves to God , '' Natasha inwardly repeated . 
`` Lord God , I submit myself to Thy will ! '' 
she thought . 
`` I want nothing , wish for nothing ; teach me what to do and how to use my will ! 
Take me , take me ! '' 
prayed Natasha , with impatient emotion in her heart , not crossing herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself , from her regrets , desires , remorse , hopes , and sins . 
The countess looked round several times at her daughter 's softened face and shining eyes and prayed God to help her . 
Unexpectedly , in the middle of the service , and not in the usual order Natasha knew so well , the deacon brought out a small stool , the one he knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday , and placed it before the doors of the sanctuary screen . 
The priest came out with his purple velvet biretta on his head , adjusted his hair , and knelt down with an effort . 
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in surprise . 
Then came the prayer just received from the Synod -- a prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion . 
`` Lord God of might , God of our salvation ! '' 
began the priest in that voice , clear , not grandiloquent but mild , in which only the Slav clergy read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart . 
`` Lord God of might , God of our salvation ! 
Look this day in mercy and blessing on Thy humble people , and graciously hear us , spare us , and have mercy upon us ! 
This foe confounding Thy land , desiring to lay waste the whole world , rises against us ; these lawless men are gathered together to overthrow Thy kingdom , to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem , Thy beloved Russia ; to defile Thy temples , to overthrow Thine altars , and to desecrate our holy shrines . 
