Princess Mary lowered her eyes and , tripping over her skirt , came close up to them . 
So many different eyes , old and young , were fixed on her , and there were so many different faces , that she could not distinguish any of them and , feeling that she must speak to them all at once , did not know how to do it . 
But again the sense that she represented her father and her brother gave her courage , and she boldly began her speech . 
`` I am very glad you have come , '' she said without raising her eyes , and feeling her heart beating quickly and violently . 
`` Dronushka tells me that the war has ruined you . 
That is our common misfortune , and I shall grudge nothing to help you . 
I am myself going away because it is dangerous here ... the enemy is near ... because ... I am giving you everything , my friends , and I beg you to take everything , all our grain , so that you may not suffer want ! 
And if you have been told that I am giving you the grain to keep you here -- that is not true . 
On the contrary , I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near Moscow , and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for nothing . 
You shall be given food and lodging . '' 
The princess stopped . 
Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd . 
`` I am not doing this on my own account , '' she continued , `` I do it in the name of my dead father , who was a good master to you , and of my brother and his son . '' 
Again she paused . 
No one broke the silence . 
`` Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together . 
All that is mine is yours , '' she concluded , scanning the faces before her . 
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression . 
She could not fathom whether it was curiosity , devotion , gratitude , or apprehension and distrust -- but the expression on all the faces was identical . 
`` We are all very thankful for your bounty , but it wo n't do for us to take the landlord 's grain , '' said a voice at the back of the crowd . 
`` But why not ? '' 
asked the princess . 
No one replied and Princess Mary , looking round at the crowd , found that every eye she met now was immediately dropped . 
`` But why do n't you want to take it ? '' 
she asked again . 
No one answered . 
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch someone 's eye . 
`` Why do n't you speak ? '' 
she inquired of a very old man who stood just in front of her leaning on his stick . 
`` If you think something more is wanted , tell me ! 
I will do anything , '' said she , catching his eye . 
But as if this angered him , he bent his head quite low and muttered : `` Why should we agree ? 
We do n't want the grain . '' 
`` Why should we give up everything ? 
We do n't agree . 
Do n't agree ... . 
We are sorry for you , but we 're not willing . 
Go away yourself , alone ... '' came from various sides of the crowd . 
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression , though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude , but of angry resolve . 
`` But you ca n't have understood me , '' said Princess Mary with a sad smile . 
`` Why do n't you want to go ? 
I promise to house and feed you , while here the enemy would ruin you ... '' But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd . 
`` We 're not willing . 
Let them ruin us ! 
We wo n't take your grain . 
We do n't agree . '' 
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone 's eye , but not a single eye in the crowd was turned to her ; evidently they were all trying to avoid her look . 
She felt strange and awkward . 
`` Oh yes , an artful tale ! 
Follow her into slavery ! 
