But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections , she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had most strongly expressed his insincere love for her , and he felt the blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break and tear whatever came to his hand . 
`` Why did I tell her that ` Je vous aime ' ? '' 
he kept repeating to himself . 
And when he had said it for the tenth time , Molibre 's words : `` Mais que diable alloit-il faire dans cette galere ? '' 
occurred to him , and he began to laugh at himself . 
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to Petersburg . 
He could not imagine how he could speak to her now . 
He resolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his intention to part from her forever . 
Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee , Pierre was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand . 
He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression , unable to realize where he was . 
`` The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home , '' said the valet . 
But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send , the countess herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with simply dressed hair -LRB- two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like a coronet -RRB- entered the room , calm and majestic , except that there was a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow . 
With her imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet . 
She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it . 
She waited till the valet had set down the coffee things and left the room . 
Pierre looked at her timidly over his spectacles , and like a hare surrounded by hounds who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her enemies , he tried to continue reading . 
But feeling this to be senseless and impossible , he again glanced timidly at her . 
She did not sit down but looked at him with a contemptuous smile , waiting for the valet to go . 
`` Well , what 's this now ? 
What have you been up to now , I should like to know ? '' 
she asked sternly . 
`` I ? 
What have I. . . ? '' 
stammered Pierre . 
`` So it seems you 're a hero , eh ? 
Come now , what was this duel about ? 
What is it meant to prove ? 
What ? 
I ask you . '' 
Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth , but could not reply . 
`` If you wo n't answer , I 'll tell you ... '' Helene went on . 
`` You believe everything you 're told . 
You were told ... '' Helene laughed , `` that Dolokhov was my lover , '' she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech , uttering the word amant as casually as any other word , `` and you believed it ! 
Well , what have you proved ? 
What does this duel prove ? 
That you 're a fool , que vous etes un sot , but everybody knew that . 
What will be the result ? 
That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow , that everyone will say that you , drunk and not knowing what you were about , challenged a man you are jealous of without cause . '' 
Helene raised her voice and became more and more excited , `` A man who 's a better man than you in every way ... '' `` Hm ... Hm ... ! '' 
growled Pierre , frowning without looking at her , and not moving a muscle . 
`` And how could you believe he was my lover ? 
Why ? 
Because I like his company ? 
If you were cleverer and more agreeable , I should prefer yours . '' 
`` Do n't speak to me ... I beg you , '' muttered Pierre hoarsely . 
`` Why should n't I speak ? 
I can speak as I like , and I tell you plainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would not have taken lovers -LRB- des amants -RRB- , but I have not done so , '' said she . 
Pierre wished to say something , looked at her with eyes whose strange expression she did not understand , and lay down again . 
He was suffering physically at that moment , there was a weight on his chest and he could not breathe . 
He knew that he must do something to put an end to this suffering , but what he wanted to do was too terrible . 
