`` Tit ! 
I say , Tit ! '' 
said the groom . 
`` What ? '' 
answered the old man absent-mindedly . 
`` Go , Tit ! 
Thresh a bit ! '' 
`` Oh , you fool ! '' 
said the old man , spitting angrily . 
Some time passed in silence , and then the same joke was repeated . 
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points . 
More than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French . 
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms . 
Other columns after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused masses . 
The remains of Langeron 's and Dokhturov 's mingled forces were crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd . 
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade -LRB- delivered by the French alone -RRB- was still to be heard from numerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights , directed at our retreating forces . 
In the rearguard , Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops . 
It was growing dusk . 
On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully angling , while his grandson , with shirt sleeves rolled up , handled the floundering silvery fish in the watering can , on that dam over which for so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their carts -- on that narrow dam amid the wagons and the cannon , under the horses ' hoofs and between the wagon wheels , men disfigured by fear of death now crowded together , crushing one another , dying , stepping over the dying and killing one another , only to move on a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way . 
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around , or a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng , killing some and splashing with blood those near them . 
Dolokhov -- now an officer -- wounded in the arm , and on foot , with the regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company , represented all that was left of that whole regiment . 
Impelled by the crowd , they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and , jammed in on all sides , had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a cannon and the crowd were dragging it out . 
A cannon ball killed someone behind them , another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood . 
The crowd , pushing forward desperately , squeezed together , moved a few steps , and again stopped . 
`` Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved , remain here another two minutes and it is certain death , '' thought each one . 
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of the dam , throwing two soldiers off their feet , and ran onto the slippery ice that covered the millpool . 
`` Turn this way ! '' 
he shouted , jumping over the ice which creaked under him ; `` turn this way ! '' 
he shouted to those with the gun . 
`` It bears ! 
... '' The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked , and it was plain that it would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd , but very soon even under his weight alone . 
The men looked at him and pressed to the bank , hesitating to step onto the ice . 
The general on horseback at the entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address Dolokhov . 
Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that everyone ducked . 
It flopped into something moist , and the general fell from his horse in a pool of blood . 
Nobody gave him a look or thought of raising him . 
`` Get onto the ice , over the ice ! 
Go on ! 
Turn ! 
Do n't you hear ? 
Go on ! '' 
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the general , the men themselves not knowing what , or why , they were shouting . 
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the ice . 
Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond . 
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers , and one leg slipped into the water . 
He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist . 
The nearest soldiers shrank back , the gun driver stopped his horse , but from behind still came the shouts : `` Onto the ice , why do you stop ? 
Go on ! 
Go on ! '' 
And cries of horror were heard in the crowd . 
