Only Natasha and the countess remained in the room . 
Petya was no longer with the family , he had gone on with his regiment which was making for Troitsa . 
The countess , on hearing that Moscow was on fire , began to cry . 
Natasha , pale , with a fixed look , was sitting on the bench under the icons just where she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention to her father 's words . 
She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of the adjutant , three houses off . 
`` Oh , how terrible , '' said Sonya returning from the yard chilled and frightened . 
`` I believe the whole of Moscow will burn , there 's an awful glow ! 
Natasha , do look ! 
You can see it from the window , '' she said to her cousin , evidently wishing to distract her mind . 
But Natasha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove . 
She had been in this condition of stupor since the morning , when Sonya , to the surprise and annoyance of the countess , had for some unaccountable reason found it necessary to tell Natasha of Prince Andrew 's wound and of his being with their party . 
The countess had seldom been so angry with anyone as she was with Sonya . 
Sonya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now , as if trying to atone for her fault , paid unceasing attention to her cousin . 
`` Look , Natasha , how dreadfully it is burning ! '' 
said she . 
`` What 's burning ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` Oh , yes , Moscow . '' 
And as if in order not to offend Sonya and to get rid of her , she turned her face to the window , looked out in such a way that it was evident that she could not see anything , and again settled down in her former attitude . 
`` But you did n't see it ! '' 
`` Yes , really I did , '' Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left in peace . 
Both the countess and Sonya understood that , naturally , neither Moscow nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance to Natasha . 
The count returned and lay down behind the partition . 
The countess went up to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hand as she was wont to do when Natasha was ill , then touched her forehead with her lips as if to feel whether she was feverish , and finally kissed her . 
`` You are cold . 
You are trembling all over . 
You 'd better lie down , '' said the countess . 
`` Lie down ? 
All right , I will . 
I 'll lie down at once , '' said Natasha . 
When Natasha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriously wounded and was traveling with their party , she had at first asked many questions : Where was he going ? 
How was he wounded ? 
Was it serious ? 
And could she see him ? 
But after she had been told that she could not see him , that he was seriously wounded but that his life was not in danger , she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all , evidently disbelieving what they told her , and convinced that say what she might she would still be told the same . 
All the way she had sat motionless in a corner of the coach with wide open eyes , and the expression in them which the countess knew so well and feared so much , and now she sat in the same way on the bench where she had seated herself on arriving . 
She was planning something and either deciding or had already decided something in her mind . 
The countess knew this , but what it might be she did not know , and this alarmed and tormented her . 
`` Natasha , undress , darling ; lie down on my bed . '' 
A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only . 
Madame Schoss and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor . 
`` No , Mamma , I will lie down here on the floor , '' Natasha replied irritably and she went to the window and opened it . 
Through the open window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly . 
She put her head out into the damp night air , and the countess saw her slim neck shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame . 
Natasha knew it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning . 
She knew Prince Andrew was in the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage ; but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob . 
The countess exchanged a look with Sonya . 
`` Lie down , darling ; lie down , my pet , '' said the countess , softly touching Natasha 's shoulders . 
`` Come , lie down . '' 
`` Oh , yes ... I 'll lie down at once , '' said Natasha , and began hurriedly undressing , tugging at the tapes of her petticoat . 
