He turned to glance at him . 
`` I ask one thing of you , '' he said sternly , `` to obey me and not shove yourself forward anywhere . '' 
He did not say another word to Petya but rode in silence all the way . 
When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing light over the field . 
Denisov talked in whispers with the esaul and the Cossacks rode past Petya and Denisov . 
When they had all ridden by , Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill . 
Slipping onto their haunches and sliding , the horses descended with their riders into the ravine . 
Petya rode beside Denisov , the pulsation of his body constantly increasing . 
It was getting lighter and lighter , but the mist still hid distant objects . 
Having reached the valley , Denisov looked back and nodded to a Cossack beside him . 
`` The signal ! '' 
said he . 
The Cossack raised his arm and a shot rang out . 
In an instant the tramp of horses galloping forward was heard , shouts came from various sides , and then more shots . 
At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting , Petya lashed his horse and loosening his rein galloped forward , not heeding Denisov who shouted at him . 
It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot was fired it suddenly became as bright as noon . 
He galloped to the bridge . 
Cossacks were galloping along the road in front of him . 
On the bridge he collided with a Cossack who had fallen behind , but he galloped on . 
In front of him soldiers , probably Frenchmen , were running from right to left across the road . 
One of them fell in the mud under his horse 's feet . 
Cossacks were crowding about a hut , busy with something . 
From the midst of that crowd terrible screams arose . 
Petya galloped up , and the first thing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a Frenchman , clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him . 
`` Hurrah ! 
... Lads ! 
... ours ! '' 
shouted Petya , and giving rein to his excited horse he galloped forward along the village street . 
He could hear shooting ahead of him . 
Cossacks , hussars , and ragged Russian prisoners , who had come running from both sides of the road , were shouting something loudly and incoherently . 
A gallant-looking Frenchman , in a blue overcoat , capless , and with a frowning red face , had been defending himself against the hussars . 
When Petya galloped up the Frenchman had already fallen . 
`` Too late again ! '' 
flashed through Petya 's mind and he galloped on to the place from which the rapid firing could be heard . 
The shots came from the yard of the landowner 's house he had visited the night before with Dolokhov . 
The French were making a stand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown with bushes and were firing at the Cossacks who crowded at the gateway . 
Through the smoke , as he approached the gate , Petya saw Dolokhov , whose face was of a pale-greenish tint , shouting to his men . 
`` Go round ! 
Wait for the infantry ! '' 
he exclaimed as Petya rode up to him . 
`` Wait ? 
... Hurrah-ah-ah ! '' 
shouted Petya , and without pausing a moment galloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where the smoke was thickest . 
A volley was heard , and some bullets whistled past , while others plashed against something . 
The Cossacks and Dolokhov galloped after Petya into the gateway of the courtyard . 
In the dense wavering smoke some of the French threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the Cossacks , while others ran down the hill toward the pond . 
Petya was galloping along the courtyard , but instead of holding the reins he waved both his arms about rapidly and strangely , slipping farther and farther to one side in his saddle . 
His horse , having galloped up to a campfire that was smoldering in the morning light , stopped suddenly , and Petya fell heavily on to the wet ground . 
The Cossacks saw that his arms and legs jerked rapidly though his head was quite motionless . 
A bullet had pierced his skull . 
