Still I remained silent . 
And what do you think , Count ? 
The next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day . 
That 's what keeping one 's head means . 
That 's the way , Count , '' said Berg , lighting his pipe and emitting rings of smoke . 
`` Yes , that was fine , '' said Rostov , smiling . 
But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg , and skillfully changed the subject . 
He asked him to tell them how and where he got his wound . 
This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it , and as he went on became more and more animated . 
He told them of his Schon Grabern affair , just as those who have taken part in a battle generally do describe it , that is , as they would like it to have been , as they have heard it described by others , and as sounds well , but not at all as it really was . 
Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no account have told a deliberate lie . 
He began his story meaning to tell everything just as it happened , but imperceptibly , involuntarily , and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood . 
If he had told the truth to his hearers -- who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear just such a story -- they would either not have believed him or , still worse , would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened to him . 
He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as he could from a Frenchman into the wood . 
Besides , to tell everything as it really happened , it would have been necessary to make an effort of will to tell only what happened . 
It is very difficult to tell the truth , and young people are rarely capable of it . 
His hearers expected a story of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement , he had flown like a storm at the square , cut his way in , slashed right and left , how his saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted , and so on . 
And so he told them all that . 
In the middle of his story , just as he was saying : `` You can not imagine what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack , '' Prince Andrew , whom Boris was expecting , entered the room . 
Prince Andrew , who liked to help young men , was flattered by being asked for his assistance and being well disposed toward Boris , who had managed to please him the day before , he wished to do what the young man wanted . 
Having been sent with papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich , he looked in on Boris , hoping to find him alone . 
When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting his military exploits -LRB- Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man -RRB- , he gave Boris a pleasant smile , frowned as with half-closed eyes he looked at Rostov , bowed slightly and wearily , and sat down languidly on the sofa : he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company . 
Rostov flushed up on noticing this , but he did not care , this was a mere stranger . 
Glancing , however , at Boris , he saw that he too seemed ashamed of the hussar of the line . 
In spite of Prince Andrew 's disagreeable , ironical tone , in spite of the contempt with which Rostov , from his fighting army point of view , regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer was evidently one , Rostov felt confused , blushed , and became silent . 
Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff , and what , without indiscretion , one might ask about our plans . 
`` We shall probably advance , '' replied Bolkonski , evidently reluctant to say more in the presence of a stranger . 
Berg took the opportunity to ask , with great politeness , whether , as was rumored , the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be doubled . 
To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could give no opinion on such an important government order , and Berg laughed gaily . 
`` As to your business , '' Prince Andrew continued , addressing Boris , `` we will talk of it later '' -LRB- and he looked round at Rostov -RRB- . 
`` Come to me after the review and we will do what is possible . '' 
And , having glanced round the room , Prince Andrew turned to Rostov , whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to anger he did not condescend to notice , and said : `` I think you were talking of the Schon Grabern affair ? 
Were you there ? '' 
`` I was there , '' said Rostov angrily , as if intending to insult the aide-de-camp . 
Bolkonski noticed the hussar 's state of mind , and it amused him . 
With a slightly contemptuous smile , he said : `` Yes , there are many stories now told about that affair ! '' 
`` Yes , stories ! '' 
repeated Rostov loudly , looking with eyes suddenly grown furious , now at Boris , now at Bolkonski . 
`` Yes , many stories ! 
But our stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy 's fire ! 
Our stories have some weight , not like the stories of those fellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything ! '' 
`` Of whom you imagine me to be one ? '' 
said Prince Andrew , with a quiet and particularly amiable smile . 
A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man 's self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov 's soul . 
`` I am not talking about you , '' he said , `` I do n't know you and , frankly , I do n't want to . 
I am speaking of the staff in general . '' 
`` And I will tell you this , '' Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet authority , `` you wish to insult me , and I am ready to agree with you that it would be very easy to do so if you have n't sufficient self-respect , but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen . 
In a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel , and besides , Drubetskoy , who says he is an old friend of yours , is not at all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you . 
However , '' he added rising , `` you know my name and where to find me , but do n't forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all insulted , and as a man older than you , my advice is to let the matter drop . 
Well then , on Friday after the review I shall expect you , Drubetskoy . 
