`` And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharev ? 
I understand ! '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Not at all , '' rejoined the adjutant in dismay . 
`` Klyucharev had his own sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished . 
But the point is that the count was much annoyed . 
` How could you have written it yourself ? ' 
said he , and he took up the Hamburg Gazette that was lying on the table . 
` Here it is ! 
You did not write it yourself but translated it , and translated it abominably , because you do n't even know French , you fool . ' 
And what do you think ? 
` No , ' said he , ' I have not read any papers , I made it up myself . ' 
` If that 's so , you 're a traitor and I 'll have you tried , and you 'll be hanged ! 
Say from whom you had it . ' ' 
I have seen no papers , I made it up myself . ' 
And that was the end of it . 
The count had the father fetched , but the fellow stuck to it . 
He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor , I believe . 
Now the father has come to intercede for him . 
But he 's a good-for-nothing lad ! 
You know that sort of tradesman 's son , a dandy and lady-killer . 
He attended some lectures somewhere and imagines that the devil is no match for him . 
That 's the sort of fellow he is . 
His father keeps a cookshop here by the Stone Bridge , and you know there was a large icon of God Almighty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other . 
Well , he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do ? 
He found some scoundrel of a painter ... '' In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in chief . 
When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin , puckering his face , was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand . 
A short man was saying something , but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went out . 
`` Ah , how do you do , great warrior ? '' 
said Rostopchin as soon as the short man had left the room . 
`` We have heard of your prowess . 
But that 's not the point . 
Between ourselves , mon cher , do you belong to the Masons ? '' 
he went on severely , as though there were something wrong about it which he nevertheless intended to pardon . 
Pierre remained silent . 
`` I am well informed , my friend , but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope that you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish to ruin Russia . '' 
`` Yes , I am a Mason , '' Pierre replied . 
`` There , you see , mon cher ! 
I expect you know that Messrs. Speranski and Magnitski have been deported to their proper place . 
Mr. Klyucharev has been treated in the same way , and so have others who on the plea of building up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple of their fatherland . 
You can understand that there are reasons for this and that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful person . 
It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage for his removal from town , and that you have even accepted papers from him for safe custody . 
I like you and do n't wish you any harm and -- as you are only half my age - I advise you , as a father would , to cease all communication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon as possible . '' 
`` But what did Klyucharev do wrong , Count ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` That is for me to know , but not for you to ask , '' shouted Rostopchin . 
`` If he is accused of circulating Napoleon 's proclamation it is not proved that he did so , '' said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin , `` and Vereshchagin ... '' `` There we are ! '' 
Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before , frowning suddenly . 
`` Vereshchagin is a renegade and a traitor who will be punished as he deserves , '' said he with the vindictive heat with which people speak when recalling an insult . 
`` But I did not summon you to discuss my actions , but to give you advice -- or an order if you prefer it . 
