Very glad ! 
Kiss me , '' he said , having learned who the young stranger was . 
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre . 
Before supper , Prince Andrew , coming back to his father 's study , found him disputing hotly with his visitor . 
Pierre was maintaining that a time would come when there would be no more wars . 
The old prince disputed it chaffingly , but without getting angry . 
`` Drain the blood from men 's veins and put in water instead , then there will be no more war ! 
Old women 's nonsense -- old women 's nonsense ! '' 
he repeated , but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder , and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew , evidently not wishing to join in the conversation , was looking over the papers his father had brought from town . 
The old prince went up to him and began to talk business . 
`` The marshal , a Count Rostov , has n't sent half his contingent . 
He came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner -- I gave him a pretty dinner ! 
... And there , look at this ... . 
Well , my boy , '' the old prince went on , addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder . 
`` A fine fellow -- your friend -- I like him ! 
He stirs me up . 
Another says clever things and one does n't care to listen , but this one talks rubbish yet stirs an old fellow up . 
Well , go ! 
Get along ! 
Perhaps I 'll come and sit with you at supper . 
We 'll have another dispute . 
Make friends with my little fool , Princess Mary , '' he shouted after Pierre , through the door . 
Only now , on his visit to Bald Hills , did Pierre fully realize the strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew . 
That charm was not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family and with the household . 
With the stern old prince and the gentle , timid Princess Mary , though he had scarcely known them , Pierre at once felt like an old friend . 
They were all fond of him already . 
Not only Princess Mary , who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims , gave him her most radiant looks , but even the one-year-old `` Prince Nicholas '' -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in his arms , and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince . 
The old prince came in to supper ; this was evidently on Pierre 's account . 
And during the two days of the young man 's visit he was extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again . 
When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together , they began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new acquaintance has left , but as seldom happens , no one said anything but what was good of him . 
When returning from his leave , Rostov felt , for the first time , how close was the bond that united him to Denisov and and the whole regiment . 
On approaching it , Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home in Moscow . 
When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of his regiment , when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the picket ropes of the roan horses , when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his master , `` The count has come ! '' 
and Denisov , who had been asleep on his bed , ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him , and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival , Rostov experienced the same feeling his mother , his father , and his sister had embraced him , and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak . 
The regiment was also a home , and as unalterably dear and precious as his parents ' house . 
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had been reassigned to his former squadron , had been on duty and had gone out foraging , when he had again entered into all the little interests of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one narrow , unchanging frame , he experienced the same sense of peace , of moral support , and the same sense being at home here in his own place , as he had felt under the parental roof . 
But here was none of all that turmoil of the world at large , where he did not know his right place and took mistaken decisions ; here was no Sonya with whom he ought , or ought not , to have an explanation ; here was no possibility of going there or not going there ; here there were not twenty-four hours in the day which could be spent in such a variety of ways ; there was not that innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther from him than another ; there were none of those uncertain and undefined money relations with his father , and nothing to recall that terrible loss to Dolokhov . 
Here , in the regiment , all was clear and simple . 
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts : one , our Pavlograd regiment ; the other , all the rest . 
And the rest was no concern of his . 
In the regiment , everything was definite : who was lieutenant , who captain , who was a good fellow , who a bad one , and most of all , who was a comrade . 
The canteenkeeper gave one credit , one 's pay came every four months , there was nothing to think out or decide , you had only to do nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and , when given an order , to do what was clearly , distinctly , and definitely ordered -- and all would be well . 
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental life , Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to rest . 
Life in the regiment , during this campaign , was all the pleasanter for him , because , after his loss to Dolokhov -LRB- for which , in spite of all his family 's efforts to console him , he could not forgive himself -RRB- , he had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving , not as he had done before , but really well , and by being a perfectly first-rate comrade and officer -- in a word , a splendid man altogether , a thing which seemed so difficult out in the world , but so possible in the regiment . 
After his losses , he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents in five years . 
He received ten thousand rubles a year , but now resolved to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his parents . 
Our army , after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk and Preussisch-Eylau , was concentrated near Bartenstein . 
It was awaiting the Emperor 's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign . 
The Pavlograd regiment , belonging to that part of the army which had served in the 1805 campaign , had been recruiting up to strength in Russia , and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the campaign . 
It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and , when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign , was attached to Platov 's division . 
