`` And what position will you adopt toward the government ? '' 
`` Why , the position of assistants . 
The society need not be secret if the government allows it . 
Not merely is it not hostile to government , but it is a society of true conservatives -- a society of gentlemen in the full meaning of that word . 
It is only to prevent some Pugachev or other from killing my children and yours , and Arakcheev from sending me off to some Military Settlement . 
We join hands only for the public welfare and the general safety . '' 
`` Yes , but it 's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful one which can only cause harm . '' 
`` Why ? 
Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe '' -LRB- they did not then venture to suggest that Russia had saved Europe -RRB- `` do any harm ? 
The Tugendbund is an alliance of virtue : it is love , mutual help ... it is what Christ preached on the Cross . '' 
Natasha , who had come in during the conversation , looked joyfully at her husband . 
It was not what he was saying that pleased her -- that did not even interest her , for it seemed to her that was all extremely simple and that she had known it a long time -LRB- it seemed so to her because she knew that it sprang from Pierre 's whole soul -RRB- , but it was his animated and enthusiastic appearance that made her glad . 
The boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn-down collar - whom everyone had forgotten -- gazed at Pierre with even greater and more rapturous joy . 
Every word of Pierre 's burned into his heart , and with a nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the sealing wax and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle 's table . 
`` It is not at all what you suppose ; but that is what the German Tugendbund was , and what I am proposing . '' 
`` No , my fwiend ! 
The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters , but I do n't understand it and ca n't even pwonounce it , '' interposed Denisov in a loud and resolute voice . 
`` I agwee that evewything here is wotten and howwible , but the Tugendbund I do n't understand . 
If we 're not satisfied , let us have a bunt of our own . 
That 's all wight . 
Je suis vot ' e homme ! '' 
* * `` I 'm your man . '' 
Pierre smiled , Natasha began to laugh , but Nicholas knitted his brows still more and began proving to Pierre that there was no prospect of any great change and that all the danger he spoke of existed only in his imagination . 
Pierre maintained the contrary , and as his mental faculties were greater and more resourceful , Nicholas felt himself cornered . 
This made him still angrier , for he was fully convinced , not by reasoning but by something within him stronger than reason , of the justice of his opinion . 
`` I will tell you this , '' he said , rising and trying with nervously twitching fingers to prop up his pipe in a corner , but finally abandoning the attempt . 
`` I ca n't prove it to you . 
You say that everything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming : I do n't see it . 
But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditional matter , and to that I reply : ` You are my best friend , as you know , but if you formed a secret society and began working against the government -- be it what it may -- I know it is my duty to obey the government . 
And if Arakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron against you and cut you down , I should not hesitate an instant , but should do it . ' 
And you may argue about that as you like ! '' 
An awkward silence followed these words . 
Natasha was the first to speak , defending her husband and attacking her brother . 
Her defense was weak and inapt but she attained her object . 
The conversation was resumed , and no longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas ' last remark . 
When they all got up to go in to supper , little Nicholas Bolkonski went up to Pierre , pale and with shining , radiant eyes . 
`` Uncle Pierre , you ... no ... If Papa were alive ... would he agree with you ? '' 
he asked . 
And Pierre suddenly realized what a special , independent , complex , and powerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on in this boy during that conversation , and remembering all he had said he regretted that the lad should have heard him . 
He had , however , to give him an answer . 
`` Yes , I think so , '' he said reluctantly , and left the study . 
The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what he had done to the things on the table . 
He flushed and went up to Nicholas . 
`` Uncle , forgive me , I did that ... unintentionally , '' he said , pointing to the broken sealing wax and pens . 
Nicholas started angrily . 
`` All right , all right , '' he said , throwing the bits under the table . 
And evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty , he turned away from the boy . 
`` You ought not to have been here at all , '' he said . 
The conversation at supper was not about politics or societies , but turned on the subject Nicholas liked best -- recollections of 1812 . 
Denisov started these and Pierre was particularly agreeable and amusing about them . 
