Go on , go on . '' 
`` No , you go on , I was talking nonsense , '' said Natasha . 
Pierre finished what he had begun . 
It was the sequel to his complacent reflections on his success in Petersburg . 
At that moment it seemed to him that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of Russian society and to the whole world . 
`` I only wished to say that ideas that have great results are always simple ones . 
My whole idea is that if vicious people are united and constitute a power , then honest folk must do the same . 
Now that 's simple enough . '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And what were you going to say ? '' 
`` I ? 
Only nonsense . '' 
`` But all the same ? '' 
`` Oh nothing , only a trifle , '' said Natasha , smilingly still more brightly . 
`` I only wanted to tell you about Petya : today nurse was coming to take him from me , and he laughed , shut his eyes , and clung to me . 
I 'm sure he thought he was hiding . 
Awfully sweet ! 
There , now he 's crying . 
Well , good-by ! '' 
and she left the room . 
Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski 's bedroom a little lamp was burning as usual . 
-LRB- The boy was afraid of the dark and they could not cure him of it . -RRB- 
Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring . 
Little Nicholas , who had just waked up in a cold perspiration , sat up in bed and gazed before him with wide-open eyes . 
He had awaked from a terrible dream . 
He had dreamed that he and Uncle Pierre , wearing helmets such as were depicted in his Plutarch , were leading a huge army . 
The army was made up of white slanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vierge . 
In front was Glory , which was similar to those threads but rather thicker . 
He and Pierre were borne along lightly and joyously , nearer and nearer to their goal . 
Suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and become entangled and it grew difficult to move . 
And Uncle Nicholas stood before them in a stern and threatening attitude . 
`` Have you done this ? '' 
he said , pointing to some broken sealing wax and pens . 
`` I loved you , but I have orders from Arakcheev and will kill the first of you who moves forward . '' 
Little Nicholas turned to look at Pierre but Pierre was no longer there . 
In his place was his father - Prince Andrew -- and his father had neither shape nor form , but he existed , and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love : he felt himself powerless , limp , and formless . 
His father caressed and pitied him . 
But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them . 
Terror seized young Nicholas and he awoke . 
`` My father ! '' 
he thought . 
-LRB- Though there were two good portraits of Prince Andrew in the house , Nicholas never imagined him in human form . -RRB- 
`` My father has been with me and caressed me . 
He approved of me and of Uncle Pierre . 
Whatever he may tell me , I will do it . 
Mucius Scaevola burned his hand . 
Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me ? 
I know they want me to learn . 
And I will learn . 
But someday I shall have finished learning , and then I will do something . 
