Following Dunyasha , Alpatych advanced to Rostov , having bared his head while still at a distance . 
`` May I make bold to trouble your honor ? '' 
said he respectfully , but with a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand thrust into his bosom . 
`` My mistress , daughter of General in Chief Prince Nicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month , finding herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people '' -- he pointed to the peasants -- `` asks you to come up to the house ... . 
Wo n't you , please , ride on a little farther , '' said Alpatych with a melancholy smile , `` as it is not convenient in the presence of ... ? '' 
He pointed to the two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse . 
`` Ah ! 
... Alpatych ... Ah , Yakov Alpatych ... Grand ! 
Forgive us for Christ 's sake , eh ? '' 
said the peasants , smiling joyfully at him . 
Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled . 
`` Or perhaps they amuse your honor ? '' 
remarked Alpatych with a staid air , as he pointed at the old men with his free hand . 
`` No , there 's not much to be amused at here , '' said Rostov , and rode on a little way . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here do n't wish to let the mistress leave the estate , and threaten to unharness her horses , so that though everything has been packed up since morning , her excellency can not get away . '' 
`` Impossible ! '' 
exclaimed Rostov . 
`` I have the honor to report to you the actual truth , '' said Alpatych . 
Rostov dismounted , gave his horse to the orderly , and followed Alpatych to the house , questioning him as to the state of affairs . 
It appeared that the princess ' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day , and her talk with Dron and at the meeting , had actually had so bad an effect that Dron had finally given up the keys and joined the peasants and had not appeared when Alpatych sent for him ; and that in the morning when the princess gave orders to harness for her journey , the peasants had come in a large crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not let her leave the village : that there was an order not to move , and that they would unharness the horses . 
Alpatych had gone out to admonish them , but was told -LRB- it was chiefly Karp who did the talking , Dron not showing himself in the crowd -RRB- that they could not let the princess go , that there was an order to the contrary , but that if she stayed they would serve her as before and obey her in everything . 
At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road , Princess Mary , despite the dissuasions of Alpatych , her nurse , and the maids , had given orders to harness and intended to start , but when the cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen , the coachman ran away , and the women in the house began to wail . 
`` Father ! 
Benefactor ! 
God has sent you ! '' 
exclaimed deeply moved voices as Rostov passed through the anteroom . 
Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting room , when Rostov was shown in . 
She could not grasp who he was and why he had come , or what was happening to her . 
When she saw his Russian face , and by his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as a man of her own class , she glanced at him with her deep radiant look and began speaking in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion . 
This meeting immediately struck Rostov as a romantic event . 
`` A helpless girl overwhelmed with grief , left to the mercy of coarse , rioting peasants ! 
And what a strange fate sent me here ! 
What gentleness and nobility there are in her features and expression ! '' 
thought he as he looked at her and listened to her timid story . 
When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her father 's funeral , her voiced trembled . 
She turned away , and then , as if fearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity , looked at him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry . 
There were tears in Rostov 's eyes . 
Princess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten . 
`` I can not express , Princess , how glad I am that I happened to ride here and am able to show my readiness to serve you , '' said Rostov , rising . 
`` Go when you please , and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dare to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort . '' 
And bowing respectfully , as if to a lady of royal blood , he moved toward the door . 
Rostov 's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would consider himself happy to be acquainted with her , he did not wish to take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her . 
Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy . 
`` I am very , very grateful to you , '' she said in French , `` but I hope it was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it . '' 
She suddenly began to cry . 
`` Excuse me ! '' 
she said . 
Rostov , knitting his brows , left the room with another low bow . 
