Yes , it was like a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him , and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows should annihilate him , but then feels that his arm drops powerless and limp like a rag , and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in his helplessness . 
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French army aroused that horror in Napoleon . 
He sat silently on a campstool below the knoll , with head bowed and elbows on his knees . 
Berthier approached and suggested that they should ride along the line to ascertain the position of affairs . 
`` What ? 
What do you say ? '' 
asked Napoleon . 
`` Yes , tell them to bring me my horse . '' 
He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk . 
Amid the powder smoke , slowly dispersing over the whole space through which Napoleon rode , horses and men were lying in pools of blood , singly or in heaps . 
Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area . 
The roar of guns , that had not ceased for ten hours , wearied the ear and gave a peculiar significance to the spectacle , as music does to tableaux vivants . 
Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk , and through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him . 
They were Russians . 
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its knoll , and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent forth clouds of smoke . 
It was no longer a battle : it was a continuous slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the Russians . 
Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie from which Berthier had aroused him . 
He could not stop what was going on before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to depend on him , and from its lack of success this affair , for the first time , seemed to him unnecessary and horrible . 
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead the Old Guard into action . 
Ney and Berthier , standing near Napoleon , exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general 's senseless offer . 
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time . 
`` At eight hundred leagues from France , I will not have my Guard destroyed ! '' 
he said , and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino . 
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat Kutuzov , his gray head hanging , his heavy body relaxed . 
He gave no orders , but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested . 
`` Yes , yes , do that , '' he replied to various proposals . 
`` Yes , yes : go , dear boy , and have a look , '' he would say to one or another of those about him ; or , `` No , do n't , we 'd better wait ! '' 
He listened to the reports that were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded that of him ; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he were not interested in the import of the words spoken , but rather in something else -- in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who were reporting . 
By long years of military experience he knew , and with the wisdom of age understood , that it is impossible for one man to direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death , and he knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of a commander in chief , nor the place where the troops are stationed , nor by the number of cannon or of slaughtered men , but by that intangible force called the spirit of the army , and he watched this force and guided it in as far as that was in his power . 
Kutuzov 's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention , and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master the fatigue of his old and feeble body . 
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by the French had been retaken , but that Prince Bagration was wounded . 
Kutuzov groaned and swayed his head . 
`` Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly , '' he said to one of his adjutants , and then turned to the Duke of Wurttemberg who was standing behind him . 
`` Will Your Highness please take command of the first army ? '' 
Soon after the duke 's departure -- before he could possibly have reached Semenovsk -- his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the duke asked for more troops . 
Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the command of the first army , and a request to the duke -- whom he said he could not spare at such an important moment -- to return to him . 
When they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner , and the staff officers congratulated him , Kutuzov smiled . 
`` Wait a little , gentlemen , '' said he . 
`` The battle is won , and there is nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat . 
Still , it is better to wait before we rejoice . '' 
But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army . 
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that the French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk , Kutuzov , guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin 's looks that the news was bad , rose as if to stretch his legs and , taking Scherbinin 's arm , led him aside . 
`` Go , my dear fellow , '' he said to Ermolov , `` and see whether something ca n't be done . '' 
Kutuzov was in Gorki , near the center of the Russian position . 
The attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several times repulsed . 
In the center the French had not got beyond Borodino , and on their left flank Uvarov 's cavalry had put the French to flight . 
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased . 
On the faces of all who came from the field of battle , and of those who stood around him , Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension . 
He was satisfied with the day 's success -- a success exceeding his expectations , but the old man 's strength was failing him . 
Several times his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off . 
