The horse first , regardless of whether it was right or wrong to show fear , snorted , reared almost throwing the major , and galloped aside . 
The horse 's terror infected the men . 
`` Lie down ! '' 
cried the adjutant , throwing himself flat on the ground . 
Prince Andrew hesitated . 
The smoking shell spun like a top between him and the prostrate adjutant , near a wormwood plant between the field and the meadow . 
`` Can this be death ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew , looking with a quite new , envious glance at the grass , the wormwood , and the streamlet of smoke that curled up from the rotating black ball . 
`` I can not , I do not wish to die . 
I love life -- I love this grass , this earth , this air ... '' He thought this , and at the same time remembered that people were looking at him . 
`` It 's shameful , sir ! '' 
he said to the adjutant . 
`` What ... '' He did not finish speaking . 
At one and the same moment came the sound of an explosion , a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame , a suffocating smell of powder , and Prince Andrew started to one side , raising his arm , and fell on his chest . 
Several officers ran up to him . 
From the right side of his abdomen , blood was welling out making a large stain on the grass . 
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the officers . 
Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass , breathing heavily and noisily . 
`` What are you waiting for ? 
Come along ! '' 
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs , but he moaned piteously and , exchanging looks , they set him down again . 
`` Pick him up , lift him , it 's all the same ! '' 
cried someone . 
They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher . 
`` Ah , God ! 
My God ! 
What is it ? 
The stomach ? 
That means death ! 
My God ! '' 
-- voices among the officers were heard saying . 
`` It flew a hair 's breadth past my ear , '' said the adjutant . 
The peasants , adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders , started hurriedly along the path they had trodden down , to the dressing station . 
`` Keep in step ! 
Ah ... those peasants ! '' 
shouted an officer , seizing by their shoulders and checking the peasants , who were walking unevenly and jolting the stretcher . 
`` Get into step , Fedor ... I say , Fedor ! '' 
said the foremost peasant . 
`` Now that 's right ! '' 
said the one behind joyfully , when he had got into step . 
`` Your excellency ! 
Eh , Prince ! '' 
said the trembling voice of Timokhin , who had run up and was looking down on the stretcher . 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids drooped . 
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to dressing station by the wood , where wagons were stationed . 
The dressing station consisted of three tents with flaps turned back , pitched at the edge of a birch wood . 
In the wood , wagons and horses were standing . 
The horses were eating oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the grains that fell . 
Some crows , scenting blood , flew among the birch trees cawing impatiently . 
Around the tents , over more than five acres , bloodstained men in various garbs stood , sat , or lay . 
