`` And then so , do you see ? '' 
and he pushed Anatole 's head forward to meet the gap left by the collar , through which Matrena 's brilliant smile was seen . 
`` Well , good-by , Matrena , '' said Anatole , kissing her . 
`` Ah , my revels here are over . 
Remember me to Steshka . 
There , good-by ! 
Good-by , Matrena , wish me luck ! '' 
`` Well , Prince , may God give you great luck ! '' 
said Matrena in her gypsy accent . 
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were holding the horses . 
Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately . 
Anatole and Dolokhov got in with him . 
Makarin , Khvostikov , and a valet seated themselves in the other sleigh . 
`` Well , are you ready ? '' 
asked Balaga . 
`` Go ! '' 
he cried , twisting the reins round his hands , and the troyka tore down the Nikitski Boulevard . 
`` Tproo ! 
Get out of the way ! 
Hi ! 
... Tproo ! 
... '' The shouting of Balaga and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could be heard . 
On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage ; something cracked , shouts were heard , and the troyka flew along the Arbat Street . 
After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard , Balaga began to rein in , and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny Street . 
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole and Dolokhov went along the pavement . 
When they reached the gate Dolokhov whistled . 
The whistle was answered , and a maidservant ran out . 
`` Come into the courtyard or you 'll be seen ; she 'll come out directly , '' said she . 
Dolokhov stayed by the gate . 
Anatole followed the maid into the courtyard , turned the corner , and ran up into the porch . 
He was met by Gabriel , Marya Dmitrievna 's gigantic footman . 
`` Come to the mistress , please , '' said the footman in his deep bass , intercepting any retreat . 
`` To what Mistress ? 
Who are you ? '' 
asked Anatole in a breathless whisper . 
`` Kindly step in , my orders are to bring you in . '' 
`` Kuragin ! 
Come back ! '' 
shouted Dolokhov . 
`` Betrayed ! 
Back ! '' 
Dolokhov , after Anatole entered , had remained at the wicket gate and was struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it . 
With a last desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside , and when Anatole ran back seized him by the arm , pulled him through the wicket , and ran back with him to the troyka . 
Marya Dmitrievna , having found Sonya weeping in the corridor , made her confess everything , and intercepting the note to Natasha she read it and went into Natasha 's room with it in her hand . 
`` You shameless good-for-nothing ! '' 
said she . 
`` I wo n't hear a word . '' 
Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless eyes , she locked her in ; and having given orders to the yard porter to admit the persons who would be coming that evening , but not to let them out again , and having told the footman to bring them up to her , she seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors . 
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run away again , she rose frowning , and clasping her hands behind her paced through the rooms a long time considering what she should do . 
Toward midnight she went to Natasha 's room fingering the key in her pocket . 
