Prince Andrew told his driver to stop , and asked a soldier in what action they had been wounded . 
`` Day before yesterday , on the Danube , '' answered the soldier . 
Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the soldier three gold pieces . 
`` That 's for them all , '' he said to the officer who came up . 
`` Get well soon , lads ! '' 
he continued , turning to the soldiers . 
`` There 's plenty to do still . '' 
`` What news , sir ? '' 
asked the officer , evidently anxious to start a conversation . 
`` Good news ! 
... Go on ! '' 
he shouted to the driver , and they galloped on . 
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings , the lights of shops , houses , and street lamps , fine carriages , and all that atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a soldier after camp life . 
Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night , Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and alert than he had done the day before . 
Only his eyes gleamed feverishly and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and rapidity . 
He again vividly recalled the details of the battle , no longer dim , but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself stating them to the Emperor Francis . 
He vividly imagined the casual questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give . 
He expected to be at once presented to the Emperor . 
At the chief entrance to the palace , however , an official came running out to meet him , and learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance . 
`` To the right from the corridor , Euer Hochgeboren ! 
There you will find the adjutant on duty , '' said the official . 
`` He will conduct you to the Minister of War . '' 
The adjutant on duty , meeting Prince Andrew , asked him to wait , and went in to the Minister of War . 
Five minutes later he returned and bowing with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work . 
The adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger . 
Prince Andrew 's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he approached the door of the minister 's room . 
He felt offended , and without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into one of disdain which was quite uncalled for . 
His fertile mind instantly suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the adjutant and the minister . 
`` Away from the smell of powder , they probably think it easy to gain victories ! '' 
he thought . 
His eyes narrowed disdainfully , he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly deliberate steps . 
This feeling of disdain was heightened when he saw the minister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencil notes on them , and for the first two or three minutes taking no notice of his arrival . 
A wax candle stood at each side of the minister 's bent bald head with its gray temples . 
He went on reading to the end , without raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps . 
`` Take this and deliver it , '' said he to his adjutant , handing him the papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger . 
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov 's army interested the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was concerned with , or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that impression . 
`` But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me , '' he thought . 
The minister drew the remaining papers together , arranged them evenly , and then raised his head . 
He had an intellectual and distinctive head , but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm , intelligent expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and habitual to him . 
His face took on the stupid artificial smile -LRB- which does not even attempt to hide its artificiality -RRB- of a man who is continually receiving many petitioners one after another . 
`` From General Field Marshal Kutuzov ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I hope it is good news ? 
There has been an encounter with Mortier ? 
A victory ? 
It was high time ! '' 
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it with a mournful expression . 
`` Oh , my God ! 
My God ! 
Schmidt ! '' 
