Sounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing the village . 
`` He 's coming ! 
He 's coming ! '' 
shouted a Cossack standing at the gate . 
Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate , at which a knot of soldiers -LRB- a guard of honor -RRB- was standing , and they saw Kutuzov coming down the street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse . 
A huge suite of generals rode behind him . 
Barclay was riding almost beside him , and a crowd of officers ran after and around them shouting , `` Hurrah ! '' 
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him . 
Kutuzov was impatiently urging on his horse , which ambled smoothly under his weight , and he raised his hand to his white Horse Guard 's cap with a red band and no peak , nodding his head continually . 
When he came up to the guard of honor , a fine set of Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations , who were giving him the salute , he looked at them silently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander and then turned to the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him . 
Suddenly his face assumed a subtle expression , he shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity . 
`` And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat ! 
Well , good-by , General , '' he added , and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and Denisov . 
`` Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! 
hurrah ! '' 
shouted those behind him . 
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more corpulent , flaccid , and fat . 
But the bleached eyeball , the scar , and the familiar weariness of his expression were still the same . 
He was wearing the white Horse Guard 's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging over his shoulder by a thin strap . 
He sat heavily and swayed limply on his brisk little horse . 
`` Whew ... whew ... whew ! '' 
he whistled just audibly as he rode into the yard . 
His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who means to rest after a ceremony . 
He drew his left foot out of the stirrup and , lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with the effort , raised it with difficulty onto the saddle , leaned on his knee , groaned , and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants who stood ready to assist him . 
He pulled himself together , looked round , screwing up his eyes , glanced at Prince Andrew , and , evidently not recognizing him , moved with his waddling gait to the porch . 
`` Whew ... whew ... whew ! '' 
he whistled , and again glanced at Prince Andrew . 
As often occurs with old men , it was only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew 's face linked itself up with Kutuzov 's remembrance of his personality . 
`` Ah , how do you do , my dear prince ? 
How do you do , my dear boy ? 
Come along ... '' said he , glancing wearily round , and he stepped onto the porch which creaked under his weight . 
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch . 
`` And how 's your father ? '' 
`` I received news of his death , yesterday , '' replied Prince Andrew abruptly . 
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off his cap and crossed himself : `` May the kingdom of Heaven be his ! 
God 's will be done to us all ! '' 
He sighed deeply , his whole chest heaving , and was silent for a while . 
`` I loved him and respected him , and sympathize with you with all my heart . '' 
He embraced Prince Andrew , pressing him to his fat breast , and for some time did not let him go . 
When he released him Prince Andrew saw that Kutuzov 's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes . 
He sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself . 
`` Come ! 
Come with me , we 'll have a talk , '' said he . 
But at that moment Denisov , no more intimidated by his superiors than by the enemy , came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch , despite the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him . 
Kutuzov , his hands still pressed on the seat , glanced at him glumly . 
Denisov , having given his name , announced that he had to communicate to his Serene Highness a matter of great importance for their country 's welfare . 
Kutuzov looked wearily at him and , lifting his hands with a gesture of annoyance , folded them across his stomach , repeating the words : `` For our country 's welfare ? 
Well , what is it ? 
Speak ! '' 
