You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand rubles ' worth of things in the house . 
I do n't consent , my dear , I do n't ! 
Do as you please ! 
It 's the government 's business to look after the wounded ; they know that . 
Look at the Lopukhins opposite , they cleared out everything two days ago . 
That 's what other people do . 
It 's only we who are such fools . 
If you have no pity on me , have some for the children . '' 
Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room without replying . 
`` Papa , what are you doing that for ? '' 
asked Natasha , who had followed him into her mother 's room . 
`` Nothing ! 
What business is it of yours ? '' 
muttered the count angrily . 
`` But I heard , '' said Natasha . 
`` Why does Mamma object ? '' 
`` What business is it of yours ? '' 
cried the count . 
Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered . 
`` Papa ! 
Here 's Berg coming to see us , '' said she , looking out of the window . 
Berg , the Rostovs ' son-in-law , was already a colonel wearing the orders of Vladimir and Anna , and he still filled the quiet and agreeable post of assistant to the head of the staff of the assistant commander of the first division of the Second Army . 
On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army . 
He had nothing to do in Moscow , but he had noticed that everyone in the army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something to do there . 
So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family and domestic reasons . 
Berg drove up to his father-in-law 's house in his spruce little trap with a pair of sleek roans , exactly like those of a certain prince . 
He looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to the porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it . 
From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the drawing room , where he embraced the count , kissed the hands of Natasha and Sonya , and hastened to inquire after `` Mamma 's '' health . 
`` Health , at a time like this ? '' 
said the count . 
`` Come , tell us the news ! 
Is the army retreating or will there be another battle ? '' 
`` God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland , Papa , '' said Berg . 
`` The army is burning with a spirit of heroism and the leaders , so to say , have now assembled in council . 
No one knows what is coming . 
But in general I can tell you , Papa , that such a heroic spirit , the truly antique valor of the Russian army , which they -- which it '' -LRB- he corrected himself -RRB- `` has shown or displayed in the battle of the twenty-sixth -- there are no words worthy to do it justice ! 
I tell you , Papa '' -LRB- he smote himself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking had done , but Berg did it a trifle late for he should have struck his breast at the words `` Russian army '' -RRB- , `` I tell you frankly that we , the commanders , far from having to urge the men on or anything of that kind , could hardly restrain those ... those ... yes , those exploits of antique valor , '' he went on rapidly . 
`` General Barclay de Tolly risked his life everywhere at the head of the troops , I can assure you . 
Our corps was stationed on a hillside . 
You can imagine ! '' 
And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he had heard those days . 
Natasha watched him with an intent gaze that confused him , as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to some question . 
`` Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors can not be imagined or adequately praised ! '' 
said Berg , glancing round at Natasha , and as if anxious to conciliate her , replying to her intent look with a smile . '' 
` Russia is not in Moscow , she lives in the hearts of her sons ! ' 
Is n't it so , Papa ? '' 
said he . 
Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and dissatisfied expression . 
Berg hurriedly jumped up , kissed her hand , asked about her health , and , swaying his head from side to side to express sympathy , remained standing beside her . 
`` Yes , Mamma , I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for every Russian . 
