`` Back ! '' 
cried Simon to a borzoi that was pushing forward out of the wood . 
The count started and dropped the snuffbox . 
Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up . 
The count and Simon were looking at him . 
Then , unexpectedly , as often happens , the sound of the hunt suddenly approached , as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just in front of them . 
The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyes starting out of his head , raising his cap and pointing before him to the other side . 
`` Look out ! '' 
he shouted , in a voice plainly showing that he had long fretted to utter that word , and letting the borzois slip he galloped toward the count . 
The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a wolf which , softly swaying from side to side , was coming at a quiet lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing . 
The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the horses ' feet at the wolf . 
The wolf paused , turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly , like a man suffering from the quinsy , and , still slightly swaying from side to side , gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail disappeared into the skirt of the wood . 
At the same instant , with a cry like a wail , first one hound , then another , and then another , sprang helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared . 
The hazel bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel 's chestnut horse appeared , dark with sweat . 
On its long back sat Daniel , hunched forward , capless , his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed , perspiring face . 
`` Ulyulyulyu ! 
ulyulyu ! 
... '' he cried . 
When he caught sight of the count his eyes flashed lightning . 
`` Blast you ! '' 
he shouted , holding up his whip threateningly at the count . 
`` You 've let the wolf go ! 
... What sportsmen ! '' 
and as if scorning to say more to the frightened and shamefaced count , he lashed the heaving flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count had aroused and flew off after the hounds . 
The count , like a punished schoolboy , looked round , trying by a smile to win Simon 's sympathy for his plight . 
But Simon was no longer there . 
He was galloping round by the bushes while the field was coming up on both sides , all trying to head the wolf , but it vanished into the wood before they could do so . 
Nicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post , waiting for the wolf . 
By the way the hunt approached and receded , by the cries of the dogs whose notes were familiar to him , by the way the voices of the huntsmen approached , receded , and rose , he realized what was happening at the copse . 
He knew that young and old wolves were there , that the hounds had separated into two packs , that somewhere a wolf was being chased , and that something had gone wrong . 
He expected the wolf to come his way any moment . 
He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and from what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it . 
Hope alternated with despair . 
Several times he addressed a prayer to God that the wolf should come his way . 
He prayed with that passionate and shame-faced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement arising from trivial causes . 
`` What would it be to Thee to do this for me ? '' 
he said to God . 
`` I know Thou art great , and that it is a sin to ask this of Thee , but for God 's sake do let the old wolf come my way and let Karay spring at it -- in sight of ` Uncle ' who is watching from over there -- and seize it by the throat in a death grip ! '' 
A thousand times during that half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the edge of the wood , with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen undergrowth and the gully with its water-worn side and `` Uncle 's '' cap just visible above the bush on his right . 
`` No , I sha n't have such luck , '' thought Rostov , `` yet what would n't it be worth ! 
It is not to be ! 
Everywhere , at cards and in war , I am always unlucky . '' 
Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly and clearly through his mind . 
`` Only once in my life to get an old wolf , I want only that ! '' 
thought he , straining eyes and ears and looking to the left and then to the right and listening to the slightest variation of note in the cries of the dogs . 
Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across the deserted field . 
`` No , it ca n't be ! '' 
thought Rostov , taking a deep breath , as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for . 
The height of happiness was reached -- and so simply , without warning , or noise , or display , that Rostov could not believe his eyes and remained in doubt for over a second . 
The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over a gully that lay in her path . 
