That army could not recover anywhere . 
Since the battle of Borodino and the pillage of Moscow it had borne within itself , as it were , the chemical elements of dissolution . 
The members of what had once been an army -- Napoleon himself and all his soldiers fled -- without knowing whither , each concerned only to make his escape as quickly as possible from this position , of the hopelessness of which they were all more or less vaguely conscious . 
So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets , when the generals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions , all mouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldier Mouton who , speaking last , said what they all felt : that the one thing needful was to get away as quickly as possible ; and no one , not even Napoleon , could say anything against that truth which they all recognized . 
But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away , there still remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they must flee . 
An external shock was needed to overcome that shame , and this shock came in due time . 
It was what the French called `` le hourra de l'Empereur . '' 
The day after the council at Malo-Yaroslavets Napoleon rode out early in the morning amid the lines of his army with his suite of marshals and an escort , on the pretext of inspecting the army and the scene of the previous and of the impending battle . 
Some Cossacks on the prowl for booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him . 
If the Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then , what saved him was the very thing that was destroying the French army , the booty on which the Cossacks fell . 
Here as at Tarutino they went after plunder , leaving the men . 
Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon managed to escape . 
When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperor himself in the midst of his army , it was clear that there was nothing for it but to fly as fast as possible along the nearest , familiar road . 
Napoleon with his forty-year-old stomach understood that hint , not feeling his former agility and boldness , and under the influence of the fright the Cossacks had given him he at once agreed with Mouton and issued orders -- as the historians tell us -- to retreat by the Smolensk road . 
That Napoleon agreed with Mouton , and that the army retreated , does not prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat , but that the forces which influenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozhaysk -LRB- that is , the Smolensk -RRB- road acted simultaneously on him also . 
A man in motion always devises an aim for that motion . 
To be able to go a thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits him at the end of those thousand miles . 
One must have the prospect of a promised land to have the strength to move . 
The promised land for the French during their advance had been Moscow , during their retreat it was their native land . 
But that native land was too far off , and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutely necessary to set aside his final goal and to say to himself : `` Today I shall get to a place twenty-five miles off where I shall rest and spend the night , '' and during the first day 's journey that resting place eclipses his ultimate goal and attracts all his hopes and desires . 
And the impulses felt by a single person are always magnified in a crowd . 
For the French retreating along the old Smolensk road , the final goal -- their native land -- was too remote , and their immediate goal was Smolensk , toward which all their desires and hopes , enormously intensified in the mass , urged them on . 
It was not that they knew that much food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk , nor that they were told so -LRB- on the contrary their superior officers , and Napoleon himself , knew that provisions were scarce there -RRB- , but because this alone could give them strength to move on and endure their present privations . 
So both those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves , and pushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land . 
Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprising energy and unheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on . 
Besides the common impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass and supplied them with a certain energy , there was another cause binding them together -- their great numbers . 
As with the physical law of gravity , their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself . 
In their hundreds of thousands they moved like a whole nation . 
Each of them desired nothing more than to give himself up as a prisoner to escape from all this horror and misery ; but on the one hand the force of this common attraction to Smolensk , their goal , drew each of them in the same direction ; on the other hand an army corps could not surrender to a company , and though the French availed themselves of every convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the slightest decent pretext , such pretexts did not always occur . 
Their very numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the Russians to stop this movement , to which the French were directing all their energies . 
Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the body could hasten the process of decomposition . 
A lump of snow can not be melted instantaneously . 
There is a certain limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow . 
On the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snow becomes . 
Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this . 
When the flight of the French army along the Smolensk road became well defined , what Konovnitsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of October began to occur . 
The superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves , to cut off , to seize , to capture , and to overthrow the French , and all clamored for action . 
Kutuzov alone used all his power -LRB- and such power is very limited in the case of any commander in chief -RRB- to prevent an attack . 
He could not tell them what we say now : `` Why fight , why block the road , losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches ? 
What is the use of that , when a third of their army has melted away on the road from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle ? '' 
But drawing from his aged wisdom what they could understand , he told them of the golden bridge , and they laughed at and slandered him , flinging themselves on , rending and exulting over the dying beast . 
Ermolov , Miloradovich , Platov , and others in proximity to the French near Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two French corps , and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzov they sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope . 
And try as Kutuzov might to restrain the troops , our men attacked , trying to bar the road . 
Infantry regiments , we are told , advanced to the attack with music and with drums beating , and killed and lost thousands of men . 
But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army , closing up more firmly at the danger , continued , while steadily melting away , to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk . 
The Battle of Borodino , with the occupation of Moscow that followed it and the flight of the French without further conflicts , is one of the most instructive phenomena in history . 
All historians agree that the external activity of states and nations in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars , and that as a direct result of greater or less success in war the political strength of states and nations increases or decreases . 
Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor , having quarreled with another , collects an army , fights his enemy 's army , gains a victory by killing three , five , or ten thousand men , and subjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of several millions , all the facts of history -LRB- as far as we know it -RRB- confirm the truth of the statement that the greater or lesser success of one army against another is the cause , or at least an essential indication , of an increase or decrease in the strength of the nation -- even though it is unintelligible why the defeat of an army - a hundredth part of a nation -- should oblige that whole nation to submit . 
An army gains a victory , and at once the rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the defeated . 
An army has suffered defeat , and at once a people loses its rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse , and if its army suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated . 
