He stopped in the village at the priest 's house in front of which stood the commander in chief 's carriage , and he sat down on the bench at the gate awaiting his Serene Highness , as everyone now called Kutuzov . 
From the field beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now the roar of many voices shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
to the new commander in chief . 
Two orderlies , a courier and a major-domo , stood near by , some ten paces from Prince Andrew , availing themselves of Kutuzov 's absence and of the fine weather . 
A short , swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick mustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and , glancing at Prince Andrew , inquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there and whether he would soon be back . 
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness ' staff but was himself a new arrival . 
The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart orderly , who , with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in chief 's orderly speaks to officers , replied : `` What ? 
His Serene Highness ? 
I expect he 'll be here soon . 
What do you want ? '' 
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the orderly 's tone , dismounted , gave his horse to a dispatch runner , and approached Bolkonski with a slight bow . 
Bolkonski made room for him on the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him . 
`` You 're also waiting for the commander in chief ? '' 
said he . 
`` They say he weceives evewyone , thank God ! 
... It 's awful with those sausage eaters ! 
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German ! 
Now p ` waps Wussians will get a look in . 
As it was , devil only knows what was happening . 
We kept wetweating and wetweating . 
Did you take part in the campaign ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I had the pleasure , '' replied Prince Andrew , `` not only of taking part in the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear -- not to mention the estate and home of my birth -- my father , who died of grief . 
I belong to the province of Smolensk . '' 
`` Ah ? 
You 're Pwince Bolkonski ? 
Vewy glad to make your acquaintance ! 
I 'm Lieutenant Colonel Denisov , better known as ` Vaska , ' '' said Denisov , pressing Prince Andrew 's hand and looking into his face with a particularly kindly attention . 
`` Yes , I heard , '' said he sympathetically , and after a short pause added : `` Yes , it 's Scythian warfare . 
It 's all vewy well -- only not for those who get it in the neck . 
So you are Pwince Andwew Bolkonski ? '' 
He swayed his head . 
`` Vewy pleased , Pwince , to make your acquaintance ! '' 
he repeated again , smiling sadly , and he again pressed Prince Andrew 's hand . 
Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first suitor . 
This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful feelings of which he had not thought lately , but which still found place in his soul . 
Of late he had received so many new and very serious impressions -- such as the retreat from Smolensk , his visit to Bald Hills , and the recent news of his father 's death -- and had experienced so many emotions , that for a long time past those memories had not entered his mind , and now that they did , they did not act on him with nearly their former strength . 
For Denisov , too , the memories awakened by the name of Bolkonski belonged to a distant , romantic past , when after supper and after Natasha 's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen without realizing what he was doing . 
He smiled at the recollection of that time and of his love for Natasha , and passed at once to what now interested him passionately and exclusively . 
This was a plan of campaign he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat . 
He had proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to Kutuzov . 
The plan was based on the fact that the French line of operation was too extended , and it proposed that instead of , or concurrently with , action on the front to bar the advance of the French , we should attack their line of communication . 
He began explaining his plan to Prince Andrew . 
`` They ca n't hold all that line . 
It 's impossible . 
I will undertake to bweak thwough . 
Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line , that 's certain ! 
There 's only one way -- guewilla warfare ! '' 
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to Bolkonski . 
In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the army , growing more incoherent and more diffused , mingling with music and songs and coming from the field where the review was held . 
