Moreover , certain men wrote some books at that time . 
At the end of the eighteenth century there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all men being free and equal . 
This caused people all over France to begin to slash at and drown one another . 
They killed the king and many other people . 
At that time there was in France a man of genius -- Napoleon . 
He conquered everybody everywhere -- that is , he killed many people because he was a great genius . 
And for some reason he went to kill Africans , and killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to France he ordered everybody to obey him , and they all obeyed him . 
Having become an Emperor he again went out to kill people in Italy , Austria , and Prussia . 
And there too he killed a great many . 
In Russia there was an Emperor , Alexander , who decided to restore order in Europe and therefore fought against Napoleon . 
In 1807 he suddenly made friends with him , but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many people . 
Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured Moscow ; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow , and the Emperor Alexander , helped by the advice of Stein and others , united Europe to arm against the disturber of its peace . 
All Napoleon 's allies suddenly became his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces he raised . 
The Allies defeated Napoleon , entered Paris , forced Napoleon to abdicate , and sent him to the island of Elba , not depriving him of the title of Emperor and showing him every respect , though five years before and one year later they all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand . 
Then Louis XVIII , who till then had been the laughingstock both of the French and the Allies , began to reign . 
And Napoleon , shedding tears before his Old Guards , renounced the throne and went into exile . 
Then the skillful statesmen and diplomatists -LRB- especially Talleyrand , who managed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and thereby extended the frontiers of France -RRB- talked in Vienna and by these conversations made the nations happy or unhappy . 
Suddenly the diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of again ordering their armies to kill one another , but just then Napoleon arrived in France with a battalion , and the French , who had been hating him , immediately all submitted to him . 
But the Allied monarchs were angry at this and went to fight the French once more . 
And they defeated the genius Napoleon and , suddenly recognizing him as a brigand , sent him to the island of St. Helena . 
And the exile , separated from the beloved France so dear to his heart , died a lingering death on that rock and bequeathed his great deeds to posterity . 
But in Europe a reaction occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress their subjects . '' 
It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic -- a caricature of the historical accounts . 
On the contrary it is a very mild expression of the contradictory replies , not meeting the questions , which all the historians give , from the compilers of memoirs and the histories of separate states to the writers of general histories and the new histories of the culture of that period . 
The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that modern history , like a deaf man , answers questions no one has asked . 
If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movement of humanity and of the peoples , the first question -- in the absence of a reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible -- is : what is the power that moves peoples ? 
To this , modern history laboriously replies either that Napoleon was a great genius , or that Louis XIV was very proud , or that certain writers wrote certain books . 
All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it , but it is not what was asked . 
All that would be interesting if we recognized a divine power based on itself and always consistently directing its nations through Napoleons , Louis-es , and writers ; but we do not acknowledge such a power , and therefore before speaking about Napoleons , Louis-es , and authors , we ought to be shown the connection existing between these men and the movement of the nations . 
If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared , it should be explained in what this new force consists , for the whole interest of history lies precisely in that force . 
History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to everyone . 
But in spite of every desire to regard it as known , anyone reading many historical works can not help doubting whether this new force , so variously understood by the historians themselves , is really quite well known to everybody . 
What force moves the nations ? 
Biographical historians and historians of separate nations understand this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers . 
In their narration events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon , and Alexander , or in general of the persons they describe . 
The answers given by this kind of historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are satisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event . 
As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin to describe the same event , the replies they give immediately lose all meaning , for this force is understood by them all not only differently but often in quite contradictory ways . 
One historian says that an event was produced by Napoleon 's power , another that it was produced by Alexander 's , a third that it was due to the power of some other person . 
Besides this , historians of that kind contradict each other even in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some particular person was based . 
Thiers , a Bonapartist , says that Napoleon 's power was based on his virtue and genius . 
Lanfrey , a Republican , says it was based on his trickery and deception of the people . 
So the historians of this class , by mutually destroying one another 's positions , destroy the understanding of the force which produces events , and furnish no reply to history 's essential question . 
Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians ' view of the force which produces events . 
They do not recognize it as a power inherent in heroes and rulers , but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously directed forces . 
In describing a war or the subjugation of a people , a general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power of one man , but in the interaction of many persons connected with the event . 
According to this view the power of historical personages , represented as the product of many forces , can no longer , it would seem , be regarded as a force that itself produces events . 
Yet in most cases universal historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself produces events , and treat it as their cause . 
In their exposition , an historic character is first the product of his time , and his power only the resultant of various forces , and then his power is itself a force producing events . 
Gervinus , Schlosser , and others , for instance , at one time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution , of the ideas of 1789 and so forth , and at another plainly say that the campaign of 1812 and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon 's misdirected will , and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their development by Napoleon 's caprice . 
The ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of the age produced Napoleon 's power . 
