Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a chair for himself , and Berg and Vera immediately began their evening party , interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain their guest . 
Vera , having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be entertained with conversation about the French embassy , at once began accordingly . 
Berg , having decided that masculine conversation was required , interrupted his wife 's remarks and touched on the question of the war with Austria , and unconsciously jumped from the general subject to personal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in the Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them . 
Though the conversation was very incoherent and Vera was angry at the intrusion of the masculine element , both husband and wife felt with satisfaction that , even if only one guest was present , their evening had begun very well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party with its talk , tea , and lighted candles . 
Before long Boris , Berg 's old comrade , arrived . 
There was a shade of condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera . 
After Boris came a lady with the colonel , then the general himself , then the Rostovs , and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other evening parties . 
Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles of satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room , at the sound of the disconnected talk , the rustling of dresses , and the bowing and scraping . 
Everything was just as everybody always has it , especially so the general , who admired the apartment , patted Berg on the shoulder , and with parental authority superintended the setting out of the table for boston . 
The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov , who was next to himself the most important guest . 
The old people sat with the old , the young with the young , and the hostess at the tea table , on which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as the Panins had at their party . 
Everything was just as it was everywhere else . 
Pierre , as one of the principal guests , had to sit down to boston with Count Rostov , the general , and the colonel . 
At the card table he happened to be directly facing Natasha , and was struck by a curious change that had come over her since the ball . 
She was silent , and not only less pretty than at the ball , but only redeemed from plainness by her look of gentle indifference to everything around . 
`` What 's the matter with her ? '' 
thought Pierre , glancing at her . 
She was sitting by her sister at the tea table , and reluctantly , without looking at him , made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her . 
After playing out a whole suit and to his partner 's delight taking five tricks , Pierre , hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had entered the room while he was picking up his tricks , glanced again at Natasha . 
`` What has happened to her ? '' 
he asked himself with still greater surprise . 
Prince Andrew was standing before her , saying something to her with a look of tender solicitude . 
She , having raised her head , was looking up at him , flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid breathing . 
And the bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was again alight in her . 
She was completely transformed and from a plain girl had again become what she had been at the ball . 
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre , and the latter noticed a new and youthful expression in his friend 's face . 
Pierre changed places several times during the game , sitting now with his back to Natasha and now facing her , but during the whole of the six rubbers he watched her and his friend . 
`` Something very important is happening between them , '' thought Pierre , and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and made him neglect the game . 
After six rubbers the general got up , saying that it was no use playing like that , and Pierre was released . 
Natasha on one side was talking with Sonya and Boris , and Vera with a subtle smile was saying something to Prince Andrew . 
Pierre went up to his friend and , asking whether they were talking secrets , sat down beside them . 
Vera , having noticed Prince Andrew 's attentions to Natasha , decided that at a party , a real evening party , subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessary and , seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone , began a conversation with him about feelings in general and about her sister . 
With so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be , she felt that she had to employ her diplomatic tact . 
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried away by her self-satisfied talk , but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed , a thing that rarely happened with him . 
`` What do you think ? '' 
Vera was saying with an arch smile . 
`` You are so discerning , Prince , and understand people 's characters so well at a glance . 
What do you think of Natalie ? 
Could she be constant in her attachments ? 
Could she , like other women '' -LRB- Vera meant herself -RRB- , `` love a man once for all and remain true to him forever ? 
That is what I consider true love . 
What do you think , Prince ? '' 
`` I know your sister too little , '' replied Prince Andrew , with a sarcastic smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment , `` to be able to solve so delicate a question , and then I have noticed that the less attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be , '' he added , and looked up Pierre who was just approaching them . 
`` Yes , that is true , Prince . 
In our days , '' continued Vera -- mentioning `` our days '' as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing , imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of `` our days '' and that human characteristics change with the times -- `` in our days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courted often stifles real feeling in her . 
And it must be confessed that Natalie is very susceptible . '' 
This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort : he was about to rise , but Vera continued with a still more subtle smile : `` I think no one has been more courted than she , '' she went on , `` but till quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone . 
Now you know , Count , '' she said to Pierre , `` even our dear cousin Boris , who , between ourselves , was very far gone in the land of tenderness ... '' -LRB- alluding to a map of love much in vogue at that time -RRB- . 
Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent . 
`` You are friendly with Boris , are n't you ? '' 
