Prince Andrew in his riding cloak , mounted on a black horse , was looking at Alpatych from the back of the crowd . 
`` Why are you here ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Your ... your excellency , '' stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs . 
`` Are we really lost ? 
Master ! 
... '' `` Why are you here ? '' 
Prince Andrew repeated . 
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master 's pale worn face . 
Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it was to get away . 
`` Are we really quite lost , your excellency ? '' 
he asked again . 
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee began writing in pencil on a page he tore out . 
He wrote to his sister : `` Smolensk is being abandoned . 
Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy within a week . 
Set off immediately for Moscow . 
Let me know at once when you will start . 
Send by special messenger to Usvyazh . '' 
Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych , he told him how to arrange for departure of the prince , the princess , his son , and the boy 's tutor , and how and where to let him know immediately . 
Before he had had time to finish giving these instructions , a chief of staff followed by a suite galloped up to him . 
`` You are a colonel ? '' 
shouted the chief of staff with a German accent , in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew . 
`` Houses are set on fire in your presence and you stand by ! 
What does this mean ? 
You will answer for it ! '' 
shouted Berg , who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army , a place , as Berg said , `` very agreeable and well en evidence . '' 
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to Alpatych . 
`` So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth , and if by the tenth I do n't receive news that they have all got away I shall have to throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills . '' 
`` Prince , '' said Berg , recognizing Prince Andrew , `` I only spoke because I have to obey orders , because I always do obey exactly ... . 
You must please excuse me , '' he went on apologetically . 
Something cracked in the flames . 
The fire died down for a moment and wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof . 
There was another terrible crash and something huge collapsed . 
`` Ou-rou-rou ! '' 
yelled the crowd , echoing the crash of the collapsing roof of the barn , the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all around . 
The flames flared up again , lighting the animated , delighted , exhausted faces of the spectators . 
The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted : `` It 's fine , lads ! 
Now it 's raging ... It 's fine ! '' 
`` That 's the owner himself , '' cried several voices . 
`` Well then , '' continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych , `` report to them as I have told you '' ; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside him , he touched his horse and rode down the side street . 
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat , followed by the enemy . 
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills . 
Heat and drought had continued for more than three weeks . 
Each day fleecy clouds floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun , but toward evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist . 
Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth . 
The unreaped corn was scorched and shed its grain . 
The marshes dried up . 
The cattle lowed from hunger , finding no food on the sun-parched meadows . 
Only at night and in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness . 
But on the road , the highroad along which the troops marched , there was no such freshness even at night or when the road passed through the forest ; the dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches deep . 
