Go ! 
Do n't let me set eyes on you ; beg her pardon ! '' 
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne 's pardon , and also her father 's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman , who had begged for her intervention . 
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her soul . 
And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his spectacles in her presence , fumbling near them and not seeing them , or would forget something that had just occurred , or take a false step with his failing legs and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness , or , worst of all , at dinner when there were no visitors to excite him would suddenly fall asleep , letting his napkin drop and his shaking head sink over his plate . 
`` He is old and feeble , and I dare to condemn him ! '' 
she thought at such moments , with a feeling of revulsion against herself . 
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor -- Metivier -- who had rapidly become the fashion . 
He was enormously tall , handsome , amiable as Frenchmen are , and was , as all Moscow said , an extraordinarily clever doctor . 
He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor , but as an equal . 
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine , but latterly on Mademoiselle Bourienne 's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and had grown accustomed to him . 
Metivier came to see the prince about twice a week . 
On December 6 -- St. Nicholas ' Day and the prince 's name day -- all Moscow came to the prince 's front door but he gave orders to admit no one and to invite to dinner only a small number , a list of whom he gave to Princess Mary . 
Metivier , who came in the morning with his felicitations , considered it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne , * as he told Princess Mary , and went in to see the prince . 
It happened that on that morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods . 
He had been going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyone and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to be understood himself . 
Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed querulousness , which generally culminated in a burst of rage , and she went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun and awaited the inevitable explosion . 
Until the doctor 's arrival the morning had passed off safely . 
After admitting the doctor , Princess Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she could hear all that passed in the study . 
* To force the guard . 
At first she heard only Metivier 's voice , then her father 's , then both voices began speaking at the same time , the door was flung open , and on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified Metivier with his shock of black hair , and the prince in his dressing gown and fez , his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolled downwards . 
`` You do n't understand ? '' 
shouted the prince , `` but I do ! 
French spy , slave of Buonaparte , spy , get out of my house ! 
Be off , I tell you ... '' Metivier , shrugging his shoulders , went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room . 
`` The prince is not very well : bile and rush of blood to the head . 
Keep calm , I will call again tomorrow , '' said Metivier ; and putting his fingers to his lips he hastened away . 
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry : `` Spies , traitors , traitors everywhere ! 
Not a moment 's peace in my own house ! '' 
After Metivier 's departure the old prince called his daughter in , and the whole weight of his wrath fell on her . 
She was to blame that a spy had been admitted . 
Had he not told her , yes , told her to make a list , and not to admit anyone who was not on that list ? 
Then why was that scoundrel admitted ? 
She was the cause of it all . 
With her , he said , he could not have a moment 's peace and could not die quietly . 
`` No , ma'am ! 
We must part , we must part ! 
Understand that , understand it ! 
I can not endure any more , '' he said , and left the room . 
Then , as if afraid she might find some means of consolation , he returned and trying to appear calm added : `` And do n't imagine I have said this in a moment of anger . 
I am calm . 
I have thought it over , and it will be carried out -- we must part ; so find some place for yourself ... '' But he could not restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves is capable , evidently suffering himself , he shook his fists at her and screamed : `` If only some fool would marry her ! '' 
Then he slammed the door , sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne , and subsided into his study . 
At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner . 
These guests -- the famous Count Rostopchin , Prince Lopukhin with his nephew , General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince 's , and of the younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy -- awaited the prince in the drawing room . 
Boris , who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before , had been anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski , and had contrived to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made an exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house . 
The prince 's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable society , but his little circle -- though not much talked about in town -- was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other . 
Boris had realized this the week before when the commander in chief in his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas ' Day , and Rostopchin had replied that he could not come : `` On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski . '' 
`` Oh , yes , yes ! '' 
replied the commander in chief . 
