A petition ? '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked the person in the other room . 
`` Another petitioner , '' answered the man with the braces . 
`` Tell him to come later . 
He 'll be coming out directly , we must go . '' 
`` Later ... later ! 
Tomorrow . 
It 's too late ... '' Rostov turned and was about to go , but the man in the braces stopped him . 
`` Whom have you come from ? 
Who are you ? '' 
`` I come from Major Denisov , '' answered Rostov . 
`` Are you an officer ? '' 
`` Lieutenant Count Rostov . '' 
`` What audacity ! 
Hand it in through your commander . 
And go along with you ... go , '' and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him . 
Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were many officers and generals in full parade uniform , whom he had to pass . 
Cursing his temerity , his heart sinking at the thought of finding himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put to shame and arrested in his presence , fully alive now to the impropriety of his conduct and repenting of it , Rostov , with downcast eyes , was making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a familiar voice called him and a hand detained him . 
`` What are you doing here , sir , in civilian dress ? '' 
asked a deep voice . 
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor 's special favor during this campaign , and who had formerly commanded the division in which Rostov was serving . 
Rostov , in dismay , began justifying himself , but seeing the kindly , jocular face of the general , he took him aside and in an excited voice told him the whole affair , asking him to intercede for Denisov , whom the general knew . 
Having heard Rostov to the end , the general shook his head gravely . 
`` I 'm sorry , sorry for that fine fellow . 
Give me the letter . '' 
Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explaining Denisov 's case , when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard on the stairs , and the general , leaving him , went to the porch . 
The gentlemen of the Emperor 's suite ran down the stairs and went to their horses . 
Hayne , the same groom who had been at Austerlitz , led up the Emperor 's horse , and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at once was heard on the stairs . 
Forgetting the danger of being recognized , Rostov went close to the porch , together with some inquisitive civilians , and again , after two years , saw those features he adored : that same face and same look and step , and the same union of majesty and mildness ... . 
And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign rose again in Rostov 's soul in all its old force . 
In the uniform of the Preobrazhensk regiment -- white chamois-leather breeches and high boots -- and wearing a star Rostov did not know -LRB- it was that of the Legion d'honneur -RRB- , the monarch came out into the porch , putting on his gloves and carrying his hat under his arm . 
He stopped and looked about him , brightening everything around by his glance . 
He spoke a few words to some of the generals , and , recognizing the former commander of Rostov 's division , smiled and beckoned to him . 
All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for some time to the Emperor . 
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse . 
Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers -LRB- among whom was Rostov -RRB- moved nearer to the Emperor . 
Stopping beside his horse , with his hand on the saddle , the Emperor turned to the cavalry general and said in a loud voice , evidently wishing to be heard by all : `` I can not do it , General . 
I can not , because the law is stronger than I , '' and he raised his foot to the stirrup . 
The general bowed his head respectfully , and the monarch mounted and rode down the street at a gallop . 
Beside himself with enthusiasm , Rostov ran after him with the crowd . 
The Emperor rode to the square where , facing one another , a battalion of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and a battalion of the French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left . 
As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions , which presented arms , another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank , and at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon . 
It could be no one else . 
He came at a gallop , wearing a small hat , a blue uniform open over a white vest , and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder . 
He was riding a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold-embroidered saddlecloth . 
On approaching Alexander he raised his hat , and as he did so , Rostov , with his cavalryman 's eye , could not help noticing that Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle . 
The battalions shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
and `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
Napoleon said something to Alexander , and both Emperors dismounted and took each other 's hands . 
