`` My pet , whose name day it is . 
My dear pet ! '' 
`` Ma chere , there is a time for everything , '' said the countess with feigned severity . 
`` You spoil her , Ilya , '' she added , turning to her husband . 
`` How do you do , my dear ? 
I wish you many happy returns of your name day , '' said the visitor . 
`` What a charming child , '' she added , addressing the mother . 
This black-eyed , wide-mouthed girl , not pretty but full of life - with childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice , with black curls tossed backward , thin bare arms , little legs in lace-frilled drawers , and feet in low slippers -- was just at that charming age when a girl is no longer a child , though the child is not yet a young woman . 
Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in the lace of her mother 's mantilla -- not paying the least attention to her severe remark -- and began to laugh . 
She laughed , and in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the folds of her frock . 
`` Do you see ? 
... My doll ... Mimi ... You see ... '' was all Natasha managed to utter -LRB- to her everything seemed funny -RRB- . 
She leaned against her mother and burst into such a loud , ringing fit of laughter that even the prim visitor could not help joining in . 
`` Now then , go away and take your monstrosity with you , '' said the mother , pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness , and turning to the visitor she added : `` She is my youngest girl . '' 
Natasha , raising her face for a moment from her mother 's mantilla , glanced up at her through tears of laughter , and again hid her face . 
The visitor , compelled to look on at this family scene , thought it necessary to take some part in it . 
`` Tell me , my dear , '' said she to Natasha , `` is Mimi a relation of yours ? 
A daughter , I suppose ? '' 
Natasha did not like the visitor 's tone of condescension to childish things . 
She did not reply , but looked at her seriously . 
Meanwhile the younger generation : Boris , the officer , Anna Mikhaylovna 's son ; Nicholas , the undergraduate , the count 's eldest son ; Sonya , the count 's fifteen-year-old niece , and little Petya , his youngest boy , had all settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that shone in all their faces . 
Evidently in the back rooms , from which they had dashed out so impetuously , the conversation had been more amusing than the drawing-room talk of society scandals , the weather , and Countess Apraksina . 
Now and then they glanced at one another , hardly able to suppress their laughter . 
The two young men , the student and the officer , friends from childhood , were of the same age and both handsome fellows , though not alike . 
Boris was tall and fair , and his calm and handsome face had regular , delicate features . 
Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression . 
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip , and his whole face expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm . 
Nicholas blushed when he entered the drawing room . 
He evidently tried to find something to say , but failed . 
Boris on the contrary at once found his footing , and related quietly and humorously how he had know that doll Mimi when she was still quite a young lady , before her nose was broken ; how she had aged during the five years he had known her , and how her head had cracked right across the skull . 
Having said this he glanced at Natasha . 
She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother , who was screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter , and unable to control herself any longer , she jumped up and rushed from the room as fast as her nimble little feet would carry her . 
Boris did not laugh . 
`` You were meaning to go out , were n't you , Mamma ? 
Do you want the carriage ? '' 
he asked his mother with a smile . 
`` Yes , yes , go and tell them to get it ready , '' she answered , returning his smile . 
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha . 
The plump boy ran after them angrily , as if vexed that their program had been disturbed . 
The only young people remaining in the drawing room , not counting the young lady visitor and the countess ' eldest daughter -LRB- who was four years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person -RRB- , were Nicholas and Sonya , the niece . 
Sonya was a slender little brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes , thick black plaits coiling twice round her head , and a tawny tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but graceful and muscular arms and neck . 
By the grace of her movements , by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs , and by a certain coyness and reserve of manner , she reminded one of a pretty , half-grown kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat . 
She evidently considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by smiling , but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was going to join the army , with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone , and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could , like Natasha and Boris , escape from the drawing room . 
`` Ah yes , my dear , '' said the count , addressing the visitor and pointing to Nicholas , `` his friend Boris has become an officer , and so for friendship 's sake he is leaving the university and me , his old father , and entering the military service , my dear . 
And there was a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department ! 
Is n't that friendship ? '' 
remarked the count in an inquiring tone . 
`` But they say that war has been declared , '' replied the visitor . 
`` They 've been saying so a long while , '' said the count , `` and they 'll say so again and again , and that will be the end of it . 
My dear , there 's friendship for you , '' he repeated . 
