`` Let us go and have supper , '' he said with a sigh , going to the door . 
They entered the elegant , newly decorated , and luxurious dining room . 
Everything from the table napkins to the silver , china , and glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married . 
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and , with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on his face , began to talk -- as one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out . 
`` Never , never marry , my dear fellow ! 
That 's my advice : never marry till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of , and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her plainly as she is , or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable mistake . 
Marry when you are old and good for nothing -- or all that is good and noble in you will be lost . 
It will all be wasted on trifles . 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
Do n't look at me with such surprise . 
If you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future , you will feel at every step that for you all is ended , all is closed except the drawing room , where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an idiot ! 
... But what 's the good ? 
... '' and he waved his arm . 
Pierre took off his spectacles , which made his face seem different and the good-natured expression still more apparent , and gazed at his friend in amazement . 
`` My wife , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` is an excellent woman , one of those rare women with whom a man 's honor is safe ; but , O God , what would I not give now to be unmarried ! 
You are the first and only one to whom I mention this , because I like you . '' 
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who had lolled in Anna Pavlovna 's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth . 
Every muscle of his thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement ; his eyes , in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished , now flashed with brilliant light . 
It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times , the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation . 
`` You do n't understand why I say this , '' he continued , `` but it is the whole story of life . 
You talk of Bonaparte and his career , '' said he -LRB- though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte -RRB- , `` but Bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward his goal . 
He was free , he had nothing but his aim to consider , and he reached it . 
But tie yourself up with a woman and , like a chained convict , you lose all freedom ! 
And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with regret . 
Drawing rooms , gossip , balls , vanity , and triviality -- these are the enchanted circle I can not escape from . 
I am now going to the war , the greatest war there ever was , and I know nothing and am fit for nothing . 
I am very amiable and have a caustic wit , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` and at Anna Pavlovna 's they listen to me . 
And that stupid set without whom my wife can not exist , and those women ... If you only knew what those society women are , and women in general ! 
My father is right . 
Selfish , vain , stupid , trivial in everything -- that 's what women are when you see them in their true colors ! 
When you meet them in society it seems as if there were something in them , but there 's nothing , nothing , nothing ! 
No , do n't marry , my dear fellow ; do n't marry ! '' 
concluded Prince Andrew . 
`` It seems funny to me , '' said Pierre , `` that you , you should consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life . 
You have everything before you , everything . 
And you ... '' He did not finish his sentence , but his tone showed how highly he thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future . 
`` How can he talk like that ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
He considered his friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked , and which might be best described as strength of will . 
Pierre was always astonished at Prince Andrew 's calm manner of treating everybody , his extraordinary memory , his extensive reading -LRB- he had read everything , knew everything , and had an opinion about everything -RRB- , but above all at his capacity for work and study . 
And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew 's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation -LRB- to which he himself was particularly addicted -RRB- , he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of strength . 
Even in the best , most friendly and simplest relations of life , praise and commendation are essential , just as grease is necessary to wheels that they may run smoothly . 
`` My part is played out , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` What 's the use of talking about me ? 
Let us talk about you , '' he added after a silence , smiling at his reassuring thoughts . 
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre 's face . 
`` But what is there to say about me ? '' 
said Pierre , his face relaxing into a careless , merry smile . 
