The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka . 
Lavrushka , understanding that this was done to perplex him and that Napoleon expected him to be frightened , to gratify his new masters promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck , opened his eyes wide , and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to be whipped . 
`` As soon as Napoleon 's interpreter had spoken , '' says Thiers , `` the Cossack , seized by amazement , did not utter another word , but rode on , his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across the steppes of the East . 
All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and replaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration . 
Napoleon , after making the Cossack a present , had him set free like a bird restored to its native fields . '' 
Napoleon rode on , dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his imagination , and `` the bird restored to its native fields '' galloped to our outposts , inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that he meant to relate to his comrades . 
What had really taken place he did not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling . 
He found the Cossacks , inquired for the regiment operating with Platov 's detachment and by evening found his master , Nicholas Rostov , quartered at Yankovo . 
Rostov was just mounting to go for a ride round the neighboring villages with Ilyin ; he let Lavrushka have another horse and took him along with him . 
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew supposed . 
After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly seemed to awake as from a dream . 
He ordered the militiamen to be called up from the villages and armed , and wrote a letter to the commander in chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the last extremity and to defend it , leaving to the commander in chief 's discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills , where one of Russia 's oldest generals would be captured or killed , and he announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills . 
But while himself remaining , he gave instructions for the departure of the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and thence to Moscow . 
Princess Mary , alarmed by her father 's feverish and sleepless activity after his previous apathy , could not bring herself to leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey him . 
She refused to go away and her father 's fury broke over her in a terrible storm . 
He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on her . 
Trying to convict her , he told her she had worn him out , had caused his quarrel with his son , had harbored nasty suspicions of him , making it the object of her life to poison his existence , and he drove her from his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same to him . 
He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not to dare to let him see her . 
The fact that he did not , as she had feared , order her to be carried away by force but only told her not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary . 
She knew it was a proof that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and had not gone away . 
The morning after little Nicholas had left , the old prince donned his full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief . 
His caleche was already at the door . 
Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his armed peasants and domestic serfs . 
She sat by the window listening to his voice which reached her from the garden . 
Suddenly several men came running up the avenue with frightened faces . 
Princess Mary ran out to the porch , down the flower-bordered path , and into the avenue . 
A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving toward her , and in their midst several men were supporting by the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and decorations . 
She ran up to him and , in the play of the sunlight that fell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue , could not be sure what change there was in his face . 
All she could see was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one of timidity and submission . 
On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless lips and made a hoarse sound . 
It was impossible to make out what he wanted . 
He was lifted up , carried to his study , and laid on the very couch he had so feared of late . 
The doctor , who was fetched that same night , bled him and said that the prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side . 
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills , and next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo , the doctor accompanying him . 
By the time they reached Bogucharovo , Dessalles and the little prince had already left for Moscow . 
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo , ever in the same state , getting neither better nor worse . 
He was unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse . 
He muttered unceasingly , his eyebrows and lips twitching , and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was going on around him or not . 
One thing was certain -- that he was suffering and wished to say something . 
But what it was , no one could tell : it might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man , or it might relate to public affairs , or possibly to family concerns . 
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due to physical causes ; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell her something , and the fact that her presence always increased his restlessness confirmed her opinion . 
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally . 
There was no hope of recovery . 
It was impossible for him to travel , it would not do to let him die on the road . 
`` Would it not be better if the end did come , the very end ? '' 
Princess Mary sometimes thought . 
Night and day , hardly sleeping at all , she watched him and , terrible to say , often watched him not with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find symptoms of the approach of the end . 
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself , yet there it was . 
And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since her father 's illness began -LRB- perhaps even sooner , when she stayed with him expecting something to happen -RRB- , all the personal desires and hopes that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened . 
Thoughts that had not entered her mind for years -- thoughts of a life free from the fear of her father , and even the possibility of love and of family happiness -- floated continually in her imagination like temptations of the devil . 
