`` It 's here , close by , '' said she and , running across the yard , opened a gate in a wooden fence and , stopping , pointed out to him a small wooden wing of the house , which was burning brightly and fiercely . 
One of its sides had fallen in , another was on fire , and bright flames issued from the openings of the windows and from under the roof . 
As Pierre passed through the fence gate , he was enveloped by hot air and involuntarily stopped . 
`` Which is it ? 
Which is your house ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Ooh ! '' 
wailed the girl , pointing to the wing . 
`` That 's it , that was our lodging . 
You 've burned to death , our treasure , Katie , my precious little missy ! 
Ooh ! '' 
lamented Aniska , who at the sight of the fire felt that she too must give expression to her feelings . 
Pierre rushed to the wing , but the heat was so great that he involuntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the large house that was as yet burning only at one end , just below the roof , and around which swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen . 
At first Pierre did not realize what these men , who were dragging something out , were about ; but seeing before him a Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt saber and trying to take from him a fox-fur coat , he vaguely understood that looting was going on there , but he had no time to dwell on that idea . 
The sounds of crackling and the din of falling walls and ceilings , the whistle and hiss of the flames , the excited shouts of the people , and the sight of the swaying smoke , now gathering into thick black clouds and now soaring up with glittering sparks , with here and there dense sheaves of flame -LRB- now red and now like golden fish scales creeping along the walls -RRB- , and the heat and smoke and rapidity of motion , produced on Pierre the usual animating effects of a conflagration . 
It had a peculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felt himself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weighed him down . 
He felt young , bright , adroit , and resolute . 
He ran round to the other side of the lodge and was about to dash into that part of it which was still standing , when just above his head he heard several voices shouting and then a cracking sound and the ring of something heavy falling close beside him . 
Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmen who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest , filled with metal articles . 
Other French soldiers standing below went up to the drawer . 
`` What does this fellow want ? '' 
shouted one of them referring to Pierre . 
`` There 's a child in that house . 
Have n't you seen a child ? '' 
cried Pierre . 
`` What 's he talking about ? 
Get along ! '' 
said several voices , and one of the soldiers , evidently afraid that Pierre might want to take from them some of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer , moved threateningly toward him . 
`` A child ? '' 
shouted a Frenchman from above . 
`` I did hear something squealing in the garden . 
Perhaps it 's his brat that the fellow is looking for . 
After all , one must be human , you know ... '' `` Where is it ? 
Where ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` There ! 
There ! '' 
shouted the Frenchman at the window , pointing to the garden at the back of the house . 
`` Wait a bit -- I 'm coming down . '' 
And a minute or two later the Frenchman , a black-eyed fellow with a spot on his cheek , in shirt sleeves , really did jump out of a window on the ground floor , and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into the garden . 
`` Hurry up , you others ! '' 
he called out to his comrades . 
`` It 's getting hot . '' 
When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulled Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round , graveled space where a three-year-old girl in a pink dress was lying under a seat . 
`` There is your child ! 
Oh , a girl , so much the better ! '' 
said the Frenchman . 
`` Good-by , Fatty . 
We must be human , we are all mortal you know ! '' 
and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his comrades . 
