he thought gazing at her sparkling eyes , and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile dimpled her cheeks , a smile he had never seen before . 
`` I 'm not afraid of anything , '' said Sonya . 
`` May I go at once ? '' 
She got up . 
They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen , and they handed her a fur cloak . 
She threw this over her head and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas . 
`` What a darling that girl is ! '' 
thought he . 
`` And what have I been thinking of till now ? '' 
Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn . 
Nicholas went hastily to the front porch , saying he felt too hot . 
The crowd of people really had made the house stuffy . 
Outside , there was the same cold stillness and the same moon , but even brighter than before . 
The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real stars were unnoticed . 
The sky was black and dreary , while the earth was gay . 
`` I am a fool , a fool ! 
what have I been waiting for ? '' 
thought Nicholas , and running out from the porch he went round the corner of the house and along the path that led to the back porch . 
He knew Sonya would pass that way . 
Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across and along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the snow and on the path . 
This path led to the barn . 
The log walls of the barn and its snow-covered roof , that looked as if hewn out of some precious stone , sparkled in the moonlight . 
A tree in the garden snapped with the frost , and then all was again perfectly silent . 
His bosom seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and gladness . 
From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps , the bottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he heard the voice of an old maidservant saying , `` Straight , straight , along the path , Miss. . 
Only , do n't look back . '' 
`` I am not afraid , '' answered Sonya 's voice , and along the path toward Nicholas came the crunching , whistling sound of Sonya 's feet in her thin shoes . 
Sonya came along , wrapped in her cloak . 
She was only a couple of paces away when she saw him , and to her too he was not the Nicholas she had known and always slightly feared . 
He was in a woman 's dress , with tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya . 
She ran rapidly toward him . 
`` Quite different and yet the same , '' thought Nicholas , looking at her face all lit up by the moonlight . 
He slipped his arms under the cloak that covered her head , embraced her , pressed her to him , and kissed her on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork . 
Sonya kissed him full on the lips , and disengaging her little hands pressed them to his cheeks . 
`` Sonya ! 
... Nicholas ! '' 
... was all they said . 
They ran to the barn and then back again , re-entering , he by the front and she by the back porch . 
When they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna 's , Natasha , who always saw and noticed everything , arranged that she and Madame Schoss should go back in the sleigh with Dimmler , and Sonya with Nicholas and the maids . 
On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya 's face and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and his present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again . 
He looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new Sonya , and being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss , inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and , looking at the ground flying beneath him and at the sparkling sky , felt himself again in fairyland . 
`` Sonya , is it well with thee ? '' 
he asked from time to time . 
`` Yes ! '' 
she replied . 
`` And with thee ? '' 
When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for a moment to Natasha 's sleigh and stood on its wing . 
`` Natasha ! '' 
he whispered in French , `` do you know I have made up my mind about Sonya ? '' 
`` Have you told her ? '' 
