Princess Mary , too , went round to him . 
He gave her a cold , angry look and offered her his wrinkled , clean-shaven cheek to kiss . 
The whole expression of his face told her that he had not forgotten the morning 's talk , that his decision remained in force , and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it to her now . 
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served , the old men sat together . 
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the impending war . 
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European affairs , into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit . 
`` We ought not to fight either for or against Austria . 
Our political interests are all in the East , and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have an armed frontier and a firm policy , and he will never dare to cross the Russian frontier , as was the case in 1807 ! '' 
`` How can we fight the French , Prince ? '' 
said Count Rostopchin . 
`` Can we arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities ? 
Look at our youths , look at our ladies ! 
The French are our Gods : Paris is our Kingdom of Heaven . '' 
He began speaking louder , evidently to be heard by everyone . 
`` French dresses , French ideas , French feelings ! 
There now , you turned Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a scoundrel , but our ladies crawl after him on their knees . 
I went to a party last night , and there out of five ladies three were Roman Catholics and had the Pope 's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays . 
And they themselves sit there nearly naked , like the signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so . 
Ah , when one looks at our young people , Prince , one would like to take Peter the Great 's old cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps out of them . '' 
All were silent . 
The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and wagged his head approvingly . 
`` Well , good-by , your excellency , keep well ! '' 
said Rostopchin , getting up with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince . 
`` Good-by , my dear fellow ... . 
His words are music , I never tire of hearing him ! '' 
said the old prince , keeping hold of the hand and offering his cheek to be kissed . 
Following Rostopchin 's example the others also rose . 
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men 's talk and faultfinding , understood nothing of what she heard ; she only wondered whether the guests had all observed her father 's hostile attitude toward her . 
She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy , who was visiting them for the third time already . 
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre , who hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to approach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone in the drawing room . 
`` May I stay a little longer ? '' 
he said , letting his stout body sink into an armchair beside her . 
`` Oh yes , '' she answered . 
`` You noticed nothing ? '' 
her look asked . 
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood . 
He looked straight before him and smiled quietly . 
`` Have you known that young man long , Princess ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Who ? '' 
`` Drubetskoy . '' 
`` No , not long ... '' `` Do you like him ? '' 
`` Yes , he is an agreeable young man ... . 
Why do you ask me that ? '' 
said Princess Mary , still thinking of that morning 's conversation with her father . 
`` Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an heiress . '' 
`` You have observed that ? '' 
said Princess Mary . 
`` Yes , '' returned Pierre with a smile , `` and this young man now manages matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too . 
I can read him like a book . 
