`` Charming ! '' 
whispered the little princess , sticking the needle into her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story prevented her from going on with it . 
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully prepared to continue , but just then Anna Pavlovna , who had kept a watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her , noticed that he was talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe , so she hurried to the rescue . 
Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about the balance of power , and the latter , evidently interested by the young man 's simple-minded eagerness , was explaining his pet theory . 
Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally , which was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved . 
`` The means are ... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the people , '' the abbe was saying . 
`` It is only necessary for one powerful nation like Russia -- barbaric as she is said to be -- to place herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe , and it would save the world ! '' 
`` But how are you to get that balance ? '' 
Pierre was beginning . 
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and , looking severely at Pierre , asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate . 
The Italian 's face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected , sugary expression , evidently habitual to him when conversing with women . 
`` I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the society , more especially of the feminine society , in which I have had the honor of being received , that I have not yet had time to think of the climate , '' said he . 
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape , Anna Pavlovna , the more conveniently to keep them under observation , brought them into the larger circle . 
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room : Prince Andrew Bolkonski , the little princess ' husband . 
He was a very handsome young man , of medium height , with firm , clearcut features . 
Everything about him , from his weary , bored expression to his quiet , measured step , offered a most striking contrast to his quiet , little wife . 
It was evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room , but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to them . 
And among all these faces that he found so tedious , none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife . 
He turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face , kissed Anna Pavlovna 's hand , and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company . 
`` You are off to the war , Prince ? '' 
said Anna Pavlovna . 
`` General Kutuzov , '' said Bolkonski , speaking French and stressing the last syllable of the general 's name like a Frenchman , `` has been pleased to take me as an aide-de-camp ... '' `` And Lise , your wife ? '' 
`` She will go to the country . '' 
`` Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife ? '' 
`` Andre , '' said his wife , addressing her husband in the same coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men , `` the vicomte has been telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte ! '' 
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away . 
Pierre , who from the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad , affectionate eyes , now came up and took his arm . 
Before he looked round Prince Andrew frowned again , expressing his annoyance with whoever was touching his arm , but when he saw Pierre 's beaming face he gave him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile . 
`` There now ! 
... So you , too , are in the great world ? '' 
said he to Pierre . 
`` I knew you would be here , '' replied Pierre . 
`` I will come to supper with you . 
May I ? '' 
he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte who was continuing his story . 
`` No , impossible ! '' 
said Prince Andrew , laughing and pressing Pierre 's hand to show that there was no need to ask the question . 
He wished to say something more , but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass . 
`` You must excuse me , dear Vicomte , '' said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman , holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising . 
`` This unfortunate fete at the ambassador 's deprives me of a pleasure , and obliges me to interrupt you . 
I am very sorry to leave your enchanting party , '' said he , turning to Anna Pavlovna . 
His daughter , Princess Helene , passed between the chairs , lightly holding up the folds of her dress , and the smile shone still more radiantly on her beautiful face . 
Pierre gazed at her with rapturous , almost frightened , eyes as she passed him . 
`` Very lovely , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Very , '' said Pierre . 
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre 's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna : `` Educate this bear for me ! 
He has been staying with me a whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society . 
Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever women . '' 
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand . 
She knew his father to be a connection of Prince Vasili 's . 
