It was at first impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at Bagration over each other 's shoulders , as if he were some rare animal . 
Count Ilya Rostov , laughing and repeating the words , `` Make way , dear boy ! 
Make way , make way ! '' 
pushed through the crowd more energetically than anyone , led the guests into the drawing room , and seated them on the center sofa . 
The bigwigs , the most respected members of the Club , beset the new arrivals . 
Count Ilya , again thrusting his way through the crowd , went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with another committeeman , carrying a large silver salver which he presented to Prince Bagration . 
On the salver lay some verses composed and printed in the hero 's honor . 
Bagration , on seeing the salver , glanced around in dismay , as though seeking help . 
But all eyes demanded that he should submit . 
Feeling himself in their power , he resolutely took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count who had presented it to him . 
Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration -LRB- or he would , it seemed , have held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it -RRB- and drew his attention to the verses . 
`` Well , I will read them , then ! '' 
Bagration seemed to say , and , fixing his weary eyes on the paper , began to read them with a fixed and serious expression . 
But the author himself took the verses and began reading them aloud . 
Bagration bowed his bead and listened : Bring glory then to Alexander 's reign And on the throne our Titus shield . 
A dreaded foe be thou , kindhearted as a man , A Rhipheus at home , a Caesar in the field ! 
E'en fortunate Napoleon Knows by experience , now , Bagration , And dare not Herculean Russians trouble ... But before he had finished reading , a stentorian major-domo announced that dinner was ready ! 
The door opened , and from the dining room came the resounding strains of the polonaise : Conquest 's joyful thunder waken , Triumph , valiant Russians , now ! 
... and Count Rostov , glancing angrily at the author who went on reading his verses , bowed to Bagration . 
Everyone rose , feeling that dinner was more important than verses , and Bagration , again preceding all the rest , went in to dinner . 
He was seated in the place of honor between two Alexanders -- Bekleshev and Naryshkin -- which was a significant allusion to the name of the sovereign . 
Three hundred persons took their seats in the dining room , according to their rank and importance : the more important nearer to the honored guest , as naturally as water flows deepest where the land lies lowest . 
Just before dinner , Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to Bagration , who recognized him and said a few words to him , disjointed and awkward , as were all the words he spoke that day , and Count Ilya looked joyfully and proudly around while Bagration spoke to his son . 
Nicholas Rostov , with Denisov and his new acquaintance , Dolokhov , sat almost at the middle of the table . 
Facing them sat Pierre , beside Prince Nesvitski . 
Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of the committee sat facing Bagration and , as the very personification of Moscow hospitality , did the honors to the prince . 
His efforts had not been in vain . 
The dinner , both the Lenten and the other fare , was splendid , yet he could not feel quite at ease till the end of the meal . 
He winked at the butler , whispered directions to the footmen , and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety . 
Everything was excellent . 
With the second course , a gigantic sterlet -LRB- at sight of which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure -RRB- , the footmen began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses . 
After the fish , which made a certain sensation , the count exchanged glances with the other committeemen . 
`` There will be many toasts , it 's time to begin , '' he whispered , and taking up his glass , he rose . 
All were silent , waiting for what he would say . 
`` To the health of our Sovereign , the Emperor ! '' 
he cried , and at the same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm . 
The band immediately struck up `` Conquest 's joyful thunder waken ... '' All rose and cried `` Hurrah ! '' 
Bagration also rose and shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Schon Grabern . 
Young Rostov 's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundred others . 
He nearly wept . 
`` To the health of our Sovereign , the Emperor ! '' 
he roared , `` Hurrah ! '' 
and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor . 
Many followed his example , and the loud shouting continued for a long time . 
When the voices subsided , the footmen cleared away the broken glass and everybody sat down again , smiling at the noise they had made and exchanging remarks . 
The old count rose once more , glanced at a note lying beside his plate , and proposed a toast , `` To the health of the hero of our last campaign , Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration ! '' 
and again his blue eyes grew moist . 
`` Hurrah ! '' 
cried the three hundred voices again , but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov : Russians ! 
