Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed : that most expensive luxury , the kind of life that can be changed at any moment , was no longer his nor did he wish for it . 
He felt that his way of life had now been settled once for all till death and that to change it was not in his power , and so that way of life proved economical . 
With a merry , smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases . 
`` What do you think of this ? '' 
said he , unrolling a piece of stuff like a shopman . 
Natasha , who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on her lap , turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to the things he showed her . 
`` That 's for Belova ? 
Excellent ! '' 
She felt the quality of the material . 
`` It was a ruble an arshin , I suppose ? '' 
Pierre told her the price . 
`` Too dear ! '' 
Natasha remarked . 
`` How pleased the children will be and Mamma too ! 
Only you need not have bought me this , '' she added , unable to suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls , of a kind then just coming into fashion . 
`` Adele tempted me : she kept on telling me to buy it , '' returned Pierre . 
`` When am I to wear it ? '' 
and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair . 
`` When I take little Masha into society ? 
Perhaps they will be fashionable again by then . 
Well , let 's go now . '' 
And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to the old countess ' rooms . 
The countess was sitting with her companion Belova , playing grand-patience as usual , when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawing room with parcels under their arms . 
The countess was now over sixty , was quite gray , and wore a cap with a frill that surrounded her face . 
Her face had shriveled , her upper lip had sunk in , and her eyes were dim . 
After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession , she felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left without aim or object for her existence . 
She ate , drank , slept , or kept awake , but did not live . 
Life gave her no new impressions . 
She wanted nothing from life but tranquillity , and that tranquillity only death could give her . 
But until death came she had to go on living , that is , to use her vital forces . 
A peculiarity one sees in very young children and very old people was particularly evident in her . 
Her life had no external aims -- only a need to exercise her various functions and inclinations was apparent . 
She had to eat , sleep , think , speak , weep , work , give vent to her anger , and so on , merely because she had a stomach , a brain , muscles , nerves , and a liver . 
She did these things not under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do , when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their functions remains unnoticed . 
She talked only because she physically needed to exercise her tongue and lungs . 
She cried as a child does , because her nose had to be cleared , and so on . 
What for people in their full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext . 
Thus in the morning -- especially if she had eaten anything rich the day before -- she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiest pretext Belova 's deafness . 
She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end of the room . 
`` It seems a little warmer today , my dear , '' she would murmur . 
And when Belova replied : `` Oh yes , they 've come , '' she would mutter angrily : `` O Lord ! 
How stupid and deaf she is ! '' 
Another pretext would be her snuff , which would seem too dry or too damp or not rubbed fine enough . 
After these fits of irritability her face would grow yellow , and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belova would again be deaf , the snuff damp , and the countess ' face yellow . 
Just as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise her still-existing faculty of thinking -- and the pretext for that was a game of patience . 
When she needed to cry , the deceased count would be the pretext . 
When she wanted to be agitated , Nicholas and his health would be the pretext , and when she felt a need to speak spitefully , the pretext would be Countess Mary . 
When her vocal organs needed exercise , which was usually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinner rest in a darkened room , the pretext would be the retelling of the same stories over and over again to the same audience . 
The old lady 's condition was understood by the whole household though no one ever spoke of it , and they all made every possible effort to satisfy her needs . 
Only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile between Nicholas , Pierre , Natasha , and Countess Mary was the common understanding of her condition expressed . 
