`` Yes , yes ! 
There they are , those false images that agitated , enraptured , and tormented me , '' said he to himself , passing in review the principal pictures of the magic lantern of life and regarding them now in the cold white daylight of his clear perception of death . 
`` There they are , those rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious . 
Glory , the good of society , love of a woman , the Fatherland itself -- how important these pictures appeared to me , with what profound meaning they seemed to be filled ! 
And it is all so simple , pale , and crude in the cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me . '' 
The three great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular : his love for a woman , his father 's death , and the French invasion which had overrun half Russia . 
`` Love ... that little girl who seemed to me brimming over with mystic forces ! 
Yes , indeed , I loved her . 
I made romantic plans of love and happiness with her ! 
Oh , what a boy I was ! '' 
he said aloud bitterly . 
`` Ah me ! 
I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her faithful to me for the whole year of my absence ! 
Like the gentle dove in the fable she was to pine apart from me ... . 
But it was much simpler really ... . 
It was all very simple and horrible . '' 
`` When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his : his land , his air , his peasants . 
But Napoleon came and swept him aside , unconscious of his existence , as he might brush a chip from his path , and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces . 
Princess Mary says it is a trial sent from above . 
What is the trial for , when he is not here and will never return ? 
He is not here ! 
For whom then is the trial intended ? 
The Fatherland , the destruction of Moscow ! 
And tomorrow I shall be killed , perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own men , by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of them did yesterday , and the French will come and take me by head and heels and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses , and new conditions of life will arise , which will seem quite ordinary to others and about which I shall know nothing . 
I shall not exist ... '' He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine , with their motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark . 
`` To die ... to be killed tomorrow ... That I should not exist ... That all this should still be , but no me ... '' And the birches with their light and shade , the curly clouds , the smoke of the campfires , and all that was around him changed and seemed terrible and menacing . 
A cold shiver ran down his spine . 
He rose quickly , went out of the shed , and began to walk about . 
After he had returned , voices were heard outside the shed . 
`` Who 's that ? '' 
he cried . 
The red-nosed Captain Timokhin , formerly Dolokhov 's squadron commander , but now from lack of officers a battalion commander , shyly entered the shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster . 
Prince Andrew rose hastily , listened to the business they had come about , gave them some further instructions , and was about to dismiss them when he heard a familiar , lisping , voice behind the shed . 
`` Devil take it ! '' 
said the voice of a man stumbling over something . 
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre , who had tripped over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen , coming his way . 
It was unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general , and Pierre especially , for he reminded him of all the painful moments of his last visit to Moscow . 
`` You ? 
What a surprise ! '' 
said he . 
`` What brings you here ? 
This is unexpected ! '' 
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness -- they expressed hostility , which Pierre noticed at once . 
He had approached the shed full of animation , but on seeing Prince Andrew 's face he felt constrained and ill at ease . 
`` I have come ... simply ... you know ... come ... it interests me , '' said Pierre , who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word `` interesting . '' 
`` I wish to see the battle . '' 
`` Oh yes , and what do the Masonic brothers say about war ? 
How would they stop it ? '' 
said Prince Andrew sarcastically . 
`` Well , and how 's Moscow ? 
