Pierre was taken back to his place , and the rows of troops on both sides of the post made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace . 
The twenty-four sharpshooters with discharged muskets , standing in the center of the circle , ran back to their places as the companies passed by . 
Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in couples out of the circle . 
All but one rejoined their companies . 
This one , a young soldier , his face deadly pale , his shako pushed back , and his musket resting on the ground , still stood near the pit at the spot from which he had fired . 
He swayed like a drunken man , taking some steps forward and back to save himself from falling . 
An old , noncommissioned officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to his company . 
The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse . 
They all went away silently and with drooping heads . 
`` That will teach them to start fires , '' said one of the Frenchmen . 
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who was trying to find some relief after what had been done , but was not able to do so . 
Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a hopeless movement with his arm and went away . 
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners and placed alone in a small , ruined , and befouled church . 
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for the prisoners of war . 
Without understanding what was said to him , Pierre got up and went with the soldiers . 
They took him to the upper end of the field , where there were some sheds built of charred planks , beams , and battens , and led him into one of them . 
In the darkness some twenty different men surrounded Pierre . 
He looked at them without understanding who they were , why they were there , or what they wanted of him . 
He heard what they said , but did not understand the meaning of the words and made no kind of deduction from or application of them . 
He replied to questions they put to him , but did not consider who was listening to his replies , nor how they would understand them . 
He looked at their faces and figures , but they all seemed to him equally meaningless . 
From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by men who did not wish to commit them , it was as if the mainspring of his life , on which everything depended and which made everything appear alive , had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed into a heap of meaningless rubbish . 
Though he did not acknowledge it to himself , his faith in the right ordering of the universe , in humanity , in his own soul , and in God , had been destroyed . 
He had experienced this before , but never so strongly as now . 
When similar doubts had assailed him before , they had been the result of his own wrongdoing , and at the bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from those doubts was to be found within himself . 
But now he felt that the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins remained , and this not by any fault of his own . 
He felt that it was not in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life . 
Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something about him interested them greatly . 
They were telling him something and asking him something . 
Then they led him away somewhere , and at last he found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and talking on all sides . 
`` Well , then , mates ... that very prince who ... '' some voice at the other end of the shed was saying , with a strong emphasis on the word who . 
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall , Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes . 
But as soon as he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory lad -- especially dreadful because of its simplicity -- and the faces of the murderers , even more dreadful because of their disquiet . 
And he opened his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him . 
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he was first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from him every time he moved . 
This man was doing something to his legs in the darkness , and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man continually glanced at him . 
On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw that the man was taking off his leg bands , and the way he did it aroused Pierre 's interest . 
Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg , he carefully coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg , glancing up at Pierre . 
While one hand hung up the first string the other was already unwinding the band on the second leg . 
In this way , having carefully removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following one another uninterruptedly , the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs fixed above his head . 
Then he took out a knife , cut something , closed the knife , placed it under the head of his bed , and , seating himself comfortably , clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes on Pierre . 
The latter was conscious of something pleasant , comforting , and well rounded in these deft movements , in the man 's well-ordered arrangements in his corner , and even in his very smell , and he looked at the man without taking his eyes from him . 
`` You 've seen a lot of trouble , sir , eh ? '' 
the little man suddenly said . 
And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice that Pierre tried to reply , but his jaw trembled and he felt tears rising to his eyes . 
The little fellow , giving Pierre no time to betray his confusion , instantly continued in the same pleasant tones : `` Eh , lad , do n't fret ! '' 
said he , in the tender singsong caressing voice old Russian peasant women employ . 
`` Do n't fret , friend -- ` suffer an hour , live for an age ! ' 
that 's how it is , my dear fellow . 
And here we live , thank heaven , without offense . 
