`` It 's that protege of yours , that sweet Princess Drubetskaya , that Anna Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid ... the infamous , vile woman ! '' 
`` Do not let us lose any time ... '' `` Ah , do n't talk to me ! 
Last winter she wheedled herself in here and told the count such vile , disgraceful things about us , especially about Sophie -- I ca n't repeat them -- that it made the count quite ill and he would not see us for a whole fortnight . 
I know it was then he wrote this vile , infamous paper , but I thought the thing was invalid . '' 
`` We 've got to it at last -- why did you not tell me about it sooner ? '' 
`` It 's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow , '' said the princess , ignoring his question . 
`` Now I know ! 
Yes ; if I have a sin , a great sin , it is hatred of that vile woman ! '' 
almost shrieked the princess , now quite changed . 
`` And what does she come worming herself in here for ? 
But I will give her a piece of my mind . 
The time will come ! '' 
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the princess ' room , a carriage containing Pierre -LRB- who had been sent for -RRB- and Anna Mikhaylovna -LRB- who found it necessary to accompany him -RRB- was driving into the court of Count Bezukhov 's house . 
As the wheels rolled softly over the straw beneath the windows , Anna Mikhaylovna , having turned with words of comfort to her companion , realized that he was asleep in his corner and woke him up . 
Rousing himself , Pierre followed Anna Mikhaylovna out of the carriage , and only then began to think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him . 
He noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to the back door . 
While he was getting down from the carriage steps two men , who looked like tradespeople , ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of the wall . 
Pausing for a moment , Pierre noticed several other men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides . 
But neither Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman , who could not help seeing these people , took any notice of them . 
`` It seems to be all right , '' Pierre concluded , and followed Anna Mikhaylovna . 
She hurriedly ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase , calling to Pierre , who was lagging behind , to follow . 
Though he did not see why it was necessary for him to go to the count at all , still less why he had to go by the back stairs , yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna 's air of assurance and haste , Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary . 
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who , carrying pails , came running downstairs , their boots clattering . 
These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there . 
`` Is this the way to the princesses ' apartments ? '' 
asked Anna Mikhaylovna of one of them . 
`` Yes , '' replied a footman in a bold loud voice , as if anything were now permissible ; `` the door to the left , ma'am . '' 
`` Perhaps the count did not ask for me , '' said Pierre when he reached the landing . 
`` I 'd better go to my own room . '' 
Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up . 
`` Ah , my friend ! '' 
she said , touching his arm as she had done her son 's when speaking to him that afternoon , `` believe me I suffer no less than you do , but be a man ! '' 
`` But really , had n't I better go away ? '' 
he asked , looking kindly at her over his spectacles . 
`` Ah , my dear friend ! 
Forget the wrongs that may have been done you . 
Think that he is your father ... perhaps in the agony of death . '' 
She sighed . 
`` I have loved you like a son from the first . 
Trust yourself to me , Pierre . 
I shall not forget your interests . '' 
Pierre did not understand a word , but the conviction that all this had to be grew stronger , and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was already opening a door . 
This door led into a back anteroom . 
An old man , a servant of the princesses , sat in a corner knitting a stocking . 
Pierre had never been in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of these rooms . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , addressing a maid who was hurrying past with a decanter on a tray as `` my dear '' and `` my sweet , '' asked about the princess ' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage . 
The first door on the left led into the princesses ' apartments . 
The maid with the decanter in her haste had not closed the door -LRB- everything in the house was done in haste at that time -RRB- , and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in passing instinctively glanced into the room , where Prince Vasili and the eldest princess were sitting close together talking . 
Seeing them pass , Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience , while the princess jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all her might . 
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on Prince Vasili 's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide . 
