On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head , with its long hair curling to his shoulders , in a majestically royal manner , and looked inquiringly at the French colonel . 
The colonel respectfully informed His Majesty of Balashev 's mission , whose name he could not pronounce . 
`` De Bal-macheve ! '' 
said the King -LRB- overcoming by his assurance the difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel -RRB- . 
`` Charmed to make your acquaintance , General ! '' 
he added , with a gesture of kingly condescension . 
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity instantly forsook him , and without noticing it he passed into his natural tone of good-natured familiarity . 
He laid his hand on the withers of Balashev 's horse and said : `` Well , General , it all looks like war , '' as if regretting a circumstance of which he was unable to judge . 
`` Your Majesty , '' replied Balashev , `` my master , the Emperor , does not desire war and as Your Majesty sees ... '' said Balashev , using the words Your Majesty at every opportunity , with the affectation unavoidable in frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty . 
Murat 's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to `` Monsieur de Bal-macheve . '' 
But royaute oblige ! 
* and he felt it incumbent on him , as a king and an ally , to confer on state affairs with Alexander 's envoy . 
He dismounted , took Balashev 's arm , and moving a few steps away from his suite , which waited respectfully , began to pace up and down with him , trying to speak significantly . 
He referred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his troops from Prussia , especially when that demand became generally known and the dignity of France was thereby offended . 
* `` Royalty has its obligations . '' 
Balashev replied that there was `` nothing offensive in the demand , because ... '' but Murat interrupted him . 
`` Then you do n't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor ? '' 
he asked unexpectedly , with a kindly and foolish smile . 
Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the war . 
`` Oh , my dear general ! '' 
Murat again interrupted him , `` with all my heart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them , and that the war begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible ! '' 
said he , in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another despite a quarrel between their masters . 
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his health , and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent with him in Naples . 
Then suddenly , as if remembering his royal dignity , Murat solemnly drew himself up , assumed the pose in which he had stood at his coronation , and , waving his right arm , said : `` I wo n't detain you longer , General . 
I wish success to your mission , '' and with his embroidered red mantle , his flowing feathers , and his glittering ornaments , he rejoined his suite who were respectfully awaiting him . 
Balashev rode on , supposing from Murat 's words that he would very soon be brought before Napoleon himself . 
But instead of that , at the next village the sentinels of Davout 's infantry corps detained him as the pickets of the vanguard had done , and an adjutant of the corps commander , who was fetched , conducted him into the village to Marshal Davout . 
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander -- though not a coward like Arakcheev , he was as precise , as cruel , and as unable to express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty . 
In the organism of states such men are necessary , as wolves are necessary in the organism of nature , and they always exist , always appear and hold their own , however incongruous their presence and their proximity to the head of the government may be . 
This inevitability alone can explain how the cruel Arakcheev , who tore out a grenadier 's mustache with his own hands , whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face danger , and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier , was able to maintain his powerful position with Alexander , whose own character was chivalrous , noble , and gentle . 
Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant 's hut , writing -- he was auditing accounts . 
Better quarters could have been found him , but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for being gloomy . 
For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a hurry . 
`` How can I think of the bright side of life when , as you see , I am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed ? '' 
the expression of his face seemed to say . 
The chief pleasure and necessity of such men , when they encounter anyone who shows animation , is to flaunt their own dreary , persistent activity . 
Davout allowed himself that pleasure when Balashev was brought in . 
He became still more absorbed in his task when the Russian general entered , and after glancing over his spectacles at Balashev 's face , which was animated by the beauty of the morning and by his talk with Murat , he did not rise or even stir , but scowled still more and sneered malevolently . 
When he noticed in Balashev 's face the disagreeable impression this reception produced , Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he wanted . 
Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because Davout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon , Balashev hastened to inform him of his rank and mission . 
Contrary to his expectation , Davout , after hearing him , became still surlier and ruder . 
`` Where is your dispatch ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` Give it to me . 
I will send it to the Emperor . '' 
Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the Emperor . 
`` Your Emperor 's orders are obeyed in your army , but here , '' said Davout , `` you must do as you 're told . '' 
And , as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his dependence on brute force , Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer on duty . 
Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor 's letter and laid it on the table -LRB- made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it , laid across two barrels -RRB- . 
Davout took the packet and read the inscription . 
