`` Will they give up Moscow like this ? 
They told you that for fun , and you believed it ! 
Are n't there plenty of troops on the march ? 
Let him in , indeed ! 
That 's what the government is for . 
You 'd better listen to what people are saying , '' said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth . 
By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand . 
`` An ukase , they are reading an ukase ! 
Reading an ukase ! '' 
cried voices in the crowd , and the people rushed toward the reader . 
The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31 When the crowd collected round him he seemed confused , but at the demand of the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him , he began in a rather tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning . 
`` Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness , '' he read -LRB- `` Sirin Highness , '' said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and a frown on his brow -RRB- , `` to consult with him to act , and to aid the army to exterminate these scoundrels . 
We too will take part ... '' the reader went on , and then paused -LRB- `` Do you see , '' shouted the youth victoriously , `` he 's going to clear up the whole affair for you ... '' -RRB- , `` in destroying them , and will send these visitors to the devil . 
I will come back to dinner , and we 'll set to work . 
We will do , completely do , and undo these scoundrels . '' 
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence . 
The tall lad hung his head gloomily . 
It was evident that no one had understood the last part . 
In particular , the words `` I will come back to dinner , '' evidently displeased both reader and audience . 
The people 's minds were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly comprehensible -- it was what any one of them might have said and therefore was what an ukase emanating from the highest authority should not say . 
They all stood despondent and silent . 
The tall youth moved his lips and swayed from side to side . 
`` We should ask him ... that 's he himself ? '' 
... `` Yes , ask him indeed ! 
... Why not ? 
He 'll explain '' ... voices in the rear of the crowd were suddenly heard saying , and the general attention turned to the police superintendent 's trap which drove into the square attended by two mounted dragoons . 
The superintendent of police , who had that morning by Count Rostopchin 's orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that matter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in his pocket , on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman to stop . 
`` What people are these ? '' 
he shouted to the men , who were moving singly and timidly in the direction of his trap . 
`` What people are these ? '' 
he shouted again , receiving no answer . 
`` Your honor ... '' replied the shopman in the frieze coat , `` your honor , in accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count , they desire to serve , not sparing their lives , and it is not any kind of riot , but as his highest excellence said ... '' `` The count has not left , he is here , and an order will be issued concerning you , '' said the superintendent of police . 
`` Go on ! '' 
he ordered his coachman . 
The crowd halted , pressing around those who had heard what the superintendent had said , and looking at the departing trap . 
The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared look , said something to his coachman , and his horses increased their speed . 
`` It 's a fraud , lads ! 
Lead the way to him , himself ! '' 
shouted the tall youth . 
`` Do n't let him go , lads ! 
Let him answer us ! 
Keep him ! '' 
shouted different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap . 
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went in the direction of the Lubyanka Street . 
`` There now , the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to perish . 
Do they think we 're dogs ? '' 
voices in the crowd were heard saying more and more frequently . 
On the evening of the first of September , after his interview with Kutuzov , Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offended because he had not been invited to attend the council of war , and because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the defense of the city ; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him at the camp , which treated the tranquillity of the capital and its patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and unimportant matters . 
Distressed , offended , and surprised by all this , Rostopchin had returned to Moscow . 
After supper he lay down on a sofa without undressing , and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier bringing him a letter from Kutuzov . 
