When Balashev had ended , Napoleon again took out his snuffbox , sniffed at it , and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal . 
The door opened , a gentleman-in-waiting , bending respectfully , handed the Emperor his hat and gloves ; another brought him a pocket handkerchief . 
Napoleon , without giving them a glance , turned to Balashev : `` Assure the Emperor Alexander from me , '' said he , taking his hat , `` that I am as devoted to him as before : I know him thoroughly and very highly esteem his lofty qualities . 
I will detain you no longer , General ; you shall receive my letter to the Emperor . '' 
And Napoleon went quickly to the door . 
Everyone in the reception room rushed forward and descended the staircase . 
After all that Napoleon had said to him -- those bursts of anger and the last dryly spoken words : `` I will detain you no longer , General ; you shall receive my letter , '' Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon would not wish to see him , and would even avoid another meeting with him -- an insulted envoy -- especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger . 
But , to his surprise , Balashev received , through Duroc , an invitation to dine with the Emperor that day . 
Bessieres , Caulaincourt , and Berthier were present at that dinner . 
Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably . 
He not only showed no sign of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that morning , but , on the contrary , tried to reassure Balashev . 
It was evident that he had long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a mistake , and that in his perception whatever he did was right , not because it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong , but because he did it . 
The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna , where crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him . 
From all the windows of the streets through which he rode , rugs , flags , and his monogram were displayed , and the Polish ladies , welcoming him , waved their handkerchiefs to him . 
At dinner , having placed Balashev beside him , Napoleon not only treated him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers , one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at his success . 
In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and questioned Balashev about the Russian capital , not merely as an interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit , but as if convinced that Balashev , as a Russian , must be flattered by his curiosity . 
`` How many inhabitants are there in Moscow ? 
How many houses ? 
Is it true that Moscow is called ` Holy Moscow ' ? 
How many churches are there in Moscow ? '' 
he asked . 
And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches , he remarked : `` Why such a quantity of churches ? '' 
`` The Russians are very devout , '' replied Balashev . 
`` But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the backwardness of a people , '' said Napoleon , turning to Caulaincourt for appreciation of this remark . 
Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor . 
`` Every country has its own character , '' said he . 
`` But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that , '' said Napoleon . 
`` I beg your Majesty 's pardon , '' returned Balashev , `` besides Russia there is Spain , where there are also many churches and monasteries . '' 
This reply of Balashev 's , which hinted at the recent defeats of the French in Spain , was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander 's court , but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon 's dinner , where it passed unnoticed . 
The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they were puzzled as to what Balashev 's tone suggested . 
`` If there is a point we do n't see it , or it is not at all witty , '' their expressions seemed to say . 
So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not notice it at all and naively asked Balashev through what towns the direct road from there to Moscow passed . 
Balashev , who was on the alert all through the dinner , replied that just as `` all roads lead to Rome , '' so all roads lead to Moscow : there were many roads , and `` among them the road through Poltava , which Charles XII chose . '' 
Balashev involuntarily flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply , but hardly had he uttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt began speaking of the badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg reminiscences . 
After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon 's study , which four days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander . 
Napoleon sat down , toying with his Sevres coffee cup , and motioned Balashev to a chair beside him . 
Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which , more than any reasoned cause , makes a man contented with himself and disposed to consider everyone his friend . 
It seemed to him that he was surrounded by men who adored him : and he felt convinced that , after his dinner , Balashev too was his friend and worshiper . 
Napoleon turned to him with a pleasant , though slightly ironic , smile . 
`` They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied ? 
Strange , is n't it , General ? '' 
he said , evidently not doubting that this remark would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his , Napoleon 's , superiority to Alexander . 
Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence . 
`` Yes . 
Four days ago in this room , Wintzingerode and Stein were deliberating , '' continued Napoleon with the same derisive and self-confident smile . 
`` What I ca n't understand , '' he went on , `` is that the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies . 
That I do not ... understand . 
Has he not thought that I may the same ? '' 
and he turned inquiringly to Balashev , and evidently this thought turned him back on to the track of his morning 's anger , which was still fresh in him . 
`` And let him know that I will do so ! '' 
