Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive faces , whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the spot . 
Disregarding the officers ' orders , the soldiers stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently , as if trying to comprehend the difficult problem of what was taking place before them . 
From the tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans . 
Occasionally dressers ran out to fetch water , or to point out those who were to be brought in next . 
The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned , sighed , wept , screamed , swore , or asked for vodka . 
Some were delirious . 
Prince Andrew 's bearers , stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged , took him , as a regimental commander , close up to one of the tents and there stopped , awaiting instructions . 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going on around him . 
He remembered the meadow , the wormwood , the field , the whirling black ball , and his sudden rush of passionate love of life . 
Two steps from him , leaning against a branch and talking loudly and attracting general attention , stood a tall , handsome , black-haired noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head . 
He had been wounded in the head and leg by bullets . 
Around him , eagerly listening to his talk , a crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered . 
`` We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything , we grabbed the King himself ! '' 
cried he , looking around him with eyes that glittered with fever . 
`` If only reserves had come up just then , lads , there would n't have been nothing left of him ! 
I tell you surely ... '' Like all the others near the speaker , Prince Andrew looked at him with shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort . 
`` But is n't it all the same now ? '' 
thought he . 
`` And what will be there , and what has there been here ? 
Why was I so reluctant to part with life ? 
There was something in this life I did not and do not understand . '' 
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron , holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small bloodstained hands , so as not to smear it . 
He raised his head and looked about him , but above the level of the wounded men . 
He evidently wanted a little respite . 
After turning his head from right to left for some time , he sighed and looked down . 
`` All right , immediately , '' he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince Andrew out to him , and he told them to carry him into the tent . 
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting . 
`` It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a chance ! '' 
remarked one . 
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been cleared and which a dresser was washing down . 
Prince Andrew could not make out distinctly what was in that tent . 
The pitiful groans from all sides and the torturing pain in his thigh , stomach , and back distracted him . 
All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked , bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent , as a few weeks previously , on that hot August day , such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road . 
Yes , it was the same flesh , the same chair a canon , the sight of which had even then filled him with horror , as by a presentiment . 
There were three operating tables in the tent . 
Two were occupied , and on the third they placed Prince Andrew . 
For a little while he was left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two tables . 
On the nearest one sat a Tartar , probably a Cossack , judging by the uniform thrown down beside him . 
Four soldiers were holding him , and a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back . 
`` Ooh , ooh , ooh ! '' 
grunted the Tartar , and suddenly lifting up his swarthy snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones , and baring his white teeth , he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing , ringing , and prolonged yells . 
On the other table , round which many people were crowding , a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back . 
His curly hair , its color , and the shape of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew . 
Several dressers were pressing on his chest to hold him down . 
One large , white , plump leg twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor . 
The man was sobbing and choking convulsively . 
Two doctors -- one of whom was pale and trembling -- were silently doing something to this man 's other , gory leg . 
When he had finished with the Tartar , whom they covered with an overcoat , the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew , wiping his hands . 
He glanced at Prince Andrew 's face and quickly turned away . 
`` Undress him ! 
