Neither the hand nor a single muscle of the count 's face stirred . 
Once more Pierre looked questioningly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next . 
Anna Mikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed . 
Pierre obediently sat down , his eyes asking if he were doing right . 
Anna Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly . 
Again Pierre fell into the naively symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue , evidently distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look as small as possible . 
He looked at the count , who still gazed at the spot where Pierre 's face had been before he sat down . 
Anna Mikhaylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance of these last moments of meeting between the father and son . 
This lasted about two minutes , which to Pierre seemed an hour . 
Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count 's face began to twitch . 
The twitching increased , the handsome mouth was drawn to one side -LRB- only now did Pierre realize how near death his father was -RRB- , and from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct , hoarse sound . 
Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively at the sick man 's eyes , trying to guess what he wanted ; she pointed first to Pierre , then to some drink , then named Prince Vasili in an inquiring whisper , then pointed to the quilt . 
The eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience . 
He made an effort to look at the servant who stood constantly at the head of the bed . 
`` Wants to turn on the other side , '' whispered the servant , and got up to turn the count 's heavy body toward the wall . 
Pierre rose to help him . 
While the count was being turned over , one of his arms fell back helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward . 
Whether he noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm , or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain , at any rate he glanced at the refractory arm , at Pierre 's terror-stricken face , and again at the arm , and on his face a feeble , piteous smile appeared , quite out of keeping with his features , that seemed to deride his own helplessness . 
At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering in his breast and a tickling in his nose , and tears dimmed his eyes . 
The sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall . 
He sighed . 
`` He is dozing , '' said Anna Mikhaylovna , observing that one of the princesses was coming to take her turn at watching . 
`` Let us go . '' 
Pierre went out . 
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the eldest princess , who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the Great and talking eagerly . 
As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion they became silent , and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide something as she whispered : `` I ca n't bear the sight of that woman . '' 
`` Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room , '' said Prince Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna . 
`` Go and take something , my poor Anna Mikhaylovna , or you will not hold out . '' 
To Pierre he said nothing , merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze below the shoulder . 
Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small drawing room . 
`` There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this delicious Russian tea , '' Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small circular room . 
Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov 's house that night had gathered to fortify themselves . 
Pierre well remembered this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables . 
During balls given at the house Pierre , who did not know how to dance , had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who , as they passed through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare shoulders , looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors which repeated their reflections several times . 
Now this same room was dimly lighted by two candles . 
On one small table tea things and supper dishes stood in disorder , and in the middle of the night a motley throng of people sat there , not merrymaking , but somberly whispering , and betraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot what was happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom . 
Pierre did not eat anything though he would very much have liked to . 
He looked inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldest princess . 
Pierre concluded that this also was essential , and after a short interval followed her . 
Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the princess , and they were both speaking in excited whispers . 
`` Permit me , Princess , to know what is necessary and what is not necessary , '' said the younger of the two speakers , evidently in the same state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room . 
`` But , my dear princess , '' answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but impressively , blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other from passing , `` wo n't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he needs repose ? 
Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already prepared ... '' Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude , with one leg crossed high above the other . 
His cheeks , which were so flabby that they looked heavier below , were twitching violently ; but he wore the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying . 
`` Come , my dear Anna Mikhaylovna , let Catiche do as she pleases . 
You know how fond the count is of her . '' 
`` I do n't even know what is in this paper , '' said the younger of the two ladies , addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she held in her hand . 
`` All I know is that his real will is in his writing table , and this is a paper he has forgotten ... '' She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna , but the latter sprang so as to bar her path . 
`` I know , my dear , kind princess , '' said Anna Mikhaylovna , seizing the portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily . 
`` Dear princess , I beg and implore you , have some pity on him ! 
