She drove them away and tried to conceal them . 
`` But am I not too cold with him ? '' 
thought the princess . 
`` I try to be reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already , but then he can not know what I think of him and may imagine that I do not like him . '' 
And Princess Mary tried , but could not manage , to be cordial to her new guest . 
`` Poor girl , she 's devilish ugly ! '' 
thought Anatole . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , also roused to great excitement by Anatole 's arrival , thought in another way . 
Of course , she , a handsome young woman without any definite position , without relations or even a country , did not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski , to reading aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who , able to appreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain , badly dressed , ungainly Russian princesses , would fall in love with her and carry her off ; and here at last was a Russian prince . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne knew a story , heard from her aunt but finished in her own way , which she liked to repeat to herself . 
It was the story of a girl who had been seduced , and to whom her poor mother -LRB- sa pauvre mere -RRB- appeared , and reproached her for yielding to a man without being married . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this story to him , her seducer . 
And now he , a real Russian prince , had appeared . 
He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear and he would marry her . 
So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle Bourienne 's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole about Paris . 
It was not calculation that guided her -LRB- she did not even for a moment consider what she should do -RRB- , but all this had long been familiar to her , and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible . 
The little princess , like an old war horse that hears the trumpet , unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition , prepared for the familiar gallop of coquetry , without any ulterior motive or any struggle , but with naive and lighthearted gaiety . 
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man tired of being run after by women , his vanity was flattered by the spectacle of his power over these three women . 
Besides that , he was beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions . 
After tea , the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was asked to play on the clavichord . 
Anatole , laughing and in high spirits , came and leaned on his elbows , facing her and beside Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion . 
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic . 
But Anatole 's expression , though his eyes were fixed on her , referred not to her but to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne 's little foot , which he was then touching with his own under the clavichord . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princess Mary , and in her lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess . 
`` How she loves me ! '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
`` How happy I am now , and how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband ! 
Husband ? 
Can it be possible ? '' 
she thought , not daring to look at his face , but still feeling his eyes gazing at her . 
In the evening , after supper , when all were about to retire , Anatole kissed Princess Mary 's hand . 
She did not know how she found the courage , but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her shortsighted eyes . 
Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne 's hand . 
-LRB- This was not etiquette , but then he did everything so simply and with such assurance ! -RRB- 
Mademoiselle Bourienne flushed , and gave the princess a frightened look . 
`` What delicacy ! '' 
thought the princess . 
`` Is it possible that Amelie '' -LRB- Mademoiselle Bourienne -RRB- `` thinks I could be jealous of her , and not value her pure affection and devotion to me ? '' 
She went up to her and kissed her warmly . 
Anatole went up to kiss the little princess ' hand . 
`` No ! 
No ! 
No ! 
When your father writes to tell me that you are behaving well I will give you my hand to kiss . 
Not till then ! '' 
she said . 
And smilingly raising a finger at him , she left the room . 
They all separated , but , except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he got into bed , all kept awake a long time that night . 
