asked the count coming to the door . 
`` Here is here is some scent . 
Peronskaya must be tired of waiting . '' 
`` It 's ready , Miss , '' said the maid , holding up the shortened gauze dress with two fingers , and blowing and shaking something off it , as if by this to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity of what she held . 
Natasha began putting on the dress . 
`` In a minute ! 
In a minute ! 
Do n't come in , Papa ! '' 
she cried to her father as he opened the door -- speaking from under the filmy skirt which still covered her whole face . 
Sonya slammed the door to . 
A minute later they let the count in . 
He was wearing a blue swallow-tail coat , shoes and stockings , and was perfumed and his hair pomaded . 
`` Oh , Papa ! 
how nice you look ! 
Charming ! '' 
cried Natasha , as she stood in the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze . 
`` If you please , Miss ! 
allow me , '' said the maid , who on her knees was pulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of her mouth to the other with her tongue . 
`` Say what you like , '' exclaimed Sonya , in a despairing voice as she looked at Natasha , `` say what you like , it 's still too long . '' 
Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass . 
The dress was too long . 
`` Really , madam , it is not at all too long , '' said Mavra , crawling on her knees after her young lady . 
`` Well , if it 's too long we 'll take it up ... we 'll tack it up in one minute , '' said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck on the front of her little shawl and , still kneeling on the floor , set to work once more . 
At that moment , with soft steps , the countess came in shyly , in her cap and velvet gown . 
`` Oo-oo , my beauty ! '' 
exclaimed the count , `` she looks better than any of you ! '' 
He would have embraced her but , blushing , she stepped aside fearing to be rumpled . 
`` Mamma , your cap , more to this side , '' said Natasha . 
`` I 'll arrange it , '' and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up her skirt could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn off . 
`` Oh goodness ! 
What has happened ? 
Really it was not my fault ! '' 
`` Never mind , I 'll run it up , it wo n't show , '' said Dunyasha . 
`` What a beauty -- a very queen ! '' 
said the nurse as she came to the door . 
`` And Sonya ! 
They are lovely ! '' 
At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and started . 
But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens . 
Peronskaya was quite ready . 
In spite of her age and plainness she had gone through the same process as the Rostovs , but with less flurry -- for to her it was a matter of routine . 
Her ugly old body was washed , perfumed , and powdered in just the same way . 
She had washed behind her ears just as carefully , and when she entered her drawing room in her yellow dress , wearing her badge as maid of honor , her old lady 's maid was as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostovs ' servants had been . 
She praised the Rostovs ' toilets . 
They praised her taste and toilet , and at eleven o'clock , careful of their coiffures and dresses , they settled themselves in their carriages and drove off . 
Natasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not once had time to think of what lay before her . 
In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage , she for the first time vividly imagined what was in store for her there at the ball , in those brightly lighted rooms -- with music , flowers , dances , the Emperor , and all the brilliant young people of Petersburg . 
The prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true , so out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the carriage . 
She understood all that awaited her only when , after stepping over the red baize at the entrance , she entered the hall , took off her fur cloak , and , beside Sonya and in front of her mother , mounted the brightly illuminated stairs between the flowers . 
Only then did she remember how she must behave at a ball , and tried to assume the majestic air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion . 
