And he looked round in the sleigh . 
`` Look , his mustache and eyelashes are all white ! '' 
said one of the strange , pretty , unfamiliar people -- the one with fine eyebrows and mustache . 
`` I think this used to be Natasha , '' thought Nicholas , `` and that was Madame Schoss , but perhaps it 's not , and this Circassian with the mustache I do n't know , but I love her . '' 
`` Are n't you cold ? '' 
he asked . 
They did not answer but began to laugh . 
Dimmler from the sleigh behind shouted something -- probably something funny -- but they could not make out what he said . 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
some voices answered , laughing . 
`` But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows , and a glitter of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy buildings and the shrill yells of some animals . 
And if this is really Melyukovka , it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and have come to Melyukovka , '' thought Nicholas . 
It really was Melyukovka , and maids and footmen with merry faces came running , out to the porch carrying candles . 
`` Who is it ? '' 
asked someone in the porch . 
`` The mummers from the count 's . 
I know by the horses , '' replied some voices . 
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova , a broadly built , energetic woman wearing spectacles , sat in the drawing room in a loose dress , surrounded by her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull . 
They were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the wax figures would throw on the wall , when they heard the steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule . 
Hussars , ladies , witches , clowns , and bears , after clearing their throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule , came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted . 
The clown -- Dimmler -- and the lady -- Nicholas -- started a dance . 
Surrounded by the screaming children the mummers , covering their faces and disguising their voices , bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the room . 
`` Dear me ! 
there 's no recognizing them ! 
And Natasha ! 
See whom she looks like ! 
She really reminds me of somebody . 
But Herr Dimmler -- is n't he good ! 
I did n't know him ! 
And how he dances . 
Dear me , there 's a Circassian . 
Really , how becoming it is to dear Sonya . 
And who is that ? 
Well , you have cheered us up ! 
Nikita and Vanya -- clear away the tables ! 
And we were sitting so quietly . 
Ha , ha , ha ! 
... The hussar , the hussar ! 
Just like a boy ! 
And the legs ! 
... I ca n't look at him ... '' different voices were saying . 
Natasha , the young Melyukovs ' favorite , disappeared with them into the back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from behind the door . 
Ten minutes later , all the young Melyukovs joined the mummers . 
Pelageya Danilovna , having given orders to clear the rooms for the visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs , went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles , peering into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any of them . 
It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize , she did not even recognize her own daughters , or her late husband 's , dressing gowns and uniforms , which they had put on . 
`` And who is is this ? '' 
she asked her governess , peering into the face of her own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar . 
`` I suppose it is one of the Rostovs ! 
Well , Mr. Hussar , and what regiment do you serve in ? '' 
she asked Natasha . 
