More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making a slight noise at the door to attract his attention , but Pierre did not hear him . 
`` Is the cabman to be discharged , your honor ? '' 
`` Oh yes ! '' 
said Pierre , rousing himself and rising hurriedly . 
`` Look here , '' he added , taking Gerasim by a button of his coat and looking down at the old man with moist , shining , and ecstatic eyes , `` I say , do you know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow ? '' 
`` We heard so , '' replied the man . 
`` I beg you not to tell anyone who I am , and to do what I ask you . '' 
`` Yes , your excellency , '' replied Gerasim . 
`` Will you have something to eat ? '' 
`` No , but I want something else . 
I want peasant clothes and a pistol , '' said Pierre , unexpectedly blushing . 
`` Yes , your excellency , '' said Gerasim after thinking for a moment . 
All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor 's study , and Gerasim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to another and talking to himself . 
And he spent the night on a bed made up for him there . 
Gerasim , being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things , accepted Pierre 's taking up his residence in the house without surprise , and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on . 
That same evening -- without even asking himself what they were wanted for -- he procured a coachman 's coat and cap for Pierre , and promised to get him the pistol next day . 
Makar Alexeevich came twice that evening shuffling along in his galoshes as far as the door and stopped and looked ingratiatingly at Pierre . 
But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he wrapped his dressing gown around him with a shamefaced and angry look and hurried away . 
It was when Pierre -LRB- wearing the coachman 's coat which Gerasim had procured for him and had disinfected by steam -RRB- was on his way with the old man to buy the pistol at the Sukharev market that he met the Rostovs . 
Kutuzov 's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazan road was issued at night on the first of September . 
The first troops started at once , and during the night they marched slowly and steadily without hurry . 
At daybreak , however , those nearing the town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldiers crowding and hurrying across the bridge , ascending on the opposite side and blocking the streets and alleys , while endless masses of troops were bearing down on them from behind , and an unreasoning hurry and alarm overcame them . 
They all rushed forward to the bridge , onto it , and to the fords and the boats . 
Kutuzov himself had driven round by side streets to the other side of Moscow . 
By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September , only the rear guard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb , where they had ample room . 
The main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it . 
At that very time , at ten in the morning of the second of September , Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklonny Hill looking at the panorama spread out before him . 
From the twenty-sixth of August to the second of September , that is from the battle of Borodino to the entry of the French into Moscow , during the whole of that agitating , memorable week , there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that always comes as a surprise , when the sun hangs low and gives more heat than in spring , when everything shines so brightly in the rare clear atmosphere that the eyes smart , when the lungs are strengthened and refreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air , when even the nights are warm , and when in those dark warm nights , golden stars startle and delight us continually by falling from the sky . 
At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather still held . 
The brightness of the morning was magical . 
Moscow seen from the Poklonny Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river , her gardens , and her churches , and she seemed to be living her usual life , her cupolas glittering like stars in the sunlight . 
The view of the strange city with its peculiar architecture , such as he had never seen before , filled Napoleon with the rather envious and uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that has no knowledge of them . 
This city was evidently living with the full force of its own life . 
By the indefinite signs which , even at a distance , distinguish a living body from a dead one , Napoleon from the Poklonny Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt , as it were , the breathing of that great and beautiful body . 
Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother ; every foreigner who sees her , even if ignorant of her significance as the mother city , must feel her feminine character , and Napoleon felt it . 
`` Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables eglises , Moscou la sainte . 
La voila done enfin , cette fameuse ville ! 
Il etait temps , '' * said he , and dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him , and summoned Lelorgne d'Ideville , the interpreter . 
* `` That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches , holy Moscow ! 
Here it is then at last , that famous city . 
It was high time . '' 
`` A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor , '' thought he -LRB- he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk -RRB- . 
From that point of view he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before . 
It seemed strange to him that his long-felt wish , which had seemed unattainable , had at last been realized . 
In the clear morning light he gazed now at the city and now at the plan , considering its details , and the assurance of possessing it agitated and awed him . 
`` But could it be otherwise ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Here is this capital at my feet . 
Where is Alexander now , and of what is he thinking ? 
A strange , beautiful , and majestic city ; and a strange and majestic moment ! 
