`` By the Lord Jesus Christ , I thought we had put something under him ! '' 
said the valet . 
The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was the matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he asked to be carried into the hut after his caleche had stopped at Mytishchi . 
After growing confused from pain while being carried into the hut he again regained consciousness , and while drinking tea once more recalled all that had happened to him , and above all vividly remembered the moment at the ambulance station when , at the sight of the sufferings of a man he disliked , those new thoughts had come to him which promised him happiness . 
And those thoughts , though now vague and indefinite , again possessed his soul . 
He remembered that he had now a new source of happiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels . 
That was why he asked for a copy of them . 
The uncomfortable position in which they had put him and turned him over again confused his thoughts , and when he came to himself a third time it was in the complete stillness of the night . 
Everybody near him was sleeping . 
A cricket chirped from across the passage ; someone was shouting and singing in the street ; cockroaches rustled on the table , on the icons , and on the walls , and a big fly flopped at the head of the bed and around the candle beside him , the wick of which was charred and had shaped itself like a mushroom . 
His mind was not in a normal state . 
A healthy man usually thinks of , feels , and remembers innumerable things simultaneously , but has the power and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which to fix his whole attention . 
A healthy man can tear himself away from the deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and can then return again to his own thoughts . 
But Prince Andrew 's mind was not in a normal state in that respect . 
All the powers of his mind were more active and clearer than ever , but they acted apart from his will . 
Most diverse thoughts and images occupied him simultaneously . 
At times his brain suddenly began to work with a vigor , clearness , and depth it had never reached when he was in health , but suddenly in the midst of its work it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strength to turn it back again . 
`` Yes , a new happiness was revealed to me of which man can not be deprived , '' he thought as he lay in the semi-darkness of the quiet hut , gazing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes . 
`` A happiness lying beyond material forces , outside the material influences that act on man -- a happiness of the soul alone , the happiness of loving . 
Every man can understand it , but to conceive it and enjoin it was possible only for God . 
But how did God enjoin that law ? 
And why was the Son ... ? '' 
And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off , and Prince Andrew heard -LRB- without knowing whether it was a delusion or reality -RRB- a soft whispering voice incessantly and rhythmically repeating `` piti-piti-piti , '' and then `` titi , '' and then again `` piti-piti-piti , '' and `` ti-ti '' once more . 
At the same time he felt that above his face , above the very middle of it , some strange airy structure was being erected out of slender needles or splinters , to the sound of this whispered music . 
He felt that he had to balance carefully -LRB- though it was difficult -RRB- so that this airy structure should not collapse ; but nevertheless it kept collapsing and again slowly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmic music -- `` it stretches , stretches , spreading out and stretching , '' said Prince Andrew to himself . 
While listening to this whispering and feeling the sensation of this drawing out and the construction of this edifice of needles , he also saw by glimpses a red halo round the candle , and heard the rustle of the cockroaches and the buzzing of the fly that flopped against his pillow and his face . 
Each time the fly touched his face it gave him a burning sensation and yet to his surprise it did not destroy the structure , though it knocked against the very region of his face where it was rising . 
But besides this there was something else of importance . 
It was something white by the door -- the statue of a sphinx , which also oppressed him . 
`` But perhaps that 's my shirt on the table , '' he thought , `` and that 's my legs , and that is the door , but why is it always stretching and drawing itself out , and ` piti-piti-piti ' and ` ti-ti ' and ` piti-piti-piti ' ... ? 
That 's enough , please leave off ! '' 
Prince Andrew painfully entreated someone . 
And suddenly thoughts and feelings again swam to the surface of his mind with peculiar clearness and force . 
`` Yes -- love , '' he thought again quite clearly . 
`` But not love which loves for something , for some quality , for some purpose , or for some reason , but the love which I -- while dying -- first experienced when I saw my enemy and yet loved him . 
I experienced that feeling of love which is the very essence of the soul and does not require an object . 
Now again I feel that bliss . 
To love one 's neighbors , to love one 's enemies , to love everything , to love God in all His manifestations . 
It is possible to love someone dear to you with human love , but an enemy can only be loved by divine love . 
That is why I experienced such joy when I felt that I loved that man . 
What has become of him ? 
Is he alive ? 
... `` When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred , but divine love can not change . 
No , neither death nor anything else can destroy it . 
It is the very essence of the soul . 
Yet how many people have I hated in my life ? 
And of them all , I loved and hated none as I did her . '' 
And he vividly pictured to himself Natasha , not as he had done in the past with nothing but her charms which gave him delight , but for the first time picturing to himself her soul . 
And he understood her feelings , her sufferings , shame , and remorse . 
He now understood for the first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her , the cruelty of his rupture with her . 
