He stood a little behind the governor and held himself with military decorum through the service , meditating on a great variety of subjects . 
When the service was over the governor 's wife beckoned him to her . 
`` Have you seen the princess ? '' 
she asked , indicating with a movement of her head a lady standing on the opposite side , beyond the choir . 
Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profile he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude , timidity , and pity that immediately overcame him . 
Princess Mary , evidently engrossed by her thoughts , was crossing herself for the last time before leaving the church . 
Nicholas looked at her face with surprise . 
It was the same face he had seen before , there was the same general expression of refined , inner , spiritual labor , but now it was quite differently lit up . 
There was a pathetic expression of sorrow , prayer , and hope in it . 
As had occurred before when she was present , Nicholas went up to her without waiting to be prompted by the governor 's wife and not asking himself whether or not it was right and proper to address her here in church , and told her he had heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul . 
As soon as she heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face , lighting up both her sorrow and her joy . 
`` There is one thing I wanted to tell you , Princess , '' said Rostov . 
`` It is that if your brother , Prince Andrew Nikolievich , were not living , it would have been at once announced in the Gazette , as he is a colonel . '' 
The princess looked at him , not grasping what he was saying , but cheered by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face . 
`` And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound '' -LRB- the Gazette said it was a shell -RRB- `` either proving fatal at once or being very slight , '' continued Nicholas . 
`` We must hope for the best , and I am sure ... '' Princess Mary interrupted him . 
`` Oh , that would be so dread ... '' she began and , prevented by agitation from finishing , she bent her head with a movement as graceful as everything she did in his presence and , looking up at him gratefully , went out , following her aunt . 
That evening Nicholas did not go out , but stayed at home to settle some accounts with the horse dealers . 
When he had finished that business it was already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed , and for a long time he paced up and down the room , reflecting on his life , a thing he rarely did . 
Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met her in Smolensk province . 
His having encountered her in such exceptional circumstances , and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as a good match , had drawn his particular attention to her . 
When he met her again in Voronezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasing but powerful . 
Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he observed in her at this time . 
He was , however , preparing to go away and it had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himself of chances of meeting her . 
But that day 's encounter in church had , he felt , sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind . 
That pale , sad , refined face , that radiant look , those gentle graceful gestures , and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features agitated him and evoked his sympathy . 
In men Rostov could not bear to see the expression of a higher spiritual life -LRB- that was why he did not like Prince Andrew -RRB- and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy and dreaminess , but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed the depth of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was an irresistible attraction . 
`` She must be a wonderful woman . 
A real angel ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Why am I not free ? 
Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya ? '' 
And he involuntarily compared the two : the lack of spirituality in the one and the abundance of it in the other -- a spirituality he himself lacked and therefore valued most highly . 
He tried to picture what would happen were he free . 
How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife . 
But no , he could not imagine that . 
He felt awed , and no clear picture presented itself to his mind . 
He had long ago pictured to himself a future with Sonya , and that was all clear and simple just because it had all been thought out and he knew all there was in Sonya , but it was impossible to picture a future with Princess Mary , because he did not understand her but simply loved her . 
Reveries about Sonya had had something merry and playful in them , but to dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening . 
`` How she prayed ! '' 
he thought . 
`` It was plain that her whole soul was in her prayer . 
Yes , that was the prayer that moves mountains , and I am sure her prayer will be answered . 
Why do n't I pray for what I want ? '' 
he suddenly thought . 
`` What do I want ? 
To be free , released from Sonya ... She was right , '' he thought , remembering what the governor 's wife had said : `` Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sonya . 
Muddles , grief for Mamma ... business difficulties ... muddles , terrible muddles ! 
Besides , I do n't love her -- not as I should . 
O , God ! 
