`` I will do it all , Father , '' he said . 
`` Well , now , good-by ! '' 
He gave his son his hand to kiss , and embraced him . 
`` Remember this , Prince Andrew , if they kill you it will hurt me , your old father ... '' he paused unexpectedly , and then in a querulous voice suddenly shrieked : `` but if I hear that you have not behaved like a son of Nicholas Bolkonski , I shall be ashamed ! '' 
`` You need not have said that to me , Father , '' said the son with a smile . 
The old man was silent . 
`` I also wanted to ask you , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` if I 'm killed and if I have a son , do not let him be taken away from you - as I said yesterday ... let him grow up with you ... . 
Please . '' 
`` Not let the wife have him ? '' 
said the old man , and laughed . 
They stood silent , facing one another . 
The old man 's sharp eyes were fixed straight on his son 's . 
Something twitched in the lower part of the old prince 's face . 
`` We 've said good-by . 
Go ! '' 
he suddenly shouted in a loud , angry voice , opening his door . 
`` What is it ? 
What ? '' 
asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressing gown , spectacled and wigless , shouting in an angry voice . 
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply . 
`` Well ! '' 
he said , turning to his wife . 
And this `` Well ! '' 
sounded coldly ironic , as if he were saying , : `` Now go through your performance . '' 
`` Andrew , already ! '' 
said the little princess , turning pale and looking with dismay at her husband . 
He embraced her . 
She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder . 
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on , looked into her face , and carefully placed her in an easy chair . 
`` Adieu , Mary , '' said he gently to his sister , taking her by the hand and kissing her , and then he left the room with rapid steps . 
The little princess lay in the armchair , Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing her temples . 
Princess Mary , supporting her sister-in-law , still looked with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction . 
From the study , like pistol shots , came the frequent sound of the old man angrily blowing his nose . 
Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white dressing gown looked out . 
`` Gone ? 
That 's all right ! '' 
said he ; and looking angrily at the unconscious little princess , he shook his head reprovingly and slammed the door . 
BOOK TWO : 1805 In October , 1805 , a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of the Archduchy of Austria , and yet other regiments freshly arriving from Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the inhabitants on whom they were quartered . 
Braunau was the headquarters of the commander-in-chief , Kutuzov . 
On October 11 , 1805 , one of the infantry regiments that had just reached Braunau had halted half a mile from the town , waiting to be inspected by the commander in chief . 
Despite the un-Russian appearance of the locality and surroundings -- fruit gardens , stone fences , tiled roofs , and hills in the distance -- and despite the fact that the inhabitants -LRB- who gazed with curiosity at the soldiers -RRB- were not Russians , the regiment had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for an inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia . 
On the evening of the last day 's march an order had been received that the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march . 
Though the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander , and the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or not , it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders to present the regiment in parade order , on the principle that it is always better to `` bow too low than not bow low enough . '' 
So the soldiers , after a twenty-mile march , were kept mending and cleaning all night long without closing their eyes , while the adjutants and company commanders calculated and reckoned , and by morning the regiment -- instead of the straggling , disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day before -- presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom knew his place and his duty , had every button and every strap in place , and shone with cleanliness . 
And not only externally was all in order , but had it pleased the commander in chief to look under the uniforms he would have found on every man a clean shirt , and in every knapsack the appointed number of articles , `` awl , soap , and all , '' as the soldiers say . 
There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at ease . 
It was the state of the soldiers ' boots . 
More than half the men 's boots were in holes . 
But this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental commander , for in spite of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the Austrian commissariat , and the regiment had marched some seven hundred miles . 
The commander of the regiment was an elderly , choleric , stout , and thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers , and wider from chest to back than across the shoulders . 
