`` Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel and judge of its purity ? 
Only by the inner purification of myself can I retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive . '' 
`` Yes , yes , that is so , '' said Pierre joyfully . 
`` The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone , not on those worldly sciences of physics , history , chemistry , and the like , into which intellectual knowledge is divided . 
The highest wisdom is one . 
The highest wisdom has but one science -- the science of the whole - the science explaining the whole creation and man 's place in it . 
To receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one 's inner self , and so before one can know , it is necessary to believe and to perfect one 's self . 
And to attain this end , we have the light called conscience that God has implanted in our souls . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' assented Pierre . 
`` Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit , and ask thyself whether thou art content with thyself . 
What hast thou attained relying on reason only ? 
What art thou ? 
You are young , you are rich , you are clever , you are well educated . 
And what have you done with all these good gifts ? 
Are you content with yourself and with your life ? '' 
`` No , I hate my life , '' Pierre muttered , wincing . 
`` Thou hatest it . 
Then change it , purify thyself ; and as thou art purified , thou wilt gain wisdom . 
Look at your life , my dear sir . 
How have you spent it ? 
In riotous orgies and debauchery , receiving everything from society and giving nothing in return . 
You have become the possessor of wealth . 
How have you used it ? 
What have you done for your neighbor ? 
Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands of slaves ? 
Have you helped them physically and morally ? 
No ! 
You have profited by their toil to lead a profligate life . 
That is what you have done . 
Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your neighbor ? 
No ! 
You have spent your life in idleness . 
Then you married , my dear sir -- took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young woman ; and what have you done ? 
You have not helped her to find the way of truth , my dear sir , but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and misery . 
A man offended you and you shot him , and you say you do not know God and hate your life . 
There is nothing strange in that , my dear sir ! '' 
After these words , the Mason , as if tired by his long discourse , again leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes . 
Pierre looked at that aged , stern , motionless , almost lifeless face and moved his lips without uttering a sound . 
He wished to say , `` Yes , a vile , idle , vicious life ! '' 
but dared not break the silence . 
The Mason cleared his throat huskily , as old men do , and called his servant . 
`` How about the horses ? '' 
he asked , without looking at Pierre . 
`` The exchange horses have just come , '' answered the servant . 
`` Will you not rest here ? '' 
`` No , tell them to harness . '' 
`` Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me all , and without promising to help me ? '' 
thought Pierre , rising with downcast head ; and he began to pace the room , glancing occasionally at the Mason . 
`` Yes , I never thought of it , but I have led a contemptible and profligate life , though I did not like it and did not want to , '' thought Pierre . 
`` But this man knows the truth and , if he wished to , could disclose it to me . '' 
