When , having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among the people in the defense of Moscow , Pierre had met the Rostovs and Natasha had said to him : `` Are you remaining in Moscow ? 
... How splendid ! '' 
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing , even if Moscow were taken , for him to remain there and do what he was predestined to do . 
Next day , with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not lagging in any way behind them , Pierre went to the Three Hills gate . 
But when he returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended , he suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable . 
He must remain in Moscow , concealing his name , and must meet Napoleon and kill him , and either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe - which it seemed to him was solely due to Napoleon . 
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte 's life in 1809 by a German student in Vienna , and knew that the student had been shot . 
And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out his design excited him still more . 
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose . 
The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in view of the common calamity , the same feeling that had caused him to go to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and , in place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed , to sleep on a hard sofa without undressing and eat the same food as Gerasim . 
The other was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt for everything conventional , artificial , and human -- for everything the majority of men regard as the greatest good in the world . 
Pierre had first experienced this strange and fascinating feeling at the Sloboda Palace , when he had suddenly felt that wealth , power , and life -- all that men so painstakingly acquire and guard -- if it has any worth has so only by reason the joy with which it can all be renounced . 
It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his last penny on drink , and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for no apparent reason and knowing that it will cost him all the money he possesses : the feeling which causes a man to perform actions which from an ordinary point of view are insane , to test , as it were , his personal power and strength , affirming the existence of a higher , nonhuman criterion of life . 
From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first time at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence , but only now found full satisfaction for it . 
Moreover , at this moment Pierre was supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what he had already done in that direction . 
If he were now to leave Moscow like everyone else , his flight from home , the peasant coat , the pistol , and his announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would all become not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous , and to this Pierre was very sensitive . 
Pierre 's physical condition , as is always the case , corresponded to his mental state . 
The unaccustomed coarse food , the vodka he drank during those days , the absence of wine and cigars , his dirty unchanged linen , two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding -- all this kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity . 
It was two o'clock in the afternoon . 
The French had already entered Moscow . 
Pierre knew this , but instead of acting he only thought about his undertaking , going over its minutest details in his mind . 
In his fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of the blow or the death of Napoleon , but with extraordinary vividness and melancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance . 
`` Yes , alone , for the sake of all , I must do it or perish ! '' 
he thought . 
`` Yes , I will approach ... and then suddenly ... with pistol or dagger ? 
But that is all the same ! 
` It is not I but the hand of Providence that punishes thee , ' I shall say , '' thought he , imagining what he would say when killing Napoleon . 
`` Well then , take me and execute me ! '' 
he went on , speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression . 
While Pierre , standing in the middle of the room , was talking to himself in this way , the study door opened and on the threshold appeared the figure of Makar Alexeevich , always so timid before but now quite transformed . 
His dressing gown was unfastened , his face red and distorted . 
He was obviously drunk . 
On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first , but noticing embarrassment on Pierre 's face immediately grew bold and , staggering on his thin legs , advanced into the middle of the room . 
`` They 're frightened , '' he said confidentially in a hoarse voice . 
`` I say I wo n't surrender , I say ... Am I not right , sir ? '' 
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it with unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor . 
Gerasim and the porter , who had followed Makar Alexeevich , stopped him in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him . 
Pierre , coming out into the corridor , looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy old man . 
Makar Alexeevich , frowning with exertion , held on to the pistol and screamed hoarsely , evidently with some heroic fancy in his head . 
`` To arms ! 
Board them ! 
No , you sha n't get it , '' he yelled . 
`` That will do , please , that will do . 
Have the goodness -- please , sir , to let go ! 
Please , sir ... '' pleaded Gerasim , trying carefully to steer Makar Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door . 
`` Who are you ? 
Bonaparte ! 
... '' shouted Makar Alexeevich . 
`` That 's not right , sir . 
Come to your room , please , and rest . 
