`` Do n't call him bad ! '' 
said Natasha . 
`` But I do n't know , do n't know at all ... '' She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity , tenderness , and love welled up in Pierre . 
He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and hoped they would not be noticed . 
`` We wo n't speak of it any more , my dear , '' said Pierre , and his gentle , cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha . 
`` We wo n't speak of it , my dear -- I 'll tell him everything ; but one thing I beg of you , consider me your friend and if you want help , advice , or simply to open your heart to someone -- not now , but when your mind is clearer think of me ! '' 
He took her hand and kissed it . 
`` I shall be happy if it 's in my power ... '' Pierre grew confused . 
`` Do n't speak to me like that . 
I am not worth it ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha and turned to leave the room , but Pierre held her hand . 
He knew he had something more to say to her . 
But when he said it he was amazed at his own words . 
`` Stop , stop ! 
You have your whole life before you , '' said he to her . 
`` Before me ? 
No ! 
All is over for me , '' she replied with shame and self-abasement . 
`` All over ? '' 
he repeated . 
`` If I were not myself , but the handsomest , cleverest , and best man in the world , and were free , I would this moment ask on my knees for your hand and your love ! '' 
For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude and tenderness , and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room . 
Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom , restraining tears of tenderness and joy that choked him , and without finding the sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh . 
`` Where to now , your excellency ? '' 
asked the coachman . 
`` Where to ? '' 
Pierre asked himself . 
`` Where can I go now ? 
Surely not to the Club or to pay calls ? '' 
All men seemed so pitiful , so poor , in comparison with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced : in comparison with that softened , grateful , last look she had given him through her tears . 
`` Home ! '' 
said Pierre , and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheit he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the air with joy . 
It was clear and frosty . 
Above the dirty , ill-lit streets , above the black roofs , stretched the dark starry sky . 
Only looking up at the sky did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised . 
At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starry sky presented itself to his eyes . 
Almost in the center of it , above the Prechistenka Boulevard , surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars but distinguished from them all by its nearness to the earth , its white light , and its long uplifted tail , shone the enormous and brilliant comet of 1812 -- the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes and the end of the world . 
In Pierre , however , that comet with its long luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear . 
On the contrary he gazed joyfully , his eyes moist with tears , at this bright comet which , having traveled in its orbit with inconceivable velocity through immeasurable space , seemed suddenly - like an arrow piercing the earth -- to remain fixed in a chosen spot , vigorously holding its tail erect , shining and displaying its white light amid countless other scintillating stars . 
It seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passing in his own softened and uplifted soul , now blossoming into a new life . 
From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of the forces of Western Europe began , and in 1812 these forces - millions of men , reckoning those transporting and feeding the army - moved from the west eastwards to the Russian frontier , toward which since 1811 Russian forces had been similarly drawn . 
On the twelfth of June , 1812 , the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began , that is , an event took place opposed to human reason and to human nature . 
Millions of men perpetrated against one another such innumerable crimes , frauds , treacheries , thefts , forgeries , issues of false money , burglaries , incendiarisms , and murders as in whole centuries are not recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world , but which those who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes . 
What produced this extraordinary occurrence ? 
What were its causes ? 
The historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongs inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg , the nonobservance of the Continental System , the ambition of Napoleon , the firmness of Alexander , the mistakes of the diplomatists , and so on . 
Consequently , it would only have been necessary for Metternich , Rumyantsev , or Talleyrand , between a levee and an evening party , to have taken proper pains and written a more adroit note , or for Napoleon to have written to Alexander : `` My respected Brother , I consent to restore the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg '' -- and there would have been no war . 
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries . 
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England 's intrigues -LRB- as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena -RRB- . 
It naturally seemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the war was Napoleon 's ambition ; to the Duke of Oldenburg , that the cause of the war was the violence done to him ; to businessmen that the cause of the way was the Continental System which was ruining Europe ; to the generals and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of giving them employment ; to the legitimists of that day that it was the need of re-establishing les bons principes , and to the diplomatists of that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed from Napoleon , and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178 . 
