`` Oh -- why , that was in a dream ! '' 
Petya said to himself , as he lurched forward . 
`` It 's in my ears . 
But perhaps it 's music of my own . 
Well , go on , my music ! 
Now ! 
... '' He closed his eyes , and , from all sides as if from a distance , sounds fluttered , grew into harmonies , separated , blended , and again all mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn . 
`` Oh , this is delightful ! 
As much as I like and as I like ! '' 
said Petya to himself . 
He tried to conduct that enormous orchestra . 
`` Now softly , softly die away ! '' 
and the sounds obeyed him . 
`` Now fuller , more joyful . 
Still more and more joyful ! '' 
And from an unknown depth rose increasingly triumphant sounds . 
`` Now voices join in ! '' 
ordered Petya . 
And at first from afar he heard men 's voices and then women 's . 
The voices grew in harmonious triumphant strength , and Petya listened to their surpassing beauty in awe and joy . 
With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song , the drip from the trees , and the hissing of the saber , `` Ozheg-zheg-zheg ... '' and again the horses jostled one another and neighed , not disturbing the choir but joining in it . 
Petya did not know how long this lasted : he enjoyed himself all the time , wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to share it . 
He was awakened by Likhachev 's kindly voice . 
`` It 's ready , your honor ; you can split a Frenchman in half with it ! '' 
Petya woke up . 
`` It 's getting light , it 's really getting light ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their very tails , and a watery light showed itself through the bare branches . 
Petya shook himself , jumped up , took a ruble from his pocket and gave it to Likhachev ; then he flourished the saber , tested it , and sheathed it . 
The Cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddle girths . 
`` And here 's the commander , '' said Likhachev . 
Denisov came out of the watchman 's hut and , having called Petya , gave orders to get ready . 
The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness , tightened their saddle girths , and formed companies . 
Denisov stood by the watchman 's hut giving final orders . 
The infantry of the detachment passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist of early dawn , hundreds of feet splashing through the mud . 
The esaul gave some orders to his men . 
Petya held his horse by the bridle , impatiently awaiting the order to mount . 
His face , having been bathed in cold water , was all aglow , and his eyes were particularly brilliant . 
Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically . 
`` Well , is ev ` wything weady ? '' 
asked Denisov . 
`` Bwing the horses . '' 
The horses were brought . 
Denisov was angry with the Cossack because the saddle girths were too slack , reproved him , and mounted . 
Petya put his foot in the stirrup . 
His horse by habit made as if to nip his leg , but Petya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious of his own weight and , turning to look at the hussars starting in the darkness behind him , rode up to Denisov . 
`` Vasili Dmitrich , entrust me with some commission ! 
Please ... for God 's sake ... ! '' 
said he . 
Denisov seemed to have forgotten Petya 's very existence . 
