But , fortunately for her , she felt her eyes growing misty , she saw nothing clearly , her pulse beat a hundred to the minute , and the blood throbbed at her heart . 
She could not assume that pose , which would have made her ridiculous , and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying with all her might to conceal it . 
And this was the very attitude that became her best . 
Before and behind them other visitors were entering , also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses . 
The mirrors on the landing reflected ladies in white , pale-blue , and pink dresses , with diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms . 
Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflection from the others . 
All was blended into one brilliant procession . 
On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices , footsteps , and greetings deafened Natasha , and the light and glitter dazzled her still more . 
The host and hostess , who had already been standing at the door for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals , `` Charme de vous voir , '' * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same manner . 
* `` Delighted to see you . '' 
The two girls in their white dresses , each with a rose in her black hair , both curtsied in the same way , but the hostess ' eye involuntarily rested longer on the slim Natasha . 
She looked at her and gave her alone a special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess . 
Looking at her she may have recalled the golden , irrecoverable days of her own girlhood and her own first ball . 
The host also followed Natasha with his eyes and asked the count which was his daughter . 
`` Charming ! '' 
said he , kissing the tips of his fingers . 
In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting the Emperor . 
The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of that crowd . 
Natasha heard and felt that several people were asking about her and looking at her . 
She realized that those noticing her liked her , and this observation helped to calm her . 
`` There are some like ourselves and some worse , '' she thought . 
Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people at the ball . 
`` That is the Dutch ambassador , do you see ? 
That gray-haired man , '' she said , indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly hair , who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said . 
`` Ah , here she is , the Queen of Petersburg , Countess Bezukhova , '' said Peronskaya , indicating Helene who had just entered . 
`` How lovely ! 
She is quite equal to Marya Antonovna . 
See how the men , young and old , pay court to her . 
Beautiful and clever ... they say Prince -- is quite mad about her . 
But see , those two , though not good-looking , are even more run after . '' 
She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plain daughter . 
`` She is a splendid match , a millionairess , '' said Peronskaya . 
`` And look , here come her suitors . '' 
`` That is Bezukhova 's brother , Anatole Kuragin , '' she said , indicating a handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head erect , looking at something over the heads of the ladies . 
`` He 's handsome , is n't he ? 
I hear they will marry him to that rich girl . 
But your cousin , Drubetskoy , is also very attentive to her . 
They say she has millions . 
Oh yes , that 's the French ambassador himself ! '' 
she replied to the countess ' inquiry about Caulaincourt . 
`` Looks as if he were a king ! 
All the same , the French are charming , very charming . 
No one more charming in society . 
Ah , here she is ! 
Yes , she is still the most beautiful of them all , our Marya Antonovna ! 
And how simply she is dressed ! 
Lovely ! 
And that stout one in spectacles is the universal Freemason , '' she went on , indicating Pierre . 
`` Put him beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon ! '' 
Pierre , swaying his stout body , advanced , making way through the crowd and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if he were passing through a crowd at a fair . 
