release me from this dreadful , inextricable position ! '' 
he suddenly began to pray . 
`` Yes , prayer can move mountains , but one must have faith and not pray as Natasha and I used to as children , that the snow might turn into sugar -- and then run out into the yard to see whether it had done so . 
No , but I am not praying for trifles now , '' he thought as he put his pipe down in a corner , and folding his hands placed himself before the icon . 
Softened by memories of Princess Mary he began to pray as he had not done for a long time . 
Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the door opened and Lavrushka came in with some papers . 
`` Blockhead ! 
Why do you come in without being called ? '' 
cried Nicholas , quickly changing his attitude . 
`` From the governor , '' said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice . 
`` A courier has arrived and there 's a letter for you . '' 
`` Well , all right , thanks . 
You can go ! '' 
Nicholas took the two letters , one of which was from his mother and the other from Sonya . 
He recognized them by the handwriting and opened Sonya 's first . 
He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his eyes opened wide with fear and joy . 
`` No , it 's not possible ! '' 
he cried aloud . 
Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and reading it . 
He glanced through it , then read it again , and then again , and standing still in the middle of the room he raised his shoulders , stretching out his hands , with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed . 
What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hear him had come to pass ; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were something extraordinary and unexpected , and as if the very fact that it had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom he had prayed , but by some ordinary coincidence . 
This unexpected and , as it seemed to Nicholas , quite voluntary letter from Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which there had seemed no escape . 
She wrote that the last unfortunate events -- the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs ' Moscow property -- and the countess ' repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry Princess Bolkonskaya , together with his silence and coldness of late , had all combined to make her decide to release him from his promise and set him completely free . 
It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrow or discord in the family that has been so good to me -LRB- she wrote -RRB- , and my love has no aim but the happiness of those I love ; so , Nicholas , I beg you to consider yourself free , and to be assured that , in spite of everything , no one can love you more than does Your Sonya Both letters were written from Troitsa . 
The other , from the countess , described their last days in Moscow , their departure , the fire , and the destruction of all their property . 
In this letter the countess also mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them ; his state was very critical , but the doctor said there was now more hope . 
Sonya and Natasha were nursing him . 
Next day Nicholas took his mother 's letter and went to see Princess Mary . 
Neither he nor she said a word about what `` Natasha nursing him '' might mean , but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as intimate with the princess as if they were relations . 
The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl , and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment . 
Sonya 's letter written from Troitsa , which had come as an answer to Nicholas ' prayer , was prompted by this : the thought of getting Nicholas married to an heiress occupied the old countess ' mind more and more . 
She knew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to this happening , and Sonya 's life in the countess ' house had grown harder and harder , especially after they had received a letter from Nicholas telling of his meeting with Princess Mary in Bogucharovo . 
The countess let no occasion slip of making humiliating or cruel allusions to Sonya . 
But a few days before they left Moscow , moved and excited by all that was going on , she called Sonya to her and , instead of reproaching and making demands on her , tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself and repay all that the family had done for her by breaking off her engagement with Nicholas . 
`` I shall not be at peace till you promise me this . '' 
Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that she would do anything and was prepared for anything , but gave no actual promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded of her . 
She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and brought her up . 
To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya 's habit . 
Her position in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her worth , and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it . 
But in all her former acts of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that they raised her in her own esteem and in that of others , and so made her more worthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world . 
But now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the whole reward for her self-sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life . 
And for the first time she felt bitterness against those who had been her benefactors only to torture her the more painfully ; she felt jealous of Natasha who had never experienced anything of this sort , had never needed to sacrifice herself , but made others sacrifice themselves for her and yet was beloved by everybody . 
And for the first time Sonya felt that out of her pure , quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling was beginning to grow up which was stronger than principle , virtue , or religion . 
Under the influence of this feeling Sonya , whose life of dependence had taught her involuntarily to be secretive , having answered the countess in vague general terms , avoided talking with her and resolved to wait till she should see Nicholas , not in order to set him free but on the contrary at that meeting to bind him to her forever . 
The bustle and terror of the Rostovs ' last days in Moscow stifled the gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sonya . 
She was glad to find escape from them in practical activity . 
But when she heard of Prince Andrew 's presence in their house , despite her sincere pity for him and for Natasha , she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that God did not intend her to be separated from Nicholas . 
She knew that Natasha loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him . 
She knew that being thrown together again under such terrible circumstances they would again fall in love with one another , and that Nicholas would then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the prohibited degrees of affinity . 
Despite all the terror of what had happened during those last days and during the first days of their journey , this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personal affairs cheered Sonya . 
