The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka . 
Nicholas could not refuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance . 
Denisov sat down by the old ladies and , leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot , told them something funny and kept them amused , while he watched the young people dancing , Iogel with Natasha , his pride and his best pupil , were the first couple . 
Noiselessly , skillfully stepping with his little feet in low shoes , Iogel flew first across the hall with Natasha , who , though shy , went on carefully executing her steps . 
Denisov did not take his eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly indicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and not because he could not . 
In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rostov who was passing : `` This is not at all the thing , '' he said . 
`` What sort of Polish mazuwka is this ? 
But she does dance splendidly . '' 
Knowing that Denisov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly way in which he danced the mazurka , Nicholas ran up to Natasha : `` Go and choose Denisov . 
He is a real dancer , a wonder ! '' 
he said . 
When it came to Natasha 's turn to choose a partner , she rose and , tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows , ran timidly to the corner where Denisov sat . 
She saw that everybody was looking at her and waiting . 
Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusing though he smiled delightedly . 
He ran up to them . 
`` Please , Vasili Dmitrich , '' Natasha was saying , `` do come ! '' 
`` Oh no , let me off , Countess , '' Denisov replied . 
`` Now then , Vaska , '' said Nicholas . 
`` They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat ! '' 
said Denisov jokingly . 
`` I 'll sing for you a whole evening , '' said Natasha . 
`` Oh , the faiwy ! 
She can do anything with me ! '' 
said Denisov , and he unhooked his saber . 
He came out from behind the chairs , clasped his partner 's hand firmly , threw back his head , and advanced his foot , waiting for the beat . 
Only on horse back and in the mazurka was Denisov 's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he felt himself to be . 
At the right beat of the music he looked sideways at his partner with a merry and triumphant air , suddenly stamped with one foot , bounded from the floor like a ball , and flew round the room taking his partner with him . 
He glided silently on one foot half across the room , and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at them , when suddenly , clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs , he stopped short on his heels , stood so a second , stamped on the spot clanking his spurs , whirled rapidly round , and , striking his left heel against his right , flew round again in a circle . 
Natasha guessed what he meant to do , and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly knowing how . 
First he spun her round , holding her now with his left , now with his right hand , then falling on one knee he twirled her round him , and again jumping up , dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath , and then he suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps . 
When at last , smartly whirling his partner round in front of her chair , he drew up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her , Natasha did not even make him a curtsy . 
She fixed her eyes on him in amazement , smiling as if she did not recognize him . 
`` What does this mean ? '' 
she brought out . 
Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka , everyone was delighted with Denisov 's skill , he was asked again and again as a partner , and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and the good old days . 
Denisov , flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself with his handkerchief , sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for the rest of the evening . 
For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or at Dolokhov 's home : on the third day he received a note from him : As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know of , and am going to rejoin my regiment , I am giving a farewell supper tonight to my friends -- come to the English Hotel . 
About ten o'clock Rostov went to the English Hotel straight from the theater , where he had been with his family and Denisov . 
He was at once shown to the best room , which Dolokhov had taken for that evening . 
Some twenty men were gathered round a table at which Dolokhov sat between two candles . 
On the table was a pile of gold and paper money , and he was keeping the bank . 
Rostov had not seen him since his proposal and Sonya 's refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of how they would meet . 
Dolokhov 's clear , cold glance met Rostov as soon as he entered the door , as though he had long expected him . 
`` It 's a long time since we met , '' he said . 
`` Thanks for coming . 
I 'll just finish dealing , and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus . '' 
`` I called once or twice at your house , '' said Rostov , reddening . 
Dolokhov made no reply . 
`` You may punt , '' he said . 
Rostov recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once had with Dolokhov . 
