The enemy is advancing to destroy Russia , to desecrate the tombs of our fathers , to carry off our wives and children . '' 
The nobleman smote his breast . 
`` We will all arise , every one of us will go , for our father the Tsar ! '' 
he shouted , rolling his bloodshot eyes . 
Several approving voices were heard in the crowd . 
`` We are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith , the throne , and the Fatherland ! 
We must cease raving if we are sons of our Fatherland ! 
We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of Russia ! '' 
Pierre wished to reply , but could not get in a word . 
He felt that his words , apart from what meaning they conveyed , were less audible than the sound of his opponent 's voice . 
Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval ; several persons , briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a phrase , said : `` That 's right , quite right ! 
Just so ! '' 
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money , his serfs , or himself , only one ought to know the state of affairs in order to be able to improve it , but he was unable to speak . 
Many voices shouted and talked at the same time , so that Count Rostov had not time to signify his approval of them all , and the group increased , dispersed , re-formed , and then moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall and to the big table . 
Not only was Pierre 's attempt to speak unsuccessful , but he was rudely interrupted , pushed aside , and people turned away from him as from a common enemy . 
This happened not because they were displeased by the substance of his speech , which had even been forgotten after the many subsequent speeches , but to animate it the crowd needed a tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate . 
Pierre became the latter . 
Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman , and all in the same tone . 
Many spoke eloquently and with originality . 
Glinka , the editor of the Russian Messenger , who was recognized -LRB- cries of `` author ! 
author ! '' 
were heard in the crowd -RRB- , said that `` hell must be repulsed by hell , '' and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning flashes and thunderclaps , but `` we will not be that child . '' 
`` Yes , yes , at thunderclaps ! '' 
was repeated approvingly in the back rows of the crowd . 
The crowd drew up to the large table , at which sat gray-haired or bald seventy-year-old magnates , uniformed and besashed almost all of whom Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons , or playing boston at the clubs . 
With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced to the table . 
Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the chairs , the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together . 
Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened to supply it . 
Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find some thought and hastened to utter it . 
The old magnates , whom Pierre knew , sat and turned to look first at one and then at another , and their faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very hot . 
Pierre , however , felt excited , and the general desire to show that they were ready to go to all lengths -- which found expression in the tones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches -- infected him too . 
He did not renounce his opinions , but felt himself in some way to blame and wished to justify himself . 
`` I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices when we know what is needed ! '' 
said he , trying to be heard above the other voices . 
One of the old men nearest to him looked round , but his attention was immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table . 
`` Yes , Moscow will be surrendered ! 
She will be our expiation ! '' 
shouted one man . 
`` He is the enemy of mankind ! '' 
cried another . 
`` Allow me to speak ... '' `` Gentlemen , you are crushing me ! 
... '' At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert eyes , wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder , entered the room , stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry . 
`` Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment , '' said Rostopchin . 
`` I am straight from the palace . 
Seeing the position we are in , I think there is little need for discussion . 
The Emperor has deigned to summon us and the merchants . 
Millions will pour forth from there '' -- he pointed to the merchants ' hall -- `` but our business is to supply men and not spare ourselves ... That is the least we can do ! '' 
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table . 
The whole consultation passed more than quietly . 
After all the preceding noise the sound of their old voices saying one after another , `` I agree , '' or for variety , `` I too am of that opinion , '' and so on had even a mournful effect . 
