They say this , not at all suspecting that thousands of years ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers , but has never been denied . 
They do not see that the role of the natural sciences in this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination of one side of it . 
For the fact that , from the point of view of observation , reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain , and that man following the general law may have developed from lower animals at some unknown period of time , only explains from a fresh side the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and philosophic theories -- that from the point of view of reason man is subject to the law of necessity ; but it does not advance by a hair 's breadth the solution of the question , which has another , opposite , side , based on the consciousness of freedom . 
If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time , that is as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a certain period of time -LRB- in the first case the unknown quantity is the time , in the second case it is the origin -RRB- ; and the question of how man 's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of necessity to which he is subject can not be solved by comparative physiology and zoology , for in a frog , a rabbit , or an ape , we can observe only the muscular nervous activity , but in man we observe consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity . 
The naturalists and their followers , thinking they can solve this question , are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of a church who , availing themselves of the absence of the chief superintendent of the work , should in an access of zeal plaster over the windows , icons , woodwork , and still unbuttressed walls , and should be delighted that from their point of view as plasterers , everything is now so smooth and regular . 
For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability , history has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which the question is dealt with , that for history this question does not refer to the essence of man 's free will but its manifestation in the past and under certain conditions . 
In regard to this question , history stands to the other sciences as experimental science stands to abstract science . 
The subject for history is not man 's will itself but our presentation of it . 
And so for history , the insoluble mystery presented by the incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does for theology , ethics , and philosophy . 
History surveys a presentation of man 's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already taken place . 
In actual life each historic event , each human action , is very clearly and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction , although each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory . 
To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions , the philosophy of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other sciences . 
Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and inevitability in themselves , and then ranging the phenomena of life under those definitions , history should deduce a definition of the conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear dependent on these two elements . 
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we may consider , we always regard it as the result partly of man 's free will and partly of the law of inevitability . 
Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions of the barbarians , or of the decrees of Napoleon III , or of someone 's action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his walk , we are unconscious of any contradiction . 
The degree of freedom and inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined for us . 
Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to differences in the point of view from which we regard the event , but every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and inevitability . 
In every action we examine we see a certain measure of freedom and a certain measure of inevitability . 
And always the more freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive , and the more inevitability the less freedom . 
The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases according to the point of view from which the action is regarded , but their relation is always one of inverse proportion . 
A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him ; or a hungry mother exhausted by feeding her baby , who steals some food ; or a man trained to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless man -- seem less guilty , that is , less free and more subject to the law of necessity , to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were placed , and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself drowning , that the mother was hungry , that the soldier was in the ranks , and so on . 
Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty and his action more due to the law of inevitability , to someone who considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who examined it the day after it was committed . 
And in the same way every action of an insane , intoxicated , or highly excited man appears less free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him who committed the action , and seems more free and less inevitable to one who does not know it . 
In all these cases the conception of freedom is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is correspondingly decreased or increased , according to the point of view from which the action is regarded . 
So that the greater the conception of necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa . 
Religion , the common sense of mankind , the science of jurisprudence , and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and freedom . 
All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations : -LRB- 1 -RRB- The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- His relation to time . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- His relation to the causes leading to the action . 
The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man 's relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness of our understanding of the definite position occupied by the man in relation to everything coexisting with him . 
This is what makes it evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity than one standing on dry ground , and that makes the actions of a man closely connected with others in a thickly populated district , or of one bound by family , official , or business duties , seem certainly less free and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and seclusion . 
If we consider a man alone , apart from his relation to everything around him , each action of his seems to us free . 
But if we see his relation to anything around him , if we see his connection with anything whatever -- with a man who speaks to him , a book he reads , the work on which he is engaged , even with the air he breathes or the light that falls on the things about him -- we see that each of these circumstances has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity . 
And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that weighs on him increases . 
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place the man 's action occupies in time . 
That is the ground which makes the fall of the first man , resulting in the production of the human race , appear evidently less free than a man 's entry into marriage today . 
It is the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago and are connected with me in time can not seem to me as free as the life of a contemporary , the consequences of which are still unknown to me . 
The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance of the action and our judgment of it . 
If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same circumstances as those I am in now , my action appears to me undoubtedly free . 
But if I examine an act performed a month ago , then being in different circumstances , I can not help recognizing that if that act had not been committed much that resulted from it - good , agreeable , and even essential -- would not have taken place . 
If I reflect on an action still more remote , ten years ago or more , then the consequences of my action are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would have happened had that action not been performed . 
The farther I go back in memory , or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in my judgment , the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my action . 
In history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity . 
A contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the known participants , but with a more remote event we already see its inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible . 
And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do they appear . 
The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the crafty conduct of Bismarck , and so on . 
The Napoleonic wars still seem to us , though already questionably , to be the outcome of their heroes ' will . 
But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definite place in history and without which we can not imagine the modern history of Europe , though to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appeared as merely due to the will of certain people . 
In regard to the migration of the peoples it does not enter anyone 's head today to suppose that the renovation of the European world depended on Attila 's caprice . 
The farther back in history the object of our observation lies , the more doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and the more manifest the law of inevitability . 
