was heard . 
Most of the time , by their officers ' order , the men sat on the ground . 
One , having taken off his shako , carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight again ; another , rubbing some dry clay between his palms , polished his bayonet ; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his bandolier , while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put his boots on again . 
Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed ground , or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield . 
All seemed fully absorbed in these pursuits . 
When men were killed or wounded , when rows of stretchers went past , when some troops retreated , and when great masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke , no one paid any attention to these things . 
But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or some of our infantry were seen to move forward , words of approval were heard on all sides . 
But the liveliest attention was attracted by occurrences quite apart from , and unconnected with , the battle . 
It was as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday , commonplace occurrences . 
A battery of artillery was passing in front of the regiment . 
The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace . 
`` Hey , look at the trace horse ! 
... Get her leg out ! 
She 'll fall ... . 
Ah , they do n't see it ! '' 
came identical shouts from the ranks all along the regiment . 
Another time , general attention was attracted by a small brown dog , coming heaven knows whence , which trotted in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell close by , when it yelped , tucked its tail between its legs , and darted aside . 
Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment . 
But such distractions lasted only a moment , and for eight hours the men had been inactive , without food , in constant fear of death , and their pale and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier . 
Prince Andrew , pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment , paced up and down from the border of one patch to another , at the edge of the meadow beside an oatfield , with head bowed and arms behind his back . 
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given . 
Everything went on of itself . 
The killed were dragged from the front , the wounded carried away , and the ranks closed up . 
If any soldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and hastily . 
At first Prince Andrew , considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them an example , walked about among the ranks , but he soon became convinced that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teach them . 
All the powers of his soul , as of every soldier there , were unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their situation . 
He walked along the meadow , dragging his feet , rustling the grass , and gazing at the dust that covered his boots ; now he took big strides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the mowers , then he counted his steps , calculating how often he must walk from one strip to another to walk a mile , then he stripped the flowers from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut , rubbed them in his palms , and smelled their pungent , sweetly bitter scent . 
Nothing remained of the previous day 's thoughts . 
He thought of nothing . 
He listened with weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds , distinguishing the whistle of flying projectiles from the booming of the reports , glanced at the tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion , and waited . 
`` Here it comes ... this one is coming our way again ! '' 
he thought , listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke . 
`` One , another ! 
Again ! 
It has hit ... '' He stopped and looked at the ranks . 
`` No , it has gone over . 
But this one has hit ! '' 
And again he started trying to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces . 
A whizz and a thud ! 
Five paces from him , a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared . 
A chill ran down his back . 
Again he glanced at the ranks . 
Probably many had been hit -- a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion . 
`` Adjutant ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Order them not to crowd together . '' 
The adjutant , having obeyed this instruction , approached Prince Andrew . 
From the other side a battalion commander rode up . 
`` Look out ! '' 
came a frightened cry from a soldier and , like a bird whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground , a shell dropped with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the battalion commander 's horse . 
