`` How ... '' she began her question but stopped short . 
She felt that it was impossible to ask , or to answer , in words . 
Natasha 's face eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and profoundly . 
Natasha was gazing at her , but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say all she knew or not ; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes which penetrated into the very depths of her heart , it was impossible not to tell the whole truth which she saw . 
And suddenly , Natasha 's lips twitched , ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth , and covering her face with her hands she burst into sobs . 
Princess Mary understood . 
But she still hoped , and asked , in words she herself did not trust : `` But how is his wound ? 
What is his general condition ? '' 
`` You , you ... will see , '' was all Natasha could say . 
They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off crying and were able to go to him with calm faces . 
`` How has his whole illness gone ? 
Is it long since he grew worse ? 
When did this happen ? '' 
Princess Mary inquired . 
Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish condition and the pain he suffered , but at Troitsa that had passed and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene . 
That danger had also passed . 
When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had begun to fester -LRB- Natasha knew all about such things as festering -RRB- and the doctor had said that the festering might take a normal course . 
Then fever set in , but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious . 
`` But two days ago this suddenly happened , '' said Natasha , struggling with her sobs . 
`` I do n't know why , but you will see what he is like . '' 
`` Is he weaker ? 
Thinner ? '' 
asked the princess . 
`` No , it 's not that , but worse . 
You will see . 
O , Mary , he is too good , he can not , can not live , because ... '' When Natasha opened Prince Andrew 's door with a familiar movement and let Princess Mary pass into the room before her , the princess felt the sobs in her throat . 
Hard as she had tried to prepare herself , and now tried to remain tranquil , she knew that she would be unable to look at him without tears . 
The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words : `` two days ago this suddenly happened . '' 
She understood those words to mean that he had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs of approaching death . 
As she stepped to the door she already saw in imagination Andrew 's face as she remembered it in childhood , a gentle , mild , sympathetic face which he had rarely shown , and which therefore affected her very strongly . 
She was sure he would speak soft , tender words to her such as her father had uttered before his death , and that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his presence . 
Yet sooner or later it had to be , and she went in . 
The sobs rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his features , and then she saw his face and met his gaze . 
He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan , surrounded by pillows . 
He was thin and pale . 
In one thin , translucently white hand he held a handkerchief , while with the other he stroked the delicate mustache he had grown , moving his fingers slowly . 
His eyes gazed at them as they entered . 
On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary 's pace suddenly slackened , she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased . 
She suddenly felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and eyes . 
`` But in what am I to blame ? '' 
she asked herself . 
And his cold , stern look replied : `` Because you are alive and thinking of the living , while I. . . '' 
In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister and Natasha . 
He kissed his sister , holding her hand in his as was their wont . 
`` How are you , Mary ? 
How did you manage to get here ? '' 
said he in a voice as calm and aloof as his look . 
Had he screamed in agony , that scream would not have struck such horror into Princess Mary 's heart as the tone of his voice . 
`` And have you brought little Nicholas ? '' 
he asked in the same slow , quiet manner and with an obvious effort to remember . 
