Why ? 
Why ? 
Who asked you to ? '' 
shouted Natasha , raising herself on the sofa and looking malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` But what did you want ? '' 
cried Marya Dmitrievna , growing angry again . 
`` Were you kept under lock and key ? 
Who hindered his coming to the house ? 
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl ? 
... Well , if he had carried you off ... do you think they would n't have found him ? 
Your father , or brother , or your betrothed ? 
And he 's a scoundrel , a wretch -- that 's a fact ! '' 
`` He is better than any of you ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha getting up . 
`` If you had n't interfered ... Oh , my God ! 
What is it all ? 
What is it ? 
Sonya , why ? 
... Go away ! '' 
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned . 
Marya Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out : `` Go away ! 
Go away ! 
You all hate and despise me ! '' 
and she threw herself back on the sofa . 
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time , enjoining on her that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened . 
Natasha did not reply , nor did she sob any longer , but she grew cold and had a shivering fit . 
Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head , covered her with two quilts , and herself brought her some lime-flower water , but Natasha did not respond to her . 
`` Well , let her sleep , '' said Marya Dmitrievna as she went of the room supposing Natasha to be asleep . 
But Natasha was not asleep ; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she looked straight before her . 
All that night she did not sleep or weep and did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times . 
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for lunch as he had promised . 
He was in very good spirits ; the affair with the purchaser was going on satisfactorily , and there was nothing to keep him any longer in Moscow , away from the countess whom he missed . 
Marya Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the day before and that they had sent for the doctor , but that she was better now . 
Natasha had not left her room that morning . 
With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes , she sat at the window , uneasily watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at anyone who entered the room . 
She was evidently expecting news of him and that he would come or would write to her . 
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound of a man 's footstep , and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent expression . 
She did not even get up to greet him . 
`` What is the matter with you , my angel ? 
Are you ill ? '' 
asked the count . 
After a moment 's silence Natasha answered : `` Yes , ill . '' 
In reply to the count 's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed , she assured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry . 
Marya Dmitrievna confirmed Natasha 's assurances that nothing had happened . 
From the pretense of illness , from his daughter 's distress , and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna , the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong during his absence , but it was so terrible for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved daughter , and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity , that he avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly had happened ; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition delayed their return to the country . 
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go away somewhere , so as not to be near her . 
Soon after the Rostovs came to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out his intention . 
He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich 's widow , who had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased husband 's . 
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great importance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed . 
Pierre had been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her was stronger than a married man 's should be for his friend 's fiancee . 
