And when there was a war , like this one , it would be war ! 
And then the determination of the troops would be quite different . 
Then all these Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow him into Russia , and we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussia without knowing why . 
War is not courtesy but the most horrible thing in life ; and we ought to understand that and not play at war . 
We ought to accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously . 
It all lies in that : get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game . 
As it is now , war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous . 
The military calling is the most highly honored . 
`` But what is war ? 
What is needed for success in warfare ? 
What are the habits of the military ? 
The aim of war is murder ; the methods of war are spying , treachery , and their encouragement , the ruin of a country 's inhabitants , robbing them or stealing to provision the army , and fraud and falsehood termed military craft . 
The habits of the military class are the absence of freedom , that is , discipline , idleness , ignorance , cruelty , debauchery , and drunkenness . 
And in spite of all this it is the highest class , respected by everyone . 
All the kings , except the Chinese , wear military uniforms , and he who kills most people receives the highest rewards . 
`` They meet , as we shall meet tomorrow , to murder one another ; they kill and maim tens of thousands , and then have thanksgiving services for having killed so many people -LRB- they even exaggerate the number -RRB- , and they announce a victory , supposing that the more people they have killed the greater their achievement . 
How does God above look at them and hear them ? '' 
exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill , piercing voice . 
`` Ah , my friend , it has of late become hard for me to live . 
I see that I have begun to understand too much . 
And it does n't do for man to taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil ... . 
Ah , well , it 's not for long ! '' 
he added . 
`` However , you 're sleepy , and it 's time for me to sleep . 
Go back to Gorki ! '' 
said Prince Andrew suddenly . 
`` Oh no ! '' 
Pierre replied , looking at Prince Andrew with frightened , compassionate eyes . 
`` Go , go ! 
Before a battle one must have one 's sleep out , '' repeated Prince Andrew . 
He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him . 
`` Good-by , be off ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Whether we meet again or not ... '' and turning away hurriedly he entered the shed . 
It was already dark , and Pierre could not make out whether the expression of Prince Andrew 's face was angry or tender . 
For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should follow him or go away . 
`` No , he does not want it ! '' 
Pierre concluded . 
`` And I know that this is our last meeting ! '' 
He sighed deeply and rode back to Gorki . 
On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug , but he could not sleep . 
He closed his eyes . 
One picture succeeded another in his imagination . 
On one of them he dwelt long and joyfully . 
He vividly recalled an evening in Petersburg . 
Natasha with animated and excited face was telling him how she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost her way in the big forest . 
She incoherently described the depths of the forest , her feelings , and a talk with a beekeeper she met , and constantly interrupted her story to say : `` No , I ca n't ! 
I 'm not telling it right ; no , you do n't understand , '' though he encouraged her by saying that he did understand , and he really had understood all she wanted to say . 
But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words : she felt that they did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experienced that day and wished to convey . 
`` He was such a delightful old man , and it was so dark in the forest ... and he had such kind ... No , I ca n't describe it , '' she had said , flushed and excited . 
