His left hand was bloody ; he wiped it on his coat and supported himself with it . 
His frowning face was pallid and quivered . 
`` Plea ... '' began Dolokhov , but could not at first pronounce the word . 
`` Please , '' he uttered with an effort . 
Pierre , hardly restraining his sobs , began running toward Dolokhov and was about to cross the space between the barriers , when Dolokhov cried : `` To your barrier ! '' 
and Pierre , grasping what was meant , stopped by his saber . 
Only ten paces divided them . 
Dolokhov lowered his head to the snow , greedily bit at it , again raised his head , adjusted himself , drew in his legs and sat up , seeking a firm center of gravity . 
He sucked and swallowed the cold snow , his lips quivered but his eyes , still smiling , glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining strength . 
He raised his pistol and aimed . 
`` Sideways ! 
Cover yourself with your pistol ! '' 
ejaculated Nesvitski . 
`` Cover yourself ! '' 
even Denisov cried to his adversary . 
Pierre , with a gentle smile of pity and remorse , his arms and legs helplessly spread out , stood with his broad chest directly facing Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him . 
Denisov , Rostov , and Nesvitski closed their eyes . 
At the same instant they heard a report and Dolokhov 's angry cry . 
`` Missed ! '' 
shouted Dolokhov , and he lay helplessly , face downwards on the snow . 
Pierre clutched his temples , and turning round went into the forest , trampling through the deep snow , and muttering incoherent words : `` Folly ... folly ! 
Death ... lies ... '' he repeated , puckering his face . 
Nesvitski stopped him and took him home . 
Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov . 
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer a word to the questions addressed to him . 
But on entering Moscow he suddenly came to and , lifting his head with an effort , took Rostov , who was sitting beside him , by the hand . 
Rostov was struck by the totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov 's face . 
`` Well ? 
How do you feel ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Bad ! 
But it 's not that , my friend - '' said Dolokhov with a gasping voice . 
`` Where are we ? 
In Moscow , I know . 
I do n't matter , but I have killed her , killed ... She wo n't get over it ! 
She wo n't survive ... '' `` Who ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` My mother ! 
My mother , my angel , my adored angel mother , '' and Dolokhov pressed Rostov 's hand and burst into tears . 
When he had become a little quieter , he explained to Rostov that he was living with his mother , who , if she saw him dying , would not survive it . 
He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her . 
Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked , and to his great surprise learned that Dolokhov the brawler , Dolokhov the bully , lived in Moscow with an old mother and a hunchback sister , and was the most affectionate of sons and brothers . 
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone . 
Both in Petersburg and in Moscow their house was always full of visitors . 
The night after the duel he did not go to his bedroom but , as he often did , remained in his father 's room , that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died . 
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that had happened to him , but could not do so . 
Such a storm of feelings , thoughts , and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall asleep , nor even remain in one place , but had to jump up and pace the room with rapid steps . 
Now he seemed to see her in the early days of their marriage , with bare shoulders and a languid , passionate look on her face , and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov 's handsome , insolent , hard , and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet , and then that same face pale , quivering , and suffering , as it had been when he reeled and sank on the snow . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
he asked himself . 
