said he . 
`` Here 's a fine warrior ! 
No ! 
Nonsense ! 
You must study . '' 
`` It 's not nonsense , Papa . 
Fedya Obolenski is younger than I , and he 's going too . 
Besides , all the same I ca n't study now when ... '' Petya stopped short , flushed till he perspired , but still got out the words , `` when our Fatherland is in danger . '' 
`` That 'll do , that 'll do -- nonsense ... '' `` But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything . '' 
`` Petya ! 
Be quiet , I tell you ! '' 
cried the count , with a glance at his wife , who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son . 
`` And I tell you -- Peter Kirilych here will also tell you ... '' `` Nonsense , I tell you . 
Your mother 's milk has hardly dried on your lips and you want to go into the army ! 
There , there , I tell you , '' and the count moved to go out of the room , taking the papers , probably to reread them in his study before having a nap . 
`` Well , Peter Kirilych , let 's go and have a smoke , '' he said . 
Pierre was agitated and undecided . 
Natasha 's unwontedly brilliant eyes , continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look , had reduced him to this condition . 
`` No , I think I 'll go home . '' 
`` Home ? 
Why , you meant to spend the evening with us ... . 
You do n't often come nowadays as it is , and this girl of mine , '' said the count good-naturedly , pointing to Natasha , `` only brightens up when you 're here . '' 
`` Yes , I had forgotten ... I really must go home ... business ... '' said Pierre hurriedly . 
`` Well , then , au revoir ! '' 
said the count , and went out of the room . 
`` Why are you going ? 
Why are you upset ? '' 
asked Natasha , and she looked challengingly into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` Because I love you ! '' 
was what he wanted to say , but he did not say it , and only blushed till the tears came , and lowered his eyes . 
`` Because it is better for me to come less often ... because ... No , simply I have business ... '' `` Why ? 
No , tell me ! '' 
Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped . 
They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces . 
He tried to smile but could not : his smile expressed suffering , and he silently kissed her hand and went out . 
Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs ' any more . 
After the definite refusal he had received , Petya went to his room and there locked himself in and wept bitterly . 
When he came in to tea , silent , morose , and with tear-stained face , everybody pretended not to notice anything . 
Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow , and several of the Rostovs ' domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him . 
That morning Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and collar to look like a grown-up man . 
He frowned before his looking glass , gesticulated , shrugged his shoulders , and finally , without saying a word to anyone , took his cap and left the house by the back door , trying to avoid notice . 
Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was and to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting -LRB- he imagined the Emperor to be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting -RRB- that he , Count Rostov , in spite of his youth wished to serve his country ; that youth could be no hindrance to loyalty , and that he was ready to ... While dressing , Petya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to the gentleman-in-waiting . 
It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for success in reaching the Emperor -- he even thought how surprised everyone would be at his youthfulness -- and yet in the arrangement of his collar and hair and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man . 
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the ever-increasing crowds moving toward the Kremlin , the less he remembered to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man . 
As he approached the Kremlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in a menacing way . 
But within the Trinity Gateway he was so pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of the patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his determination he had to give in , and stop while carriages passed in , rumbling beneath the archway . 
Beside Petya stood a peasant woman , a footman , two tradesmen , and a discharged soldier . 
After standing some time in the gateway , Petya tried to move forward in front of the others without waiting for all the carriages to pass , and he began resolutely working his way with his elbows , but the woman just in front of him , who was the first against whom he directed his efforts , angrily shouted at him : `` What are you shoving for , young lordling ? 
Do n't you see we 're all standing still ? 
Then why push ? '' 
