Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were cracking nuts . 
All these conversations , especially the joking with the girls , were such as might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age , but they did not interest him now . 
He sat on his elevation -- the pedestal of the cannon -- still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and by his love for him . 
The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced when he was being crushed , together with that of rapture , still further intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion . 
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment , to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks , and the crowd rushed impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing . 
Petya too would have run there , but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under his protection stopped him . 
The firing was still proceeding when officers , generals , and gentlemen-in-waiting came running out of the cathedral , and after them others in a more leisurely manner : caps were again raised , and those who had run to look at the cannon ran back again . 
At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from the cathedral doors . 
`` Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! '' 
shouted the crowd again . 
`` Which is he ? 
Which ? '' 
asked Petya in a tearful voice , of those around him , but no one answered him , everybody was too excited ; and Petya , fixing on one of those four men , whom he could not clearly see for the tears of joy that filled his eyes , concentrated all his enthusiasm on him -- though it happened not to be the Emperor - frantically shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
and resolved that tomorrow , come what might , he would join the army . 
The crowd ran after the Emperor , followed him to the palace , and began to disperse . 
It was already late , and Petya had not eaten anything and was drenched with perspiration , yet he did not go home but stood with that diminishing , but still considerable , crowd before the palace while the Emperor dined -- looking in at the palace windows , expecting he knew not what , and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table , glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows . 
While the Emperor was dining , Valuev , looking out of the window , said : `` The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again . '' 
The dinner was nearly over , and the Emperor , munching a biscuit , rose and went out onto the balcony . 
The people , with Petya among them , rushed toward the balcony . 
`` Angel ! 
Dear one ! 
Hurrah ! 
Father ! 
... '' cried the crowd , and Petya with it , and again the women and men of weaker mold , Petya among them , wept with joy . 
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke off , fell on the balcony parapet , and then to the ground . 
A coachman in a jerkin , who stood nearest , sprang forward and snatched it up . 
Several people in the crowd rushed at the coachman . 
Seeing this the Emperor had a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from the balcony . 
Petya 's eyes grew bloodshot , and still more excited by the danger of being crushed , he rushed at the biscuits . 
He did not know why , but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar 's hand and he felt that he must not give way . 
He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was catching at a biscuit ; the old woman did not consider herself defeated though she was lying on the ground -- she grabbed at some biscuits but her hand did not reach them . 
Petya pushed her hand away with his knee , seized a biscuit , and as if fearing to be too late , again shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
with a voice already hoarse . 
The Emperor went in , and after that the greater part of the crowd began to disperse . 
`` There ! 
I said if only we waited -- and so it was ! '' 
was being joyfully said by various people . 
Happy as Petya was , he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all the enjoyment of that day was over . 
He did not go straight home from the Kremlin , but called on his friend Obolenski , who was fifteen and was also entering the regiment . 
On returning home Petya announced resolutely and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would run away . 
And next day , Count Ilya Rostov -- though he had not yet quite yielded -- went to inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve where there would be least danger . 
Two days later , on the fifteenth of July , an immense number of carriages were standing outside the Sloboda Palace . 
The great halls were full . 
In the first were the nobility and gentry in their uniforms , in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats of blue cloth and wearing medals . 
In the noblemen 's hall there was an incessant movement and buzz of voices . 
The chief magnates sat on high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor , but most of the gentry were strolling about the room . 
All these nobles , whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own houses , were in uniform -- some in that of Catherine 's day , others in that of Emperor Paul , others again in the new uniforms of Alexander 's time or the ordinary uniform of the nobility , and the general characteristic of being in uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to these diverse and familiar personalities , both old and young . 
The old men , dim-eyed , toothless , bald , sallow , and bloated , or gaunt and wrinkled , were especially striking . 
For the most part they sat quietly in their places and were silent , or , if they walked about and talked , attached themselves to someone younger . 
