`` Ah , that 's always the way ! '' 
said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand . 
`` How did you get here ? '' 
said he , turning to Zherkov . 
`` On the same business . 
But you are damp ! 
Let me wring you out ! '' 
`` You were saying , Mr. Staff Officer ... '' continued the colonel in an offended tone . 
`` Colonel , '' interrupted the officer of the suite , `` You must be quick or the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot . '' 
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite , at the stout staff officer , and at Zherkov , and he frowned . 
`` I will the bridge fire , '' he said in a solemn tone as if to announce that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still do the right thing . 
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame for everything , the colonel moved forward and ordered the second squadron , that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov , to return to the bridge . 
`` There , it 's just as I thought , '' said Rostov to himself . 
`` He wishes to test me ! '' 
His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face . 
`` Let him see whether I am a coward ! '' 
he thought . 
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression appeared that they had worn when under fire . 
Rostov watched his enemy , the colonel , closely -- to find in his face confirmation of his own conjecture , but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov , and looked as he always did when at the front , solemn and stern . 
Then came the word of command . 
`` Look sharp ! 
Look sharp ! '' 
several voices repeated around him . 
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling , the hussars hastily dismounted , not knowing what they were to do . 
The men were crossing themselves . 
Rostov no longer looked at the colonel , he had no time . 
He was afraid of falling behind the hussars , so much afraid that his heart stood still . 
His hand trembled as he gave his horse into an orderly 's charge , and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a thud . 
Denisov rode past him , leaning back and shouting something . 
Rostov saw nothing but the hussars running all around him , their spurs catching and their sabers clattering . 
`` Stretchers ! '' 
shouted someone behind him . 
Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant ; he ran on , trying only to be ahead of the others ; but just at the bridge , not looking at the ground , he came on some sticky , trodden mud , stumbled , and fell on his hands . 
The others outstripped him . 
`` At boss zides , Captain , '' he heard the voice of the colonel , who , having ridden ahead , had pulled up his horse near the bridge , with a triumphant , cheerful face . 
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and was about to run on , thinking that the farther he went to the front the better . 
But Bogdanich , without looking at or recognizing Rostov , shouted to him : `` Who 's that running on the middle of the bridge ? 
To the right ! 
Come back , Cadet ! '' 
he cried angrily ; and turning to Denisov , who , showing off his courage , had ridden on to the planks of the bridge : `` Why run risks , Captain ? 
You should dismount , '' he said . 
`` Oh , every bullet has its billet , '' answered Vaska Denisov , turning in his saddle . 
Meanwhile Nesvitski , Zherkov , and the officer of the suite were standing together out of range of the shots , watching , now the small group of men with yellow shakos , dark-green jackets braided with cord , and blue riding breeches , who were swarming near the bridge , and then at what was approaching in the distance from the opposite side - the blue uniforms and groups with horses , easily recognizable as artillery . 
`` Will they burn the bridge or not ? 
Who 'll get there first ? 
Will they get there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range and wipe them out ? '' 
These were the questions each man of the troops on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a sinking heart -- watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their bayonets and guns . 
`` Ugh . 
The hussars will get it hot ! '' 
said Nesvitski ; `` they are within grapeshot range now . '' 
