We must ride round more to the left ... '' While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded from the low ground by the pond , a puff of white smoke appeared , then another , and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voices shouting together came up from the slope . 
For a moment Denisov and the esaul drew back . 
They were so near that they thought they were the cause of the firing and shouting . 
But the firing and shouting did not relate to them . 
Down below , a man wearing something red was running through the marsh . 
The French were evidently firing and shouting at him . 
`` Why , that 's our Tikhon , '' said the esaul . 
`` So it is ! 
It is ! '' 
`` The wascal ! '' 
said Denisov . 
`` He 'll get away ! '' 
said the esaul , screwing up his eyes . 
The man whom they called Tikhon , having run to the stream , plunged in so that the water splashed in the air , and , having disappeared for an instant , scrambled out on all fours , all black with the wet , and ran on . 
The French who had been pursuing him stopped . 
`` Smart , that ! '' 
said the esaul . 
`` What a beast ! '' 
said Denisov with his former look of vexation . 
`` What has he been doing all this time ? '' 
`` Who is he ? '' 
asked Petya . 
`` He 's our plastun . 
I sent him to capture a ` tongue . ' '' 
`` Oh , yes , '' said Petya , nodding at the first words Denisov uttered as if he understood it all , though he really did not understand anything of it . 
Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in their band . 
He was a peasant from Pokrovsk , near the river Gzhat . 
When Denisov had come to Pokrovsk at the beginning of his operations and had as usual summoned the village elder and asked him what he knew about the French , the elder , as though shielding himself , had replied , as all village elders did , that he had neither seen nor heard anything of them . 
But when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French , and asked if no French had strayed that way , the elder replied that some `` more-orderers '' had really been at their village , but that Tikhon Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters . 
Denisov had Tikhon called and , having praised him for his activity , said a few words in the elder 's presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country and the hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish . 
`` We do n't do the French any harm , '' said Tikhon , evidently frightened by Denisov 's words . 
`` We only fooled about with the lads for fun , you know ! 
We killed a score or so of ` more-orderers , ' but we did no harm else ... '' Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk , having quite forgotten about this peasant , it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it . 
Denisov gave orders to let him do so . 
Tikhon , who at first did rough work , laying campfires , fetching water , flaying dead horses , and so on , soon showed a great liking and aptitude for partisan warfare . 
At night he would go out for booty and always brought back French clothing and weapons , and when told to would bring in French captives also . 
Denisov then relieved him from drudgery and began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him enrolled among the Cossacks . 
Tikhon did not like riding , and always went on foot , never lagging behind the cavalry . 
He was armed with a musketoon -LRB- which he carried rather as a joke -RRB- , a pike and an ax , which latter he used as a wolf uses its teeth , with equal case picking fleas out of its fur or crunching thick bones . 
Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at arm 's length , or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs or carve spoons . 
In Denisov 's party he held a peculiar and exceptional position . 
When anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be done -- to push a cart out of the mud with one 's shoulders , pull a horse out of a swamp by its tail , skin it , slink in among the French , or walk more than thirty miles in a day -- everybody pointed laughingly at Tikhon . 
`` It wo n't hurt that devil -- he 's as strong as a horse ! '' 
they said of him . 
Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him and shot him in the fleshy part of the back . 
That wound -LRB- which Tikhon treated only with internal and external applications of vodka -RRB- was the subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment - jokes in which Tikhon readily joined . 
`` Hallo , mate ! 
Never again ? 
Gave you a twist ? '' 
the Cossacks would banter him . 
