`` Oh , it would be a terrible loss , she is an enchanting woman . '' 
`` You are speaking of the poor countess ? '' 
said Anna Pavlovna , coming up just then . 
`` I sent to ask for news , and hear that she is a little better . 
Oh , she is certainly the most charming woman in the world , '' she went on , with a smile at her own enthusiasm . 
`` We belong to different camps , but that does not prevent my esteeming her as she deserves . 
She is very unfortunate ! '' 
added Anna Pavlovna . 
Supposing that by these words Anna Pavlovna was somewhat lifting the veil from the secret of the countess ' malady , an unwary young man ventured to express surprise that well known doctors had not been called in and that the countess was being attended by a charlatan who might employ dangerous remedies . 
`` Your information maybe better than mine , '' Anna Pavlovna suddenly and venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man , `` but I know on good authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man . 
He is private physician to the Queen of Spain . '' 
And having thus demolished the young man , Anna Pavlovna turned to another group where Bilibin was talking about the Austrians : having wrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out again and utter one of his mots . 
`` I think it is delightful , '' he said , referring to a diplomatic note that had been sent to Vienna with some Austrian banners captured from the French by Wittgenstein , `` the hero of Petropol '' as he was then called in Petersburg . 
`` What ? 
What 's that ? '' 
asked Anna Pavlovna , securing silence for the mot , which she had heard before . 
And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch , which he had himself composed . 
`` The Emperor returns these Austrian banners , '' said Bilibin , `` friendly banners gone astray and found on a wrong path , '' and his brow became smooth again . 
`` Charming , charming ! '' 
observed Prince Vasili . 
`` The path to Warsaw , perhaps , '' Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and unexpectedly . 
Everybody looked at him , understanding what he meant . 
Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise . 
He knew no more than the others what his words meant . 
During his diplomatic career he had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very witty , and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words that entered his head . 
`` It may turn out very well , '' he thought , `` but if not , they 'll know how to arrange matters . '' 
And really , during the awkward silence that ensued , that insufficiently patriotic person entered whom Anna Pavlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert , and she , smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte , invited Prince Vasili to the table and bringing him two candles and the manuscript begged him to begin . 
Everyone became silent . 
`` Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor ! '' 
Prince Vasili sternly declaimed , looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had anything to say to the contrary . 
But no one said anything . 
`` Moscow , our ancient capital , the New Jerusalem , receives her Christ '' -- he placed a sudden emphasis on the word her -- `` as a mother receives her zealous sons into her arms , and through the gathering mists , foreseeing the brilliant glory of thy rule , sings in exultation , ` Hosanna , blessed is he that cometh ! ' '' 
Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice . 
Bilibin attentively examined his nails , and many of those present appeared intimidated , as if asking in what they were to blame . 
Anna Pavlovna whispered the next words in advance , like an old woman muttering the prayer at Communion : `` Let the bold and insolent Goliath ... '' she whispered . 
Prince Vasili continued . 
`` Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompass the realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors ; humble Faith , the sling of the Russian David , shall suddenly smite his head in his blood-thirsty pride . 
This icon of the Venerable Sergius , the servant of God and zealous champion of old of our country 's weal , is offered to Your Imperial Majesty . 
I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing in the sight of your most gracious presence . 
I raise fervent prayers to Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just , and mercifully fulfill the desires of Your Majesty . '' 
`` What force ! 
What a style ! '' 
was uttered in approval both of reader and of author . 
Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna 's guests talked for a long time of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the result of the battle to be fought in a few days . 
`` You will see , '' said Anna Pavlovna , `` that tomorrow , on the Emperor 's birthday , we shall receive news . 
I have a favorable presentiment ! '' 
Anna Pavlovna 's presentiment was in fact fulfilled . 
Next day during the service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor 's birthday , Prince Volkonski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from Prince Kutuzov . 
It was Kutuzov 's report , written from Tatarinova on the day of the battle . 
Kutuzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a step , that the French losses were much heavier than ours , and that he was writing in haste from the field of battle before collecting full information . 
