I took down the name and rank of their commanding officer , to hand in a complaint about it . '' 
`` Well , and what are you going to do ? 
Will you stay here if the enemy occupies the place ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew . 
Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew , looked at him , and suddenly with a solemn gesture raised his arm . 
`` He is my refuge ! 
His will be done ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward the prince . 
`` Well , good-by ! '' 
said Prince Andrew , bending over to Alpatych . 
`` You must go away too , take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to the Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow . '' 
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew 's leg and burst into sobs . 
Gently disengaging himself , the prince spurred his horse and rode down the avenue at a gallop . 
The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden , like a fly impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead , tapping the last on which he was making the bast shoe , and two little girls , running out from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked from the trees there , came upon Prince Andrew . 
On seeing the young master , the elder one frightened look clutched her younger companion by the hand and hid with her behind a birch tree , not stopping to pick up some green plums they had dropped . 
Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste , unwilling to let them see that they had been observed . 
He was sorry for the pretty frightened little girl , was afraid of looking at her , and yet felt an irresistible desire to do so . 
A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him when , seeing these girls , he realized the existence of other human interests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as those that occupied him . 
Evidently these girls passionately desired one thing -- to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught -- and Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise . 
He could not resist looking at them once more . 
Believing their danger past , they sprang from their ambush and , chirruping something in their shrill little voices and holding up their skirts , their bare little sunburned feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass . 
Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty highroad along which the troops were moving . 
But not far from Bald Hills he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its halting place by the dam of a small pond . 
It was past one o'clock . 
The sun , a red ball through the dust , burned and scorched his back intolerably through his black coat . 
The dust always hung motionless above the buzz of talk that came from the resting troops . 
There was no wind . 
As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the pond . 
He longed to get into that water , however dirty it might be , and he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks and laughter . 
The small , muddy , green pond had risen visibly more than a foot , flooding the dam , because it was full of the naked white bodies of soldiers with brick-red hands , necks , and faces , who were splashing about in it . 
All this naked white human flesh , laughing and shrieking , floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering can , and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered it specially pathetic . 
One fair-haired young soldier of the third company , whom Prince Andrew knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg , crossed himself , stepped back to get a good run , and plunged into the water ; another , a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy , stood up to his waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands blackened to the wrists . 
There were sounds of men slapping one another , yelling , and puffing . 
Everywhere on the bank , on the dam , and in the pond , there was healthy , white , muscular flesh . 
The officer , Timokhin , with his red little nose , standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel , felt confused at seeing the prince , but made up his mind to address him nevertheless . 
`` It 's very nice , your excellency ! 
Would n't you like to ? '' 
said he . 
`` It 's dirty , '' replied Prince Andrew , making a grimace . 
`` We 'll clear it out for you in a minute , '' said Timokhin , and , still undressed , ran off to clear the men out of the pond . 
`` The prince wants to bathe . '' 
`` What prince ? 
Ours ? '' 
said many voices , and the men were in such haste to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them . 
He decided that he would rather wash himself with water in the barn . 
`` Flesh , bodies , cannon fodder ! '' 
he thought , and he looked at his own naked body and shuddered , not from cold but from a sense of disgust and horror he did not himself understand , aroused by the sight of that immense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond . 
On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from his quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road : Dear Count Alexis Andreevich -- -LRB- He was writing to Arakcheev but knew that his letter would be read by the Emperor , and therefore weighed every word in it to the best of his ability . -RRB- 
I expect the Minister -LSB- Barclay de Tolly -RSB- has already reported the abandonment of Smolensk to the enemy . 
