And my people ? 
Have they reached Moscow at last ? '' 
he asked seriously . 
`` Yes , they have . 
Julie Drubetskaya told me so . 
I went to see them , but missed them . 
They have gone to your estate near Moscow . '' 
The officers were about to take leave , but Prince Andrew , apparently reluctant to be left alone with his friend , asked them to stay and have tea . 
Seats were brought in and so was the tea . 
The officers gazed with surprise at Pierre 's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of Moscow and the position of our army , round which he had ridden . 
Prince Andrew remained silent , and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to the good-natured battalion commander . 
`` So you understand the whole position of our troops ? '' 
Prince Andrew interrupted him . 
`` Yes -- that is , how do you mean ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Not being a military man I ca n't say I have understood it fully , but I understand the general position . '' 
`` Well , then , you know more than anyone else , be it who it may , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Pierre , looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince Andrew . 
`` Well , and what do think of Kutuzov 's appointment ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I was very glad of his appointment , that 's all I know , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly . 
In Moscow they are saying heaven knows what about him ... . 
What do you think of him ? '' 
`` Ask them , '' replied Prince Andrew , indicating the officers . 
Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer . 
`` We see light again , since his Serenity has been appointed , your excellency , '' said Timokhin timidly , and continually turning to glance at his colonel . 
`` Why so ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Well , to mention only firewood and fodder , let me inform you . 
Why , when we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp of hay or anything . 
You see , we were going away , so he would get it all ; was n't it so , your excellency ? '' 
and again Timokhin turned to the prince . 
`` But we dare n't . 
In our regiment two officers were court-martialed for that kind of thing . 
But when his Serenity took command everything became straight forward . 
Now we see light ... '' `` Then why was it forbidden ? '' 
Timokhin looked about in confusion , not knowing what or how to answer such a question . 
Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew . 
`` Why , so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the enemy , '' said Prince Andrew with venomous irony . 
`` It is very sound : one ca n't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to marauding . 
At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French might outflank us , as they had larger forces . 
But he could not understand this , '' cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him involuntarily : `` he could not understand that there , for the first time , we were fighting for Russian soil , and that there was a spirit in the men such as I had never seen before , that we had held the French for two days , and that that success had increased our strength tenfold . 
He ordered us to retreat , and all our efforts and losses went for nothing . 
He had no thought of betraying us , he tried to do the best he could , he thought out everything , and that is why he is unsuitable . 
He is unsuitable now , just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to . 
How can I explain ? 
... Well , say your father has a German valet , and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your father 's requirements better than you could , then it 's all right to let him serve . 
But if your father is mortally sick you 'll send the valet away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed , awkward hands , and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could . 
