-- that is , wants to exchange the current paper money for the real gold of actual comprehension . 
The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture are like people who , recognizing the defects of paper money , decide to substitute for it money made of metal that has not the specific gravity of gold . 
It may indeed make jingling coin , but will do no more than that . 
Paper money may deceive the ignorant , but nobody is deceived by tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle . 
As gold is gold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchange but also for use , so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to history 's essential question : what is power ? 
The universal historians give contradictory replies to that question , while the historians of culture evade it and answer something quite different . 
And as counters of imitation gold can be used only among a group of people who agree to accept them as gold , or among those who do not know the nature of gold , so universal historians and historians of culture , not answering humanity 's essential question , serve as currency for some purposes of their own , only in universities and among the mass of readers who have a taste for what they call `` serious reading . '' 
Having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine subjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjection of that man 's will to the Deity , history can not without contradictions take a single step till it has chosen one of two things : either a return to the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in human affairs or a definite explanation of the meaning of the force producing historical events and termed `` power . '' 
A return to the first is impossible , the belief has been destroyed ; and so it is essential to explain what is meant by power . 
Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war . 
We are so accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question : why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered certain words , seems to us senseless . 
He had the power and so what he ordered was done . 
This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was given him by God . 
But as soon as we do not admit that , it becomes essential to determine what is this power of one man over others . 
It can not be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weak one -- a domination based on the application or threat of physical force , like the power of Hercules ; nor can it be based on the effect of moral force , as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the leading figures in history are heroes , that is , men gifted with a special strength of soul and mind called genius . 
This power can not be based on the predominance of moral strength , for , not to mention heroes such as Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely , history shows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich , who ruled over millions of people , had any particular moral qualities , but on the contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they ruled over . 
If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moral qualities of him who possesses it , it must evidently be looked for elsewhere -- in the relation to the people of the man who wields the power . 
And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence , that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history 's understanding of power for true gold . 
Power is the collective will of the people transferred , by expressed or tacit consent , to their chosen rulers . 
In the domain of jurisprudence , which consists of discussions of how a state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to be arranged , it is all very clear ; but when applied to history that definition of power needs explanation . 
The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancients regarded fire -- namely , as something existing absolutely . 
But for history , the state and power are merely phenomena , just as for modern physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon . 
From this fundamental difference between the view held by history and that held by jurisprudence , it follows that jurisprudence can tell minutely how in its opinion power should be constituted and what power -- existing immutably outside time -- is , but to history 's questions about the meaning of the mutations of power in time it can answer nothing . 
If power be the collective will of the people transferred to their ruler , was Pugachev a representative of the will of the people ? 
If not , then why was Napoleon I ? 
Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was taken prisoner at Boulogne , and why , later on , were those criminals whom he arrested ? 
Do palace revolutions -- in which sometimes only two or three people take part -- transfer the will of the people to a new ruler ? 
In international relations , is the will of the people also transferred to their conqueror ? 
Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred to Napoleon in 1806 ? 
Was the will of the Russian people transferred to Napoleon in 1809 , when our army in alliance with the French went to fight the Austrians ? 
To these questions three answers are possible : Either to assume -LRB- 1 -RRB- that the will of the people is always unconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen , and that therefore every emergence of a new power , every struggle against the power once appointed , should be absolutely regarded as an infringement of the real power ; or -LRB- 2 -RRB- that the will of the people is transferred to the rulers conditionally , under definite and known conditions , and to show that all limitations , conflicts , and even destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of the conditions under which their power was entrusted to them ; or -LRB- 3 -RRB- that the will of the people is delegated to the rulers conditionally , but that the conditions are unknown and indefinite , and that the appearance of several authorities , their struggles and their falls , result solely from the greater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknown conditions on which the will of the people is transferred from some people to others . 
And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the relation of the people to their rulers . 
Some historians -- those biographical and specialist historians already referred to -- in their simplicity failing to understand the question of the meaning of power , seem to consider that the collective will of the people is unconditionally transferred to historical persons , and therefore when describing some single state they assume that particular power to be the one absolute and real power , and that any other force opposing this is not a power but a violation of power -- mere violence . 
Their theory , suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history , has the inconvenience -- in application to complex and stormy periods in the life of nations during which various powers arise simultaneously and struggle with one another -- that a Legitimist historian will prove that the National Convention , the Directory , and Bonaparte were mere infringers of the true power , while a Republican and a Bonapartist will prove : the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was the real power , and that all the others were violations of power . 
Evidently the explanations furnished by these historians being mutually contradictory can only satisfy young children . 
Recognizing the falsity of this view of history , another set of historians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of the will of the people to their rulers , and that historical leaders have power only conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of the people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them . 
But what this program consists in these historians do not say , or if they do they continually contradict one another . 
Each historian , according to his view of what constitutes a nation 's progress , looks for these conditions in the greatness , wealth , freedom , or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country . 
But not to mention the historians ' contradictions as to the nature of this program -- or even admitting that some one general program of these conditions exists -- the facts of history almost always contradict that theory . 
If the conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the wealth , freedom , and enlightenment of the people , how is it that Louis XIV and Ivan the Terrible end their reigns tranquilly , while Louis XVI and Charles I are executed by their people ? 
To this question historians reply that Louis XIV 's activity , contrary to the program , reacted on Louis XVI . 
But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV -- why should it react just on Louis XVI ? 
And what is the time limit for such reactions ? 
To these questions there are and can be no answers . 
Equally little does this view explain why for several centuries the collective will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs , and then suddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to the Convention , to the Directory , to Napoleon , to Alexander , to Louis XVIII , to Napoleon again , to Charles X , to Louis Philippe , to a Republican government , and to Napoleon III . 
When explaining these rapid transfers of the people 's will from from one individual to another , especially in view of international relations , conquests , and alliances , the historians are obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations of the people 's will but are accidents dependent on cunning , on mistakes , on craft , or on the weakness of a diplomatist , a ruler , or a party leader . 
So that the greater part of the events of history -- civil wars , revolutions , and conquests -- are presented by these historians not as the results of free transferences of the people 's will , but as results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals , that is , once again , as usurpations of power . 
And so these historians also see and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory . 
These historians resemble a botanist who , having noticed that some plants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons , should insist that all that grows does so by sprouting into two leaves , and that the palm , the mushroom , and even the oak , which blossom into full growth and no longer resemble two leaves , are deviations from the theory . 
Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people is transferred to historic personages conditionally , but that the conditions are unknown to us . 
