The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him , tried to ingratiate themselves with him , and it seemed to them all that he was preparing something for them and concealing it . 
A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened , at which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order . 
The meeting was a full one . 
After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began his address . 
`` Dear Brothers , '' he began , blushing and stammering , with a written speech in his hand , `` it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in the seclusion of our lodge -- we must act -- act ! 
We are drowsing , but we must act . '' 
Pierre raised his notebook and began to read . 
`` For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of virtue , '' he read , `` we must cleanse men from prejudice , diffuse principles in harmony with the spirit of the times , undertake the education of the young , unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the wisest men , boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions , infidelity , and folly , and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity of purpose and possessed of authority and power . 
`` To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may , even in this world , receive a lasting reward for his virtue . 
But in these great endeavors we are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today . 
What is to be done in these circumstances ? 
To favor revolutions , overthrow everything , repel force by force ? 
... No ! 
We are very far from that . 
Every violent reform deserves censure , for it quite fails to remedy evil while men remain what they are , and also because wisdom needs no violence . 
`` The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparing men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of conviction -- aiming at the punishment of vice and folly , and patronizing talent and virtue : raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brotherhood . 
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being aware of it . 
In a word , we must found a form of government holding universal sway , which should be diffused over the whole world without destroying the bonds of citizenship , and beside which all other governments can continue in their customary course and do everything except what impedes the great aim of our order , which is to obtain for virtue the victory over vice . 
This aim was that of Christianity itself . 
It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow the example and instruction of the best and wisest men . 
`` At that time , when everything was plunged in darkness , preaching alone was of course sufficient . 
The novelty of Truth endowed her with special strength , but now we need much more powerful methods . 
It is now necessary that man , governed by his senses , should find in virtue a charm palpable to those senses . 
It is impossible to eradicate the passions ; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim , and it is therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions within the limits of virtue . 
Our order should provide means to that end . 
`` As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state , each of them again training two others and all being closely united , everything will be possible for our order , which has already in secret accomplished much for the welfare of mankind . '' 
This speech not only made a strong impression , but created excitement in the lodge . 
The majority of the Brothers , seeing in it dangerous designs of Illuminism , * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre . 
The Grand Master began answering him , and Pierre began developing his views with more and more warmth . 
It was long since there had been so stormy a meeting . 
Parties were formed , some accusing Pierre of Illuminism , others supporting him . 
At that meeting he was struck for the first time by the endless variety of men 's minds , which prevents a truth from ever presenting itself identically to two persons . 
Even those members who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with limitations and alterations he could not agree to , as what he always wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself understood it . 
* The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for monarchical institutions . 
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue alone , but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute . 
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would be accepted . 
He was told that it would not , and without waiting for the usual formalities he left the lodge and went home . 
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded . 
For three days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at home receiving no one and going nowhere . 
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife , who implored him to see her , telling him how grieved she was about him and how she wished to devote her whole life to him . 
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would return to Petersburg from abroad . 
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected less than the others forced his way in to see him and , turning the conversation upon Pierre 's matrimonial affairs , by way of fraternal advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong and that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not forgiving the penitent . 
At the same time his mother-in-law , Prince Vasili 's wife , sent to him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most important matter . 
Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and that they wanted to reunite him with his wife , and in the mood he then was , this was not even unpleasant to him . 
Nothing mattered to him . 
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance , and under the influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife . 
`` No one is right and no one is to blame ; so she too is not to blame , '' he thought . 
If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife , it was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take any step . 
Had his wife come to him , he would not have turned her away . 
Compared to what preoccupied him , was it not a matter of indifference whether he lived with his wife or not ? 
