But the princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes -- the look they had when she was not thinking of herself . 
As with everyone , her face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass . 
She went on reading : All Moscow talks of nothing but war . 
One of my two brothers is already abroad , the other is with the Guards , who are starting on their march to the frontier . 
Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war . 
God grant that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty , in His goodness , to give us as sovereign ! 
To say nothing of my brothers , this war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart . 
I mean young Nicholas Rostov , who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left the university to join the army . 
I will confess to you , dear Mary , that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was a great grief to me . 
This young man , of whom I spoke to you last summer , is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and , particularly , he is so frank and has so much heart . 
He is so pure and poetic that my relations with him , transient as they were , have been one of the sweetest comforts to my poor heart , which has already suffered so much . 
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then . 
That is still too fresh . 
Ah , dear friend , you are happy not to know these poignant joys and sorrows . 
You are fortunate , for the latter are generally the stronger ! 
I know very well that Count Nicholas is too young ever to be more to me than a friend , but this sweet friendship , this poetic and pure intimacy , were what my heart needed . 
But enough of this ! 
The chief news , about which all Moscow gossips , is the death of old Count Bezukhov , and his inheritance . 
Fancy ! 
The three princesses have received very little , Prince Vasili nothing , and it is Monsieur Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been recognized as legitimate ; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor of the finest fortune in Russia . 
It is rumored that Prince Vasili played a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen . 
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and inheritance ; but I do know that since this young man , whom we all used to know as plain Monsieur Pierre , has become Count Bezukhov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia , I am much amused to watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by marriageable daughters , and of the young ladies themselves , toward him , though , between you and me , he always seemed to me a poor sort of fellow . 
As for the past two years people have amused themselves by finding husbands for me -LRB- most of whom I do n't even know -RRB- , the matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess Bezukhova . 
But you will understand that I have no desire for the post . 
A propos of marriages : do you know that a while ago that universal auntie Anna Mikhaylovna told me , under the seal of strict secrecy , of a plan of marriage for you . 
It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili 's son Anatole , whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich and distinguee , and it is on you that his relations ' choice has fallen . 
I do n't know what you will think of it , but I consider it my duty to let you know of it . 
He is said to be very handsome and a terrible scapegrace . 
That is all I have been able to find out about him . 
But enough of gossip . 
I am at the end of my second sheet of paper , and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins ' . 
Read the mystical book I am sending you ; it has an enormous success here . 
Though there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp , it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul . 
Adieu ! 
Give my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
I embrace you as I love you . 
JULIE P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife . 
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed . 
Then she suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table . 
She took a sheet of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it . 
This is the reply she wrote , also in French : Dear and precious Friend , Your letter of the 13th has given me great delight . 
So you still love me , my romantic Julie ? 
Separation , of which you say so much that is bad , does not seem to have had its usual effect on you . 
You complain of our separation . 
What then should I say , if I dared complain , I who am deprived of all who are dear to me ? 
Ah , if we had not religion to console us life would be very sad . 
Why do you suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young man ? 
On such matters I am only severe with myself . 
I understand such feelings in others , and if never having felt them I can not approve of them , neither do I condemn them . 
Only it seems to me that Christian love , love of one 's neighbor , love of one 's enemy , is worthier , sweeter , and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself . 
