`` Now go ! '' 
`` All the same I sha n't sleep . 
What silliness , to sleep ! 
Mummy ! 
Mummy ! 
such a thing never happened to me before , '' she said , surprised and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself . 
`` And could we ever have thought ! 
... '' It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him . 
It was as if she feared this strange , unexpected happiness of meeting again the very man she had then chosen -LRB- she was firmly convinced she had done so -RRB- and of finding him , as it seemed , not indifferent to her . 
`` And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg while we are here . 
And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball . 
It is fate . 
Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this ! 
Already then , directly I saw him I felt something peculiar . '' 
`` What else did he say to you ? 
What are those verses ? 
Read them ... '' said her mother , thoughtfully , referring to some verses Prince Andrew had written in Natasha 's album . 
`` Mamma , one need not be ashamed of his being a widower ? '' 
`` Do n't , Natasha ! 
Pray to God . 
` Marriages are made in heaven , ' '' said her mother . 
`` Darling Mummy , how I love you ! 
How happy I am ! '' 
cried Natasha , shedding tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother . 
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him of his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make her his wife . 
That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house . 
The French ambassador was there , and a foreign prince of the blood who had of late become a frequent visitor of hers , and many brilliant ladies and gentlemen . 
Pierre , who had come downstairs , walked through the rooms and struck everyone by his preoccupied , absent-minded , and morose air . 
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression and had made desperate efforts to combat it . 
Since the intimacy of his wife with the royal prince , Pierre had unexpectedly been made a gentleman of the bedchamber , and from that time he had begun to feel oppressed and ashamed in court society , and dark thoughts of the vanity of all things human came to him oftener than before . 
At the same time the feeling he had noticed between his protegee Natasha and Prince Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position and his friend 's . 
He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife , and about Natasha and Prince Andrew ; and again everything seemed to him insignificant in comparison with eternity ; again the question : for what ? 
presented itself ; and he forced himself to work day and night at Masonic labors , hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him . 
Toward midnight , after he had left the countess ' apartments , he was sitting upstairs in a shabby dressing gown , copying out the original transaction of the Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy with tobacco smoke , when someone came in . 
It was Prince Andrew . 
`` Ah , it 's you ! '' 
said Pierre with a preoccupied , dissatisfied air . 
`` And I , you see , am hard at it . '' 
He pointed to his manuscript book with that air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at their work . 
Prince Andrew , with a beaming , ecstatic expression of renewed life on his face , paused in front of Pierre and , not noticing his sad look , smiled at him with the egotism of joy . 
`` Well , dear heart , '' said he , `` I wanted to tell you about it yesterday and I have come to do so today . 
I never experienced anything like it before . 
I am in love , my friend ! '' 
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on the sofa beside Prince Andrew . 
`` With Natasha Rostova , yes ? '' 
said he . 
`` Yes , yes ! 
Who else should it be ? 
I should never have believed it , but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and suffered , but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in the world , I have not lived till now . 
At last I live , but I ca n't live without her ! 
