The family separated on the most friendly terms . 
After supper Nicholas , having undressed in his study and given instructions to the steward who had been waiting for him , went to the bedroom in his dressing gown , where he found his wife still at her table , writing . 
`` What are you writing , Mary ? '' 
Nicholas asked . 
Countess Mary blushed . 
She was afraid that what she was writing would not be understood or approved by her husband . 
She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him , but at the same time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to tell him . 
`` A diary , Nicholas , '' she replied , handing him a blue exercise book filled with her firm , bold writing . 
`` A diary ? '' 
Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony , and he took up the book . 
It was in French . 
December 4 . 
Today when Andrusha -LRB- her eldest boy -RRB- woke up he did not wish to dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me . 
He was naughty and obstinate . 
I tried threats , but he only grew angrier . 
Then I took the matter in hand : I left him alone and began with nurse 's help to get the other children up , telling him that I did not love him . 
For a long time he was silent , as if astonished , then he jumped out of bed , ran to me in his shirt , and sobbed so that I could not calm him for a long time . 
It was plain that what troubled him most was that he had grieved me . 
Afterwards in the evening when I gave him his ticket , he again began crying piteously and kissing me . 
One can do anything with him by tenderness . 
`` What is a ` ticket ' ? '' 
Nicholas inquired . 
`` I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening , showing how they have behaved . '' 
Nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were gazing at him , and continued to turn over the pages and read . 
In the diary was set down everything in the children 's lives that seemed noteworthy to their mother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflections on educational methods . 
They were for the most part quite insignificant trifles , but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either , now that he read this diary about his children for the first time . 
Under the date `` 5 '' was entered : Mitya was naughty at table . 
Papa said he was to have no pudding . 
He had none , but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they were eating ! 
I think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only develops their greediness . 
Must tell Nicholas this . 
Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife . 
The radiant eyes gazed at him questioningly : would he approve or disapprove of her diary ? 
There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his admiration for his wife . 
Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically , thought Nicholas , or even done at all , but this untiring , continual spiritual effort of which the sole aim was the children 's moral welfare delighted him . 
Had Nicholas been able to analyze his feelings he would have found that his steady , tender , and proud love of his wife rested on his feeling of wonder at her spirituality and at the lofty moral world , almost beyond his reach , in which she had her being . 
He was proud of her intelligence and goodness , recognized his own insignificance beside her in the spiritual world , and rejoiced all the more that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part of himself . 
`` I quite , quite approve , my dearest ! '' 
said he with a significant look , and after a short pause he added : `` And I behaved badly today . 
You were n't in the study . 
We began disputing -- Pierre and I -- and I lost my temper . 
But he is impossible : such a child ! 
I do n't know what would become of him if Natasha did n't keep him in hand ... . 
Have you any idea why he went to Petersburg ? 
They have formed ... '' `` Yes , I know , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` Natasha told me . '' 
`` Well , then , you know , '' Nicholas went on , growing hot at the mere recollection of their discussion , `` he wanted to convince me that it is every honest man 's duty to go against the government , and that the oath of allegiance and duty ... I am sorry you were n't there . 
They all fell on me -- Denisov and Natasha ... Natasha is absurd . 
How she rules over him ! 
And yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her own but only repeats his sayings ... '' added Nicholas , yielding to that irresistible inclination which tempts us to judge those nearest and dearest to us . 
