Lying on his bed during those sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals for doing . 
He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies , just like the younger men , but with this difference , that he saw thousands of contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them . 
The longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves . 
He imagined all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or in sections -- against Petersburg , or against him , or to outflank him . 
He thought too of the possibility -LRB- which he feared most of all -RRB- that Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow awaiting him . 
Kutuzov even imagined that Napoleon 's army might turn back through Medyn and Yukhnov , but the one thing he could not foresee was what happened -- the insane , convulsive stampede of Napoleon 's army during its first eleven days after leaving Moscow : a stampede which made possible what Kutuzov had not yet even dared to think of -- the complete extermination of the French . 
Dorokhov 's report about Broussier 's division , the guerrillas ' reports of distress in Napoleon 's army , rumors of preparations for leaving Moscow , all confirmed the supposition that the French army was beaten and preparing for flight . 
But these were only suppositions , which seemed important to the younger men but not to Kutuzov . 
With his sixty years ' experience he knew what value to attach to rumors , knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news so that it appears to confirm what they desire , and he knew how readily in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary . 
And the more he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it . 
This question absorbed all his mental powers . 
All else was to him only life 's customary routine . 
To such customary routine belonged his conversations with the staff , the letters he wrote from Tarutino to Madame de Stael , the reading of novels , the distribution of awards , his correspondence with Petersburg , and so on . 
But the destruction of the French , which he alone foresaw , was his heart 's one desire . 
On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm and thinking of that . 
There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll , Konovnitsyn , and Bolkhovitinov . 
`` Eh , who 's there ? 
Come in , come in ! 
What news ? '' 
the field marshal called out to them . 
While a footman was lighting a candle , Toll communicated the substance of the news . 
`` Who brought it ? '' 
asked Kutuzov with a look which , when the candle was lit , struck Toll by its cold severity . 
`` There can be no doubt about it , your Highness . '' 
`` Call him in , call him here . '' 
Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch resting against the other which was doubled under him . 
He screwed up his seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully , as if wishing to read in his face what preoccupied his own mind . 
`` Tell me , tell me , friend , '' said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low , aged voice , as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on his chest , `` come nearer -- nearer . 
What news have you brought me ? 
Eh ? 
That Napoleon has left Moscow ? 
Are you sure ? 
Eh ? '' 
Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had been told to report . 
`` Speak quicker , quicker ! 
Do n't torture me ! '' 
Kutuzov interrupted him . 
Bolkhovitinov told him everything and was then silent , awaiting instructions . 
Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzov checked him . 
He tried to say something , but his face suddenly puckered and wrinkled ; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of the room , to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there . 
`` O Lord , my Creator , Thou has heard our prayer ... '' said he in a tremulous voice with folded hands . 
`` Russia is saved . 
I thank Thee , O Lord ! '' 
and he wept . 
From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign all Kutuzov 's activity was directed toward restraining his troops , by authority , by guile , and by entreaty , from useless attacks , maneuvers , or encounters with the perishing enemy . 
Dokhturov went to Malo-Yaroslavets , but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gave orders for the evacuation of Kaluga -- a retreat beyond which town seemed to him quite possible . 
Everywhere Kutuzov retreated , but the enemy without waiting for his retreat fled in the opposite direction . 
Napoleon 's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarutino and Malo-Yaroslavets , and make conjectures as to what would have happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern provinces . 
But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancing into those southern provinces -LRB- for the Russian army did not bar his way -RRB- , the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army , for then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin . 
How could that army -- which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had trampled them underfoot instead of keeping them , and on arriving at Smolensk had looted provisions instead of storing them -- how could that army recuperate in Kaluga province , which was inhabited by Russians such as those who lived in Moscow , and where fire had the same property of consuming what was set ablaze ? 
