Nothing . 
He had merely understood that the woman he had known as a child , of whom when her beauty was mentioned he had said absent-mindedly : `` Yes , she 's good looking , '' he had understood that this woman might belong to him . 
`` But she 's stupid . 
I have myself said she is stupid , '' he thought . 
`` There is something nasty , something wrong , in the feeling she excites in me . 
I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and she with him , that there was quite a scandal and that that 's why he was sent away . 
Hippolyte is her brother ... Prince Vasili is her father ... It 's bad ... '' he reflected , but while he was thinking this -LRB- the reflection was still incomplete -RRB- , he caught himself smiling and was conscious that another line of thought had sprung up , and while thinking of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his wife , how she would love him become quite different , and how all he had thought and heard of her might be false . 
And he again saw her not as the daughter of Prince Vasili , but visualized her whole body only veiled by its gray dress . 
`` But no ! 
Why did this thought never occur to me before ? '' 
and again he told himself that it was impossible , that there would be something unnatural , and as it seemed to him dishonorable , in this marriage . 
He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks of those who had seen them together . 
He recalled Anna Pavlovna 's words and looks when she spoke to him about his house , recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasili and others , and was seized by terror lest he had already , in some way , bound himself to do something that was evidently wrong and that he ought not to do . 
But at the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself , in another part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly beauty . 
In November , 1805 , Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection in four different provinces . 
He had arranged this for himself so as to visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole where his regiment was stationed , and take him to visit Prince Nicholas Bolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that rich old man . 
But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs , Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre , who , it is true , had latterly spent whole days at home , that is , in Prince Vasili 's house where he was staying , and had been absurd , excited , and foolish in Helene 's presence -LRB- as a lover should be -RRB- , but had not yet proposed to her . 
`` This is all very fine , but things must be settled , '' said Prince Vasili to himself , with a sorrowful sigh , one morning , feeling that Pierre who was under such obligations to him -LRB- `` But never mind that '' -RRB- was not behaving very well in this matter . 
`` Youth , frivolity ... well , God be with him , '' thought he , relishing his own goodness of heart , `` but it must be brought to a head . 
The day after tomorrow will be Lelya 's name day . 
I will invite two or three people , and if he does not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair - yes , my affair . 
I am her father . '' 
Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna 's `` At Home '' and after the sleepless night when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he ought to avoid her and go away , Pierre , despite that decision , had not left Prince Vasili 's and felt with terror that in people 's eyes he was every day more and more connected with her , that it was impossible for him to return to his former conception of her , that he could not break away from her , and that though it would be a terrible thing he would have to unite his fate with hers . 
He might perhaps have been able to free himself but that Prince Vasili -LRB- who had rarely before given receptions -RRB- now hardly let a day go by without having an evening party at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the general pleasure and disappoint everyone 's expectation . 
Prince Vasili , in the rare moments when he was at home , would take Pierre 's hand in passing and draw it downwards , or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled , clean-shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say : `` Till tomorrow , '' or , `` Be in to dinner or I shall not see you , '' or , `` I am staying in for your sake , '' and so on . 
And though Prince Vasili , when he stayed in -LRB- as he said -RRB- for Pierre 's sake , hardly exchanged a couple of words with him , Pierre felt unable to disappoint him . 
Every day he said to himself one and the same thing : `` It is time I understood her and made up my mind what she really is . 
Was I mistaken before , or am I mistaken now ? 
No , she is not stupid , she is an excellent girl , '' he sometimes said to himself `` she never makes a mistake , never says anything stupid . 
She says little , but what she does say is always clear and simple , so she is not stupid . 
She never was abashed and is not abashed now , so she can not be a bad woman ! '' 
He had often begun to make reflections or think aloud in her company , and she had always answered him either by a brief but appropriate remark -- showing that it did not interest her -- or by a silent look and smile which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre her superiority . 
She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile . 
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him alone , in which there was something more significant than in the general smile that usually brightened her face . 
Pierre knew that everyone was waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line , and he knew that sooner or later he would step across it , but an incomprehensible terror seized him at the thought of that dreadful step . 
A thousand times during that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to that dreadful abyss , Pierre said to himself : `` What am I doing ? 
I need resolution . 
Can it be that I have none ? '' 
He wished to take a decision , but felt with dismay that in this matter he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really possessed . 
Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel themselves quite innocent , and since that day when he was overpowered by a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna 's , an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will . 
On Helene 's name day , a small party of just their own people -- as his wife said -- met for supper at Prince Vasili 's . 
All these friends and relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girl would be decided that evening . 
The visitors were seated at supper . 
Princess Kuragina , a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome , was sitting at the head of the table . 
On either side of her sat the more important guests -- an old general and his wife , and Anna Pavlovna Scherer . 
At the other end sat the younger and less important guests , and there too sat the members of the family , and Pierre and Helene , side by side . 
Prince Vasili was not having any supper : he went round the table in a merry mood , sitting down now by one , now by another , of the guests . 
To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to Pierre and Helene , whose presence he seemed not to notice . 
He enlivened the whole party . 
The wax candles burned brightly , the silver and crystal gleamed , so did the ladies ' toilets and the gold and silver of the men 's epaulets ; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table , the clatter of plates , knives , and glasses mingled with the animated hum of several conversations . 
