The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow nobility and gentry , that they would furnish ten men , fully equipped , out of every thousand serfs , as the Smolensk gentry had done . 
Their chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose with apparent relief , and began walking up and down , arm in arm , to stretch their legs and converse in couples . 
`` The Emperor ! 
The Emperor ! '' 
a sudden cry resounded through the halls and the whole throng hurried to the entrance . 
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of nobles . 
Every face expressed respectful , awe-struck curiosity . 
Pierre stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said . 
From what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow nobility . 
He was answered by a voice which informed him of the resolution just arrived at . 
`` Gentlemen ! '' 
said the Emperor with a quivering voice . 
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided , so that Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying with emotion : `` I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles , but today it has surpassed my expectations . 
I thank you in the name of the Fatherland ! 
Gentlemen , let us act ! 
Time is most precious ... '' The Emperor ceased speaking , the crowd began pressing round him , and rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides . 
`` Yes , most precious ... a royal word , '' said Count Rostov , with a sob . 
He stood at the back , and , though he had heard hardly anything , understood everything in his own way . 
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants . 
There he remained about ten minutes . 
Pierre was among those who saw him come out from the merchants ' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes . 
As became known later , he had scarcely begun to address the merchants before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling voice . 
When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two merchants , one of whom Pierre knew , a fat otkupshchik . 
The other was the mayor , a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard . 
Both were weeping . 
Tears filled the thin man 's eyes , and the fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating : `` Our lives and property -- take them , Your Majesty ! '' 
Pierre 's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything . 
He now felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought an opportunity of effacing it . 
Having heard that Count Mamonov was furnishing a regiment , Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he would give a thousand men and their maintenance . 
Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears , and at once consented to Petya 's request and went himself to enter his name . 
Next day the Emperor left Moscow . 
The assembled nobles all took off their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs , and not without some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment , feeling amazed themselves at what they had done . 
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going to Dresden , could not help having his head turned by the homage he received , could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the stimulating influence of a June morning , and could not refrain from bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev . 
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally insulted . 
Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way , because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great commander . 
Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain his wish for a gallop across a level field ; and in the same way the innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with their personal characteristics , habits , circumstances , and aims . 
They were moved by fear or vanity , rejoiced or were indignant , reasoned , imagining that they knew what they were doing and did it of their own free will , but they all were involuntary tools of history , carrying on a work concealed from them but comprehensible to us . 
Such is the inevitable fate of men of action , and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy the less are they free . 
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage , their personal interests have vanished leaving no trace , and nothing remains of that time but its historic results . 
Providence compelled all these men , striving to attain personal aims , to further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all expected -- neither Napoleon , nor Alexander , nor still less any of those who did the actual fighting . 
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now . 
No one will deny that that cause was , on the one hand , its advance into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for a winter campaign and , on the other , the character given to the war by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused among the Russian people . 
But no one at the time foresaw -LRB- what now seems so evident -RRB- that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand men -- the best in the world and led by the best general -- could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength , and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was . 
Not only did no one see this , but on the Russian side every effort was made to hinder the only thing that could save Russia , while on the French side , despite Napoleon 's experience and so-called military genius , every effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer , that is , to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction . 
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line , that he sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk , and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign was even then understood . 
Russian authors are still fonder of telling us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia , and this plan some of them attribute to Pfuel , others to a certain Frenchman , others to Toll , and others again to Alexander himself - pointing to notes , projects , and letters which contain hints of such a line of action . 
But all these hints at what happened , both from the French side and the Russian , are advanced only because they fit in with the event . 
Had that event not occurred these hints would have been forgotten , as we have forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because the event falsified them . 
There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people to say : `` I said then that it would be so , '' quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect . 
Conjectures as to Napoleon 's awareness of the danger of extending his line , and -LRB- on the Russian side -RRB- as to luring the enemy into the depths of Russia , are evidently of that kind , and only by much straining can historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals , or such plans to the Russian commanders . 
