he murmured to himself , still not replying to the Austrian . 
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order . 
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance , he stopped the third division and convinced himself that there really were no sharpshooters in front of our columns . 
The colonel at the head of the regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief 's order to throw out skirmishers . 
He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away . 
There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent hidden by dense mist . 
Having given orders in the commander in chief 's name to rectify this omission , Prince Andrew galloped back . 
Kutuzov still in the same place , his stout body resting heavily in the saddle with the lassitude of age , sat yawning wearily with closed eyes . 
The troops were no longer moving , but stood with the butts of their muskets on the ground . 
`` All right , all right ! '' 
he said to Prince Andrew , and turned to a general who , watch in hand , was saying it was time they started as all the left-flank columns had already descended . 
`` Plenty of time , your excellency , '' muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a yawn . 
`` Plenty of time , '' he repeated . 
Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regiments saluting , and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended line of the advancing Russian columns . 
Evidently the person they were greeting was riding quickly . 
When the soldiers of the regiment in front of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout , he rode a little to one side and looked round with a frown . 
Along the road from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms . 
Two of them rode side by side in front , at full gallop . 
One in a black uniform with white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse , the other who was in a white uniform rode a black one . 
These were the two Emperors followed by their suites . 
Kutuzov , affecting the manners of an old soldier at the front , gave the command `` Attention ! '' 
and rode up to the Emperors with a salute . 
His whole appearance and manner were suddenly transformed . 
He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without reasoning . 
With an affectation of respect which evidently struck Alexander unpleasantly , he rode up and saluted . 
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished . 
After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad , but there was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in his fine gray eyes , and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varying expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent youth . 
At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic ; here he seemed brighter and more energetic . 
He was slightly flushed after galloping two miles , and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round at the faces of his suite , young and animated as his own . 
Czartoryski , Novosiltsev , Prince Volkonsky , Strogonov , and the others , all richly dressed gay young men on splendid , well-groomed , fresh , only slightly heated horses , exchanging remarks and smiling , had stopped behind the Emperor . 
The Emperor Francis , a rosy , long faced young man , sat very erect on his handsome black horse , looking about him in a leisurely and preoccupied manner . 
He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked some question -- `` Most likely he is asking at what o'clock they started , '' thought Prince Andrew , watching his old acquaintance with a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn . 
In the Emperors ' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard and line regiments , Russian and Austrian . 
Among them were grooms leading the Tsar 's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths . 
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters a stuffy room , so a whiff of youthfulness , energy , and confidence of success reached Kutuzov 's cheerless staff with the galloping advent of all these brilliant young men . 
`` Why are n't you beginning , Michael Ilarionovich ? '' 
said the Emperor Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov , glancing courteously at the same time at the Emperor Francis . 
`` I am waiting , Your Majesty , '' answered Kutuzov , bending forward respectfully . 
The Emperor , frowning slightly , bent his ear forward as if he had not quite heard . 
`` Waiting , Your Majesty , '' repeated Kutuzov . 
-LRB- Prince Andrew noted that Kutuzov 's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word `` waiting . '' -RRB- 
`` Not all the columns have formed up yet , Your Majesty . '' 
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply ; he shrugged his rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him , as if complaining of Kutuzov . 
`` You know , Michael Ilarionovich , we are not on the Empress ' Field where a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled , '' said the Tsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis , as if inviting him if not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying . 
But the Emperor Francis continued to look about him and did not listen . 
`` That is just why I do not begin , sire , '' said Kutuzov in a resounding voice , apparently to preclude the possibility of not being heard , and again something in his face twitched -- `` That is just why I do not begin , sire , because we are not on parade and not on the Empress ' Field . '' 
said clearly and distinctly . 
In the Emperor 's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed dissatisfaction and reproach . 
`` Old though he may be , he should not , he certainly should not , speak like that , '' their glances seemed to say . 
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov 's eye waiting to hear whether he would say anything more . 
