Nicholas and his attendant , with `` Uncle '' and his huntsman , were all riding round the wolf , crying `` ulyulyu ! '' 
shouting and preparing to dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back , and starting forward again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she would be safe . 
Already , at the beginning of this chase , Daniel , hearing the ulyulyuing , had rushed out from the wood . 
He saw Karay seize the wolf , and checked his horse , supposing the affair to be over . 
But when he saw that the horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran for safety , Daniel set his chestnut galloping , not at the wolf but straight toward the wood , just as Karay had run to cut the animal off . 
As a result of this , he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been stopped a second time by `` Uncle 's '' borzois . 
Daniel galloped up silently , holding a naked dagger in his left hand and thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if it were a flail . 
Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut , breathing heavily , panted past him , and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel lying on the wolf 's back among the dogs , trying to seize her by the ears . 
It was evident to the dogs , the hunters , and to the wolf herself that all was now over . 
The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and tried to rise , but the borzois stuck to her . 
Daniel rose a little , took a step , and with his whole weight , as if lying down to rest , fell on the wolf , seizing her by the ears . 
Nicholas was about to stab her , but Daniel whispered , `` Do n't ! 
We 'll gag her ! '' 
and , changing his position , set his foot on the wolf 's neck . 
A stick was thrust between her jaws and she was fastened with a leash , as if bridled , her legs were bound together , and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side . 
With happy , exhausted faces , they laid the old wolf , alive , on a shying and snorting horse and , accompanied by the dogs yelping at her , took her to the place where they were all to meet . 
The hounds had killed two of the cubs and the borzois three . 
The huntsmen assembled with their booty and their stories , and all came to look at the wolf , which , with her broad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws , gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding her . 
When she was touched , she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at everybody . 
Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the wolf . 
`` Oh , what a formidable one ! '' 
said he . 
`` A formidable one , eh ? '' 
he asked Daniel , who was standing near . 
`` Yes , your excellency , '' answered Daniel , quickly doffing his cap . 
The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with Daniel . 
`` Ah , but you are a crusty fellow , friend ! '' 
said the count . 
For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy , childlike , meek , and amiable smile . 
The old count went home , and Natasha and Petya promised to return very soon , but as it was still early the hunt went farther . 
At midday they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees . 
Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips . 
Facing him lay a field of winter rye , there his own huntsman stood alone in a hollow behind a hazel bush . 
The hounds had scarcely been loosed before Nicholas heard one he knew , Voltorn , giving tongue at intervals ; other hounds joined in , now pausing and now again giving tongue . 
A moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been found , and the whole pack , joining together , rushed along the ravine toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas . 
He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the ravine , he even saw the hounds , and was expecting a fox to show itself at any moment on the ryefield opposite . 
The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois , and Nicholas saw a queer , short-legged red fox with a fine brush going hard across the field . 
The borzois bore down on it ... . 
Now they drew close to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper curves , trailing its brush , when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashed in followed by a black one , and everything was in confusion ; the borzois formed a star-shaped figure , scarcely swaying their bodies and with tails turned away from the center of the group . 
Two huntsmen galloped up to the dogs ; one in a red cap , the other , a stranger , in a green coat . 
`` What 's this ? '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` Where 's that huntsman from ? 
He is not ` Uncle 's ' man . '' 
The huntsmen got the fox , but stayed there a long time without strapping it to the saddle . 
Their horses , bridled and with high saddles , stood near them and there too the dogs were lying . 
The huntsmen waved their arms and did something to the fox . 
Then from that spot came the sound of a horn , with the signal agreed on in case of a fight . 
`` That 's Ilagin 's huntsman having a row with our Ivan , '' said Nicholas ' groom . 
Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him , and rode at a footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together . 
