The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev , Prince Andrew spent the evening at Count Kochubey 's . 
He told the count of his interview with Sila Andreevich -LRB- Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War 's anteroom -RRB- . 
`` Mon cher , even in this case you ca n't do without Michael Mikhaylovich Speranski . 
He manages everything . 
I 'll speak to him . 
He has promised to come this evening . '' 
`` What has Speranski to do with the army regulations ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew . 
Kochubey shook his head smilingly , as if surprised at Bolkonski 's simplicity . 
`` We were talking to him about you a few days ago , '' Kochubey continued , `` and about your freed plowmen . '' 
`` Oh , is it you , Prince , who have freed your serfs ? '' 
said an old man of Catherine 's day , turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski . 
`` It was a small estate that brought in no profit , '' replied Prince Andrew , trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man uselessly . 
`` Afraid of being late ... '' said the old man , looking at Kochubey . 
`` There 's one thing I do n't understand , '' he continued . 
`` Who will plow the land if they are set free ? 
It is easy to write laws , but difficult to rule ... . 
Just the same as now -- I ask you , Count -- who will be heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations ? '' 
`` Those who pass the examinations , I suppose , '' replied Kochubey , crossing his legs and glancing round . 
`` Well , I have Pryanichnikov serving under me , a splendid man , a priceless man , but he 's sixty . 
Is he to go up for examination ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's a difficulty , as education is not at all general , but ... '' Count Kochubey did not finish . 
He rose , took Prince Andrew by the arm , and went to meet a tall , bald , fair man of about forty with a large open forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness , who was just entering . 
The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a cross suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast . 
It was Speranski . 
Prince Andrew recognized him at once , and felt a throb within him , as happens at critical moments of life . 
Whether it was from respect , envy , or anticipation , he did not know . 
Speranski 's whole figure was of a peculiar type that made him easily recognizable . 
In the society in which Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who together with awkward and clumsy gestures possessed such calmness and self-assurance ; he had never seen so resolute yet gentle an expression as that in those half-closed , rather humid eyes , or so firm a smile that expressed nothing ; nor had he heard such a refined , smooth , soft voice ; above all he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands -- hands which were broad , but very plump , soft , and white . 
Such whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long in hospital . 
This was Speranski , Secretary of State , reporter to the Emperor and his companion at Erfurt , where he had more than once met and talked with Napoleon . 
Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to speak . 
He spoke slowly , with assurance that he would be listened to , and he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing . 
Prince Andrew followed Speranski 's every word and movement with particular attention . 
As happens to some people , especially to men who judge those near to them severely , he always on meeting anyone new - especially anyone whom , like Speranski , he knew by reputation - expected to discover in him the perfection of human qualities . 
Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner as he had been detained at the palace . 
He did not say that the Emperor had kept him , and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty . 
When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew , Speranski slowly turned his eyes to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence . 
`` I am very glad to make your acquaintance . 
I had heard of you , as everyone has , '' he said after a pause . 
Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given Bolkonski . 
Speranski smiled more markedly . 
`` The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend Monsieur Magnitski , '' he said , fully articulating every word and syllable , `` and if you like I can put you in touch with him . '' 
He paused at the full stop . 
`` I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable . '' 
A circle soon formed round Speranski , and the old man who had talked about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him . 
Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement of Speranski 's : this man , not long since an insignificant divinity student , who now , Bolkonski thought , held in his hands -- those plump white hands -- the fate of Russia . 
Prince Andrew was struck by the extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered the old man . 
He appeared to address condescending words to him from an immeasurable height . 
When the old man began to speak too loud , Speranski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of what pleased the sovereign . 
