For some seconds they looked at one another , and that look saved Pierre . 
Apart from conditions of war and law , that look established human relations between the two men . 
At that moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both their minds , and they realized that they were both children of humanity and were brothers . 
At the first glance , when Davout had only raised his head from the papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers , Pierre was merely a circumstance , and Davout could have shot him without burdening his conscience with an evil deed , but now he saw in him a human being . 
He reflected for a moment . 
`` How can you show me that you are telling the truth ? '' 
said Davout coldly . 
Pierre remembered Ramballe , and named him and his regiment and the street where the house was . 
`` You are not what you say , '' returned Davout . 
In a trembling , faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the truth of his statements . 
But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout . 
Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought , and began buttoning up his uniform . 
It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre . 
When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner , he jerked his head in Pierre 's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away . 
But where they were to take him Pierre did not know : back to the coach house or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as they crossed the Virgin 's Field . 
He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting another question to Davout . 
`` Yes , of course ! '' 
replied Davout , but what this `` yes '' meant , Pierre did not know . 
Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went , whether it was far , or in which direction . 
His faculties were quite numbed , he was stupefied , and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others did till they all stopped and he stopped too . 
The only thought in his mind at that time was : who was it that had really sentenced him to death ? 
Not the men on the commission that had first examined him -- not one of them wished to or , evidently , could have done it . 
It was not Davout , who had looked at him in so human a way . 
In another moment Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong , but just then the adjutant had come in and interrupted him . 
The adjutant , also , had evidently had no evil intent though he might have refrained from coming in . 
Then who was executing him , killing him , depriving him of life -- him , Pierre , with all his memories , aspirations , hopes , and thoughts ? 
Who was doing this ? 
And Pierre felt that it was no one . 
It was a system -- a concurrence of circumstances . 
A system of some sort was killing him -- Pierre -- depriving him of life , of everything , annihilating him . 
From Prince Shcherbatov 's house the prisoners were led straight down the Virgin 's Field , to the left of the nunnery , as far as a kitchen garden in which a post had been set up . 
Beyond that post a fresh pit had been dug in the ground , and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood in a semicircle . 
The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of Napoleon 's soldiers who were not on duty -- Germans , Italians , and Frenchmen , in a variety of uniforms . 
To the right and left of the post stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high boots and shakos . 
The prisoners were placed in a certain order , according to the list -LRB- Pierre was sixth -RRB- , and were led to the post . 
Several drums suddenly began to beat on both sides of them , and at that sound Pierre felt as if part of his soul had been torn away . 
He lost the power of thinking or understanding . 
He could only hear and see . 
And he had only one wish -- that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly . 
Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them . 
The two first were convicts with shaven heads . 
One was tall and thin , the other dark , shaggy , and sinewy , with a flat nose . 
The third was a domestic serf , about forty-five years old , with grizzled hair and a plump , well-nourished body . 
The fourth was a peasant , a very handsome man with a broad , light-brown beard and black eyes . 
The fifth was a factory hand , a thin , sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat . 
Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or two at a time . 
`` In couples , '' replied the officer in command in a calm voice . 
There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident that they were all hurrying -- not as men hurry to do something they understand , but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and incomprehensible task . 
A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French . 
Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the officer 's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row . 
