Behave as if you know nothing either , '' she said . 
`` And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him ! 
And stay to dinner if you care to ! '' 
she called after Pierre . 
Pierre met the old count , who seemed nervous and upset . 
That morning Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski . 
`` Troubles , troubles , my dear fellow ! '' 
he said to Pierre . 
`` What troubles one has with these girls without their mother ! 
I do so regret having come here ... . 
I will be frank with you . 
Have you heard she has broken off her engagement without consulting anybody ? 
It 's true this engagement never was much to my liking . 
Of course he is an excellent man , but still , with his father 's disapproval they would n't have been happy , and Natasha wo n't lack suitors . 
Still , it has been going on so long , and to take such a step without father 's or mother 's consent ! 
And now she 's ill , and God knows what ! 
It 's hard , Count , hard to manage daughters in their mother 's absence ... '' Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the subject , but the count returned to his troubles . 
Sonya entered the room with an agitated face . 
`` Natasha is not quite well ; she 's in her room and would like to see you . 
Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come . '' 
`` Yes , you are a great friend of Bolkonski 's , no doubt she wants to send him a message , '' said the count . 
`` Oh dear ! 
Oh dear ! 
How happy it all was ! '' 
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the room . 
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married , Natasha did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre himself . 
Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to Natasha 's room . 
Natasha , pale and stern , was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna , and her eyes , glittering feverishly , met Pierre with a questioning look the moment he entered . 
She did not smile or nod , but only gazed fixedly at him , and her look asked only one thing : was he a friend , or like the others an enemy in regard to Anatole ? 
As for Pierre , he evidently did not exist for her . 
`` He knows all about it , '' said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and addressing Natasha . 
`` Let him tell you whether I have told the truth . '' 
Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen . 
`` Natalya Ilynichna , '' Pierre began , dropping his eyes with a feeling of pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do , `` whether it is true or not should make no difference to you , because ... '' `` Then it is not true that he 's married ! '' 
`` Yes , it is true . '' 
`` Has he been married long ? '' 
she asked . 
`` On your honor ? 
... '' Pierre gave his word of honor . 
`` Is he still here ? '' 
she asked , quickly . 
`` Yes , I have just seen him . '' 
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that they should leave her alone . 
Pierre did not stay for dinner , but left the room and went away at once . 
He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin , at the thought of whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing . 
He was not at the ice hills , nor at the gypsies ' , nor at Komoneno 's . 
Pierre drove to the Club . 
In the Club all was going on as usual . 
The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about in groups ; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news . 
The footman having greeted him , knowing his habits and his acquaintances , told him there was a place left for him in the small dining room and that Prince Michael Zakharych was in the library , but Paul Timofeevich had not yet arrived . 
