But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of what they were doing , though they would have been glad to leave off , some incomprehensible , mysterious power continued to control them , and they still brought up the charges , loaded , aimed , and applied the match , though only one artilleryman survived out of every three , and though they stumbled and panted with fatigue , perspiring and stained with blood and powder . 
The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both sides , crushing human bodies , and that terrible work which was not done by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds continued . 
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have said that , if only the French made one more slight effort , it would disappear ; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the French would be destroyed . 
But neither the French nor the Russians made that effort , and the flame of battle burned slowly out . 
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking the French . 
At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the beginning . 
But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French from their positions , they could not have made this last effort , for all the Russian troops had been broken up , there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in the battle , and though still holding their positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army . 
The French , with the memory of all their former victories during fifteen years , with the assurance of Napoleon 's invincibility , with the consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact , twenty thousand strong , might easily have made that effort . 
The French had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position ought to have made that effort , for as long as the Russians continued to block the road to Moscow as before , the aim of the French had not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain . 
But the French did not make that effort . 
Some historians say that Napoleon need only have used his Old Guards , who were intact , and the battle would have been won . 
To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring . 
It could not be . 
Napoleon did not give his Guards , not because he did not want to , but because it could not be done . 
All the generals , officers , and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done , because the flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it . 
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling of the mighty arm being stricken powerless , but all the generals and soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not , after all their experience of previous battles -- when after one tenth of such efforts the enemy had fled -- experienced a similar feeling of terror before an enemy who , after losing HALF his men , stood as threateningly at the end as at the beginning of the battle . 
The moral force of the attacking French army was exhausted . 
Not that sort of victory which is defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks , called standards , and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were standing , but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the Russians at Borodino . 
The French invaders , like an infuriated animal that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound , felt that they were perishing , but could not stop , any more than the Russian army , weaker by one half , could help swerving . 
By impetus gained , the French army was still able to roll forward to Moscow , but there , without further effort on the part of the Russians , it had to perish , bleeding from the mortal wound it had received at Borodino . 
The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino was Napoleon 's senseless flight from Moscow , his retreat along the old Smolensk road , the destruction of the invading army of five hundred thousand men , and the downfall of Napoleonic France , on which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger spirit had been laid . 
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind . 
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion ; but at the same time , a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements . 
There is a well known , so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this , that Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following , in spite of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise . 
By the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the tortoise , the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead of him : when Achilles has covered that tenth , the tortoise has covered another one hundredth , and so on forever . 
This problem seemed to the ancients insoluble . 
The absurd answer -LRB- that Achilles could never overtake the tortoise -RRB- resulted from this : that motion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements , whereas the motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous . 
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a solution of the problem , but never reach it . 
Only when we have admitted the conception of the infinitely small , and the resulting geometrical progression with a common ratio of one tenth , and have found the sum of this progression to infinity , do we reach a solution of the problem . 
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble . 
This modern branch of mathematics , unknown to the ancients , when dealing with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small , and so conforms to the chief condition of motion -LRB- absolute continuity -RRB- and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind can not avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of examining continuous motion . 
In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens . 
The movement of humanity , arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary human wills , is continuous . 
To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of history . 
But to arrive at these laws , resulting from the sum of all those human wills , man 's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected units . 
The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected series of continuous events and examine it apart from others , though there is and can be no beginning to any event , for one event always flows uninterruptedly from another . 
The second method is to consider the actions of some one man -- a king or a commander -- as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills ; whereas the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a single historic personage . 
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually takes smaller and smaller units for examination . 
But however small the units it takes , we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others , or to assume a beginning of any phenomenon , or to say that the will of many men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personage , is in itself false . 
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions drawn from history . 
It is merely necessary to select some larger or smaller unit as the subject of observation -- as criticism has every right to do , seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be arbitrarily selected . 
Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation -LRB- the differential of history , that is , the individual tendencies of men -RRB- and attaining to the art of integrating them -LRB- that is , finding the sum of these infinitesimals -RRB- can we hope to arrive at the laws of history . 
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an extraordinary movement of millions of people . 
Men leave their customary pursuits , hasten from one side of Europe to the other , plunder and slaughter one another , triumph and are plunged in despair , and for some years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive movement which first increases and then slackens . 
What was the cause of this movement , by what laws was it governed ? 
asks the mind of man . 
The historians , replying to this question , lay before us the sayings and doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris , calling these sayings and doings `` the Revolution '' ; then they give a detailed biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him ; tell of the influence some of these people had on others , and say : that is why this movement took place and those are its laws . 
But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation , but plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious , because in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger . 
The sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon , and only the sum of those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them . 
`` But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors ; every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been great men , '' says history . 
