thought Natasha . 
He noticed her watching him , raised his eyes , and began to speak seriously : `` One thing would be terrible , '' said he : `` to bind oneself forever to a suffering man . 
It would be continual torture . '' 
And he looked searchingly at her . 
Natasha as usual answered before she had time to think what she would say . 
She said : `` This ca n't go on -- it wo n't . 
You will get well -- quite well . '' 
She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she had then felt . 
She recalled his long sad and severe look at those words and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protracted gaze . 
`` I agreed , '' Natasha now said to herself , `` that it would be dreadful if he always continued to suffer . 
I said it then only because it would have been dreadful for him , but he understood it differently . 
He thought it would be dreadful for me . 
He then still wished to live and feared death . 
And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly ! 
I did not say what I meant . 
I thought quite differently . 
Had I said what I thought , I should have said : even if he had to go on dying , to die continually before my eyes , I should have been happy compared with what I am now . 
Now there is nothing ... nobody . 
Did he know that ? 
No , he did not and never will know it . 
And now it will never , never be possible to put it right . '' 
And now he again seemed to be saying the same words to her , only in her imagination Natasha this time gave him a different answer . 
She stopped him and said : `` Terrible for you , but not for me ! 
You know that for me there is nothing in life but you , and to suffer with you is the greatest happiness for me , '' and he took her hand and pressed it as he had pressed it that terrible evening four days before his death . 
And in her imagination she said other tender and loving words which she might have said then but only spoke now : `` I love thee ! 
... thee ! 
I love , love ... '' she said , convulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with a desperate effort ... She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising in her eyes ; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this . 
Again everything was shrouded in hard , dry perplexity , and again with a strained frown she peered toward the world where he was . 
And now , now it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery ... . 
But at the instant when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her a loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears . 
Dunyasha , her maid , entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened look on her face and showing no concern for her mistress . 
`` Come to your Papa at once , please ! '' 
said she with a strange , excited look . 
`` A misfortune ... about Peter Ilynich ... a letter , '' she finished with a sob . 
Besides a feeling of aloofness from everybody Natasha was feeling a special estrangement from the members of her own family . 
All of them -- her father , mother , and Sonya -- were so near to her , so familiar , so commonplace , that all their words and feelings seemed an insult to the world in which she had been living of late , and she felt not merely indifferent to them but regarded them with hostility . 
She heard Dunyasha 's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune , but did not grasp them . 
`` What misfortune ? 
What misfortune can happen to them ? 
They just live their own old , quiet , and commonplace life , '' thought Natasha . 
As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of her mother 's room . 
His face was puckered up and wet with tears . 
He had evidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that were choking him . 
When he saw Natasha he waved his arms despairingly and burst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face . 
`` Pe ... Petya ... Go , go , she ... is calling ... '' and weeping like a child and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair , he almost fell into it , covering his face with his hands . 
Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natasha 's whole being . 
Terrible anguish struck her heart , she felt a dreadful ache as if something was being torn inside her and she were dying . 
But the pain was immediately followed by a feeling of release from the oppressive constraint that had prevented her taking part in life . 
The sight of her father , the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through the door , made her immediately forget herself and her own grief . 
She ran to her father , but he feebly waved his arm , pointing to her mother 's door . 
