Near Hetzelsdorf Prince Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with great haste and in the greatest disorder . 
The road was so obstructed with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage . 
Prince Andrew took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander , and hungry and weary , making his way past the baggage wagons , rode in search of the commander in chief and of his own luggage . 
Very sinister reports of the position of the army reached him as he went along , and the appearance of the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors . 
`` Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites de l'univers , nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort -- -LRB- le sort de l'armee d'Ulm -RRB- . '' 
* He remembered these words in Bonaparte 's address to his army at the beginning of the campaign , and they awoke in him astonishment at the genius of his hero , a feeling of wounded pride , and a hope of glory . 
`` And should there be nothing left but to die ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Well , if need be , I shall do it no worse than others . '' 
* `` That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of the earth by English gold , we shall cause to share the same fate -- -LRB- the fate of the army at Ulm -RRB- . '' 
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments , carts , guns , artillery , and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road , three and sometimes four abreast . 
From all sides , behind and before , as far as ear could reach , there were the rattle of wheels , the creaking of carts and gun carriages , the tramp of horses , the crack of whips , shouts , the urging of horses , and the swearing of soldiers , orderlies , and officers . 
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen , some flayed , some not , and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers sat waiting for something , and again soldiers straggling from their companies , crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages , or returned from them dragging sheep , fowls , hay , and bulging sacks . 
At each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the din of shouting more incessant . 
Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud pushed the guns and wagons themselves . 
Whips cracked , hoofs slipped , traces broke , and lungs were strained with shouting . 
The officers directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts . 
Their voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder . 
`` Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army , '' thought Bolkonski , recalling Bilibin 's words . 
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was , he rode up to a convoy . 
Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle , evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and looking like something between a cart , a cabriolet , and a caleche . 
A soldier was driving , and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the apron under the leather hood of the vehicle . 
Prince Andrew rode up and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle . 
An officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving the woman 's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others , and the strokes of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage . 
The woman screamed piercingly . 
Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron and , waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl , cried : `` Mr. Aide-de-camp ! 
Mr. Aide-de-camp ! 
... For heaven 's sake ... Protect me ! 
What will become of us ? 
I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh Chasseurs ... . 
They wo n't let us pass , we are left behind and have lost our people ... '' `` I 'll flatten you into a pancake ! '' 
shouted the angry officer to the soldier . 
`` Turn back with your slut ! '' 
`` Mr. Aide-de-camp ! 
Help me ! 
... What does it all mean ? '' 
screamed the doctor 's wife . 
`` Kindly let this cart pass . 
Do n't you see it 's a woman ? '' 
said Prince Andrew riding up to the officer . 
The officer glanced at him , and without replying turned again to the soldier . 
`` I 'll teach you to push on ! 
... Back ! '' 
`` Let them pass , I tell you ! '' 
repeated Prince Andrew , compressing his lips . 
`` And who are you ? '' 
cried the officer , turning on him with tipsy rage , `` who are you ? 
Are you in command here ? 
Eh ? 
I am commander here , not you ! 
