`` And do you know , Countess , '' he said , suddenly addressing her as an old , familiar acquaintance , `` we are getting up a costume tournament ; you ought to take part in it ! 
It will be great fun . 
We shall all meet at the Karagins ' ! 
Please come ! 
No ! 
Really , eh ? '' 
said he . 
While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face , her neck , and her bare arms . 
Natasha knew for certain that he was enraptured by her . 
This pleased her , yet his presence made her feel constrained and oppressed . 
When she was not looking at him she felt that he was looking at her shoulders , and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he should look into hers rather than this . 
But looking into his eyes she was frightened , realizing that there was not that barrier of modesty she had always felt between herself and other men . 
She did not know how it was that within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near to this man . 
When she turned away she feared he might seize her from behind by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck . 
They spoke of most ordinary things , yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she had ever been to any man . 
Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her father , as if asking what it all meant , but Helene was engaged in conversation with a general and did not answer her look , and her father 's eyes said nothing but what they always said : `` Having a good time ? 
Well , I 'm glad of it ! '' 
During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole 's prominent eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her , Natasha , to break the silence , asked him how he liked Moscow . 
She asked the question and blushed . 
She felt all the time that by talking to him she was doing something improper . 
Anatole smiled as though to encourage her . 
`` At first I did not like it much , because what makes a town pleasant ce sont les jolies femmes , * is n't that so ? 
But now I like it very much indeed , '' he said , looking at her significantly . 
`` You 'll come to the costume tournament , Countess ? 
Do come ! '' 
and putting out his hand to her bouquet and dropping his voice , he added , `` You will be the prettiest there . 
Do come , dear countess , and give me this flower as a pledge ! '' 
* Are the pretty women . 
Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he did himself , but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper intention . 
She did not know what to say and turned away as if she had not heard his remark . 
But as soon as she had turned away she felt that he was there , behind , so close behind her . 
`` How is he now ? 
Confused ? 
Angry ? 
Ought I to put it right ? '' 
she asked herself , and she could not refrain from turning round . 
She looked straight into his eyes , and his nearness , self-assurance , and the good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her . 
She smiled just as he was doing , gazing straight into his eyes . 
And again she felt with horror that no barrier lay between him and her . 
The curtain rose again . 
Anatole left the box , serene and gay . 
Natasha went back to her father in the other box , now quite submissive to the world she found herself in . 
All that was going on before her now seemed quite natural , but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her betrothed , of Princess Mary , or of life in the country did not once recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past . 
In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm about , till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared down below . 
That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha saw . 
She felt agitated and tormented , and the cause of this was Kuragin whom she could not help watching . 
As they were leaving the theater Anatole came up to them , called their carriage , and helped them in . 
As he was putting Natasha in he pressed her arm above the elbow . 
Agitated and flushed she turned round . 
He was looking at her with glittering eyes , smiling tenderly . 
