The princess gave no reply and did not even smile , but left the room as Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and , occupying the position she had conquered , settled down in an armchair , inviting Prince Vasili to take a seat beside her . 
`` Boris , '' she said to her son with a smile , `` I shall go in to see the count , my uncle ; but you , my dear , had better go to Pierre meanwhile and do n't forget to give him the Rostovs ' invitation . 
They ask him to dinner . 
I suppose he wo n't go ? '' 
she continued , turning to the prince . 
`` On the contrary , '' replied the prince , who had plainly become depressed , `` I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man ... . 
Here he is , and the count has not once asked for him . '' 
He shrugged his shoulders . 
A footman conducted Boris down one flight of stairs and up another , to Pierre 's rooms . 
Pierre , after all , had not managed to choose a career for himself in Petersburg , and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and sent to Moscow . 
The story told about him at Count Rostov 's was true . 
Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear . 
He had now been for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father 's house . 
Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be already known in Moscow and that the ladies about his father - who were never favorably disposed toward him -- would have used it to turn the count against him , he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father 's part of the house . 
Entering the drawing room , where the princesses spent most of their time , he greeted the ladies , two of whom were sitting at embroidery frames while a third read aloud . 
It was the eldest who was reading -- the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna . 
The two younger ones were embroidering : both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier . 
Pierre was received as if he were a corpse or a leper . 
The eldest princess paused in her reading and silently stared at him with frightened eyes ; the second assumed precisely the same expression ; while the youngest , the one with the mole , who was of a cheerful and lively disposition , bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene she foresaw . 
She drew her wool down through the canvas and , scarcely able to refrain from laughing , stooped as if trying to make out the pattern . 
`` How do you do , cousin ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` You do n't recognize me ? '' 
`` I recognize you only too well , too well . '' 
`` How is the count ? 
Can I see him ? '' 
asked Pierre , awkwardly as usual , but unabashed . 
`` The count is suffering physically and mentally , and apparently you have done your best to increase his mental sufferings . '' 
`` Can I see the count ? '' 
Pierre again asked . 
`` Hm ... . 
If you wish to kill him , to kill him outright , you can see him ... Olga , go and see whether Uncle 's beef tea is ready -- it is almost time , '' she added , giving Pierre to understand that they were busy , and busy making his father comfortable , while evidently he , Pierre , was only busy causing him annoyance . 
Olga went out . 
Pierre stood looking at the sisters ; then he bowed and said : `` Then I will go to my rooms . 
You will let me know when I can see him . '' 
And he left the room , followed by the low but ringing laughter of the sister with the mole . 
Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count 's house . 
He sent for Pierre and said to him : `` My dear fellow , if you are going to behave here as you did in Petersburg , you will end very badly ; that is all I have to say to you . 
The count is very , very ill , and you must not see him at all . '' 
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in his rooms upstairs . 
When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room , stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall , as if running a sword through an invisible foe , and glaring savagely over his spectacles , and then again resuming his walk , muttering indistinct words , shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating . 
`` England is done for , '' said he , scowling and pointing his finger at someone unseen . 
`` Mr. Pitt , as a traitor to the nation and to the rights of man , is sentenced to ... '' But before Pierre -- who at that moment imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured London -- could pronounce Pitt 's sentence , he saw a well-built and handsome young officer entering his room . 
Pierre paused . 
He had left Moscow when Boris was a boy of fourteen , and had quite forgotten him , but in his usual impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendly smile . 
`` Do you remember me ? '' 
asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile . 
`` I have come with my mother to see the count , but it seems he is not well . '' 
`` Yes , it seems he is ill . 
People are always disturbing him , '' answered Pierre , trying to remember who this young man was . 
