The soldiers of Dessaix 's division advancing against the fleches could only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and the fleches . 
As soon as they had descended into that hollow , the smoke of the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it covered the whole approach on that side of it . 
Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of something black -- probably men -- and at times the glint of bayonets . 
But whether they were moving or stationary , whether they were French or Russian , could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt . 
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into Napoleon 's face as , shading his eyes with his hand , he looked at the fleches . 
The smoke spread out before them , and at times it looked as if the smoke were moving , at times as if the troops moved . 
Sometimes shouts were heard through the firing , but it was impossible to tell what was being done there . 
Napoleon , standing on the knoll , looked through a field glass , and in its small circlet saw smoke and men , sometimes his own and sometimes Russians , but when he looked again with the naked eye , he could not tell where what he had seen was . 
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it . 
Occasionally he stopped , listened to the firing , and gazed intently at the battlefield . 
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where he was standing down below , or from the knoll above on which some of his generals had taken their stand , but even from the fleches themselves -- in which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers , alternately or together , dead , wounded , alive , frightened , or maddened -- even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what was taking place . 
There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketry fire , now Russians were seen alone , now Frenchmen alone , now infantry , and now cavalry : they appeared , fired , fell , collided , not knowing what to do with one another , screamed , and ran back again . 
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out , and orderlies from his marshals , kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress of the action , but all these reports were false , both because it was impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place of conflict but reported what they had heard from others ; and also because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming false . 
Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the hands of the French . 
The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the troops to cross it ? 
Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up on the farther side and wait . 
But before that order was given - almost as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino -- the bridge had been retaken by the Russians and burned , in the very skirmish at which Pierre had been present at the beginning of the battle . 
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed , Campan wounded , and Davout killed ; yet at the very time the adjutant had been told that the French had been repulsed , the fleches had in fact been recaptured by other French troops , and Davout was alive and only slightly bruised . 
On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders , which had either been executed before he gave them or could not be and were not executed . 
The marshals and generals , who were nearer to the field of battle but , like Napoleon , did not take part in the actual fighting and only occasionally went within musket range , made their own arrangements without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run . 
But even their orders , like Napoleon 's , were seldom carried out , and then but partially . 
For the most part things happened contrary to their orders . 
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot ; soldiers ordered to remain where they were , suddenly , seeing Russians unexpectedly before them , sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward , and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians . 
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and galloped full speed back again . 
The infantry moved in the same way , sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to go to . 
All orders as to where and when to move the guns , when to send infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry -- all such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the units concerned , without asking either Ney , Davout , or Murat , much less Napoleon . 
They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling orders or for acting on their own initiative , for in battle what is at stake is what is dearest to man -- his own life -- and it sometimes seems that safety lies in running back , sometimes in running forward ; and these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to the mood of the moment . 
In reality , however , all these movements forward and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops . 
All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm , the harm of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over the fields on which these men were floundering about . 
As soon as they left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about , their superiors , located in the background , re-formed them and brought them under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them back to the zone of fire , where under the influence of fear of death they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance promptings of the throng . 
Napoleon 's generals -- Davout , Ney , and Murat , who were near that region of fire and sometimes even entered it -- repeatedly led into it huge masses of well-ordered troops . 
But contrary to what had always happened in their former battles , instead of the news they expected of the enemy 's flight , these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized and terrified mobs . 
The generals re-formed them , but their numbers constantly decreased . 
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements . 
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll , drinking punch , when Murat 's adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed if His Majesty would let him have another division . 
`` Reinforcements ? '' 
said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise , looking at the adjutant -- a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat 's own -- as though he did not understand his words . 
`` Reinforcements ! '' 
thought Napoleon to himself . 
`` How can they need reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a weak , unentrenched Russian wing ? '' 
`` Tell the King of Naples , '' said he sternly , `` that it is not noon yet , and I do n't yet see my chessboard clearly . 
Go ! 
... '' The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being slaughtered . 
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle . 
In the midst of this conversation , which was beginning to interest Napoleon , Berthier 's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite , who was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse . 
It was Belliard . 
Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending reinforcements . 
He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the Emperor would give another division . 
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down without replying . 
Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the generals of the suite around him . 
