Stopping in front of the Pavlograds , the Tsar said something in French to the Austrian Emperor and smiled . 
Seeing that smile , Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still stronger flow of love for his sovereign . 
He longed to show that love in some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry . 
The Tsar called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him . 
`` Oh God , what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me ? '' 
thought Rostov . 
`` I should die of happiness ! '' 
The Tsar addressed the officers also : `` I thank you all , gentlemen , I thank you with my whole heart . '' 
To Rostov every word sounded like a voice from heaven . 
How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar ! 
`` You have earned the St. George 's standards and will be worthy of them . '' 
`` Oh , to die , to die for him , '' thought Rostov . 
The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear , and the soldiers , straining their lungs , shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
Rostov too , bending over his saddle , shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
with all his might , feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout , if only to express his rapture fully . 
The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided . 
`` How can the Emperor be undecided ? '' 
thought Rostov , but then even this indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting , like everything else the Tsar did . 
That hesitation lasted only an instant . 
The Tsar 's foot , in the narrow pointed boot then fashionable , touched the groin of the bobtailed bay mare he rode , his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins , and he moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp . 
Farther and farther he rode away , stopping at other regiments , till at last only his white plumes were visible to Rostov from amid the suites that surrounded the Emperors . 
Among the gentlemen of the suite , Rostov noticed Bolkonski , sitting his horse indolently and carelessly . 
Rostov recalled their quarrel of yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought not to challenge Bolkonski . 
`` Of course not ! '' 
he now thought . 
`` Is it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment ? 
At a time of such love , such rapture , and such self-sacrifice , what do any of our quarrels and affronts matter ? 
I love and forgive everybody now . '' 
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments , the troops began a ceremonial march past him , and Rostov on Bedouin , recently purchased from Denisov , rode past too , at the rear of his squadron - that is , alone and in full view of the Emperor . 
Before he reached him , Rostov , who was a splendid horseman , spurred Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the animal went when excited . 
Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest , his tail extended , Bedouin , as if also conscious of the Emperor 's eye upon him , passed splendidly , lifting his feet with a high and graceful action , as if flying through the air without touching the ground . 
Rostov himself , his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling himself one with his horse , rode past the Emperor with a frowning but blissful face `` like a vewy devil , '' as Denisov expressed it . 
`` Fine fellows , the Pavlograds ! '' 
remarked the Emperor . 
`` My God , how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire this instant ! '' 
thought Rostov . 
When the review was over , the newly arrived officers , and also Kutuzov 's , collected in groups and began to talk about the awards , about the Austrians and their uniforms , about their lines , about Bonaparte , and how badly the latter would fare now , especially if the Essen corps arrived and Prussia took our side . 
But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander . 
His every word and movement was described with ecstasy . 
They all had but one wish : to advance as soon as possible against the enemy under the Emperor 's command . 
Commanded by the Emperor himself they could not fail to vanquish anyone , be it whom it might : so thought Rostov and most of the officers after the review . 
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles would have made them . 
The day after the review , Boris , in his best uniform and with his comrade Berg 's best wishes for success , rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski , wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the best post he could -- preferably that of adjutant to some important personage , a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive . 
`` It is all very well for Rostov , whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a time , to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone 's lackey , but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career and must not miss opportunities , but must avail myself of them ! '' 
he reflected . 
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day , but the appearance of the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed and the two Emperors were living with their suites , households , and courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world . 
He knew no one , and despite his smart Guardsman 's uniform , all these exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages with their plumes , ribbons , and medals , both courtiers and military men , seemed so immeasurably above him , an insignificant officer of the Guards , that they not only did not wish to , but simply could not , be aware of his existence . 
At the quarters of the commander in chief , Kutuzov , where he inquired for Bolkonski , all the adjutants and even the orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a great many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody was heartily sick of them . 
In spite of this , or rather because of it , next day , November 15 , after dinner he again went to Olmutz and , entering the house occupied by Kutuzov , asked for Bolkonski . 
Prince Andrew was in and Boris was shown into a large hall probably formerly used for dancing , but in which five beds now stood , and furniture of various kinds : a table , chairs , and a clavichord . 
