He was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him . 
`` It must be one of ours , a prisoner . 
Yes . 
Can it be that they will take me too ? 
Who are these men ? '' 
thought Rostov , scarcely believing his eyes . 
`` Can they be French ? '' 
He looked at the approaching Frenchmen , and though but a moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack them to pieces , their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe his eyes . 
`` Who are they ? 
Why are they running ? 
Can they be coming at me ? 
And why ? 
To kill me ? 
Me whom everyone is so fond of ? '' 
He remembered his mother 's love for him , and his family 's , and his friends ' , and the enemy 's intention to kill him seemed impossible . 
`` But perhaps they may do it ! '' 
For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation . 
The foremost Frenchman , the one with the hooked nose , was already so close that the expression of his face could be seen . 
And the excited , alien face of that man , his bayonet hanging down , holding his breath , and running so lightly , frightened Rostov . 
He seized his pistol and , instead of firing it , flung it at the Frenchman and ran with all his might toward the bushes . 
He did not now run with the feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge , but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds . 
One single sentiment , that of fear for his young and happy life , possessed his whole being . 
Rapidly leaping the furrows , he fled across the field with the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay , now and then turning his good-natured , pale , young face to look back . 
A shudder of terror went through him : `` No , better not look , '' he thought , but having reached the bushes he glanced round once more . 
The French had fallen behind , and just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and , turning , shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back . 
Rostov paused . 
`` No , there 's some mistake , '' thought he . 
`` They ca n't have wanted to kill me . '' 
But at the same time , his left arm felt as heavy as if a seventy-pound weight were tied to it . 
He could run no more . 
The Frenchman also stopped and took aim . 
Rostov closed his eyes and stooped down . 
One bullet and then another whistled past him . 
He mustered his last remaining strength , took hold of his left hand with his right , and reached the bushes . 
Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters . 
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts of the wood ran out of it , the different companies getting mixed , and retreated as a disorderly crowd . 
One soldier , in his fear , uttered the senseless cry , `` Cut off ! '' 
that is so terrible in battle , and that word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic . 
`` Surrounded ! 
Cut off ? 
We 're lost ! '' 
shouted the fugitives . 
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind , the general realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment , and the thought that he , an exemplary officer of many years ' service who had never been to blame , might be held responsible at headquarters for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that , forgetting the recalcitrant cavalry colonel , his own dignity as a general , and above all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation , he clutched the crupper of his saddle and , spurring his horse , galloped to the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around , but fortunately missed him . 
His one desire was to know what was happening and at any cost correct , or remedy , the mistake if he had made one , so that he , an exemplary officer of twenty-two years ' service , who had never been censured , should not be held to blame . 
Having galloped safely through the French , he reached a field behind the copse across which our men , regardless of orders , were running and descending the valley . 
That moment of moral hesitation which decides the fate of battles had arrived . 
Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers attend to the voice of their commander , or would they , disregarding him , continue their flight ? 
Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem so terrible to the soldiers , despite his furious purple countenance distorted out of all likeness to his former self , and the flourishing of his saber , the soldiers all continued to run , talking , firing into the air , and disobeying orders . 
The moral hesitation which decided the fate of battles was evidently culminating in a panic . 
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the powder smoke and stopped in despair . 
