Breathless with joy , Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to take her in his arms . 
But seeing a stranger the sickly , scrofulous-looking child , unattractively like her mother , began to yell and run away . 
Pierre , however , seized her and lifted her in his arms . 
She screamed desperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre 's hands away and to bite them with her slobbering mouth . 
Pierre was seized by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when touching some nasty little animal . 
But he made an effort not to throw the child down and ran with her to the large house . 
It was now , however , impossible to get back the way he had come ; the maid , Aniska , was no longer there , and Pierre with a feeling of pity and disgust pressed the wet , painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly as he could and ran with her through the garden seeking another way out . 
Having run through different yards and side streets , Pierre got back with his little burden to the Gruzinski garden at the corner of the Povarskoy . 
He did not at first recognize the place from which he had set out to look for the child , so crowded was it now with people and goods that had been dragged out of the houses . 
Besides Russian families who had taken refuge here from the fire with their belongings , there were several French soldiers in a variety of clothing . 
Pierre took no notice of them . 
He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order to restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else . 
Pierre felt that he had still much to do and to do quickly . 
Glowing with the heat and from running , he felt at that moment more strongly than ever the sense of youth , animation , and determination that had come on him when he ran to save the child . 
She had now become quiet and , clinging with her little hands to Pierre 's coat , sat on his arm gazing about her like some little wild animal . 
He glanced at her occasionally with a slight smile . 
He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in that frightened , sickly little face . 
He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them . 
He walked among the crowd with rapid steps , scanning the various faces he met . 
Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian family consisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type , wearing a new , cloth-covered , sheepskin coat and new boots , an old woman of similar type , and a young woman . 
That very young woman seemed to Pierre the perfection of Oriental beauty , with her sharply outlined , arched , black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft , bright color of her long , beautiful , expressionless face . 
Amid the scattered property and the crowd on the open space , she , in her rich satin cloak with a bright lilac shawl on her head , suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out onto the snow . 
She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old woman , and looked from under her long lashes with motionless , large , almond-shaped eyes at the ground before her . 
Evidently she was aware of her beauty and fearful because of it . 
Her face struck Pierre and , hurrying along by the fence , he turned several times to look at her . 
When he had reached the fence , still without finding those he sought , he stopped and looked about him . 
With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous than before , and a group of Russians , both men and women , gathered about him . 
`` Have you lost anyone , my dear fellow ? 
You 're of the gentry yourself , are n't you ? 
Whose child is it ? '' 
they asked him . 
Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who had been sitting there with her other children , and he asked whether anyone knew where she had gone . 
`` Why , that must be the Anferovs , '' said an old deacon , addressing a pockmarked peasant woman . 
`` Lord have mercy , Lord have mercy ! '' 
he added in his customary bass . 
`` The Anferovs ? 
No , '' said the woman . 
`` They left in the morning . 
That must be either Mary Nikolievna 's or the Ivanovs ' ! '' 
`` He says ' a woman , ' and Mary Nikolievna is a lady , '' remarked a house serf . 
`` Do you know her ? 
She 's thin , with long teeth , '' said Pierre . 
`` That 's Mary Nikolievna ! 
They went inside the garden when these wolves swooped down , '' said the woman , pointing to the French soldiers . 
`` O Lord , have mercy ! '' 
added the deacon . 
`` Go over that way , they 're there . 
It 's she ! 
She kept on lamenting and crying , '' continued the woman . 
`` It 's she . 
