But when he had been on the Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo . 
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought to him of the effect those batteries produced . 
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns had been concentrated on the Russians , as he had ordered , but that they still held their ground . 
`` Our fire is mowing them down by rows , but still they hold on , '' said the adjutant . 
`` They want more ! 
... '' said Napoleon in a hoarse voice . 
`` Sire ? '' 
asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark . 
`` They want more ! '' 
croaked Napoleon frowning . 
`` Let them have it ! '' 
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire , and for which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him , was being done . 
And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary greatness , and again -- as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing something for itself -- he submissively fulfilled the cruel , sad , gloomy , and inhuman role predestined for him . 
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening lay more than on all the others who took part in it . 
Never to the end of his life could he understand goodness , beauty , or truth , or the significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and truth , too remote from everything human , for him ever to be able to grasp their meaning . 
He could not disavow his actions , belauded as they were by half the world , and so he had to repudiate truth , goodness , and all humanity . 
Not only on that day , as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men killed and maimed -LRB- by his will as he believed -RRB- , did he reckon as he looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and , deceiving himself , find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that there were five Russians for every Frenchman . 
Not on that day alone did he write in a letter to Paris that `` the battle field was superb , '' because fifty thousand corpses lay there , but even on the island of St. Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done , he wrote : The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times : it was a war of good sense , for real interests , for the tranquillity and security of all ; it was purely pacific and conservative . 
It was a war for a great cause , the end of uncertainties and the beginning of security . 
A new horizon and new labors were opening out , full of well-being and prosperity for all . 
The European system was already founded ; all that remained was to organize it . 
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere , I too should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance . 
Those ideas were stolen from me . 
In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have discussed our interests like one family , and have rendered account to the peoples as clerk to master . 
Europe would in this way soon have been , in fact , but one people , and anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the common fatherland . 
I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable rivers for everybody , that the seas should be common to all , and that the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards for the sovereigns . 
On returning to France , to the bosom of the great , strong , magnificent , peaceful , and glorious fatherland , I should have proclaimed her frontiers immutable ; all future wars purely defensive , all aggrandizement antinational . 
I should have associated my son in the Empire ; my dictatorship would have been finished , and his constitutional reign would have begun . 
Paris would have been the capital of the world , and the French the envy of the nations ! 
My leisure then , and my old age , would have been devoted , in company with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son , to leisurely visiting , with our own horses and like a true country couple , every corner of the Empire , receiving complaints , redressing wrongs , and scattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides and everywhere . 
Napoleon , predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner of the peoples , assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the peoples ' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by the employment of power confer benefactions . 
`` Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula , '' he wrote further of the Russian war , `` half were Austrians , Prussians , Saxons , Poles , Bavarians , Wurttembergers , Mecklenburgers , Spaniards , Italians , and Neapolitans . 
The Imperial army , strictly speaking , was one third composed of Dutch , Belgians , men from the borders of the Rhine , Piedmontese , Swiss , Genevese , Tuscans , Romans , inhabitants of the Thirty-second Military Division , of Bremen , of Hamburg , and so on : it included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French . 
The Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men ; the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various battles four times more men than the French army ; the burning of Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want in the woods ; finally , in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian army also suffered from the severity of the season ; so that by the the time it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand , and at Kalisch less than eighteen thousand . '' 
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will , and the horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul . 
He boldly took the whole responsibility for what happened , and his darkened mind found justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians . 
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov family and to the crown serfs -- those fields and meadows where for hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino , Gorki , Shevardino , and Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle . 
At the dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space of some three acres around . 
Crowds of men of various arms , wounded and unwounded , with frightened faces , dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other . 
Other crowds , exhausted and hungry , went forward led by their officers . 
Others held their ground and continued to fire . 
Over the whole field , previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun , there now spread a mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood . 
Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded , on the frightened , exhausted , and hesitating men , as if to say : `` Enough , men ! 
Enough ! 
Cease ... bethink yourselves ! 
What are you doing ? '' 
To the men of both sides alike , worn out by want of food and rest , it began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to slaughter one another ; all the faces expressed hesitation , and the question arose in every soul : `` For what , for whom , must I kill and be killed ? 
... You may go and kill whom you please , but I do n't want to do so anymore ! '' 
By evening this thought had ripened in every soul . 
At any moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere . 
