Prince Andrew was silent , but the princess noticed the ironical and contemptuous look that showed itself on his face . 
`` One must be indulgent to little weaknesses ; who is free from them , Andrew ? 
Do n't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society , and so her position now is not a rosy one . 
We should enter into everyone 's situation . 
Tout comprendre , c'est tout pardonner . 
* Think it must be for her , poor thing , after what she has been used to , to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country , in her condition ! 
It 's very hard . '' 
* To understand all is to forgive all . 
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister , as we smile at those we think we thoroughly understand . 
`` You live in the country and do n't think the life terrible , '' he replied . 
`` I. . . 
that 's different . 
Why speak of me ? 
I do n't want any other life , and ca n't , for I know no other . 
But think , Andrew : for a young society woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life , all alone -- for Papa is always busy , and I. . . 
well , you know what poor resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society . 
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne ... '' `` I do n't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` No ? 
She is very nice and kind and , above all , she 's much to be pitied . 
She has no one , no one . 
To tell the truth , I do n't need her , and she 's even in my way . 
You know I always was a savage , and now am even more so . 
I like being alone ... . 
Father likes her very much . 
She and Michael Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind , because he has been a benefactor to them both . 
As Sterne says : ` We do n't love people so much for the good they have done us , as for the good we have done them . ' 
Father took her when she was homeless after losing her own father . 
She is very good-natured , and my father likes her way of reading . 
She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly . '' 
`` To be quite frank , Mary , I expect Father 's character sometimes makes things trying for you , does n't it ? '' 
Prince Andrew asked suddenly . 
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question . 
`` For me ? 
For me ? 
... Trying for me ! 
... '' said she . 
`` He always was rather harsh ; and now I should think he 's getting very trying , '' said Prince Andrew , apparently speaking lightly of their father in order to puzzle or test his sister . 
`` You are good in every way , Andrew , but you have a kind of intellectual pride , '' said the princess , following the train of her own thoughts rather than the trend of the conversation -- `` and that 's a great sin . 
How can one judge Father ? 
But even if one might , what feeling except veneration could such a man as my father evoke ? 
And I am so contented and happy with him . 
I only wish you were all as happy as I am . '' 
Her brother shook his head incredulously . 
`` The only thing that is hard for me ... I will tell you the truth , Andrew ... is Father 's way of treating religious subjects . 
I do n't understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as clear as day , and can go so far astray . 
That is the only thing that makes me unhappy . 
But even in this I can see lately a shade of improvement . 
His satire has been less bitter of late , and there was a monk he received and had a long talk with . '' 
`` Ah ! 
my dear , I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder , '' said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly . 
