But at the moment the first report was heard , Bagration looked round and shouted , `` Hurrah ! '' 
`` Hurrah -- ah ! 
-- ah ! '' 
rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks , and passing Bagration and racing one another they rushed in an irregular but joyous and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe . 
The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right flank . 
In the center Tushin 's forgotten battery , which had managed to set fire to the Schon Grabern village , delayed the French advance . 
The French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading , and thus gave us time to retreat . 
The retirement of the center to the other side of the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy , but the different companies did not get mixed . 
But our left -- which consisted of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd hussars -- was simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under Lannes and was thrown into confusion . 
Bagration had sent Zherkov to the general commanding that left flank with orders to retreat immediately . 
Zherkov , not removing his hand from his cap , turned his horse about and galloped off . 
But no sooner had he left Bagration than his courage failed him . 
He was seized by panic and could not go where it was dangerous . 
Having reached the left flank , instead of going to the front where the firing was , he began to look for the general and his staff where they could not possibly be , and so did not deliver the order . 
The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was serving as a private . 
But the command of the extreme left flank had been assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment in which Rostov was serving , and a misunderstanding arose . 
The two commanders were much exasperated with one another and , long after the action had begun on the right flank and the French were already advancing , were engaged in discussion with the sole object of offending one another . 
But the regiments , both cavalry and infantry , were by no means ready for the impending action . 
From privates to general they were not expecting a battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations , the cavalry feeding the horses and the infantry collecting wood . 
`` He higher iss dan I in rank , '' said the German colonel of the hussars , flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up , `` so let him do what he vill , but I can not sacrifice my hussars ... Bugler , sount ze retreat ! '' 
But haste was becoming imperative . 
Cannon and musketry , mingling together , thundered on the right and in the center , while the capotes of Lannes ' sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and forming up within twice the range of a musket shot . 
The general in command of the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps , and having mounted drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the Pavlograd commander . 
The commanders met with polite bows but with secret malevolence in their hearts . 
`` Once again , Colonel , '' said the general , `` I ca n't leave half my men in the wood . 
I beg of you , I beg of you , '' he repeated , `` to occupy the position and prepare for an attack . '' 
`` I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business ! '' 
suddenly replied the irate colonel . 
`` If you vere in the cavalry ... '' `` I am not in the cavalry , Colonel , but I am a Russian general and if you are not aware of the fact ... '' `` Quite avare , your excellency , '' suddenly shouted the colonel , touching his horse and turning purple in the face . 
`` Vill you be so goot to come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot ? 
I do n't vish to destroy my men for your pleasure ! '' 
`` You forget yourself , Colonel . 
I am not considering my own pleasure and I wo n't allow it to be said ! '' 
Taking the colonel 's outburst as a challenge to his courage , the general expanded his chest and rode , frowning , beside him to the front line , as if their differences would be settled there amongst the bullets . 
They reached the front , several bullets sped over them , and they halted in silence . 
There was nothing fresh to be seen from the line , for from where they had been before it had been evident that it was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground , as well as that the French were outflanking our left . 
The general and colonel looked sternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cocks preparing for battle , each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice in the other . 
Both passed the examination successfully . 
As there was nothing to said , and neither wished to give occasion for it to be alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire , they would have remained there for a long time testing each other 's courage had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry and a muffled shout almost behind them in the wood . 
The French had attacked the men collecting wood in the copse . 
It was no longer possible for the hussars to retreat with the infantry . 
They were cut off from the line of retreat on the left by the French . 
However inconvenient the position , it was now necessary to attack in order to cut away through for themselves . 
The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time to mount before it was halted facing the enemy . 
Again , as at the Enns bridge , there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy , and again that terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear - resembling the line separating the living from the dead -- lay between them . 
All were conscious of this unseen line , and the question whether they would cross it or not , and how they would cross it , agitated them all . 
The colonel rode to the front , angrily gave some reply to questions put to him by the officers , and , like a man desperately insisting on having his own way , gave an order . 
No one said anything definite , but the rumor of an attack spread through the squadron . 
The command to form up rang out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards . 
Still no one moved . 
