Those three got hold of a bear somewhere , put it in a carriage , and set off with it to visit some actresses ! 
The police tried to interfere , and what did the young men do ? 
They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal . 
And there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back ! '' 
`` What a nice figure the policeman must have cut , my dear ! '' 
shouted the count , dying with laughter . 
`` Oh , how dreadful ! 
How can you laugh at it , Count ? '' 
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing . 
`` It was all they could do to rescue the poor man , '' continued the visitor . 
`` And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov 's son who amuses himself in this sensible manner ! 
And he was said to be so well educated and clever . 
This is all that his foreign education has done for him ! 
I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him , in spite of his money . 
They wanted to introduce him to me , but I quite declined : I have my daughters to consider . '' 
`` Why do you say this young man is so rich ? '' 
asked the countess , turning away from the girls , who at once assumed an air of inattention . 
`` His children are all illegitimate . 
I think Pierre also is illegitimate . '' 
The visitor made a gesture with her hand . 
`` I should think he has a score of them . '' 
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation , evidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in society . 
`` The fact of the matter is , '' said she significantly , and also in a half whisper , `` everyone knows Count Cyril 's reputation ... . 
He has lost count of his children , but this Pierre was his favorite . '' 
`` How handsome the old man still was only a year ago ! '' 
remarked the countess . 
`` I have never seen a handsomer man . '' 
`` He is very much altered now , '' said Anna Mikhaylovna . 
`` Well , as I was saying , Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife , but the count is very fond of Pierre , looked after his education , and wrote to the Emperor about him ; so that in the case of his death -- and he is so ill that he may die at any moment , and Dr. Lorrain has come from Petersburg -- no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune , Pierre or Prince Vasili . 
Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles ! 
I know it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself . 
Besides , Cyril Vladimirovich is my mother 's second cousin . 
He 's also my Bory 's godfather , '' she added , as if she attached no importance at all to the fact . 
`` Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday . 
I hear he has come on some inspection business , '' remarked the visitor . 
`` Yes , but between ourselves , '' said the princess , `` that is a pretext . 
The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich , hearing how ill he is . '' 
`` But do you know , my dear , that was a capital joke , '' said the count ; and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening , he turned to the young ladies . 
`` I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut ! '' 
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman , his portly form again shook with a deep ringing laugh , the laugh of one who always eats well and , in particular , drinks well . 
`` So do come and dine with us ! '' 
he said . 
Silence ensued . 
The countess looked at her callers , smiling affably , but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now rose and took their leave . 
The visitor 's daughter was already smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother , when suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over , and a girl of thirteen , hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock , darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room . 
It was evident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far . 
Behind her in the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar , an officer of the Guards , a girl of fifteen , and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket . 
The count jumped up and , swaying from side to side , spread his arms wide and threw them round the little girl who had run in . 
`` Ah , here she is ! '' 
he exclaimed laughing . 
