Benefit performances , poor pictures , statues , benevolent societies , gypsy choirs , schools , subscription dinners , sprees , Freemasons , churches , and books -- no one and nothing met with a refusal from him , and had it not been for two friends who had borrowed large sums from him and taken him under their protection , he would have given everything away . 
There was never a dinner or soiree at the Club without him . 
As soon as he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux he was surrounded , and talking , disputing , and joking began . 
When there were quarrels , his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled the antagonists . 
The Masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he was not there . 
When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile , yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewhere with them , shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men . 
At balls he danced if a partner was needed . 
Young ladies , married and unmarried , liked him because without making love to any of them , he was equally amiable to all , especially after supper . 
`` Il est charmant ; il n ' a pas de sexe , '' * they said of him . 
* `` He is charming ; he has no sex . '' 
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow . 
How horrified he would have been seven years before , when he first arrived from abroad , had he been told that there was no need for him to seek or plan anything , that his rut had long been shaped , eternally predetermined , and that wriggle as he might , he would be what all in his position were . 
He could not have believed it ! 
Had he not at one time longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia ; then himself to be a Napoleon ; then to be a philosopher ; and then a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon ? 
Had he not seen the possibility of , and passionately desired , the regeneration of the sinful human race , and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection ? 
Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs ? 
But instead of all that -- here he was , the wealthy husband of an unfaithful wife , a retired gentleman-in-waiting , fond of eating and drinking and , as he unbuttoned his waistcoat , of abusing the government a bit , a member of the Moscow English Club , and a universal favorite in Moscow society . 
For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waiting he had so despised seven years before . 
Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living this life temporarily ; but then he was shocked by the thought of how many , like himself , had entered that life and that Club temporarily , with all their teeth and hair , and had only left it when not a single tooth or hair remained . 
In moments of pride , when he thought of his position it seemed to him that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised : they were empty , stupid , contented fellows , satisfied with their position , `` while I am still discontented and want to do something for mankind . 
But perhaps all these comrades of mine struggled just like me and sought something new , a path in life of their own , and like me were brought by force of circumstances , society , and race -- by that elemental force against which man is powerless -- to the condition I am in , '' said he to himself in moments of humility ; and after living some time in Moscow he no longer despised , but began to grow fond of , to respect , and to pity his comrades in destiny , as he pitied himself . 
Pierre longer suffered moments of despair , hypochondria , and disgust with life , but the malady that had formerly found expression in such acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment . 
`` What for ? 
Why ? 
What is going on in the world ? '' 
he would ask himself in perplexity several times a day , involuntarily beginning to reflect anew on the meaning of the phenomena of life ; but knowing by experience that there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away from them , and took up a book , or hurried of to the Club or to Apollon Nikolaevich 's , to exchange the gossip of the town . 
`` Helene , who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one of the stupidest women in the world , '' thought Pierre , `` is regarded by people as the acme of intelligence and refinement , and they pay homage to her . 
Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great , but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage . 
The Spaniards , through the Catholic clergy , offer praise to God for their victory over the French on the fourteenth of June , and the French , also through the Catholic clergy , offer praise because on that same fourteenth of June they defeated the Spaniards . 
My brother Masons swear by the blood that they are ready to sacrifice everything for their neighbor , but they do not give a ruble each to the collections for the poor , and they intrigue , the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers , and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs , and the meaning of which the very man who wrote it does not understand . 
We all profess the Christian law of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors , the law in honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty churches -- but yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister of that same law of love and forgiveness , a priest , gave the soldier a cross to kiss before his execution . '' 
So thought Pierre , and the whole of this general deception which everyone accepts , accustomed as he was to it , astonished him each time as if it were something new . 
`` I understand the deception and confusion , '' he thought , `` but how am I to tell them all that I see ? 
I have tried , and have always found that they too in the depths of their souls understand it as I do , and only try not to see it . 
So it appears that it must be so ! 
But I - what is to become of me ? '' 
thought he . 
He had the unfortunate capacity many men , especially Russians , have of seeing and believing in the possibility of goodness and truth , but of seeing the evil and falsehood of life too clearly to be able to take a serious part in it . 
Every sphere of work was connected , in his eyes , with evil and deception . 
Whatever he tried to be , whatever he engaged in , the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him and blocked every path of activity . 
Yet he had to live and to find occupation . 
It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these insoluble problems , so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order to forget them . 
He frequented every kind of society , drank much , bought pictures , engaged in building , and above all -- read . 
He read , and read everything that came to hand . 
On coming home , while his valets were still taking off his things , he picked up a book and began to read . 
From reading he passed to sleeping , from sleeping to gossip in drawing rooms of the Club , from gossip to carousals and women ; from carousals back to gossip , reading , and wine . 
Drinking became more and more a physical and also a moral necessity . 
Though the doctors warned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him , he drank a great deal . 
He was only quite at ease when having poured several glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant warmth in his body , an amiability toward all his fellows , and a readiness to respond superficially to every idea without probing it deeply . 
Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the terribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was not as dreadful as he had thought . 
