She understood that when speaking of `` trash '' he referred not only to Mademoiselle Bourienne , the cause of her misery , but also to the man who had ruined his own happiness . 
`` Andrew ! 
One thing I beg , I entreat of you ! '' 
she said , touching his elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears . 
`` I understand you '' -LRB- she looked down -RRB- . 
`` Do n't imagine that sorrow is the work of men . 
Men are His tools . '' 
She looked a little above Prince Andrew 's head with the confident , accustomed look with which one looks at the place where a familiar portrait hangs . 
`` Sorrow is sent by Him , not by men . 
Men are His instruments , they are not to blame . 
If you think someone has wronged you , forget it and forgive ! 
We have no right to punish . 
And then you will know the happiness of forgiving . '' 
`` If I were a woman I would do so , Mary . 
That is a woman 's virtue . 
But a man should not and can not forgive and forget , '' he replied , and though till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin , all his unexpended anger suddenly swelled up in his heart . 
`` If Mary is already persuading me forgive , it means that I ought long ago to have punished him , '' he thought . 
And giving her no further reply , he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet Kuragin who he knew was now in the army . 
Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more , saying that she knew how unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to him , but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again from the army and would certainly write to his father , but that the longer he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become . 
`` Good-by , Andrew ! 
Remember that misfortunes come from God , and men are never to blame , '' were the last words he heard from his sister when he took leave of her . 
`` Then it must be so ! '' 
thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the avenue from the house at Bald Hills . 
`` She , poor innocent creature , is left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits . 
The old man feels he is guilty , but can not change himself . 
My boy is growing up and rejoices in life , in which like everybody else he will deceive or be deceived . 
And I am off to the army . 
Why ? 
I myself do n't know . 
I want to meet that man whom I despise , so as to give him a chance to kill and laugh at me ! '' 
These conditions of life had been the same before , but then they were all connected , while now they had all tumbled to pieces . 
Only senseless things , lacking coherence , presented themselves one after another to Prince Andrew 's mind . 
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of June . 
The first army , with which was the Emperor , occupied the fortified camp at Drissa ; the second army was retreating , trying to effect a junction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off by large French forces . 
Everyone was dissatisfied with the general course of affairs in the Russian army , but no one anticipated any danger of invasion of the Russian provinces , and no one thought the war would extend farther than the western , the Polish , provinces . 
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly , to whom he had been assigned , on the bank of the Drissa . 
As there was not a single town or large village in the vicinity of the camp , the immense number of generals and courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the villages on both sides of the river , over a radius of six miles . 
Barclay de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor . 
He received Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment , but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff . 
Anatole Kuragin , whom Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army , was not there . 
He had gone to Petersburg , but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this . 
His mind was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting a gigantic war , and he was glad to be free for a while from the distraction caused by the thought of Kuragin . 
During the first four days , while no duties were required of him , Prince Andrew rode round the whole fortified camp and , by the aid of his own knowledge and by talks with experts , tried to form a definite opinion about it . 
But the question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained for him undecided . 
Already from his military experience and what he had seen in the Austrian campaign , he had come to the conclusion that in war the most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy -- that can not be foreseen - are met , and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled . 
To clear up this last point for himself , Prince Andrew , utilizing his position and acquaintances , tried to fathom the character of the control of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it , and he deduced for himself the following of the state of affairs . 
While the Emperor had still been at Vilna , the forces had been divided into three armies . 
First , the army under Barclay de Tolly , secondly , the army under Bagration , and thirdly , the one commanded by Tormasov . 
The Emperor was with the first army , but not as commander in chief . 
In the orders issued it was stated , not that the Emperor would take command , but only that he would be with the army . 
