`` Oh , tell that blockhead , '' he said in reply to the question from the Registrar 's Department , `` that he should remain to guard his documents . 
Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade ? 
They have horses , let them be off to Vladimir , and not leave them to the French . '' 
`` Your excellency , the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come : what are your commands ? '' 
`` My commands ? 
Let them go away , that 's all ... . 
And let the lunatics out into the town . 
When lunatics command our armies God evidently means these other madmen to be free . '' 
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison , Count Rostopchin shouted angrily at the governor : `` Do you expect me to give you two battalions -- which we have not got - for a convoy ? 
Release them , that 's all about it ! '' 
`` Your excellency , there are some political prisoners , Meshkov , Vereshchagin ... '' `` Vereshchagin ! 
Has n't he been hanged yet ? '' 
shouted Rostopchin . 
`` Bring him to me ! '' 
Toward nine o'clock in the morning , when the troops were already moving through Moscow , nobody came to the count any more for instructions . 
Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord , those who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do . 
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki , and sat in his study with folded hands , morose , sallow , and taciturn . 
In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is kept going , and in this consciousness of being indispensable every administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts . 
While the sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark , holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself moving , naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he is holding on to . 
But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and the ship to move , such a delusion is no longer possible . 
The ship moves independently with its own enormous motion , the boat hook no longer reaches the moving vessel , and suddenly the administrator , instead of appearing a ruler and a source of power , becomes an insignificant , useless , feeble man . 
Rostopchin felt this , and it was this which exasperated him . 
The superintendent of police , whom the crowd had stopped , went in to see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the horses were harnessed . 
They were both pale , and the superintendent of police , after reporting that he had executed the instructions he had received , informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the courtyard and wished to see him . 
Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his light , luxurious drawing room , went to the balcony door , took hold of the handle , let it go again , and went to the window from which he had a better view of the whole crowd . 
The tall lad was standing in front , flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look . 
The blood stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face . 
A drone of voices was audible through the closed window . 
`` Is my carriage ready ? '' 
asked Rostopchin , stepping back from the window . 
`` It is , your excellency , '' replied the adjutant . 
Rostopchin went again to the balcony door . 
`` But what do they want ? '' 
he asked the superintendent of police . 
`` Your excellency , they say they have got ready , according to your orders , to go against the French , and they shouted something about treachery . 
But it is a turbulent crowd , your excellency -- I hardly managed to get away from it . 
Your excellency , I venture to suggest ... '' `` You may go . 
I do n't need you to tell me what to do ! '' 
exclaimed Rostopchin angrily . 
He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd . 
`` This is what they have done with Russia ! 
This is what they have done with me ! '' 
thought he , full of an irrepressible fury that welled up within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be attributed . 
As often happens with passionate people , he was mastered by anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it . 
`` Here is that mob , the dregs of the people , '' he thought as he gazed at the crowd : `` this rabble they have roused by their folly ! 
They want a victim , '' he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm . 
And this thought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim , something on which to vent his rage . 
`` Is the carriage ready ? '' 
he asked again . 
`` Yes , your excellency . 
