he added . 
Pierre , with downcast eyes , drank out of his glass without looking at Dolokhov or answering him . 
The footman , who was distributing leaflets with Kutuzov 's cantata , laid one before Pierre as one of the principal guests . 
He was just going to take it when Dolokhov , leaning across , snatched it from his hand and began reading it . 
Pierre looked at Dolokhov and his eyes dropped , the something terrible and monstrous that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him . 
He leaned his whole massive body across the table . 
`` How dare you take it ? '' 
he shouted . 
Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed , Nesvitski and the neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov . 
`` Do n't ! 
Do n't ! 
What are you about ? '' 
whispered their frightened voices . 
Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear , mirthful , cruel eyes , and that smile of his which seemed to say , `` Ah ! 
This is what I like ! '' 
`` You sha n't have it ! '' 
he said distinctly . 
Pale , with quivering lips , Pierre snatched the copy . 
`` You ... ! 
you ... scoundrel ! 
I challenge you ! '' 
he ejaculated , and , pushing back his chair , he rose from the table . 
At the very instant he did this and uttered those words , Pierre felt that the question of his wife 's guilt which had been tormenting him the whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative . 
He hated her and was forever sundered from her . 
Despite Denisov 's request that he would take no part in the matter , Rostov agreed to be Dolokhov 's second , and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for the duel with Nesvitski , Bezukhov 's second . 
Pierre went home , but Rostov with Dolokhov and Denisov stayed on at the Club till late , listening to the gypsies and other singers . 
`` Well then , till tomorrow at Sokolniki , '' said Dolokhov , as he took leave of Rostov in the Club porch . 
`` And do you feel quite calm ? '' 
Rostov asked . 
Dolokhov paused . 
`` Well , you see , I 'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two words . 
If you are going to fight a duel , and you make a will and write affectionate letters to your parents , and if you think you may be killed , you are a fool and are lost for certain . 
But go with the firm intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible , and then all will be right , as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tell me . 
` Everyone fears a bear , ' he says , ` but when you see one your fear 's all gone , and your only thought is not to let him get away ! ' 
And that 's how it is with me . 
A demain , mon cher . '' 
* * Till tomorrow , my dear fellow . 
Next day , at eight in the morning , Pierre and Nesvitski drove to the Sokolniki forest and found Dolokhov , Denisov , and Rostov already there . 
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no connection with the matter in hand . 
His haggard face was yellow . 
He had evidently not slept that night . 
He looked about distractedly and screwed up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun . 
He was entirely absorbed by two considerations : his wife 's guilt , of which after his sleepless night he had not the slightest doubt , and the guiltlessness of Dolokhov , who had no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothing to him ... `` I should perhaps have done the same thing in his place , '' thought Pierre . 
`` It 's even certain that I should have done the same , then why this duel , this murder ? 
Either I shall kill him , or he will hit me in the head , or elbow , or knee . 
Ca n't I go away from here , run away , bury myself somewhere ? '' 
passed through his mind . 
But just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him , he would ask in a particularly calm and absent-minded way , which inspired the respect of the onlookers , `` Will it be long ? 
Are things ready ? '' 
When all was ready , the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers , and the pistols loaded , Nesvitski went up to Pierre . 
