The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening was Boris Drubetskoy , who had just arrived as a special messenger from the Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage . 
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that evening was this : `` Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance Bonaparte , and to cause me , and us in general , annoyance and mortification , our opinion of Bonaparte can not alter . 
We shall not cease to express our sincere views on that subject , and can only say to the King Prussia and others : ` So much the worse for you . 
Tu l'as voulu , George Dandin , ' that 's all we have to say about it ! '' 
When Boris , who was to be served up to the guests , entered the drawing room , almost all the company had assembled , and the conversation , guided by Anna Pavlovna , was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and the hope of an alliance with her . 
Boris , grown more manly and looking fresh , rosy and self-possessed , entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and then brought back to the general circle . 
Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to several persons whom he did not know , giving him a whispered description of each . 
`` Prince Hippolyte Kuragin , M. Krug , the charge d'affaires from Copenhagen -- a profound intellect , '' and simply , `` Mr. Shitov -- a man of great merit '' -- this of the man usually so described . 
Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna 's efforts , his own tastes , and the peculiarities of his reserved nature , Boris had managed during his service to place himself very advantageously . 
He was aide-de-camp to a very important personage , had been sent on a very important mission to Prussia , and had just returned from there as a special messenger . 
He had become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rank incomparably higher than a general , and according to which what was needed for success in the service was not effort or work , or courage , or perseverance , but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can grant rewards , and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his success and at the inability of others to understand these things . 
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life , all his relations with old friends , all his plans for his future , were completely altered . 
He was not rich , but would spend his last groat to be better dressed than others , and would rather deprive himself of many pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear in the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform . 
He made friends with and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and who could therefore be of use to him . 
He liked Petersburg and despised Moscow . 
The remembrance of the Rostovs ' house and of his childish love for Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the Rostovs since the day of his departure for the army . 
To be in Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room he considered an important step up in the service , and he at once understood his role , letting his hostess make use of whatever interest he had to offer . 
He himself carefully scanned each face , appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with each of those present , and the advantages that might accrue . 
He took the seat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general conversation . 
`` Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them , and she doubts the means we have of gaining them . 
That is the actual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet , '' said the Danish charge d'affaires . 
`` The doubt is flattering , '' said `` the man of profound intellect , '' with a subtle smile . 
`` We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of Austria , '' said Mortemart . 
`` The Emperor of Austria can never have thought of such a thing , it is only the cabinet that says it . '' 
`` Ah , my dear vicomte , '' put in Anna Pavlovna , `` L'Urope '' -LRB- for some reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined French pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with a Frenchman -RRB- , `` L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere . '' 
* * `` Europe will never be our sincere ally . '' 
After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King of Prussia , in order to draw Boris into the conversation . 
Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers , awaiting his turn , but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor , the beautiful Helene , whose eyes several times met those of the handsome young aide-de-camp with a smile . 
Speaking of the position of Prussia , Anna Pavlovna very naturally asked Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he found the Prussian army . 
Boris , speaking with deliberation , told them in pure , correct French many interesting details about the armies and the court , carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about the facts he was recounting . 
For some time he engrossed the general attention , and Anna Pavlovna felt that the novelty she had served up was received with pleasure by all her visitors . 
The greatest attention of all to Boris ' narrative was shown by Helene . 
She asked him several questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the state of the Prussian army . 
As soon as he had finished she turned to him with her usual smile . 
`` You absolutely must come and see me , '' she said in a tone that implied that , for certain considerations he could not know of , this was absolutely necessary . 
`` On Tuesday between eight and nine . 
It will give me great pleasure . '' 
Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversation with her , when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that her aunt wished to hear him . 
`` You know her husband , of course ? '' 
said Anna Pavlovna , closing her eyes and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture . 
`` Ah , she is such an unfortunate and charming woman ! 
Do n't mention him before her -- please do n't ! 
It is too painful for her ! '' 
When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had the ear of the company . 
Bending forward in his armchair he said : `` Le Roi de Prusse ! '' 
and having said this laughed . 
Everyone turned toward him . 
`` Le Roi de Prusse ? '' 
Hippolyte said interrogatively , again laughing , and then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair . 
Anna Pavlovna waited for him to go on , but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the sword of Frederick the Great . 
