The Emperor , moreover , had with him not a commander in chief 's staff but the imperial headquarters staff . 
In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff , Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski , as well as generals , imperial aides-de-camp , diplomatic officials , and a large number of foreigners , but not the army staff . 
Besides these , there were in attendance on the Emperor without any definite appointments : Arakcheev , the ex-Minister of War ; Count Bennigsen , the senior general in rank ; the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich ; Count Rumyantsev , the Chancellor ; Stein , a former Prussian minister ; Armfeldt , a Swedish general ; Pfuel , the chief author of the plan of campaign ; Paulucci , an adjutant general and Sardinian emigre ; Wolzogen -- and many others . 
Though these men had no military appointment in the army , their position gave them influence , and often a corps commander , or even the commander in chief , did not know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen , the Grand Duke , Arakcheev , or Prince Volkonski , or was given this or that advice and did not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be executed or not . 
But this was only the external condition ; the essential significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people , from a courtier 's point of view -LRB- and in an Emperor 's vicinity all became courtiers -RRB- , was clear to everyone . 
It was this : the Emperor did not assume the title of commander in chief , but disposed of all the armies ; the men around him were his assistants . 
Arakcheev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign 's bodyguard . 
Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doing the honors of the district , but was in reality a good general , useful as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay . 
The Grand Duke was there because it suited him to be . 
The ex-Minister Stein was there because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally . 
Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general full of self-confidence , a quality that always influenced Alexander . 
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech . 
The adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the Emperor , and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up the plan of campaign against Napoleon and , having induced Alexander to believe in the efficacy of that plan , was directing the whole business of the war . 
With Pfuel was Wolzogen , who expressed Pfuel 's thoughts in a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself -LRB- who was a harsh , bookish theorist , self-confident to the point of despising everyone else -RRB- was able to do . 
Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpected ideas every day -- especially the foreigners , who did so with a boldness characteristic of people employed in a country not their own -- there were many secondary personages accompanying the army because their principals were there . 
Among the opinions and voices in this immense , restless , brilliant , and proud sphere , Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined subdivisions of and parties : The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents -- military theorists who believed in a science of war with immutable laws -- laws of oblique movements , outflankings , and so forth . 
Pfuel and his adherents demanded a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war , and they saw only barbarism , ignorance , or evil intention in every deviation from that theory . 
To this party belonged the foreign nobles , Wolzogen , Wintzingerode , and others , chiefly Germans . 
The second party was directly opposed to the first ; one extreme , as always happens , was met by representatives of the other . 
The members of this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Poland and freedom from all prearranged plans . 
Besides being advocates of bold action , this section also represented nationalism , which made them still more one-sided in the dispute . 
They were Russians : Bagration , Ermolov -LRB- who was beginning to come to the front -RRB- , and others . 
At that time a famous joke of Ermolov 's was being circulated , that as a great favor he had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German . 
The men of that party , remembering Suvorov , said that what one had to do was not to reason , or stick pins into maps , but to fight , beat the enemy , keep him out of Russia , and not let the army get discouraged . 
To the third party -- in which the Emperor had most confidence - belonged the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two . 
The members of this party , chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev belonged , thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to have some generally say . 
They said that undoubtedly war , particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte -LRB- they called him Bonaparte now -RRB- , needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius , but at the same time it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one sided , and therefore one should not trust them absolutely , but should also listen to what Pfuel 's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had to say , and then choose a middle course . 
They insisted on the retention of the camp at Drissa , according to Pfuel 's plan , but on changing the movements of the other armies . 
Though , by this course , neither one aim nor the other could be attained , yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third party . 
Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the Tsarevich , who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz , where he had ridden out at the head of the Guards , in his casque and cavalry uniform as to a review , expecting to crush the French gallantly ; but unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amid the general confusion . 
The men of this party had both the quality and the defect of frankness in their opinions . 
They feared Napoleon , recognized his strength and their own weakness , and frankly said so . 
They said : `` Nothing but sorrow , shame , and ruin will come of all this ! 
We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa . 
The only reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible , before we are turned out of Petersburg . '' 
This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support also in Petersburg and from the chancellor , Rumyantsev , who , for other reasons of state , was in favor of peace . 
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de Tolly , not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in chief . 
`` Be he what he may '' -LRB- they always began like that -RRB- , `` he is an honest , practical man and we have nobody better . 
Give him real power , for war can not be conducted successfully without unity of command , and he will show what he can do , as he did in Finland . 
If our army is well organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering any defeats , we owe this entirely to Barclay . 
If Barclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost , for Bennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807 . '' 
The sixth party , the Bennigsenites , said , on the contrary , that at any rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen : `` and twist about as you may , you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually . 
Let the others make mistakes now ! '' 
said they , arguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series of blunders . 
`` The more mistakes that are made the better . 
It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that things can not go on like this . 
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other , but a man like Bennigsen , who made his mark in 1807 , and to whom Napoleon himself did justice -- a man whose authority would be willingly recognized , and Bennigsen is the only such man . '' 
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to be found , especially around young sovereigns , and of whom there were particularly many round Alexander -- generals and imperial aides-de-camp passionately devoted to the Emperor , not merely as a monarch but as a man , adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly , as Rostov had done in 1805 , and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human capabilities as well . 
These men , though enchanted with the sovereign for refusing the command of the army , yet blamed him for such excessive modesty , and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would place himself at the head of the army , gather round him a commander in chief 's staff , and , consulting experienced theoreticians and practical men where necessary , would himself lead the troops , whose spirits would thereby be raised to the highest pitch . 
The eighth and largest group , which in its enormous numbers was to the others as ninety-nine to one , consisted of men who desired neither peace nor war , neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa or anywhere else , neither Barclay nor the Emperor , neither Pfuel nor Bennigsen , but only the one most essential thing -- as much advantage and pleasure for themselves as possible . 
