At one end of the table , the old chamberlain was heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately , at which she laughed ; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes of some Mary Viktorovna or other . 
At the center of the table , Prince Vasili attracted everybody 's attention . 
With a facetious smile on his face , he was telling the ladies about last Wednesday 's meeting of the Imperial Council , at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov , the new military governor general of Petersburg , had received and read the then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich , in which the Emperor said that he was receiving from all sides declarations of the people 's loyalty , that the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure , and that he was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor to be worthy of it . 
This rescript began with the words : `` Sergey Kuzmich , From all sides reports reach me , '' etc. `` Well , and so he never got farther than : ` Sergey Kuzmich ' ? '' 
asked one of the ladies . 
`` Exactly , not a hair 's breadth farther , '' answered Prince Vasili , laughing , '' ` Sergey Kuzmich ... From all sides ... From all sides ... Sergey Kuzmich ... ' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther ! 
He began the rescript again and again , but as soon as he uttered ` Sergey ' he sobbed , ` Kuz-mi-ch , ' tears , and ` From all sides ' was smothered in sobs and he could get no farther . 
And again his handkerchief , and again : ` Sergey Kuzmich , From all sides , ' ... and tears , till at last somebody else was asked to read it . '' 
`` Kuzmich ... From all sides ... and then tears , '' someone repeated laughing . 
`` Do n't be unkind , '' cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holding up a threatening finger . 
`` He is such a worthy and excellent man , our dear Vyazmitinov ... '' Everybody laughed a great deal . 
At the head of the table , where the honored guests sat , everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the influence of a variety of exciting sensations . 
Only Pierre and Helene sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table , a suppressed smile brightening both their faces , a smile that had nothing to do with Sergey Kuzmich -- a smile of bashfulness at their own feelings . 
But much as all the rest laughed , talked , and joked , much as they enjoyed their Rhine wine , saute , and ices , and however they avoided looking at the young couple , and heedless and unobservant as they seemed of them , one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that the story about Sergey Kuzmich , the laughter , and the food were all a pretense , and that the whole attention of that company was directed to -- Pierre and Helene . 
Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing of Sergey Kuzmich and at the same time his eyes glanced toward his daughter , and while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said : `` Yes ... it 's getting on , it will all be settled today . '' 
Anna Pavlovna threatened him on behalf of `` our dear Vyazmitinov , '' and in her eyes , which , for an instant , glanced at Pierre , Prince Vasili read a congratulation on his future son-in-law and on his daughter 's happiness . 
The old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter , and her sigh seemed to say : `` Yes , there 's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine , my dear , now that the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly , provocatively happy . '' 
`` And what nonsense all this is that I am saying ! '' 
thought a diplomatist , glancing at the happy faces of the lovers . 
`` That 's happiness ! '' 
Into the insignificant , trifling , and artificial interests uniting that society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy and handsome young man and woman for one another . 
And this human feeling dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter . 
Jests fell flat , news was not interesting , and the animation was evidently forced . 
Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting at table seemed to feel this , and they forgot their duties as they looked at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red , broad , and happy though uneasy face of Pierre . 
It seemed as if the very light of the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone . 
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all , and this both pleased and embarrassed him . 
He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation . 
He did not see , hear , or understand anything clearly . 
Only now and then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot unexpectedly through his mind . 
`` So it is all finished ! '' 
he thought . 
`` And how has it all happened ? 
How quickly ! 
Now I know that not because of her alone , nor of myself alone , but because of everyone , it must inevitably come about . 
They are all expecting it , they are so sure that it will happen that I can not , I can not , disappoint them . 
But how will it be ? 
I do not know , but it will certainly happen ! '' 
thought Pierre , glancing at those dazzling shoulders close to his eyes . 
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what . 
He felt it awkward to attract everyone 's attention and to be considered a lucky man and , with his plain face , to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed of a Helen . 
`` But no doubt it always is and must be so ! '' 
he consoled himself . 
`` And besides , what have I done to bring it about ? 
How did it begin ? 
I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili . 
Then there was nothing . 
So why should I not stay at his house ? 
Then I played cards with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her . 
How did it begin , when did it all come about ? '' 
And here he was sitting by her side as her betrothed , seeing , hearing , feeling her nearness , her breathing , her movements , her beauty . 
