Nicholas did not take his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her . 
Sonya , as she listened , thought of the immense difference there was between herself and her friend , and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as bewitching as her cousin . 
The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad smile and with tears in her eyes , occasionally shaking her head . 
She thought of Natasha and of her own youth , and of how there was something unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince Andrew . 
Dimmler , who had seated himself beside the countess , listened with closed eyes . 
`` Ah , Countess , '' he said at last , `` that 's a European talent , she has nothing to learn -- what softness , tenderness , and strength ... '' `` Ah , how afraid I am for her , how afraid I am ! '' 
said the countess , not realizing to whom she was speaking . 
Her maternal instinct told her that Natasha had too much of something , and that because of this she would not be happy . 
Before Natasha had finished singing , fourteen-year-old Petya rushed in delightedly , to say that some mummers had arrived . 
Natasha stopped abruptly . 
`` Idiot ! '' 
she screamed at her brother and , running to a chair , threw herself on it , sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long time . 
`` It 's nothing , Mamma , really it 's nothing ; only Petya startled me , '' she said , trying to smile , but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked her . 
The mummers -LRB- some of the house serfs -RRB- dressed up as bears , Turks , innkeepers , and ladies -- frightening and funny -- bringing in with them the cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety , crowded , at first timidly , into the anteroom , then hiding behind one another they pushed into the ballroom where , shyly at first and then more and more merrily and heartily , they started singing , dancing , and playing Christmas games . 
The countess , when she had identified them and laughed at their costumes , went into the drawing room . 
The count sat in the ballroom , smiling radiantly and applauding the players . 
The young people had disappeared . 
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt -- this was Nicholas . 
A Turkish girl was Petya . 
A clown was Dimmler . 
An hussar was Natasha , and a Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows . 
After the condescending surprise , nonrecognition , and praise , from those who were not themselves dressed up , the young people decided that their costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere . 
Nicholas , who , as the roads were in splendid condition , wanted to take them all for a drive in his troyka , proposed to take with them about a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to `` Uncle 's . '' 
`` No , why disturb the old fellow ? '' 
said the countess . 
`` Besides , you would n't have room to turn round there . 
If you must go , go to the Melyukovs ' . '' 
Melyukova was a widow , who , with her family and their tutors and governesses , lived three miles from the Rostovs . 
`` That 's right , my dear , '' chimed in the old count , thoroughly aroused . 
`` I 'll dress up at once and go with them . 
I 'll make Pashette open her eyes . '' 
But the countess would not agree to his going ; he had had a bad leg all these last days . 
It was decided that the count must not go , but that if Louisa Ivanovna -LRB- Madame Schoss -RRB- would go with them , the young ladies might go to the Melyukovs ' , Sonya , generally so timid and shy , more urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse . 
Sonya 's costume was the best of all . 
Her mustache and eyebrows were extraordinarily becoming . 
Everyone told her she looked very handsome , and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her . 
Some inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided , and in her male attire she seemed quite a different person . 
Louisa Ivanovna consented to go , and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and small bells , their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow , drove up to the porch . 
Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone , which , passing from one to another , grew stronger and reached its climax when they all came out into the frost and got into the sleighs , talking , calling to one another , laughing , and shouting . 
Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs , the third was the old count 's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse , the fourth was Nicholas ' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse . 
Nicholas , in his old lady 's dress over which he had belted his hussar overcoat , stood in the middle of the sleigh , reins in hand . 
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal harness disks and from the eyes of the horses , who looked round in alarm at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof . 
Natasha , Sonya , Madame Schoss , and two maids got into Nicholas ' sleigh ; Dimmler , his wife , and Petya , into the old count 's , and the rest of the mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs . 
`` You go ahead , Zakhar ! '' 
shouted Nicholas to his father 's coachman , wishing for a chance to race past him . 
The old count 's troyka , with Dimmler and his party , started forward , squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow , its deep-toned bell clanging . 
The side horses , pressing against the shafts of the middle horse , sank in the snow , which was dry and glittered like sugar , and threw it up . 
Nicholas set off , following the first sleigh ; behind him the others moved noisily , their runners squeaking . 
At first they drove at a steady trot along the narrow road . 
While they drove past the garden the shadows of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant moonlight , but as soon as they were past the fence , the snowy plain bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows . 
