`` You are very fiery , Belliard , '' said Napoleon , when he again came up to the general . 
`` In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake . 
Go and have another look and then come back to me . '' 
Before Belliard was out of sight , a messenger from another part of the battlefield galloped up . 
`` Now then , what do you want ? '' 
asked Napoleon in the tone of a man irritated at being continually disturbed . 
`` Sire , the prince ... '' began the adjutant . 
`` Asks for reinforcements ? '' 
said Napoleon with an angry gesture . 
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report , but the Emperor turned from him , took a couple of steps , stopped , came back , and called Berthier . 
`` We must give reserves , '' he said , moving his arms slightly apart . 
`` Who do you think should be sent there ? '' 
he asked of Berthier -LRB- whom he subsequently termed `` that gosling I have made an eagle '' -RRB- . 
`` Send Claparede 's division , sire , '' replied Berthier , who knew all the divisions regiments , and battalions by heart . 
Napoleon nodded assent . 
The adjutant galloped to Claparede 's division and a few minutes later the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward . 
Napoleon gazed silently in that direction . 
`` No ! '' 
he suddenly said to Berthier . 
`` I ca n't send Claparede . 
Send Friant 's division . '' 
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant 's division instead of Claparede 's , and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping Claparede and sending Friant now , the order was carried out exactly . 
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines -- a role he so justly understood and condemned . 
Friant 's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke of the battlefield . 
From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing . 
They all asked for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was melting away . 
Napoleon sat on a campstool , wrapped in thought . 
M. de Beausset , the man so fond of travel , having fasted since morning , came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His Majesty . 
`` I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory ? '' 
said he . 
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation . 
Assuming the negation to refer only to the victory and not to the lunch , M. de Beausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not having lunch when one can get it . 
`` Go away ... '' exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely , and turned aside . 
A beatific smile of regret , repentance , and ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset 's face and he glided away to the other generals . 
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an ever-lucky gambler who , after recklessly flinging money about and always winning , suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the game , finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he loses . 
His troops were the same , his generals the same , the same preparations had been made , the same dispositions , and the same proclamation courte et energique , he himself was still the same : he knew that and knew that he was now even more experienced and skillful than before . 
Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland -- yet the terrible stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent . 
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success : the concentration of batteries on one point , an attack by reserves to break the enemy 's line , and a cavalry attack by `` the men of iron , '' all these methods had already been employed , yet not only was there no victory , but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded , of reinforcements needed , of the impossibility of driving back the Russians , and of disorganization among his own troops . 
Formerly , after he had given two or three orders and uttered a few phrases , marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with congratulations and happy faces , announcing the trophies taken , the corps of prisoners , bundles of enemy eagles and standards , cannon and stores , and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gather in the baggage wagons . 
So it had been at Lodi , Marengo , Arcola , Jena , Austerlitz , Wagram , and so on . 
But now something strange was happening to his troops . 
Despite news of the capture of the fleches , Napoleon saw that this was not the same , not at all the same , as what had happened in his former battles . 
He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about him experienced in the art of war . 
All their faces looked dejected , and they all shunned one another 's eyes -- only a de Beausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was happening . 
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours , after all efforts had been expended . 
He knew that it was a lost battle and that the least accident might now -- with the fight balanced on such a strained center -- destroy him and his army . 
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign in which not one battle had been won , and in which not a flag , or cannon , or army corps had been captured in two months , when he looked at the concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the Russians still holding their ground -- a terrible feeling like a nightmare took possession of him , and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy him occurred to his mind . 
The Russians might fall on his left wing , might break through his center , he himself might be killed by a stray cannon ball . 
All this was possible . 
In former battles he had only considered the possibilities of success , but now innumerable unlucky chances presented themselves , and he expected them all . 
