remarked another . 
`` Do n't kick up the dust , you infantry ! '' 
jested an hussar whose prancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers . 
`` I 'd like to put you on a two days ' march with a knapsack ! 
Your fine cords would soon get a bit rubbed , '' said an infantryman , wiping the mud off his face with his sleeve . 
`` Perched up there , you 're more like a bird than a man . '' 
`` There now , Zikin , they ought to put you on a horse . 
You 'd look fine , '' said a corporal , chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the weight of his knapsack . 
`` Take a stick between your legs , that 'll suit you for a horse ! '' 
the hussar shouted back . 
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge , squeezing together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel . 
At last the baggage wagons had all crossed , the crush was less , and the last battalion came onto the bridge . 
Only Denisov 's squadron of hussars remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy , who could be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from the bridge , for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away . 
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our Cossack scouts were moving . 
Suddenly on the road at the top of the high ground , artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen . 
These were the French . 
A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot . 
All the officers and men of Denisov 's squadron , though they tried to talk of other things and to look in other directions , thought only of what was there on the hilltop , and kept constantly looking at the patches appearing on the skyline , which they knew to be the enemy 's troops . 
The weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills around it . 
It was calm , and at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard from the hill . 
There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy except a few scattered skirmishers . 
An empty space of some seven hundred yards was all that separated them . 
The enemy ceased firing , and that stern , threatening , inaccessible , and intangible line which separates two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt . 
`` One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing the living from the dead lies uncertainty , suffering , and death . 
And what is there ? 
Who is there ? 
-- there beyond that field , that tree , that roof lit up by the sun ? 
No one knows , but one wants to know . 
You fear and yet long to cross that line , and know that sooner or later it must be crossed and you will have to find out what is there , just as you will inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death . 
But you are strong , healthy , cheerful , and excited , and are surrounded by other such excitedly animated and healthy men . '' 
So thinks , or at any rate feels , anyone who comes in sight of the enemy , and that feeling gives a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that takes place at such moments . 
On the high ground where the enemy was , the smoke of a cannon rose , and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron . 
The officers who had been standing together rode off to their places . 
The hussars began carefully aligning their horses . 
Silence fell on the whole squadron . 
All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron commander , awaiting the word of command . 
A second and a third cannon ball flew past . 
Evidently they were firing at the hussars , but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell somewhere beyond them . 
The hussars did not look round , but at the sound of each shot , as at the word of command , the whole squadron with its rows of faces so alike yet so different , holding its breath while the ball flew past , rose in the stirrups and sank back again . 
The soldiers without turning their heads glanced at one another , curious to see their comrades ' impression . 
Every face , from Denisov 's to that of the bugler , showed one common expression of conflict , irritation , and excitement , around chin and mouth . 
The quartermaster frowned , looking at the soldiers as if threatening to punish them . 
Cadet Mironov ducked every time a ball flew past . 
Rostov on the left flank , mounted on his Rook -- a handsome horse despite its game leg -- had the happy air of a schoolboy called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels sure he will distinguish himself . 
He was glancing at everyone with a clear , bright expression , as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat under fire . 
But despite himself , on his face too that same indication of something new and stern showed round the mouth . 
`` Who 's that curtseying there ? 
Cadet Miwonov ! 
That 's not wight ! 
Look at me , '' cried Denisov who , unable to keep still on one spot , kept turning his horse in front of the squadron . 
