`` You , who have suffered so from the French , do not even feel animosity toward them . '' 
Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely by evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing . 
During the last days of Pierre 's stay in Orel his old Masonic acquaintance Count Willarski , who had introduced him to the lodge in 1807 , came to see him . 
Willarski was married to a Russian heiress who had a large estate in Orel province , and he occupied a temporary post in the commissariat department in that town . 
Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel , Willarski , though they had never been intimate , came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy that people who meet in a desert generally express for one another . 
Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man of his own circle and , as he supposed , of similar interests . 
But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had lagged much behind the times , and had sunk , as he expressed it to himself , into apathy and egotism . 
`` You are letting yourself go , my dear fellow , '' he said . 
But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been formerly to be with Pierre , and came to see him every day . 
To Pierre as he looked at and listened to Willarski , it seemed strange to think that he had been like that himself but a short time before . 
Willarski was a married man with a family , busy with his family affairs , his wife 's affairs , and his official duties . 
He regarded all these occupations as hindrances to life , and considered that they were all contemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and his family . 
Military , administrative , political , and Masonic interests continually absorbed his attention . 
And Pierre , without trying to change the other 's views and without condemning him , but with the quiet , joyful , and amused smile now habitual to him , was interested in this strange though very familiar phenomenon . 
There was a new feature in Pierre 's relations with Willarski , with the princess , with the doctor , and with all the people he now met , which gained for him the general good will . 
This was his acknowledgment of the impossibility of changing a man 's convictions by words , and his recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking , feeling , and seeing things each from his own point of view . 
This legitimate peculiarity of each individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became a basis of the sympathy he felt for , and the interest he took in , other people . 
The difference , and sometimes complete contradiction , between men 's opinions and their lives , and between one man and another , pleased him and drew from him an amused and gentle smile . 
In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a center of gravity he had previously lacked . 
Formerly all pecuniary questions , especially requests for money to which , as an extremely wealthy man , he was very exposed , produced in him a state of hopeless agitation and perplexity . 
`` To give or not to give ? '' 
he had asked himself . 
`` I have it and he needs it . 
But someone else needs it still more . 
Who needs it most ? 
And perhaps they are both impostors ? '' 
In the old days he had been unable to find a way out of all these surmises and had given to all who asked as long as he had anything to give . 
Formerly he had been in a similar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning his property , when one person advised one thing and another something else . 
Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt or perplexity about these questions . 
There was now within him a judge who by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done . 
He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters , but now he felt certain of what ought and what ought not to be done . 
The first time he had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner , a colonel , came to him and , after talking a great deal about his exploits , concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should give him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children . 
Pierre refused without the least difficulty or effort , and was afterwards surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so insurmountably difficult . 
At the same time that he refused the colonel 's demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice when leaving Orel , to induce the Italian officer to accept some money of which he was evidently in need . 
A further proof to Pierre of his own more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision with regard to his wife 's debts and to the rebuilding of his houses in and near Moscow . 
His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with him his diminished income . 
The burning of Moscow had cost him , according to the head steward 's calculation , about two million rubles . 
To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimate showing that despite these losses his income would not be diminished but would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife 's debts which he was under no obligation to meet , and did not rebuild his Moscow house and the country house on his Moscow estate , which had cost him eighty thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing . 
`` Yes , of course that 's true , '' said Pierre with a cheerful smile . 
`` I do n't need all that at all . 
By being ruined I have become much richer . '' 
But in January Savelich came from Moscow and gave him an account of the state of things there , and spoke of the estimate an architect had made of the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses , speaking of this as of a settled matter . 
About the same time he received letters from Prince Vasili and other Petersburg acquaintances speaking of his wife 's debts . 
And Pierre decided that the steward 's proposals which had so pleased him were wrong and that he must go to Petersburg and settle his wife 's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow . 
Why this was necessary he did not know , but he knew for certain that it was necessary . 
His income would be reduced by three fourths , but he felt it must be done . 
Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together . 
During the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre had experienced a feeling of joy , freedom , and life ; but when during his journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new faces , that feeling was intensified . 
Throughout his journey he felt like a schoolboy on holiday . 
Everyone -- the stagecoach driver , the post-house overseers , the peasants on the roads and in the villages - had a new significance for him . 
