His sobs ceased , he pointed to his eyes , and Tikhon , understanding him , wiped away the tears . 
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could understand for a long time , till at last Tikhon understood and repeated it . 
Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in which he had just been speaking . 
She thought he was speaking of Russia , or Prince Andrew , of herself , of his grandson , or of his own death , and so she could not guess his words . 
`` Put on your white dress . 
I like it , '' was what he said . 
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder , and the doctor taking her arm led her out to the veranda , soothing her and trying to persuade her to prepare for her journey . 
When she had left the room the prince again began speaking about his son , about the war , and about the Emperor , angrily twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice , and then he had a second and final stroke . 
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda . 
The day had cleared , it was hot and sunny . 
She could understand nothing , think of nothing and feel nothing , except passionate love for her father , love such as she thought she had never felt till that moment . 
She ran out sobbing into the garden and as far as the pond , along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had planted . 
`` Yes ... I. . . 
I. . . 
I wished for his death ! 
Yes , I wanted it to end quicker ... . 
I wished to be at peace ... . 
And what will become of me ? 
What use will peace be when he is no longer here ? '' 
Princess Mary murmured , pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom which heaved with convulsive sobs . 
When she had completed the tour of the garden , which brought her again to the house , she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne -- who had remained at Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it -- coming toward her with a stranger . 
This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district , who had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her prompt departure . 
Princess Mary listened without understanding him ; she led him to the house , offered him lunch , and sat down with him . 
Then , excusing herself , she went to the door of the old prince 's room . 
The doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter . 
`` Go away , Princess ! 
Go away ... go away ! '' 
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the slope by the pond , where no one could see her . 
She did not know how long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman 's footsteps running along the path . 
She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid , who was evidently looking for her , and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm on seeing her mistress . 
`` Please come , Princess ... The Prince , '' said Dunyasha in a breaking voice . 
`` Immediately , I 'm coming , I 'm coming ! '' 
replied the princess hurriedly , not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying , and trying to avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house . 
`` Princess , it 's God 's will ! 
You must be prepared for everything , '' said the Marshal , meeting her at the house door . 
`` Let me alone ; it 's not true ! '' 
she cried angrily to him . 
The doctor tried to stop her . 
She pushed him aside and ran to her father 's door . 
`` Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me ? 
I do n't want any of them ! 
And what are they doing here ? '' 
she thought . 
She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkened room startled her . 
In the room were her nurse and other women . 
They all drew back from the bed , making way for her . 
He was still lying on the bed as before , but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess Mary stop short on the threshold . 
`` No , he 's not dead -- it 's impossible ! '' 
she told herself and approached him , and repressing the terror that seized her , she pressed her lips to his cheek . 
But she stepped back immediately . 
