Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on . 
Nicholas dismounted , and with Natasha and Petya , who had ridden up , stopped near the hounds , waiting to see how the matter would end . 
Out of the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward his young master , with the fox tied to his crupper . 
While still at a distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully , but he was pale and breathless and his face was angry . 
One of his eyes was black , but he probably was not even aware of it . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
asked Nicholas . 
`` A likely thing , killing a fox our dogs had hunted ! 
And it was my gray bitch that caught it ! 
Go to law , indeed ! 
... He snatches at the fox ! 
I gave him one with the fox . 
Here it is on my saddle ! 
Do you want a taste of this ? 
... '' said the huntsman , pointing to his dagger and probably imagining himself still speaking to his foe . 
Nicholas , not stopping to talk to the man , asked his sister and Petya to wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy 's , Ilagin 's , hunting party was . 
The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field , and there , surrounded by inquiring sympathizers , recounted his exploits . 
The facts were that Ilagin , with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and were at law , hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostovs , and had now , as if purposely , sent his men to the very woods the Rostovs were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased . 
Nicholas , though he had never seen Ilagin , with his usual absence of moderation in judgment , hated him cordially from reports of his arbitrariness and violence , and regarded him as his bitterest foe . 
He rode in angry agitation toward him , firmly grasping his whip and fully prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish his enemy . 
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-black horse , accompanied by two hunt servants . 
Instead of an enemy , Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately and courteous gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count 's acquaintance . 
Having ridden up to Nicholas , Ilagin raised his beaver cap and said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the man punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else 's borzois . 
He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited him to draw his covert . 
Natasha , afraid that her brother would do something dreadful , had followed him in some excitement . 
Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly greetings , she rode up to them . 
Ilagin lifted his beaver cap still higher to Natasha and said , with a pleasant smile , that the young countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in her beauty , of which he had heard much . 
To expiate his huntsman 's offense , Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to come to an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself and which , he said , swarmed with hares . 
Nicholas agreed , and the hunt , now doubled , moved on . 
The way to Iligin 's upland was across the fields . 
The hunt servants fell into line . 
The masters rode together . 
`` Uncle , '' Rostov , and Ilagin kept stealthily glancing at one another 's dogs , trying not to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois . 
Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small , pure-bred , red-spotted bitch on Ilagin 's leash , slender but with muscles like steel , a delicate muzzle , and prominent black eyes . 
He had heard of the swiftness of Ilagin 's borzois , and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to his own Milka . 
In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year 's harvest , Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch . 
`` A fine little bitch , that ! '' 
said he in a careless tone . 
`` Is she swift ? '' 
`` That one ? 
Yes , she 's a good dog , gets what she 's after , '' answered Ilagin indifferently , of the red-spotted bitch Erza , for which , a year before , he had given a neighbor three families of house serfs . 
`` So in your parts , too , the harvest is nothing to boast of , Count ? '' 
he went on , continuing the conversation they had begun . 
And considering it polite to return the young count 's compliment , Ilagin looked at his borzois and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth . 
`` That black-spotted one of yours is fine -- well shaped ! '' 
said he . 
`` Yes , she 's fast enough , '' replied Nicholas , and thought : `` If only a full-grown hare would cross the field now I 'd show you what sort of borzoi she is , '' and turning to his groom , he said he would give a ruble to anyone who found a hare . 
`` I do n't understand , '' continued Ilagin , `` how some sportsmen can be so jealous about game and dogs . 
For myself , I can tell you , Count , I enjoy riding in company such as this ... what could be better ? '' 
-LRB- he again raised his cap to Natasha -RRB- `` but as for counting skins and what one takes , I do n't care about that . '' 
