Everything seemed lost . 
But at that moment the French who were attacking , suddenly and without any apparent reason , ran back and disappeared from the outskirts , and Russian sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse . 
It was Timokhin 's company , which alone had maintained its order in the wood and , having lain in ambush in a ditch , now attacked the French unexpectedly . 
Timokhin , armed only with a sword , had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and such mad , drunken determination that , taken by surprise , the French had thrown down their muskets and run . 
Dolokhov , running beside Timokhin , killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his collar . 
Our fugitives returned , the battalions re-formed , and the French who had nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed . 
Our reserve units were able to join up , and the fight was at an end . 
The regimental commander and Major Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge , letting the retreating companies pass by them , when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander 's stirrup , almost leaning against him . 
The man was wearing a bluish coat of broadcloth , he had no knapsack or cap , his head was bandaged , and over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung . 
He had an officer 's sword in his hand . 
The soldier was pale , his blue eyes looked impudently into the commander 's face , and his lips were smiling . 
Though the commander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov , he could not help taking notice of the soldier . 
`` Your excellency , here are two trophies , '' said Dolokhov , pointing to the French sword and pouch . 
`` I have taken an officer prisoner . 
I stopped the company . '' 
Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt sentences . 
`` The whole company can bear witness . 
I beg you will remember this , your excellency ! '' 
`` All right , all right , '' replied the commander , and turned to Major Ekonomov . 
But Dolokhov did not go away ; he untied the handkerchief around his head , pulled it off , and showed the blood congealed on his hair . 
`` A bayonet wound . 
I remained at the front . 
Remember , your excellency ! '' 
Tushin 's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the action did Prince Bagration , still hearing the cannonade in the center , send his orderly staff officer , and later Prince Andrew also , to order the battery to retire as quickly as possible . 
When the supports attached to Tushin 's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action by someone 's order , the battery had continued firing and was only not captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended guns . 
On the contrary , the energetic action of that battery led the French to suppose that here -- in the center - the main Russian forces were concentrated . 
Twice they had attempted to attack this point , but on each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns on the hillock . 
Soon after Prince Bagration had left him , Tushin had succeeded in setting fire to Schon Grabern . 
`` Look at them scurrying ! 
It 's burning ! 
Just see the smoke ! 
Fine ! 
Grand ! 
Look at the smoke , the smoke ! '' 
exclaimed the artillerymen , brightening up . 
All the guns , without waiting for orders , were being fired in the direction of the conflagration . 
As if urging each other on , the soldiers cried at each shot : `` Fine ! 
That 's good ! 
Look at it ... Grand ! '' 
The fire , fanned by the breeze , was rapidly spreading . 
The French columns that had advanced beyond the village went back ; but as though in revenge for this failure , the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and began firing them at Tushin 's battery . 
In their childlike glee , aroused by the fire and their luck in successfully cannonading the French , our artillerymen only noticed this battery when two balls , and then four more , fell among our guns , one knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon driver 's leg . 
Their spirits once roused were , however , not diminished , but only changed character . 
The horses were replaced by others from a reserve gun carriage , the wounded were carried away , and the four guns were turned against the ten-gun battery . 
Tushin 's companion officer had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour seventeen of the forty men of the guns ' crews had been disabled , but the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever . 
Twice they noticed the French appearing below them , and then they fired grapeshot at them . 
Little Tushin , moving feebly and awkwardly , kept telling his orderly to `` refill my pipe for that one ! '' 
and then , scattering sparks from it , ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French . 
`` Smack at 'em , lads ! '' 
he kept saying , seizing the guns by the wheels and working the screws himself . 
