`` I am starting on a journey of inspection , and of course I shall think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same time , my honored benefactor , '' wrote Prince Vasili . 
`` My son Anatole is accompanying me on his way to the army , so I hope you will allow him personally to express the deep respect that , emulating his father , he feels for you . '' 
`` It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out , suitors are coming to us of their own accord , '' incautiously remarked the little princess on hearing the news . 
Prince Nicholas frowned , but said nothing . 
A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili 's servants came one evening in advance of him , and he and his son arrived next day . 
Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili 's character , but more so recently , since in the new reigns of Paul and Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors . 
And now , from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess , he saw which way the wind was blowing , and his low opinion changed into a feeling of contemptuous ill will . 
He snorted whenever he mentioned him . 
On the day of Prince Vasili 's arrival , Prince Bolkonski was particularly discontented and out of temper . 
Whether he was in a bad temper because Prince Vasili was coming , or whether his being in a bad temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili 's visit , he was in a bad temper , and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect not to go the prince with his report . 
`` Do you hear how he 's walking ? '' 
said Tikhon , drawing the architect 's attention to the sound of the prince 's footsteps . 
`` Stepping flat on his heels -- we know what that means ... '' However , at nine o'clock the prince , in his velvet coat with a sable collar and cap , went out for his usual walk . 
It had snowed the day before and the path to the hothouse , along which the prince was in the habit of walking , had been swept : the marks of the broom were still visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path . 
The prince went through the conservatories , the serfs ' quarters , and the outbuildings , frowning and silent . 
`` Can a sleigh pass ? '' 
he asked his overseer , a venerable man , resembling his master in manners and looks , who was accompanying him back to the house . 
`` The snow is deep . 
I am having the avenue swept , your honor . '' 
The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch . 
`` God be thanked , '' thought the overseer , `` the storm has blown over ! '' 
`` It would have been hard to drive up , your honor , '' he added . 
`` I heard , your honor , that a minister is coming to visit your honor . '' 
The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him , frowning . 
`` What ? 
A minister ? 
What minister ? 
Who gave orders ? '' 
he said in his shrill , harsh voice . 
`` The road is not swept for the princess my daughter , but for a minister ! 
For me , there are no ministers ! '' 
`` Your honor , I thought ... '' `` You thought ! '' 
shouted the prince , his words coming more and more rapidly and indistinctly . 
`` You thought ! 
... Rascals ! 
Blackgaurds ! 
... I 'll teach you to think ! '' 
and lifting his stick he swung it and would have hit Alpatych , the overseer , had not the latter instinctively avoided the blow . 
`` Thought ... Blackguards ... '' shouted the prince rapidly . 
But although Alpatych , frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the stroke , came up to the prince , bowing his bald head resignedly before him , or perhaps for that very reason , the prince , though he continued to shout : `` Blackgaurds ! 
... Throw the snow back on the road ! '' 
did not lift his stick again but hurried into the house . 
Before dinner , Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne , who knew that the prince was in a bad humor , stood awaiting him ; Mademoiselle Bourienne with a radiant face that said : `` I know nothing , I am the same as usual , '' and Princess Mary pale , frightened , and with downcast eyes . 
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne , but could not . 
She thought : `` If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with him ; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself , he will say -LRB- as he has done before -RRB- that I 'm in the dumps . '' 
The prince looked at his daughter 's frightened face and snorted . 
`` Fool ... or dummy ! '' 
he muttered . 
`` And the other one is not here . 
They 've been telling tales , '' he thought -- referring to the little princess who was not in the dining room . 
