`` Can you do it ? '' 
`` Of course I can . '' 
Likhachev got up , rummaged in his pack , and soon Petya heard the warlike sound of steel on whetstone . 
He climbed onto the wagon and sat on its edge . 
The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon . 
`` I say ! 
Are the lads asleep ? '' 
asked Petya . 
`` Some are , and some are n't -- like us . '' 
`` Well , and that boy ? '' 
`` Vesenny ? 
Oh , he 's thrown himself down there in the passage . 
Fast asleep after his fright . 
He was that glad ! '' 
After that Petya remained silent for a long time , listening to the sounds . 
He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figure appeared . 
`` What are you sharpening ? '' 
asked a man coming up to the wagon . 
`` Why , this gentleman 's saber . '' 
`` That 's right , '' said the man , whom Petya took to be an hussar . 
`` Was the cup left here ? '' 
`` There , by the wheel ! '' 
The hussar took the cup . 
`` It must be daylight soon , '' said he , yawning , and went away . 
Petya ought to have known that he was in a forest with Denisov 's guerrilla band , less than a mile from the road , sitting on a wagon captured from the French beside which horses were tethered , that under it Likhachev was sitting sharpening a saber for him , that the big dark blotch to the right was the watchman 's hut , and the red blotch below to the left was the dying embers of a campfire , that the man who had come for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink ; but he neither knew nor waited to know anything of all this . 
He was in a fairy kingdom where nothing resembled reality . 
The big dark blotch might really be the watchman 's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of the earth . 
Perhaps the red spot was a fire , or it might be the eye of an enormous monster . 
Perhaps he was really sitting on a wagon , but it might very well be that he was not sitting on a wagon but on a terribly high tower from which , if he fell , he would have to fall for a whole day or a whole month , or go on falling and never reach the bottom . 
Perhaps it was just the Cossack , Likhachev , who was sitting under the wagon , but it might be the kindest , bravest , most wonderful , most splendid man in the world , whom no one knew of . 
It might really have been that the hussar came for water and went back into the hollow , but perhaps he had simply vanished -- disappeared altogether and dissolved into nothingness . 
Nothing Petya could have seen now would have surprised him . 
He was in a fairy kingdom where everything was possible . 
He looked up at the sky . 
And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth . 
It was clearing , and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly sailing as if unveiling the stars . 
Sometimes it looked as if the clouds were passing , and a clear black sky appeared . 
Sometimes it seemed as if the black spaces were clouds . 
Sometimes the sky seemed to be rising high , high overhead , and then it seemed to sink so low that one could touch it with one 's hand . 
Petya 's eyes began to close and he swayed a little . 
The trees were dripping . 
Quiet talking was heard . 
The horses neighed and jostled one another . 
Someone snored . 
`` Ozheg-zheg , Ozheg-zheg ... '' hissed the saber against the whetstone , and suddenly Petya heard an harmonious orchestra playing some unknown , sweetly solemn hymn . 
Petya was as musical as Natasha and more so than Nicholas , but had never learned music or thought about it , and so the melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly fresh and attractive . 
The music became more and more audible . 
The melody grew and passed from one instrument to another . 
And what was played was a fugue -- though Petya had not the least conception of what a fugue is . 
Each instrument -- now resembling a violin and now a horn , but better and clearer than violin or horn - played its own part , and before it had finished the melody merged with another instrument that began almost the same air , and then with a third and a fourth ; and they all blended into one and again became separate and again blended , now into solemn church music , now into something dazzlingly brilliant and triumphant . 
