`` Well , fwiend ? 
So you 've smelt powdah ! '' 
shouted Vaska Denisov just above his ear . 
`` It 's all over ; but I am a coward -- yes , a coward ! '' 
thought Rostov , and sighing deeply he took Rook , his horse , which stood resting one foot , from the orderly and began to mount . 
`` Was that grapeshot ? '' 
he asked Denisov . 
`` Yes and no mistake ! '' 
cried Denisov . 
`` You worked like wegular bwicks and it 's nasty work ! 
An attack 's pleasant work ! 
Hacking away at the dogs ! 
But this sort of thing is the very devil , with them shooting at you like a target . '' 
And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov , composed of the colonel , Nesvitski , Zherkov , and the officer from the suite . 
`` Well , it seems that no one has noticed , '' thought Rostov . 
And this was true . 
No one had taken any notice , for everyone knew the sensation which the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced . 
`` Here 's something for you to report , '' said Zherkov . 
`` See if I do n't get promoted to a sublieutenancy . '' 
`` Inform the prince that I the bridge fired ! '' 
said the colonel triumphantly and gaily . 
`` And if he asks about the losses ? '' 
`` A trifle , '' said the colonel in his bass voice : `` two hussars wounded , and one knocked out , '' he added , unable to restrain a happy smile , and pronouncing the phrase `` knocked out '' with ringing distinctness . 
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command of Bonaparte , encountering a population that was unfriendly to it , losing confidence in its allies , suffering from shortness of supplies , and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had been foreseen , the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded by Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube , stopping where overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment . 
There had been actions at Lambach , Amstetten , and Melk ; but despite the courage and endurance -- acknowledged even by the enemy -- with which the Russians fought , the only consequence of these actions was a yet more rapid retreat . 
Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army , and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces . 
The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of . 
Instead of an offensive , the plan of which , carefully prepared in accord with the modern science of strategics , had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath , the sole and almost unattainable aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were advancing from Russia , without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm . 
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time with the river between himself and the main body of the French . 
On the thirtieth he attacked Mortier 's division , which was on the left bank , and broke it up . 
In this action for the first time trophies were taken : banners , cannon , and two enemy generals . 
For the first time , after a fortnight 's retreat , the Russian troops had halted and after a fight had not only held the field but had repulsed the French . 
Though the troops were ill-clad , exhausted , and had lost a third of their number in killed , wounded , sick , and stragglers ; though a number of sick and wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy ; and though the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded , yet the stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of the army considerably . 
Throughout the whole army and at headquarters most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach of columns from Russia , of some victory gained by the Austrians , and of the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte . 
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian General Schmidt , who was killed in the action . 
His horse had been wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet . 
As a mark of the commander in chief 's special favor he was sent with the news of this victory to the Austrian court , now no longer at Vienna -LRB- which was threatened by the French -RRB- but at Brunn . 
Despite his apparently delicate build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many very muscular men , and on the night of the battle , having arrived at Krems excited but not weary , with dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov , he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brunn . 
To be so sent meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion . 
The night was dark but starry , the road showed black in the snow that had fallen the previous day -- the day of the battle . 
Reviewing his impressions of the recent battle , picturing pleasantly to himself the impression his news of a victory would create , or recalling the send-off given him by the commander in chief and his fellow officers , Prince Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness . 
As soon as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the wheels and the sensation of victory . 
Then he began to imagine that the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed , but he quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy , as if learning afresh that this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away . 
He again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage during the battle , and feeling reassured he dozed off ... . 
The dark starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning . 
The snow was thawing in the sunshine , the horses galloped quickly , and on both sides of the road were forests of different kinds , fields , and villages . 
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded . 
The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front cart , shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse . 
In each of the long German carts six or more pale , dirty , bandaged men were being jolted over the stony road . 
Some of them were talking -LRB- he heard Russian words -RRB- , others were eating bread ; the more severely wounded looked silently , with the languid interest of sick children , at the envoy hurrying past them . 
