He was filled with happiness at his nearness to the Emperor . 
He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the day he had lost . 
He was happy as a lover when the longed-for moment of meeting arrives . 
Not daring to look round and without looking round , he was ecstatically conscious of his approach . 
He felt it not only from the sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade , but because as he drew near everything grew brighter , more joyful , more significant , and more festive around him . 
Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun shedding beams of mild and majestic light around , and already he felt himself enveloped in those beams , he heard his voice , that kindly , calm , and majestic voice that was yet so simple ! 
And as if in accord with Rostov 's feeling , there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the Emperor 's voice . 
`` The Pavlograd hussars ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` The reserves , sire ! '' 
replied a voice , a very human one compared to that which had said : `` The Pavlograd hussars ? '' 
The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted . 
Alexander 's face was even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review . 
It shone with such gaiety and youth , such innocent youth , that it suggested the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy , and yet it was the face of the majestic Emperor . 
Casually , while surveying the squadron , the Emperor 's eyes met Rostov 's and rested on them for not more than two seconds . 
Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on in Rostov 's soul -LRB- it seemed to Rostov that he understood everything -RRB- , at any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into Rostov 's face . 
A gentle , mild light poured from them . 
Then all at once he raised his eyebrows , abruptly touched his horse with his left foot , and galloped on . 
The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the battle and , in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers , at twelve o'clock left the third column with which he had been and galloped toward the vanguard . 
Before he came up with the hussars , several adjutants met him with news of the successful result of the action . 
This battle , which consisted in the capture of a French squadron , was represented as a brilliant victory over the French , and so the Emperor and the whole army , especially while the smoke hung over the battlefield , believed that the French had been defeated and were retreating against their will . 
A few minutes after the Emperor had passed , the Pavlograd division was ordered to advance . 
In Wischau itself , a petty German town , Rostov saw the Emperor again . 
In the market place , where there had been some rather heavy firing before the Emperor 's arrival , lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there had not been time to move . 
The Emperor , surrounded by his suite of officers and courtiers , was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare , a different one from that which he had ridden at the review , and bending to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and looked at a soldier who lay prone , with blood on his uncovered head . 
The wounded soldier was so dirty , coarse , and revolting that his proximity to the Emperor shocked Rostov . 
Rostov saw how the Emperor 's rather round shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them , how his left foot began convulsively tapping the horse 's side with the spur , and how the well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not stir . 
An adjutant , dismounting , lifted the soldier under the arms to place him on a stretcher that had been brought . 
The soldier groaned . 
`` Gently , gently ! 
Ca n't you do it more gently ? '' 
said the Emperor apparently suffering more than the dying soldier , and he rode away . 
Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor 's eyes and heard him , as he was riding away , say to Czartoryski : `` What a terrible thing war is : what a terrible thing ! 
Quelle terrible chose que la guerre ! '' 
The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau , within sight of the enemy 's lines , which all day long had yielded ground to us at the least firing . 
The Emperor 's gratitude was announced to the vanguard , rewards were promised , and the men received a double ration of vodka . 
The campfires crackled and the soldiers ' songs resounded even more merrily than on the previous night . 
Denisov celebrated his promotion to the rank of major , and Rostov , who had already drunk enough , at the end of the feast proposed the Emperor 's health . 
`` Not ` our Sovereign , the Emperor , ' as they say at official dinners , '' said he , `` but the health of our Sovereign , that good , enchanting , and great man ! 
Let us drink to his health and to the certain defeat of the French ! '' 
`` If we fought before , '' he said , `` not letting the French pass , as at Schon Grabern , what shall we not do now when he is at the front ? 
We will all die for him gladly ! 
Is it not so , gentlemen ? 
Perhaps I am not saying it right , I have drunk a good deal -- but that is how I feel , and so do you too ! 
To the health of Alexander the First ! 
Hurrah ! '' 
`` Hurrah ! '' 
rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers . 
And the old cavalry captain , Kirsten , shouted enthusiastically and no less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov . 
When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses , Kirsten filled others and , in shirt sleeves and breeches , went glass in hand to the soldiers ' bonfires and with his long gray mustache , his white chest showing under his open shirt , he stood in a majestic pose in the light of the campfire , waving his uplifted arm . 
