Though there was no definite news of an Austrian defeat , there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors that were afloat , and so Kutuzov 's suggestion of an Austrian victory sounded much like irony . 
But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with the same expression , which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so . 
And , in fact , the last letter he had received from Mack 's army informed him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army was very favorable . 
`` Give me that letter , '' said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew . 
`` Please have a look at it '' -- and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners of his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage , in German , from the Archduke Ferdinand 's letter : We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech . 
Also , as we are masters of Ulm , we can not be deprived of the advantage of commanding both sides of the Danube , so that should the enemy not cross the Lech , we can cross the Danube , throw ourselves on his line of communications , recross the river lower down , and frustrate his intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful ally . 
We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial Russian army will be fully equipped , and shall then , in conjunction with it , easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves . 
Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively . 
`` But you know the wise maxim your excellency , advising one to expect the worst , '' said the Austrian general , evidently wishing to have done with jests and to come to business . 
He involuntarily looked round at the aide-de-camp . 
`` Excuse me , General , '' interrupted Kutuzov , also turning to Prince Andrew . 
`` Look here , my dear fellow , get from Kozlovski all the reports from our scouts . 
Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these , '' he said , handing him several papers , `` make a neat memorandum in French out of all this , showing all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian army , and then give it to his excellency . '' 
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked to tell him . 
He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both , stepped softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room . 
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia , he had changed greatly during that period . 
In the expression of his face , in his movements , in his walk , scarcely a trace was left of his former affected languor and indolence . 
He now looked like a man who has time to think of the impression he makes on others , but is occupied with agreeable and interesting work . 
His face expressed more satisfaction with himself and those around him , his smile and glance were brighter and more attractive . 
Kutuzov , whom he had overtaken in Poland , had received him very kindly , promised not to forget him , distinguished him above the other adjutants , and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions . 
From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade , Prince Andrew 's father . 
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry , firmness , and expedition . 
I consider myself fortunate to have such a subordinate by me . 
On Kutuzov 's staff , among his fellow officers and in the army generally , Prince Andrew had , as he had had in Petersburg society , two quite opposite reputations . 
Some , a minority , acknowledged him to be different from themselves and from everyone else , expected great things of him , listened to him , admired , and imitated him , and with them Prince Andrew was natural and pleasant . 
Others , the majority , disliked him and considered him conceited , cold , and disagreeable . 
But among these people Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even feared him . 
Coming out of Kutuzov 's room into the waiting room with the papers in his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade , the aide-de-camp on duty , Kozlovski , who was sitting at the window with a book . 
`` Well , Prince ? '' 
asked Kozlovski . 
`` I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not advancing . '' 
`` And why is it ? '' 
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders . 
`` Any news from Mack ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` If it were true that he has been beaten , news would have come . '' 
`` Probably , '' said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door . 
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat , with the order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head , who had evidently just arrived , entered quickly , slamming the door . 
Prince Andrew stopped short . 
`` Commander in Chief Kutuzov ? '' 
said the newly arrived general speaking quickly with a harsh German accent , looking to both sides and advancing straight toward the inner door . 
`` The commander in chief is engaged , '' said Kozlovski , going hurriedly up to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door . 
`` Whom shall I announce ? '' 
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski , who was rather short , as if surprised that anyone should not know him . 
`` The commander in chief is engaged , '' repeated Kozlovski calmly . 
The general 's face clouded , his lips quivered and trembled . 
He took out a notebook , hurriedly scribbled something in pencil , tore out the leaf , gave it to Kozlovski , stepped quickly to the window , and threw himself into a chair , gazing at those in the room as if asking , `` Why do they look at me ? '' 
Then he lifted his head , stretched his neck as if he intended to say something , but immediately , with affected indifference , began to hum to himself , producing a queer sound which immediately broke off . 
The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in the doorway . 
The general with the bandaged head bent forward as though running away from some danger , and , making long , quick strides with his thin legs , went up to Kutuzov . 
