He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand men . 
It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to win a campaign . 
For that , storming and attacking but patience and time are wanted . 
Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk , but I only employed these two things and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made the but eat horseflesh ! '' 
He swayed his head . 
`` And the French shall too , believe me , '' he went on , growing warmer and beating his chest , `` I 'll make them eat horseflesh ! '' 
And tears again dimmed his eyes . 
* `` Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait . '' 
`` But sha n't we have to accept battle ? '' 
remarked Prince Andrew . 
`` We shall if everybody wants it ; it ca n't be helped ... . 
But believe me , my dear boy , there is nothing stronger than those two : patience and time , they will do it all . 
But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette oreille , voila le mal . 
* Some want a thing -- others do n't . 
What 's one to do ? '' 
he asked , evidently expecting an answer . 
`` Well , what do you want us to do ? '' 
he repeated and his eye shone with a deep , shrewd look . 
`` I 'll tell you what to do , '' he continued , as Prince Andrew still did not reply : `` I will tell you what to do , and what I do . 
Dans le doute , mon cher , '' he paused , `` abstiens-toi '' * -LSB- 2 -RSB- -- he articulated the French proverb deliberately . 
* `` Do n't see it that way , that 's the trouble . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` When in doubt , my dear fellow , do nothing . '' 
`` Well , good-by , my dear fellow ; remember that with all my heart I share your sorrow , and that for you I am not a Serene Highness , nor a prince , nor a commander in chief , but a father ! 
If you want anything come straight to me . 
Good-by , my dear boy . '' 
Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew , but before the latter had left the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his unfinished novel , Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis . 
Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was , but after that interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to the general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been entrusted . 
The more he realized the absence of all personal motive in that old man -- in whom there seemed to remain only the habit of passions , and in place of an intellect -LRB- grouping events and drawing conclusions -RRB- only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of events -- the more reassured he was that everything would be as it should . 
`` He will not bring in any plan of his own . 
He will not devise or undertake anything , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` but he will hear everything , remember everything , and put everything in its place . 
He will not hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful . 
He understands that there is something stronger and more important than his own will -- the inevitable course of events , and he can see them and grasp their significance , and seeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his personal wish directed to something else . 
And above all , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` one believes in him because he 's Russian , despite the novel by Genlis and the French proverbs , and because his voice shook when he said : ` What they have brought us to ! ' 
and had a sob in it when he said he would ` make them eat horseflesh ! ' '' 
On such feelings , more or less dimly shared by all , the unanimity and general approval were founded with which , despite court influences , the popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief was received . 
After the Emperor had left Moscow , life flowed on there in its usual course , and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor , hard to believe that Russia was really in danger and that the members of the English Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything for it . 
The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had displayed during the Emperor 's stay was the call for contributions of men and money , a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made assumed a legal , official form and became unavoidable . 
With the enemy 's approach to Moscow , the Moscovites ' view of their situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even more frivolous , as always happens with people who see a great danger approaching . 
At the approach of danger there are always two voices that speak with equal power in the human soul : one very reasonably tells a man to consider the nature of the danger and the means of escaping it ; the other , still more reasonably , says that it is too depressing and painful to think of the danger , since it is not in man 's power to foresee everything and avert the general course of events , and it is therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes , and to think about what is pleasant . 
In solitude a man generally listens to the first voice , but in society to the second . 
So it was now with the inhabitants of Moscow . 
It was long since people had been as gay in Moscow as that year . 
Rostopchin 's broadsheets , headed by woodcuts of a drink shop , a potman , and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin , `` who -- having been a militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub -- heard that Napoleon wished to come to Moscow , grew angry , abused the French in very bad language , came out of the drink shop , and , under the sign of the eagle , began to address the assembled people , '' were read and discussed , together with the latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin 's bouts rimes . 
In the corner room at the Club , members gathered to read these broadsheets , and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French , saying : `` They will swell up with Russian cabbage , burst with our buckwheat porridge , and choke themselves with cabbage soup . 
They are all dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork . '' 
Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar . 
It was said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen and even all foreigners from Moscow , and that there had been some spies and agents of Napoleon among them ; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchin 's witty remark on that occasion . 
The foreigners were deported to Nizhni by boat , and Rostopchin had said to them in French : `` Rentrez en vousmemes ; entrez dans la barque , et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon . '' 
* There was talk of all the government offices having been already removed from Moscow , and to this Shinshin 's witticism was added -- that for that alone Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon . 
It was said that Mamonov 's regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles , and that Bezukhov had spent even more on his , but that the best thing about Bezukhov 's action was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the head of his regiment without charging anything for the show . 
