Count Arakcheev 's anteroom had quite a special character . 
The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn for an audience showed embarrassment and servility ; the faces of those of higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness , covered by a mask of unconcern and ridicule of themselves , their situation , and the person for whom they were waiting . 
Some walked thoughtfully up and down , others whispered and laughed . 
Prince Andrew heard the nickname `` Sila Andreevich '' and the words , `` Uncle will give it to us hot , '' in reference to Count Arakcheev . 
One general -LRB- an important personage -RRB- , evidently feeling offended at having to wait so long , sat crossing and uncrossing his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself . 
But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all faces -- that of fear . 
Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant on duty to take in his name , but received an ironical look and was told that his turn would come in due course . 
After some others had been shown in and out of the minister 's room by the adjutant on duty , an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air was admitted at that terrible door . 
This officer 's audience lasted a long time . 
Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard from the other side of the door , and the officer -- with pale face and trembling lips -- came out and passed through the waiting room , clutching his head . 
After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on duty said in a whisper , `` To the right , at the window . '' 
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of forty with a long waist , a long closely cropped head , deep wrinkles , scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging red nose . 
Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him . 
`` What is your petition ? '' 
asked Arakcheev . 
`` I am not petitioning , your excellency , '' returned Prince Andrew quietly . 
Arakcheev 's eyes turned toward him . 
`` Sit down , '' said he . 
`` Prince Bolkonski ? '' 
`` I am not petitioning about anything . 
His Majesty the Emperor has deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me ... '' `` You see , my dear sir , I have read your project , '' interrupted Arakcheev , uttering only the first words amiably and then -- again without looking at Prince Andrew -- relapsing gradually into a tone of grumbling contempt . 
`` You are proposing new military laws ? 
There are many laws but no one to carry out the old ones . 
Nowadays everybody designs laws , it is easier writing than doing . '' 
`` I came at His Majesty the Emperor 's wish to learn from your excellency how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented , '' said Prince Andrew politely . 
`` I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the committee . 
I do not approve of it , '' said Arakcheev , rising and taking a paper from his writing table . 
`` Here ! '' 
and he handed it to Prince Andrew . 
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil , without capital letters , misspelled , and without punctuation : `` Unsoundly constructed because resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles of War needlessly deviating . '' 
`` To what committee has the memorandum been referred ? '' 
inquired Prince Andrew . 
`` To the Committee on Army Regulations , and I have recommended that your honor should be appointed a member , but without a salary . '' 
Prince Andrew smiled . 
`` I do n't want one . '' 
`` A member without salary , '' repeated Arakcheev . 
`` I have the honor ... Eh ! 
Call the next one ! 
Who else is there ? '' 
he shouted , bowing to Prince Andrew . 
While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances , particularly those he knew to be in power and whose aid he might need . 
In Petersburg he now experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle , when troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling circles where the future , on which the fate of millions depended , was being shaped . 
From the irritation of the older men , the curiosity of the uninitiated , the reserve of the initiated , the hurry and preoccupation of everyone , and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose existence he learned every day , he felt that now , in 1809 , here in Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation , the commander in chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know , but who was supposed to be a man of genius -- Speranski . 
And this movement of reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea , and Speranski its chief promoter , began to interest him so keenly that the question of the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his consciousness . 
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day . 
The reforming party cordially welcomed and courted him , the first place because he was reputed to be clever and very well read , and secondly because by liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal . 
The party of the old and dissatisfied , who censured the innovations , turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the reforms , simply because he was the son of his father . 
The feminine society world welcomed him gladly , because he was rich , distinguished , a good match , and almost a newcomer , with a halo of romance on account of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife . 
Besides this the general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had greatly improved during these last five years , having softened and grown more manly , lost his former affectation , pride , and contemptuous irony , and acquired the serenity that comes with years . 
People talked about him , were interested in him , and wanted to meet him . 
