We took Vienna , Berlin , Madrid , Naples , Rome , Warsaw , all the world 's capitals ... . 
We are feared , but we are loved . 
We are nice to know . 
And then the Emperor ... '' he began , but Pierre interrupted him . 
`` The Emperor , '' Pierre repeated , and his face suddenly became sad and embarrassed , `` is the Emperor ... ? '' 
`` The Emperor ? 
He is generosity , mercy , justice , order , genius - that 's what the Emperor is ! 
It is I , Ramballe , who tell you so ... . 
I assure you I was his enemy eight years ago . 
My father was an emigrant count ... . 
But that man has vanquished me . 
He has taken hold of me . 
I could not resist the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France . 
When I understood what he wanted -- when I saw that he was preparing a bed of laurels for us , you know , I said to myself : ` That is a monarch , ' and I devoted myself to him ! 
So there ! 
Oh yes , mon cher , he is the greatest man of the ages past or future . '' 
`` Is he in Moscow ? '' 
Pierre stammered with a guilty look . 
The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled . 
`` No , he will make his entry tomorrow , '' he replied , and continued his talk . 
Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at the gate and by Morel , who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussars had come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain 's horses were . 
This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did not understand what was said to them in French . 
The captain had their senior sergeant called in , and in a stern voice asked him to what regiment he belonged , who was his commanding officer , and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already occupied . 
The German who knew little French , answered the two first questions by giving the names of his regiment and of his commanding officer , but in reply to the third question which he did not understand said , introducing broken French into his own German , that he was the quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to occupy all the houses one after another . 
Pierre , who knew German , translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain 's reply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German . 
When he had understood what was said to him , the German submitted and took his men elsewhere . 
The captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in a loud voice . 
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as before , with his head in his hands . 
His face expressed suffering . 
He really was suffering at that moment . 
When the captain went out and he was left alone , suddenly he came to himself and realized the position he was in . 
It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him . 
Painful as that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment . 
He was tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness . 
The few glasses of wine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man had destroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in which he had spent the last few days and which was essential for the execution of his design . 
The pistol , dagger , and peasant coat were ready . 
Napoleon was to enter the town next day . 
Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and worthy action to slay the evildoer , but now he felt that he would not do it . 
He did not know why , but he felt a foreboding that he would not carry out his intention . 
He struggled against the confession of his weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his former gloomy frame of mind , concerning vengeance , killing , and self-sacrifice , had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first man he met . 
The captain returned to the room , limping slightly and whistling a tune . 
The Frenchman 's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled him . 
The tune he was whistling , his gait , and the gesture with which he twirled his mustache , all now seemed offensive . 
`` I will go away immediately . 
I wo n't say another word to him , '' thought Pierre . 
He thought this , but still sat in the same place . 
A strange feeling of weakness tied him to the spot ; he wished to get up and go away , but could not do so . 
The captain , on the other hand , seemed very cheerful . 
He paced up and down the room twice . 
His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he were smiling to himself at some amusing thought . 
