Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and , hearing what the officer had to say , took the papers from him without a word . 
`` You think he went off just by chance ? '' 
said a comrade , who was on the staff that evening , to the officer of the Horse Guards , referring to Ermolov . 
`` It was a trick . 
It was done on purpose to get Konovnitsyn into trouble . 
You 'll see what a mess there 'll be tomorrow . '' 
Next day the decrepit Kutuzov , having given orders to be called early , said his prayers , dressed , and , with an unpleasant consciousness of having to direct a battle he did not approve of , got into his caleche and drove from Letashovka -LRB- a village three and a half miles from Tarutino -RRB- to the place where the attacking columns were to meet . 
He sat in the caleche , dozing and waking up by turns , and listening for any sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun . 
But all was still quiet . 
A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning . 
On approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to water across the road along which he was driving . 
Kutuzov looked at them searchingly , stopped his carriage , and inquired what regiment they belonged to . 
They belonged to a column that should have been far in front and in ambush long before then . 
`` It may be a mistake , '' thought the old commander in chief . 
But a little further on he saw infantry regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers , only partly dressed , eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel . 
He sent for an officer . 
The officer reported that no order to advance had been received . 
`` How ! 
Not rec ... '' Kutuzov began , but checked himself immediately and sent for a senior officer . 
Getting out of his caleche , he waited with drooping head and breathing heavily , pacing silently up and down . 
When Eykhen , the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned , appeared , Kutuzov went purple in the face , not because that officer was to blame for the mistake , but because he was an object of sufficient importance for him to vent his wrath on . 
Trembling and panting the old man fell into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the ground , and he fell upon Eykhen , threatening him with his hands , shouting and loading him with gross abuse . 
Another man , Captain Brozin , who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame , suffered the same fate . 
`` What sort of another blackguard are you ? 
I 'll have you shot ! 
Scoundrels ! '' 
yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice , waving his arms and reeling . 
He was suffering physically . 
He , the commander in chief , a Serene Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had in Russia , to be placed in this position -- made the laughingstock of the whole army ! 
`` I need n't have been in such a hurry to pray about today , or have kept awake thinking everything over all night , '' thought he to himself . 
`` When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to mock me so ... and now ! '' 
He was in a state of physical suffering as if from corporal punishment , and could not avoid expressing it by cries of anger and distress . 
But his strength soon began to fail him , and looking about him , conscious of having said much that was amiss , he again got into his caleche and drove back in silence . 
His wrath , once expended , did not return , and blinking feebly he listened to excuses and self-justifications -LRB- Ermolov did not come to see him till the next day -RRB- and to the insistence of Bennigsen , Konovnitsyn , and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed next day . 
And once more Kutuzov had to consent . 
Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening and advanced during the night . 
It was an autumn night with dark purple clouds , but no rain . 
The ground was damp but not muddy , and the troops advanced noiselessly , only occasionally a jingling of the artillery could be faintly heard . 
The men were forbidden to talk out loud , to smoke their pipes , or to strike a light , and they tried to prevent their horses neighing . 
The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm and they marched gaily . 
Some columns , supposing they had reached their destination , halted , piled arms , and settled down on the cold ground , but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where they evidently should not have been . 
Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks -LRB- the least important detachment of all -RRB- got to his appointed place at the right time . 
This detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest , on the path leading from the village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk . 
Toward dawn , Count Orlov-Denisov , who had dozed off , was awakened by a deserter from the French army being brought to him . 
This was a Polish sergeant of Poniatowski 's corps , who explained in Polish that he had come over because he had been slighted in the service : that he ought long ago to have been made an officer , that he was braver than any of them , and so he had left them and wished to pay them out . 
He said that Murat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were , and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would capture him alive . 
Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers . 
The offer was too tempting to be refused . 
Everyone volunteered to go and everybody advised making the attempt . 
After much disputing and arguing , Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with the Polish sergeant . 
