he added . 
While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their tea talked of the price of corn , the crops , and the good weather for harvesting . 
`` Well , it seems to be getting quieter , '' remarked Ferapontov , finishing his third cup of tea and getting up . 
`` Ours must have got the best of it . 
The orders were not to let them in . 
So we 're in force , it seems ... . 
They say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day . '' 
Alpatych collected his parcels , handed them to the coachman who had come in , and settled up with the innkeeper . 
The noise of wheels , hoofs , and bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out . 
It was by now late in the afternoon . 
Half the street was in shadow , the other half brightly lit by the sun . 
Alpatych looked out of the window and went to the door . 
Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling and thud was heard , followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull roar that set the windows rattling . 
He went out into the street : two men were running past toward the bridge . 
From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town . 
But these sounds were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants . 
The town was being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered up after four o'clock . 
The people did not at once realize the meaning of this bombardment . 
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused curiosity . 
Ferapontov 's wife , who till then had not ceased wailing under the shed , became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate , listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people . 
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate . 
With lively curiosity everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over their heads . 
Several people came round the corner talking eagerly . 
`` What force ! '' 
remarked one . 
`` Knocked the roof and ceiling all to splinters ! '' 
`` Routed up the earth like a pig , '' said another . 
`` That 's grand , it bucks one up ! '' 
laughed the first . 
`` Lucky you jumped aside , or it would have wiped you out ! '' 
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen on a house close to them . 
Meanwhile still more projectiles , now with the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball , now with the agreeable intermittent whistle of a shell , flew over people 's heads incessantly , but not one fell close by , they all flew over . 
Alpatych was getting into his trap . 
The innkeeper stood at the gate . 
`` What are you staring at ? '' 
he shouted to the cook , who in her red skirt , with sleeves rolled up , swinging her bare elbows , had stepped to the corner to listen to what was being said . 
`` What marvels ! '' 
she exclaimed , but hearing her master 's voice she turned back , pulling down her tucked-up skirt . 
Once more something whistled , but this time quite close , swooping downwards like a little bird ; a flame flashed in the middle of the street , something exploded , and the street was shrouded in smoke . 
`` Scoundrel , what are you doing ? '' 
shouted the innkeeper , rushing to the cook . 
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different sides , the frightened baby began to cry , and people crowded silently with pale faces round the cook . 
The loudest sound in that crowd was her wailing . 
`` Oh-h-h ! 
Dear souls , dear kind souls ! 
Do n't let me die ! 
My good souls ! 
... '' Five minutes later no one remained in the street . 
The cook , with her thigh broken by a shell splinter , had been carried into the kitchen . 
Alpatych , his coachman , Ferapontov 's wife and children and the house porter were all sitting in the cellar , listening . 
