`` Hey , Cossack , my horse ! '' 
he said . 
`` Now , then , you there ! 
get out of the way ! 
Make way ! '' 
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse , and shouting continually he moved on . 
The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way for him , but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg , and those nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still harder from behind . 
`` Nesvitski , Nesvitski ! 
you numskull ! '' 
came a hoarse voice from behind him . 
Nesvitski looked round and saw , some fifteen paces away but separated by the living mass of moving infantry , Vaska Denisov , red and shaggy , with his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily over his shoulder . 
`` Tell these devils , these fiends , to let me pass ! '' 
shouted Denisov evidently in a fit of rage , his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small bare hand as red as his face . 
`` Ah , Vaska ! '' 
joyfully replied Nesvitski . 
`` What 's up with you ? '' 
`` The squadwon ca n't pass , '' shouted Vaska Denisov , showing his white teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab , which twitched its ears as the bayonets touched it , and snorted , spurting white foam from his bit , tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs , and apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let him . 
`` What is this ? 
They 're like sheep ! 
Just like sheep ! 
Out of the way ! 
... Let us pass ! 
... Stop there , you devil with the cart ! 
I 'll hack you with my saber ! '' 
he shouted , actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and flourishing it . 
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces , and Denisov joined Nesvitski . 
`` How 's it you 're not drunk today ? '' 
said Nesvitski when the other had ridden up to him . 
`` They do n't even give one time to dwink ! '' 
answered Vaska Denisov . 
`` They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day . 
If they mean to fight , let 's fight . 
But the devil knows what this is . '' 
`` What a dandy you are today ! '' 
said Nesvitski , looking at Denisov 's new cloak and saddlecloth . 
Denisov smiled , took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused a smell of perfume , and put it to Nesvitski 's nose . 
`` Of course . 
I 'm going into action ! 
I 've shaved , bwushed my teeth , and scented myself . '' 
The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack , and the determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted frantically , had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry . 
Beside the bridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order , and having done this he rode back . 
Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge . 
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the ground , eager to rejoin its fellows , he watched his squadron draw nearer . 
Then the clang of hoofs , as of several horses galloping , resounded on the planks of the bridge , and the squadron , officers in front and men four abreast , spread across the bridge and began to emerge on his side of it . 
The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will , estrangement , and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually encounter one another at the clean , smart hussars who moved past them in regular order . 
`` Smart lads ! 
Only fit for a fair ! '' 
said one . 
`` What good are they ? 
They 're led about just for show ! '' 
