The hairs tied in the knot hurt Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile . 
His huge figure , with arms hanging down and with a puckered , though smiling face , moved after Willarski with uncertain , timid steps . 
Having led him about ten paces , Willarski stopped . 
`` Whatever happens to you , '' he said , `` you must bear it all manfully if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood . '' 
-LRB- Pierre nodded affirmatively . -RRB- 
`` When you hear a knock at the door , you will uncover your eyes , '' added Willarski . 
`` I wish you courage and success , '' and , pressing Pierre 's hand , he went out . 
Left alone , Pierre went on smiling in the same way . 
Once or twice he shrugged his and raised his hand to the kerchief , as if wishing to take it off , but let it drop again . 
The five minutes spent with his eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour . 
His arms felt numb , his legs almost gave way , it seemed to him that he was tired out . 
He experienced a variety of most complex sensations . 
He felt afraid of what would happen to him and still more afraid of showing his fear . 
He felt curious to know what was going to happen and what would be revealed to him ; but most of all , he felt joyful that the moment had come when he would at last start on that path of regeneration and on the actively virtuous life of which he had been dreaming since he met Joseph Alexeevich . 
Loud knocks were heard at the door . 
Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him . 
The room was in black darkness , only a small lamp was burning inside something white . 
Pierre went nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book . 
The book was the Gospel , and the white thing with the lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and teeth . 
After reading the first words of the Gospel : `` In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God , '' Pierre went round the table and saw a large open box filled with something . 
It was a coffin with bones inside . 
He was not at all surprised by what he saw . 
Hoping to enter on an entirely new life quite unlike the old one , he expected everything to be unusual , even more unusual than what he was seeing . 
A skull , a coffin , the Gospel -- it seemed to him that he had expected all this and even more . 
Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around . 
`` God , death , love , the brotherhood of man , '' he kept saying to himself , associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas . 
The door opened and someone came in . 
By the dim light , to which Pierre had already become accustomed , he saw rather short man . 
Having evidently come from the light into the darkness , the man paused , then moved with cautious steps toward the table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands . 
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and part of his legs ; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a high white ruffle , outlining his rather long face which was lit up from below . 
`` For what have you come hither ? '' 
asked the newcomer , turning in Pierre 's direction at a slight rustle made by the latter . 
`` Why have you , who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light , come here ? 
What do you seek from us ? 
Wisdom , virtue , enlightenment ? '' 
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in , Pierre felt a sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at confession ; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete stranger , yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man . 
With bated breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor -LRB- by which name the brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was known -RRB- . 
Drawing nearer , he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew , Smolyaninov , and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an acquaintance -- he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor . 
For a long time he could not utter a word , so that the Rhetor had to repeat his question . 
`` Yes ... I. . . 
I. . . 
desire regeneration , '' Pierre uttered with difficulty . 
`` Very well , '' said Smolyaninov , and went on at once : `` Have you any idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim ? '' 
said he quietly and quickly . 
`` I. . . 
hope ... for guidance ... help ... in regeneration , '' said Pierre , with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in Russian . 
`` What is your conception of Freemasonry ? '' 
`` I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who have virtuous aims , '' said Pierre , feeling ashamed of the inadequacy of his words for the solemnity of the moment , as he spoke . 
`` I imagine ... '' `` Good ! '' 
said the Rhetor quickly , apparently satisfied with this answer . 
