Napoleon advanced farther and we retired , thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction . 
The day after his son had left , Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary to come to his study . 
`` Well ? 
Are you satisfied now ? '' 
said he . 
`` You 've made me quarrel with my son ! 
Satisfied , are you ? 
That 's all you wanted ! 
Satisfied ? 
... It hurts me , it hurts . 
I 'm old and weak and this is what you wanted . 
Well then , gloat over it ! 
Gloat over it ! '' 
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week . 
He was ill and did not leave his study . 
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the old prince not only excluded her from his room , but did not admit Mademoiselle Bourienne either . 
Tikhon alone attended him . 
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way of life , devoting himself with special activity to building operations and the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
His looks and cold tone to his daughter seemed to say : `` There , you see ? 
You plotted against me , you lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him , but you see I need neither her nor you ! '' 
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas , watching his lessons , teaching him Russian and music herself , and talking to Dessalles ; the rest of the day she spent over her books , with her old nurse , or with `` God 's folk '' who sometimes came by the back door to see her . 
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars . 
She feared for her brother who was in it , was horrified by and amazed at the strange cruelty that impels men to kill one another , but she did not understand the significance of this war , which seemed to her like all previous wars . 
She did not realize the significance of this war , though Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interested in its progress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her , and though the `` God 's folk '' who came to see her reported , in their own way , the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist , and though Julie -LRB- now Princess Drubetskaya -RRB- , who had resumed correspondence with her , wrote patriotic letters from Moscow . 
`` I write you in Russian , my good friend , '' wrote Julie in her Frenchified Russian , `` because I have a detestation for all the French , and the same for their language which I can not support to hear spoken ... . 
We in Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor . 
`` My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns , but the news which I have inspires me yet more . 
`` You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski , embracing his two sons and saying : ' I will perish with them but we will not be shaken ! ' 
And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we , we were unshakable . 
We pass the time as we can , but in war as in war ! 
The princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me , and we , unhappy widows of live men , make beautiful conversations over our charpie , only you , my friend , are missing ... '' and so on . 
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of this war was that the old prince never spoke of it , did not recognize it , and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner . 
The prince 's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary unhesitatingly believed him . 
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated . 
He planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic serfs . 
The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that he slept very little and , instead of sleeping in his study as usual , changed his sleeping place every day . 
One day he would order his camp bed to be set up in the glass gallery , another day he remained on the couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without undressing , while -- instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne -- a serf boy read to him . 
Then again he would spend a night in the dining room . 
On August 1 , a second letter was received from Prince Andrew . 
In his first letter which came soon after he had left home , Prince Andrew had dutifully asked his father 's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself to say and begged to be restored to his favor . 
To this letter the old prince had replied affectionately , and from that time had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance . 
Prince Andrew 's second letter , written near Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town , gave a brief account of the whole campaign , enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and forecasts as to the further progress of the war . 
In this letter Prince Andrew pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills , so near the theater of war and on the army 's direct line of march , and advised him to move to Moscow . 
At dinner that day , on Dessalles ' mentioning that the French were said to have already entered Vitebsk , the old prince remembered his son 's letter . 
`` There was a letter from Prince Andrew today , '' he said to Princess Mary -- `` Have n't you read it ? '' 
`` No , Father , '' she replied in a frightened voice . 
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had arrived . 
`` He writes about this war , '' said the prince , with the ironic smile that had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war . 
`` That must be very interesting , '' said Dessalles . 
`` Prince Andrew is in a position to know ... '' `` Oh , very interesting ! '' 
