The whole day had been hot . 
Somewhere a storm was gathering , but only a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly , sprinkling the road and the sappy leaves . 
The left side of the forest was dark in the shade , the right side glittered in the sunlight , wet and shiny and scarcely swayed by the breeze . 
Everything was in blossom , the nightingales trilled , and their voices reverberated now near , now far away . 
`` Yes , here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed , '' thought Prince Andrew . 
`` But where is it ? '' 
he again wondered , gazing at the left side of the road , and without recognizing it he looked with admiration at the very oak he sought . 
The old oak , quite transfigured , spreading out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage , stood rapt and slightly trembling in the rays of the evening sun . 
Neither gnarled fingers nor old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now . 
Through the hard century-old bark , even where there were no twigs , leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran could have produced . 
`` Yes , it is the same oak , '' thought Prince Andrew , and all at once he was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal . 
All the best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory . 
Austerlitz with the lofty heavens , his wife 's dead reproachful face , Pierre at the ferry , that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night , and that night itself and the moon , and ... . 
all this rushed suddenly to his mind . 
`` No , life is not over at thirty-one ! '' 
Prince Andrew suddenly decided finally and decisively . 
`` It is not enough for me to know what I have in me -- everyone must know it : Pierre , and that young girl who wanted to fly away into the sky , everyone must know me , so that my life may not be lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it , but so that it may be reflected in them all , and they and I may live in harmony ! '' 
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn and found all sorts of reasons for this decision . 
A whole serics of sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him to go to Petersburg , and even to re-enter the service , kept springing up in his mind . 
He could not now understand how he could ever even have doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life , just as a month before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country could ever enter his head . 
It now seemed clear to him that all his experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of work and again played an active part in life . 
He did not even remember how formerly , on the strength of similar wretched logical arguments , it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if he now , after the lessons he had had in life , allowed himself to believe in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness or love . 
Now reason suggested quite the opposite . 
After that journey to Ryazan he found the country dull ; his former pursuits no longer interested him , and often when sitting alone in his study he got up , went to the mirror , and gazed a long time at his own face . 
Then he would turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise , who with hair curled a la grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame . 
She did not now say those former terrible words to him , but looked simply , merrily , and inquisitively at him . 
And Prince Andrew , crossing his arms behind him , long paced the room , now frowning , now smiling , as he reflected on those irrational , inexpressible thoughts , secret as a crime , which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre , with fame , with the girl at the window , the oak , and woman 's beauty and love . 
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly cold , stern , and above all unpleasantly logical . 
`` My dear , '' Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say , `` little Nicholas ca n't go out today , it 's very cold . '' 
`` If it were hot , '' Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly to his sister , `` he could go out in his smock , but as it is cold he must wear warm clothes , which were designed for that purpose . 
That is what follows from the fact that it is cold ; and not that a child who needs fresh air should remain at home , '' he would add with extreme logic , as if punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirred within him . 
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries men up . 
Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August , 1809 . 
It was the time when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy . 
That same August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche , injured his leg , and remained three weeks at Peterhof , receiving Speranski every day and no one else . 
At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that so agitated society -- abolishing court ranks and introducing examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State Councilor -- and not merely these but a whole state constitution , intended to change the existing order of government in Russia : legal , administrative , and financial , from the Council of State down to the district tribunals . 
Now those vague liberal dreams with which the Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne , and which he had tried to put into effect with the aid of his associates , Czartoryski , Novosiltsev , Kochubey , and Strogonov -- whom he himself in jest had called his Comite de salut public -- were taking shape and being realized . 
Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side , and Arakcheev on the military . 
Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew , as a gentleman of the chamber , presented himself at court and at a levee . 
The Emperor , though he met him twice , did not favor him with a single word . 
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality generally , and in the cold , repellent glance the Emperor gave him , he now found further confirmation of this surmise . 
The courtiers explained the Emperor 's neglect of him by His Majesty 's displeasure at Bolkonski 's not having served since 1805 . 
`` I know myself that one can not help one 's sympathies and antipathies , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` so it will not do to present my proposal for the reform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally , but the project will speak for itself . '' 
He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal , a friend of his father 's . 
The field marshal made an appointment to see him , received him graciously , and promised to inform the Emperor . 
A few days later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of War , Count Arakcheev . 
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev 's waiting room at nine in the morning . 
He did not know Arakcheev personally , had never seen him , and all he had heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man . 
`` He is Minister of War , a man trusted by the Emperor , and I need not concern myself about his personal qualities : he has been commissioned to consider my project , so he alone can get it adopted , '' thought Prince Andrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant people in Count Arakcheev 's waiting room . 
During his service , chiefly as an adjutant , Prince Andrew had seen the anterooms of many important men , and the different types of such rooms were well known to him . 
