I only pray God that something may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch 's men , and I will act as they did . 
I will do better . 
Everyone shall know me , love me , and be delighted with me ! '' 
And suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and he began to cry . 
`` Are you ill ? '' 
he heard Dessalles ' voice asking . 
`` No , '' answered Nicholas , and lay back on his pillow . 
`` He is good and kind and I am fond of him ! '' 
he thought of Dessalles . 
`` But Uncle Pierre ! 
Oh , what a wonderful man he is ! 
And my father ? 
Oh , Father , Father ! 
Yes , I will do something with which even he would be satisfied ... '' SECOND EPILOGUE History is the life of nations and of humanity . 
To seize and put into words , to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single nation , appears impossible . 
The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe and seize the apparently elusive -- the life of a people . 
They described the activity of individuals who ruled the people , and regarded the activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation . 
The question : how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by what was the will of these individuals themselves guided ? 
the ancients met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of a chosen man , and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish ends that were predestined . 
For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct participation of the Deity in human affairs . 
Modern history , in theory , rejects both these principles . 
It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man 's subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations are led , modern history should study not the manifestations of power but the causes that produce it . 
But modern history has not done this . 
Having in theory rejected the view held by the ancients , it still follows them in practice . 
Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by the will of God , modern history has given us either heroes endowed with extraordinary , superhuman capacities , or simply men of very various kinds , from monarchs to journalists , who lead the masses . 
Instead of the former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish , Greek , or Roman nations , which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of humanity , modern history has postulated its own aims - the welfare of the French , German , or English people , or , in its highest abstraction , the welfare and civilization of humanity in general , by which is usually meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a large continent . 
Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without replacing them by a new conception , and the logic of the situation has obliged the historians , after they had apparently rejected the divine authority of the kings and the `` fate '' of the ancients , to reach the same conclusion by another road , that is , to recognize -LRB- 1 -RRB- nations guided by individual men , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the existence of a known aim to which these nations and humanity at large are tending . 
At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon to Buckle , despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of their outlooks , lie those two old , unavoidable assumptions . 
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals who in his opinion have directed humanity -LRB- one historian considers only monarchs , generals , and ministers as being such men , while another includes also orators , learned men , reformers , philosophers , and poets -RRB- . 
Secondly , it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led is known to the historians : to one of them this goal is the greatness of the Roman , Spanish , or French realm ; to another it is liberty , equality , and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called Europe . 
In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris ; it grows , spreads , and is expressed by a movement of peoples from west to east . 
Several times it moves eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward . 
In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit , Moscow , and then , with remarkable symmetry , a countermovement occurs from east to west , attracting to it , as the first movement had done , the nations of middle Europe . 
The counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the west -- Paris -- and subsides . 
During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left untilled , houses were burned , trade changed its direction , millions of men migrated , were impoverished , or were enriched , and millions of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew one another . 
What does all this mean ? 
Why did it happen ? 
What made those people burn houses and slay their fellow men ? 
What were the causes of these events ? 
What force made men act so ? 
These are the instinctive , plain , and most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the monuments and tradition of that period . 
For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the science of history , whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know themselves . 
If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have said that God , to reward or punish his people , gave Napoleon power and directed his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends , and that reply , would have been clear and complete . 
One might believe or disbelieve in the divine significance of Napoleon , but for anyone believing in it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that period , nor would there have been any contradictions . 
But modern history can not give that reply . 
Science does not admit the conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deity in human affairs , and therefore history ought to give other answers . 
Modern history replying to these questions says : you want to know what this movement means , what caused it , and what force produced these events ? 
Then listen : `` Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man ; he had such and such mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly . 
His descendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly . 
And they had such and such favorites and such and such mistresses . 
