Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperor honored by his presence . 
Kutuzov had received the Order of St. George of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors , but everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him . 
The proprieties were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example , but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and good-for-nothing . 
When Kutuzov , conforming to a custom of Catherine 's day , ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at the Emperor 's feet on his entering the ballroom , the Emperor made a wry face and muttered something in which some people caught the words , `` the old comedian . '' 
The Emperor 's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilna by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand the importance of the coming campaign . 
When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officers assembled about him : `` You have not only saved Russia , you have saved Europe ! '' 
they all understood that the war was not ended . 
Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia , but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia had gained . 
He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levying fresh troops , spoke of the hardships already endured by the people , of the possibility of failure and so forth . 
This being the field marshal 's frame of mind he was naturally regarded as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war . 
To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man , the natural method was to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at the beginning of the Russian campaign -- to transfer the authority to the Emperor himself , thus cutting the ground from under the commander in chief 's feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of the change . 
With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its real strength removed and transferred to the Emperor . 
Toll , Konovnitsyn , and Ermolov received fresh appointments . 
Everyone spoke loudly of the field marshal 's great weakness and failing health . 
His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to another . 
And in fact his health was poor . 
So naturally , simply , and gradually -- just as he had come from Turkey to the Treasury in Petersburg to recruit the militia , and then to the army when he was needed there -- now when his part was played out , Kutuzov 's place was taken by a new and necessary performer . 
The war 1812 , besides its national significance dear to every Russian heart , was now to assume another , a European , significance . 
The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by a movement of peoples from east to west , and for this fresh war another leader was necessary , having qualities and views differing from Kutuzov 's and animated by different motives . 
Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov had been for the salvation and glory of Russia . 
Kutuzov did not understand what Europe , the balance of power , or Napoleon meant . 
He could not understand it . 
For the representative of the Russian people , after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia had been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory , there was nothing left to do as a Russian . 
Nothing remained for the representative of the national war but to die , and Kutuzov died . 
As generally happens , Pierre did not feel the full effects of the physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after they were over . 
After his liberation he reached Orel , and on the third day there , when preparing to go to Kiev , he fell ill and was laid up for three months . 
He had what the doctors termed `` bilious fever . '' 
But despite the fact that the doctors treated him , bled him , and gave him medicines to drink , he recovered . 
Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre 's mind by all that happened to him from the time of his rescue till his illness . 
He remembered only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy , internal physical distress , and pains in his feet and side . 
He remembered a general impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him , he also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses , and above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time . 
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov . 
That same day he had learned that Prince Andrew , after surviving the battle of Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs ' house at Yaroslavl , and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene 's death , supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before . 
All this at the time seemed merely strange to Pierre : he felt he could not grasp its significance . 
Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as possible from places where people were killing one another , to some peaceful refuge where he could recover himself , rest , and think over all the strange new facts he had learned ; but on reaching Orel he immediately fell ill . 
When he came to himself after his illness he saw in attendance on him two of his servants , Terenty and Vaska , who had come from Moscow ; and also his cousin the eldest princess , who had been living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness had come to look after him . 
It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost the impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere tomorrow , that no one would deprive him of his warm bed , and that he would be sure to get his dinner , tea , and supper . 
But for a long time in his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity . 
In the same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been told after his rescue , about the death of Prince Andrew , the death of his wife , and the destruction of the French . 
A joyous feeling of freedom -- that complete inalienable freedom natural to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside Moscow -- filled Pierre 's soul during his convalescence . 
He was surprised to find that this inner freedom , which was independent of external conditions , now had as it were an additional setting of external liberty . 
He was alone in a strange town , without acquaintances . 
No one demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere . 
He had all he wanted : the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no longer there , since she was no more . 
`` Oh , how good ! 
How splendid ! '' 
said he to himself when a cleanly laid table was moved up to him with savory beef tea , or when he lay down for the night on a soft clean bed , or when he remembered that the French had gone and that his wife was no more . 
`` Oh , how good , how splendid ! '' 
And by old habit he asked himself the question : `` Well , and what then ? 
What am I going to do ? '' 
