` Yes , ' cry the pastors and the judges and philanthropic ladies . 
` This is the happiest day of your life , for you are going to the Lord ! ' 
They all walk or drive to the scaffold in procession behind the prison van . 
At the scaffold they call to Richard : ` Die , brother , die in the Lord , for even thou hast found grace ! ' 
And so , covered with his brothers ' kisses , Richard is dragged on to the scaffold , and led to the guillotine . 
And they chopped off his head in brotherly fashion , because he had found grace . 
Yes , that 's characteristic . 
That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists of aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations , and has been distributed gratis for the enlightenment of the people . 
The case of Richard is interesting because it 's national . 
Though to us it 's absurd to cut off a man 's head , because he has become our brother and has found grace , yet we have our own speciality , which is all but worse . 
Our historical pastime is the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain . 
There are lines in Nekrassov describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes , ` on its meek eyes , ' everyone must have seen it . 
It 's peculiarly Russian . 
He describes how a feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and can not move . 
The peasant beats it , beats it savagely , beats it at last not knowing what he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty , thrashes it mercilessly over and over again . 
` However weak you are , you must pull , if you die for it . ' 
The nag strains , and then he begins lashing the poor defenceless creature on its weeping , on its ` meek eyes . ' 
The frantic beast tugs and draws the load , trembling all over , gasping for breath , moving sideways , with a sort of unnatural spasmodic action - it 's awful in Nekrassov . 
But that only a horse , and God has horses to be beaten . 
So the Tatars have taught us , and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it . 
But men , too , can be beaten . 
A well-educated , cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own child with a birch-rod , a girl of seven . 
I have an exact account of it . 
The papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs . 
` It stings more , ' said he , and so be began stinging his daughter . 
I know for a fact there are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality , to literal sensuality , which increases progressively at every blow they inflict . 
They beat for a minute , for five minutes , for ten minutes , more often and more savagely . 
The child screams . 
At last the child can not scream , it gasps , ` Daddy daddy ! ' 
By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was brought into court . 
A counsel is engaged . 
The Russian people have long called a barrister ' a conscience for hire . ' 
The counsel protests in his client 's defence . 
` It 's such a simple thing , ' he says , ` an everyday domestic event . 
A father corrects his child . 
To our shame be it said , it is brought into court . ' 
The jury , convinced by him , give a favourable verdict . 
The public roars with delight that the torturer is acquitted . 
Ah , pity I was n't there ! 
I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honour ! 
Charming pictures . 
`` But I 've still better things about children . 
I 've collected a great , great deal about Russian children , Alyosha . 
There was a little girl of five who was hated by her father and mother , ` most worthy and respectable people , of good education and breeding . ' 
You see , I must repeat again , it is a peculiar characteristic of many people , this love of torturing children , and children only . 
To all other types of humanity these torturers behave mildly and benevolently , like cultivated and humane Europeans ; but they are very fond of tormenting children , even fond of children themselves in that sense . 
it 's just their defencelessness that tempts the tormentor , just the angelic confidence of the child who has no refuge and no appeal , that sets his vile blood on fire . 
In every man , of course , a demon lies hidden - the demon of rage , the demon of lustful heat at the screams of the tortured victim , the demon of lawlessness let off the chain , the demon of diseases that follow on vice , gout , kidney disease , and so on . 
`` This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by those cultivated parents . 
They beat her , thrashed her , kicked her for no reason till her body was one bruise . 
Then , they went to greater refinements of cruelty - shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy , and because she did n't ask to be taken up at night -LRB- as though a child of five sleeping its angelic , sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask -RRB- , they smeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement , and it was her mother , her mother did this . 
And that mother could sleep , hearing the poor child 's groans ! 
Can you understand why a little creature , who ca n't even understand what 's done to her , should beat her little aching heart with her tiny fist in the dark and the cold , and weep her meek unresentful tears to dear , kind God to protect her ? 
Do you understand that , friend and brother , you pious and humble novice ? 
Do you understand why this infamy must be and is permitted ? 
Without it , I am told , man could not have existed on earth , for he could not have known good and evil . 
Why should he know that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much ? 
Why , the whole world of knowledge is not worth that child 's prayer to dear , kind God ' ! 
I say nothing of the sufferings of grown-up people , they have eaten the apple , damn them , and the devil take them all ! 
But these little ones ! 
I am making you suffer , Alyosha , you are not yourself . 
I 'll leave off if you like . '' 
`` Nevermind . 
I want to suffer too , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` One picture , only one more , because it 's so curious , so characteristic , and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities . 
I 've forgotten the name . 
I must look it up . 
It was in the darkest days of serfdom at the beginning of the century , and long live the Liberator of the People ! 
There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections , the owner of great estates , one of those men - somewhat exceptional , I believe , even then - who , retiring from the service into a life of leisure , are convinced that they 've earned absolute power over the lives of their subjects . 
There were such men then . 
So our general , settled on his property of two thousand souls , lives in pomp , and domineers over his poor neighbours as though they were dependents and buffoons . 
He has kennels of hundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog-boys - all mounted , and in uniform . 
One day a serf-boy , a little child of eight , threw a stone in play and hurt the paw of the general 's favourite hound . 
` Why is my favourite dog lame ? ' 
He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog 's paw . 
` So you did it . ' 
The general looked the child up and down . 
` Take him . ' 
He was taken - taken from his mother and kept shut up all night . 
Early that morning the general comes out on horseback , with the hounds , his dependents , dog-boys , and huntsmen , all mounted around him in full hunting parade . 
The servants are summoned for their edification , and in front of them all stands the mother of the child . 
The child is brought from the lock-up . 
It 's a gloomy , cold , foggy , autumn day , a capital day for hunting . 
The general orders the child to be undressed ; the child is stripped naked . 
He shivers , numb with terror , not daring to cry ... ` Make him run , ' commands the general . 
` Run ! 
run ! ' 
shout the dog-boys . 
The boy runs ... ` At him ! ' 
yells the general , and he sets the whole pack of hounds on the child . 
The hounds catch him , and tear him to pieces before his mother 's eyes ! 
... I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable of administering his estates . 
Well - what did he deserve ? 
To be shot ? 
To be shot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings ? 
Speak , Alyosha ! 
`` To be shot , '' murmured Alyosha , lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale , twisted smile . 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan delighted . 
`` If even you say so ... You 're a pretty monk ! 
So there is a little devil sitting in your heart , Alyosha Karamazov ! '' 
`` What I said was absurd , but - '' `` That 's just the point , that ` but ' ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Let me tell you , novice , that the absurd is only too necessary on earth . 
The world stands on absurdities , and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without them . 
We know what we know ! '' 
`` What do you know ? '' 
`` I understand nothing , '' Ivan went on , as though in delirium . 
`` I do n't want to understand anything now . 
I want to stick to the fact . 
I made up my mind long ago not to understand . 
If I try to understand anything , I shall be false to the fact , and I have determined to stick to the fact . '' 
`` Why are you trying me ? '' 
Alyosha cried , with sudden distress . 
`` Will you say what you mean at last ? '' 
`` Of course , I will ; that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
You are dear to me , I do n't want to let you go , and I wo n't give you up to your Zossima . '' 
Ivan for a minute was silent , his face became all at once very sad . 
`` Listen ! 
I took the case of children only to make my case clearer . 
Of the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to its centre , I will say nothing . 
I have narrowed my subject on purpose . 
I am a bug , and I recognise in all humility that I can not understand why the world is arranged as it is . 
Men are themselves to blame , I suppose ; they were given paradise , they wanted freedom , and stole fire from heaven , though they knew they would become unhappy , so there is no need to pity them . 
With my pitiful , earthly , Euclidian understanding , all I know is that there is suffering and that there are none guilty ; that cause follows effect , simply and directly ; that everything flows and finds its level - but that 's only Euclidian nonsense , I know that , and I ca n't consent to live by it ! 
What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect simply and directly , and that I know it ? 
- I must have justice , or I will destroy myself . 
And not justice in some remote infinite time and space , but here on earth , and that I could see myself . 
I have believed in it . 
I want to see it , and if I am dead by then , let me rise again , for if it all happens without me , it will be too unfair . 
Surely I have n't suffered simply that I , my crimes and my sufferings , may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else . 
I want to see with my own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer . 
I want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for . 
All the religions of the world are built on this longing , and I am a believer . 
But then there are the children , and what am I to do about them ? 
That 's a question I ca n't answer . 
For the hundredth time I repeat , there are numbers of questions , but I 've only taken the children , because in their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear . 
Listen ! 
If all must suffer to pay for the eternal harmony , what have children to do with it , tell me , please ? 
It 's beyond all comprehension why they should suffer , and why they should pay for the harmony . 
Why should they , too , furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future ? 
I understand solidarity in sin among men . 
I understand solidarity in retribution , too ; but there can be no such solidarity with children . 
And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for all their fathers ' crimes , such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension . 
Some jester will say , perhaps , that the child would have grown up and have sinned , but you see he did n't grow up , he was torn to pieces by the dogs , at eight years old . 
Oh , Alyosha , I am not blaspheming ! 
I understand , of course , what an upheaval of the universe it will be when everything in heaven and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud : ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed . ' 
When the mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to the dogs , and all three cry aloud with tears , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
then , of course , the crown of knowledge will be reached and all will be made clear . 
But what pulls me up here is that I ca n't accept that harmony . 
And while I am on earth , I make haste to take my own measures . 
You see , Alyosha , perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that moment , or rise again to see it , I , too , perhaps , may cry aloud with the rest , looking at the mother embracing the child 's torturer , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
but I do n't want to cry aloud then . 
While there is still time , I hasten to protect myself , and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether . 
It 's not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse , with its unexpiated tears to ` dear , kind God ' ! 
It 's not worth it , because those tears are unatoned for . 
They must be atoned for , or there can be no harmony . 
But how ? 
How are you going to atone for them ? 
Is it possible ? 
By their being avenged ? 
But what do I care for avenging them ? 
What do I care for a hell for oppressors ? 
What good can hell do , since those children have already been tortured ? 
And what becomes of harmony , if there is hell ? 
I want to forgive . 
I want to embrace . 
I do n't want more suffering . 
And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth , then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price . 
I do n't want the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs ! 
She dare not forgive him ! 
Let her forgive him for herself , if she will , let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother 's heart . 
But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive ; she dare not forgive the torturer , even if the child were to forgive him ! 
And if that is so , if they dare not forgive , what becomes of harmony ? 
Is there in the whole world a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
I do n't want harmony . 
From love for humanity I do n't want it . 
I would rather be left with the unavenged suffering . 
I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation , even if I were wrong . 
Besides , too high a price is asked for harmony ; it 's beyond our means to pay so much to enter on it . 
And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket , and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible . 
And that I am doing . 
It 's not God that I do n't accept , Alyosha , only I most respectfully return him the ticket . '' 
`` That 's rebellion , '' murmered Alyosha , looking down . 
`` Rebellion ? 
I am sorry you call it that , '' said Ivan earnestly . 
`` One can hardly live in rebellion , and I want to live . 
Tell me yourself , I challenge your answer . 
Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end , giving them peace and rest at last , but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature - that baby beating its breast with its fist , for instance - and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears , would you consent to be the architect on those conditions ? 
Tell me , and tell the truth . '' 
`` No , I would n't consent , '' said Alyosha softly . 
`` And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood of a little victim ? 
And accepting it would remain happy for ever ? '' 
`` No , I ca n't admit it . 
Brother , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with flashing eyes , `` you said just now , is there a being in the whole world who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
But there is a Being and He can forgive everything , all and for all , because He gave His innocent blood for all and everything . 
You have forgotten Him , and on Him is built the edifice , and it is to Him they cry aloud , ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed ! ' 
`` Ah ! 
the One without sin and His blood ! 
No , I have not forgotten Him ; on the contrary I 've been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring Him in before , for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the foreground . 
Do you know , Alyosha - do n't laugh I made a poem about a year ago . 
If you can waste another ten minutes on me , I 'll tell it to you . '' 
`` You wrote a poem ? '' 
`` Oh , no , I did n't write it , '' laughed Ivan , and I 've never written two lines of poetry in my life . 
But I made up this poem in prose and I remembered it . 
I was carried away when I made it up . 
You will be my first reader - that is listener . 
Why should an author forego even one listener ? '' 
smiled Ivan . 
`` Shall I tell it to you ? '' 
`` I am all attention . '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` My poem is called The Grand Inquisitor ; it 's a ridiculous thing , but I want to tell it to you . 
The Grand Inquisitor `` EVEN this must have a preface - that is , a literary preface , '' laughed Ivan , `` and I am a poor hand at making one . 
You see , my action takes place in the sixteenth century , and at that time , as you probably learnt at school , it was customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth . 
Not to speak of Dante , in France , clerks , as well as the monks in the monasteries , used to give regular performances in which the Madonna , the saints , the angels , Christ , and God Himself were brought on the stage . 
In those days it was done in all simplicity . 
In Victor Hugo 's Notre Dame de Paris an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people in the Hotel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI in honour of the birth of the dauphin . 
It was called Le bon jugement de la tres sainte et gracieuse Vierge Marie , and she appears herself on the stage and pronounces her bon jugement . 
Similar plays , chiefly from the Old Testament , were occasionally performed in Moscow too , up to the times of Peter the Great . 
But besides plays there were all sorts of legends and ballads scattered about the world , in which the saints and angels and all the powers of Heaven took part when required . 
In our monasteries the monks busied themselves in translating , copying , and even composing such poems - and even under the Tatars . 
There is , for instance , one such poem -LRB- of course , from the Greek -RRB- , The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell , with descriptions as bold as Dante 's . 
Our Lady visits hell , and the Archangel Michael leads her through the torments . 
She sees the sinners and their punishment . 
There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in a burning lake ; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that they ca n't swim out , and ` these God forgets ' - an expression of extraordinary depth and force . 
And so Our Lady , shocked and weeping , falls before the throne of God and begs for mercy for all in hell - for all she has seen there , indiscriminately . 
Her conversation with God is immensely interesting . 
She beseeches Him , she will not desist , and when God points to the hands and feet of her Son , nailed to the Cross , and asks , ` How can I forgive His tormentors ? ' 
she bids all the saints , all the martyrs , all the angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on all without distinction . 
It ends by her winning from God a respite of suffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day , and the sinners at once raise a cry of thankfulness from hell , chanting , ` Thou art just , O Lord , in this judgment . ' 
Well , my poem would have been of that kind if it had appeared at that time . 
He comes on the scene in my poem , but He says nothing , only appears and passes on . 
Fifteen centuries have passed since He promised to come in His glory , fifteen centuries since His prophet wrote , ` Behold , I come quickly ' ; ` Of that day and that hour knoweth no man , neither the Son , but the Father , ' as He Himself predicted on earth . 
But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love . 
Oh , with greater faith , for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased to see signs from heaven . 
No signs from heaven come to-day To add to what the heart doth say . 
There was nothing left but faith in what the heart doth say . 
It is true there were many miracles in those days . 
There were saints who performed miraculous cures ; some holy people , according to their biographies , were visited by the Queen of Heaven herself . 
But the devil did not slumber , and doubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles . 
And just then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy . ' 
A huge star like to a torch ' -LRB- that is , to a church -RRB- ` fell on the sources of the waters and they became bitter . ' 
These heretics began blasphemously denying miracles . 
But those who remained faithful were all the more ardent in their faith . 
The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before , awaited His coming , loved Him , hoped for Him , yearned to suffer and die for Him as before . 
And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervour , ' O Lord our God , hasten Thy coming ' ; so many ages called upon Him , that in His infinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants . 
Before that day He had come down , He had visited some holy men , martyrs , and hermits , as is written in their lives . 
Among us , Tyutchev , with absolute faith in the truth of his words , bore witness that Bearing the Cross , in slavish dress , Weary and worn , the Heavenly King Our mother , Russia , came to bless , And through our land went wandering . 
And that certainly was so , I assure you . 
`` And behold , He deigned to appear for a moment to the people , to the tortured , suffering people , sunk in iniquity , but loving Him like children . 
My story is laid in Spain , in Seville , in the most terrible time of the Inquisition , when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God , and ` in the splendid auto da fe the wicked heretics were burnt . ' 
Oh , of course , this was not the coming in which He will appear , according to His promise , at the end of time in all His heavenly glory , and which will be sudden ` as lightning flashing from east to west . ' 
No , He visited His children only for a moment , and there where the flames were crackling round the heretics . 
In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in that human shape in which He walked among men for thirty-three years fifteen centuries ago . 
He came down to the ` hot pavements ' of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had , ad majorem gloriam Dei , been burnt by the cardinal , the Grand Inquisitor , in a magnificent auto da fe , in the presence of the king , the court , the knights , the cardinals , the most charming ladies of the court , and the whole population of Seville . 
`` He came softly , unobserved , and yet , strange to say , everyone recognised Him . 
That might be one of the best passages in the poem . 
I mean , why they recognised Him . 
The people are irresistibly drawn to Him , they surround Him , they flock about Him , follow Him . 
He moves silently in their midst with a gentle smile of infinite compassion . 
The sun of love burns in His heart , and power shine from His eyes , and their radiance , shed on the people , stirs their hearts with responsive love . 
He holds out His hands to them , blesses them , and a healing virtue comes from contact with Him , even with His garments . 
An old man in the crowd , blind from childhood , cries out , ' O Lord , heal me and I shall see Thee ! ' 
and , as it were , scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him . 
The crowd weeps and kisses the earth under His feet . 
Children throw flowers before Him , sing , and cry hosannah . 
` It is He - it is He ! ' 
repeat . 
` It must be He , it can be no one but Him ! ' 
He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin . 
In it lies a child of seven , the only daughter of a prominent citizen . 
The dead child lies hidden in flowers . 
` He will raise your child , ' the crowd shouts to the weeping mother . 
The priest , coming to meet the coffin , looks perplexed , and frowns , but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail . 
` If it is Thou , raise my child ! ' 
she cries , holding out her hands to Him . 
The procession halts , the coffin is laid on the steps at His feet . 
He looks with compassion , and His lips once more softly pronounce , ` Maiden , arise ! ' 
and the maiden arises . 
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round , smiling with wide-open wondering eyes , holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her hand . 
`` There are cries , sobs , confusion among the people , and at that moment the cardinal himself , the Grand Inquisitor , passes by the cathedral . 
He is an old man , almost ninety , tall and erect , with a withered face and sunken eyes , in which there is still a gleam of light . 
He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal 's robes , as he was the day before , when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church - at this moment he is wearing his coarse , old , monk 's cassock . 
At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the ` holy guard . ' 
He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance . 
He sees everything ; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet , sees the child rise up , and his face darkens . 
He knits his thick grey brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire . 
He holds out his finger and bids the guards take Him . 
And such is his power , so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him , that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards , and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead him away . 
The crowd instantly bows down to the earth , like one man , before the old Inquisitor . 
He blesses the people in silence and passes on ' The guards lead their prisoner to the close , gloomy vaulted prison - in the ancient palace of the Holy , inquisition and shut him in it . 
The day passes and is followed by the dark , burning , ` breathless ' night of Seville . 
The air is ` fragrant with laurel and lemon . ' 
In the pitch darkness the iron door of the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand . 
He is alone ; the door is closed at once behind him . 
He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face . 
At last he goes up slowly , sets the light on the table and speaks . '' 
` Is it Thou ? 
Thou ? ' 
but receiving no answer , he adds at once . 
` Do n't answer , be silent . 
What canst Thou say , indeed ? 
I know too well what Thou wouldst say . 
And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadst said of old . 
Why , then , art Thou come to hinder us ? 
For Thou hast come to hinder us , and Thou knowest that . 
But dost thou know what will be to-morrow ? 
I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou or only a semblance of Him , but to-morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee at the stake as the worst of heretics . 
And the very people who have to-day kissed Thy feet , to-morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap up the embers of Thy fire . 
Knowest Thou that ? 
Yes , maybe Thou knowest it , ' he added with thoughtful penetration , never for a moment taking his eyes off the Prisoner . '' 
`` I do n't quite understand , Ivan . 
What does it mean ? '' 
Alyosha , who had been listening in silence , said with a smile . 
`` Is it simply a wild fantasy , or a mistake on the part of the old man - some impossible quid pro quo ? '' 
`` Take it as the last , '' said Ivan , laughing , `` if you are so corrupted by modern realism and ca n't stand anything fantastic . 
If you like it to be a case of mistaken identity , let it be so . 
It is true , '' he went on , laughing , `` the old man was ninety , and he might well be crazy over his set idea . 
He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner . 
It might , in fact , be simply his ravings , the delusion of an old man of ninety , over-excited by the auto da fe of a hundred heretics the day before . 
But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake of identity or a wild fantasy ? 
All that matters is that the old man should speak out , that he should speak openly of what he has thought in silence for ninety years . '' 
`` And the Prisoner too is silent ? 
Does He look at him and not say a word ? '' 
`` That 's inevitable in any case , '' Ivan laughed again . 
`` The old man has told Him He has n't the right to add anything to what He has said of old . 
One may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism , in my opinion at least . 
` All has been given by Thee to the Pope , ' they say , ` and all , therefore , is still in the Pope 's hands , and there is no need for Thee to come now at all . 
Thou must not meddle for the time , at least . ' 
That 's how they speak and write too - the Jesuits , at any rate . 
I have read it myself in the works of their theologians . 
` Hast Thou the right to reveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hast come ? ' 
my old man asks Him , and answers the question for Him . 
` No , Thou hast not ; that Thou mayest not add to what has been said of old , and mayest not take from men the freedom which Thou didst exalt when Thou wast on earth . 
Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men 's freedom of faith ; for it will be manifest as a miracle , and the freedom of their faith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred years ago . 
Didst Thou not often say then , `` I will make you free '' ? 
But now Thou hast seen these `` free '' men , ' the old man adds suddenly , with a pensive smile . 
` Yes , we 've paid dearly for it , ' he goes on , looking sternly at Him , ` but at last we have completed that work in Thy name . 
For fifteen centuries we have been wrestling with Thy freedom , but now it is ended and over for good . 
Dost Thou not believe that it 's over for good ? 
Thou lookest meekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me . 
But let me tell Thee that now , to-day , people are more persuaded than ever that they have perfect freedom , yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid it humbly at our feet . 
But that has been our doing . 
Was this what Thou didst ? 
Was this Thy freedom ? ' '' 
`` I do n't understand again . '' 
Alyosha broke in . 
`` Is he ironical , is he jesting ? '' 
`` Not a bit of it ! 
He claims it as a merit for himself and his Church that at last they have vanquished freedom and have done so to make men happy . 
` For now ' -LRB- he is speaking of the Inquisition , of course -RRB- ` for the first time it has become possible to think of the happiness of men . 
Man was created a rebel ; and how can rebels be happy ? 
Thou wast warned , ' he says to Him . 
` Thou hast had no lack of admonitions and warnings , but Thou didst not listen to those warnings ; Thou didst reject the only way by which men might be made happy . 
But , fortunately , departing Thou didst hand on the work to us . 
Thou hast promised , Thou hast established by Thy word , Thou hast given to us the right to bind and to unbind , and now , of course , Thou canst not think of taking it away . 
Why , then , hast Thou come to hinder us ? ' '' 
`` And what 's the meaning of ` no lack of admonitions and warnings ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Why , that 's the chief part of what the old man must say . '' 
` The wise and dread spirit , the spirit of self-destruction and non-existence , ' the old man goes on , great spirit talked with Thee in the wilderness , and we are told in the books that he `` tempted '' Thee . 
Is that so ? 
And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee in three questions and what Thou didst reject , and what in the books is called `` the temptation '' ? 
And yet if there has ever been on earth a real stupendous miracle , it took place on that day , on the day of the three temptations . 
The statement of those three questions was itself the miracle . 
If it were possible to imagine simply for the sake of argument that those three questions of the dread spirit had perished utterly from the books , and that we had to restore them and to invent them anew , and to do so had gathered together all the wise men of the earth - rulers , chief priests , learned men , philosophers , poets - and had set them the task to invent three questions , such as would not only fit the occasion , but express in three words , three human phrases , the whole future history of the world and of humanity - dost Thou believe that all the wisdom of the earth united could have invented anything in depth and force equal to the three questions which were actually put to Thee then by the wise and mighty spirit in the wilderness ? 
From those questions alone , from the miracle of their statement , we can see that we have here to do not with the fleeting human intelligence , but with the absolute and eternal . 
For in those three questions the whole subsequent history of mankind is , as it were , brought together into one whole , and foretold , and in them are united all the unsolved historical contradictions of human nature . 
At the time it could not be so clear , since the future was unknown ; but now that fifteen hundred years have passed , we see that everything in those three questions was so justly divined and foretold , and has been so truly fulfilled , that nothing can be added to them or taken from them . 
`` Judge Thyself who was right - Thou or he who questioned Thee then ? 
Remember the first question ; its meaning , in other words , was this : `` Thou wouldst go into the world , and art going with empty hands , with some promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural unruliness can not even understand , which they fear and dread - for nothing has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society than freedom . 
But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren wilderness ? 
Turn them into bread , and mankind will run after Thee like a flock of sheep , grateful and obedient , though for ever trembling , lest Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread . '' 
But Thou wouldst not deprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer , thinking , what is that freedom worth if obedience is bought with bread ? 
Thou didst reply that man lives not by bread alone . 
But dost Thou know that for the sake of that earthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up against Thee and will strive with Thee and overcome Thee , and all will follow him , crying , `` Who can compare with this beast ? 
He has given us fire from heaven ! '' 
Dost Thou know that the ages will pass , and humanity will proclaim by the lips of their sages that there is no crime , and therefore no sin ; there is only hunger ? 
`` Feed men , and then ask of them virtue ! '' 
that 's what they 'll write on the banner , which they will raise against Thee , and with which they will destroy Thy temple . 
Where Thy temple stood will rise a new building ; the terrible tower of Babel will be built again , and though , like the one of old , it will not be finished , yet Thou mightest have prevented that new tower and have cut short the sufferings of men for a thousand years ; for they will come back to us after a thousand years of agony with their tower . 
They will seek us again , hidden underground in the catacombs , for we shall be again persecuted and tortured . 
They will find us and cry to us , `` Feed us , for those who have promised us fire from heaven have n't given it ! '' 
And then we shall finish building their tower , for he finishes the building who feeds them . 
And we alone shall feed them in Thy name , declaring falsely that it is in Thy name . 
Oh , never , never can they feed themselves without us ! 
No science will give them bread so long as they remain free . 
In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet , and say to us , `` Make us your slaves , but feed us . '' 
They will understand themselves , at last , that freedom and bread enough for all are inconceivable together , for never , never will they be able to share between them ! 
They will be convinced , too , that they can never be free , for they are weak , vicious , worthless , and rebellious . 
Thou didst promise them the bread of Heaven , but , I repeat again , can it compare with earthly bread in the eyes of the weak , ever sinful and ignoble race of man ? 
And if for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall follow Thee , what is to become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatures who will not have the strength to forego the earthly bread for the sake of the heavenly ? 
Or dost Thou care only for the tens of thousands of the great and strong , while the millions , numerous as the sands of the sea , who are weak but love Thee , must exist only for the sake of the great and strong ? 
No , we care for the weak too . 
They are sinful and rebellious , but in the end they too will become obedient . 
They will marvel at us and look on us as gods , because we are ready to endure the freedom which they have found so dreadful and to rule over them - so awful it will seem to them to be free . 
But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in Thy name . 
We shall deceive them again , for we will not let Thee come to us again . 
That deception will be our suffering , for we shall be forced to lie . '' 
` This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness , and this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thou hast exalted above everything . 
Yet in this question lies hid the great secret of this world . 
Choosing `` bread , '' Thou wouldst have satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity - to find someone to worship . 
So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and so painfully as to find someone to worship . 
But man seeks to worship what is established beyond dispute , so that all men would agree at once to worship it . 
For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one or the other can worship , but to find community of worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time . 
For the sake of common worship they 've slain each other with the sword . 
They have set up gods and challenged one another , `` Put away your gods and come and worship ours , or we will kill you and your gods ! '' 
And so it will be to the end of the world , even when gods disappear from the earth ; they will fall down before idols just the same . 
Thou didst know , Thou couldst not but have known , this fundamental secret of human nature , but Thou didst reject the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow down to Thee alone - the banner of earthly bread ; and Thou hast rejected it for the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven . 
Behold what Thou didst further . 
And all again in the name of freedom ! 
I tell Thee that man is tormented by no greater anxiety than to find someone quickly to whom he can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill-fated creature is born . 
But only one who can appease their conscience can take over their freedom . 
In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner ; give bread , and man will worship thee , for nothing is more certain than bread . 
But if someone else gains possession of his conscience - Oh ! 
then he will cast away Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience . 
In that Thou wast right . 
For the secret of man 's being is not only to live but to have something to live for . 
Without a stable conception of the object of life , man would not consent to go on living , and would rather destroy himself than remain on earth , though he had bread in abundance . 
That is true . 
But what happened ? 
Instead of taking men 's freedom from them , Thou didst make it greater than ever ! 
Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace , and even death , to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good and evil ? 
Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom of conscience , but nothing is a greater cause of suffering . 
And behold , instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man at rest for ever , Thou didst choose all that is exceptional , vague and enigmatic ; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men , acting as though Thou didst not love them at all - Thou who didst come to give Thy life for them ! 
Instead of taking possession of men 's freedom , Thou didst increase it , and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with its sufferings for ever . 
Thou didst desire man 's free love , that he should follow Thee freely , enticed and taken captive by Thee . 
In place of the rigid ancient law , man must hereafter with free heart decide for himself what is good and what is evil , having only Thy image before him as his guide . 
But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even Thy image and Thy truth , if he is weighed down with the fearful burden of free choice ? 
They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee , for they could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thou hast caused , laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems . '' 
` So that , in truth , Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the destruction of Thy kingdom , and no one is more to blame for it . 
Yet what was offered Thee ? 
There are three powers , three powers alone , able to conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotent rebels for their happiness those forces are miracle , mystery and authority . 
Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing so . 
When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle of the temple and said to Thee , `` If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art the Son of God then cast Thyself down , for it is written : the angels shall hold him up lest he fall and bruise himself , and Thou shalt know then whether Thou art the Son of God and shalt prove then how great is Thy faith in Thy Father . '' 
But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast Thyself down . 
Oh , of course , Thou didst proudly and well , like God ; but the weak , unruly race of men , are they gods ? 
Oh , Thou didst know then that in taking one step , in making one movement to cast Thyself down , Thou wouldst be tempting God and have lost all Thy faith in Him , and wouldst have been dashed to pieces against that earth which Thou didst come to save . 
And the wise spirit that tempted Thee would have rejoiced . 
But I ask again , are there many like Thee ? 
And couldst Thou believe for one moment that men , too , could face such a temptation ? 
Is the nature of men such , that they can reject miracle , and at the great moments of their life , the moments of their deepest , most agonising spiritual difficulties , cling only to the free verdict of the heart ? 
Oh , Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books , would be handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth , and Thou didst hope that man , following Thee , would cling to God and not ask for a miracle . 
But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejects God too ; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous . 
And as man can not bear to be without the miraculous , he will create new miracles of his own for himself , and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft , though he might be a hundred times over a rebel , heretic and infidel . 
Thou didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee , mocking and reviling Thee , `` Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou art He . '' 
Thou didst not come down , for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle , and didst crave faith given freely , not based on miracle . 
Thou didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him for ever . 
But Thou didst think too highly of men therein , for they are slaves , of course , though rebellious by nature . 
Look round and judge ; fifteen centuries have passed , look upon them . 
Whom hast Thou raised up to Thyself ? 
I swear , man is weaker and baser by nature than Thou hast believed him ! 
Can he , can he do what Thou didst ? 
By showing him so much respect , Thou didst , as it were , cease to feel for him , for Thou didst ask far too much from him - Thou who hast loved him more than Thyself ! 
Respecting him less , Thou wouldst have asked less of him . 
That would have been more like love , for his burden would have been lighter . 
He is weak and vile . 
What though he is everywhere now rebelling against our power , and proud of his rebellion ? 
It is the pride of a child and a schoolboy . 
They are little children rioting and barring out the teacher at school . 
But their childish delight will end ; it will cost them dear . 
Mankind as a whole has always striven to organise a universal state . 
There have been many great nations with great histories , but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were , for they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world-wide union . 
The great conquerors , Timours and Ghenghis-Khans , whirled like hurricanes over the face of the earth striving to subdue its people , and they too were but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universal unity . 
Hadst Thou taken the world and Caesar 's purple , Thou wouldst have founded the universal state and have given universal peace . 
For who can rule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in his hands ? 
We have taken the sword of Caesar , and in taking it , of course , have rejected Thee and followed him . 
Oh , ages are yet to come of the confusion of free thought , of their science and cannibalism . 
For having begun to build their tower of Babel without us , they will end , of course , with cannibalism . 
But then the beast will crawl to us and lick our feet and spatter them with tears of blood . 
And we shall sit upon the beast and raise the cup , and on it will be written , `` Mystery . '' 
But then , and only then , the reign of peace and happiness will come for men . 
Thou art proud of Thine elect , but Thou hast only the elect , while we give rest to all . 
And besides , how many of those elect , those mighty ones who could become elect , have grown weary waiting for Thee , and have transferred and will transfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to the other camp , and end by raising their free banner against Thee . 
Thou didst Thyself lift up that banner . 
But with us all will be happy and will no more rebel nor destroy one another as under Thy freedom . 
Oh , we shall persuade them that they will only become free when they renounce their freedom to us and submit to us . 
And shall we be right or shall we be lying ? 
They will be convinced that we are right , for they will remember the horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them . 
Freedom , free thought , and science will lead them into such straits and will bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries , that some of them , the fierce and rebellious , will destroy themselves , others , rebellious but weak , will destroy one another , while the rest , weak and unhappy , will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us : `` Yes , you were right , you alone possess His mystery , and we come back to you , save us from ourselves ! '' '' 
` Receiving bread from us , they will see clearly that we take the bread made by their hands from them , to give it to them , without any miracle . 
They will see that we do not change the stones to bread , but in truth they will be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the bread itself ! 
For they will remember only too well that in old days , without our help , even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands , while since they have come back to us , the very stones have turned to bread in their hands . 
Too , too well will they know the value of complete submission ! 
And until men know that , they will be unhappy . 
Who is most to blame for their not knowing it ? 
- speak ! 
Who scattered the flock and sent it astray on unknown paths ? 
But the flock will come together again and will submit once more , and then it will be once for all . 
Then we shall give them the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are by nature . 
Oh , we shall persuade them at last not to be proud , for Thou didst lift them up and thereby taught them to be proud . 
We shall show them that they are weak , that they are only pitiful children , but that childlike happiness is the sweetest of all . 
They will become timid and will look to us and huddle close to us in fear , as chicks to the hen . 
They will marvel at us and will be awe-stricken before us , and will be proud at our being so powerful and clever that we have been able to subdue such a turbulent flock of thousands of millions . 
They will tremble impotently before our wrath , their minds will grow fearful , they will be quick to shed tears like women and children , but they will be just as ready at a sign from us to pass to laughter and rejoicing , to happy mirth and childish song . 
Yes , we shall set them to work , but in their leisure hours we shall make their life like a child 's game , with children 's songs and innocent dance . 
Oh , we shall allow them even sin , they are weak and helpless , and they will love us like children because we allow them to sin . 
We shall tell them that every sin will be expiated , if it is done with our permission , that we allow them to sin because we love them , and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves . 
And we shall take it upon ourselves , and they will adore us as their saviours who have taken on themselves their sins before God . 
