Oh , run , run ! 
... Do n't say another word Save the old man ... run to his father ... run ! '' 
`` Excuse me , madam , then you did not give him money ? 
You remember for a fact that you did not give him any money ? '' 
`` No , I did n't , I did n't ! 
I refused to give it him , for he could not appreciate it . 
He ran out in a fury , stamping . 
He rushed at me , but I slipped away ... . 
And let me tell you , as I wish to hide nothing from you now , that he positively spat at me . 
Can you fancy that ! 
But why are we standing ? 
Ah , sit down . '' 
`` Excuse me , I. . . '' 
`` Or better run , run , you must run and save the poor old man from an awful death ! '' 
`` But if he has killed him already ? '' 
`` Ah , good heavens , yes ! 
Then what are we to do now ? 
What do you think we must do now ? '' 
Meantime she had made Pyotr Ilyitch sit down and sat down herself , facing him briefly , but fairly clearly , Pyotr Ilyitch told her the history of the affair , that part of it at least which he had himself witnessed . 
He described , too , his visit to Fenya , and told her about the pestle . 
All these details produced an overwhelming effect on the distracted lady , who kept uttering shrieks , and covering her face with her hands ... `` Would you believe it , I foresaw all this ! 
I have that special faculty , whatever I imagine comes to pass . 
And how often I 've looked at that awful man and always thought , that man will end by murdering me . 
And now it 's happened ... that is , if he has n't murdered me , but only his own father , it 's only because the finger of God preserved me , and what 's more , he was ashamed to murder me because , in this very place , I put the holy ikon from the relics of the holy martyr , Saint Varvara , on his neck ... . 
And to think how near I was to death at that minute I went close up to him and he stretched out his neck to me ! 
... Do you know , Pyotr Ilyitch -LRB- I think you said your name was Pyotr Ilyitch -RRB- , I do n't believe in miracles , but that ikon and this unmistakable miracle with me now - that shakes me , and I 'm ready to believe in anything you like . 
Have you heard about Father Zossima ? 
... But I do n't know what I 'm saying ... and only fancy , with the ikon on his neck he spat at me ... . 
He only spat , it 's true , he did n't murder me and ... he dashed away ! 
But what shall we do , what must we do now ? 
What do you think ? '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch got up , and announced that he was going straight to the police captain , to tell him all about it , and leave him to do what he thought fit . 
`` Oh , he 's an excellent man , excellent ! 
Mihail Makarovitch , I know him . 
Of course , he 's the person to go to . 
How practical you are , Pyotr Ilyitch ! 
How well you 've thought of everything ! 
I should never have thought of it in your place ! '' 
`` Especially as I know the police captain very well , too , '' observed Pyotr Ilyitch , who still continued to stand , and was obviously anxious to escape as quickly as possible from the impulsive lady , who would not let him say good-bye and go away . 
`` And be sure , be sure , '' she prattled on , `` to come back and tell me what you see there , and what you find out ... what comes to light ... how they 'll try him ... and what he 's condemned to ... . 
Tell me , we have no capital punishment , have we ? 
But be sure to come , even if it 's at three o'clock at night , at four , at half-past four ... . 
Tell them to wake me , to wake me , to shake me , if I do n't get up ... . 
But , good heavens , I sha n't sleep ! 
But wait , had n't I better come with you ? '' 
`` N-no . 
But if you would write three lines with your own hand , stating that you did not give Dmitri Fyodorovitch money , it might , perhaps , be of use ... in case it 's needed ... '' `` To be sure ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov skipped , delighted , to her bureau . 
`` And you know I 'm simply struck , amazed at your resourcefulness , your good sense in such affairs . 
Are you in the service here ? 
I 'm delighted to think that you 're in the service here ! '' 
And still speaking , she scribbled on half a sheet of notepaper the following lines : I 've never in my life lent to that unhappy man , Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov -LRB- for , in spite of all , he is unhappy -RRB- , three thousand roubles to-day . 
I 've never given him money , never : That I swear by all thats holy ! 
K. Hohlakov `` Here 's the note ! '' 
she turned quickly to Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` Go , save him . 
It 's a noble deed on your part ! '' 
And she made the sign of the cross three times over him . 
She ran out to accompany him to the passage . 
`` How grateful I am to you ! 
You ca n't think how grateful I am to you for having come to me , first . 
How is it I have n't met you before ? 
I shall feel flattered at seeing you at my house in the future . 
How delightful it is that you are living here ! 
... Such precision ! 
Such practical ability ! 
... They must appreciate you , they must understand you . 
If there 's anything I can do , believe me ... oh , I love young people ! 
I 'm in love with young people ! 
The younger generation are the one prop of our suffering country . 
Her one hope ... . 
Oh , go , go ! 
... '' But Pyotr Ilyitch had already run away or she would not have let him go so soon . 
Yet Madame Hohlakov had made a rather agreeable impression on him , which had somewhat softened his anxiety at being drawn into such an unpleasant affair . 
Tastes differ , as we all know . 
`` She 's by no means so elderly , '' he thought , feeling pleased , `` on the contrary I should have taken her for her daughter . '' 
As for Madame Hohlakov , she was simply enchanted by the young man . 
`` Such sence such exactness ! 
in so young a man ! 
in our day ! 
and all that with such manners and appearance ! 
People say the young people of to-day are no good for anything , but here 's an example ! '' 
etc. . 
So she simply forgot this `` dreadful affair , '' and it was only as she was getting into bed , that , suddenly recalling `` how near death she had been , '' she exclaimed : `` Ah , it is awful , awful ! '' 
But she fell at once into a sound , sweet sleep . 
I would not , however , have dwelt on such trivial and irrelevant details , if this eccentric meeting of the young official with the by no means elderly widow had not subsequently turned out to be the foundation of the whole career of that practical and precise young man . 
His story is remembered to this day with amazement in our town , and I shall perhaps have something to say about it , when I have finished my long history of the Brothers Karamazov . 
The Alarm OUR police captain , Mihail Makarovitch Makarov , a retired lieutenant-colonel , was a widower and an excellent man . 
He had only come to us three years previously , but had won general esteem , chiefly because he `` knew how to keep society together . '' 
He was never without visitors , and could not have got on without them . 
Someone or other was always dining with him ; he never sat down to table without guests . 
He gave regular dinners , too , on all sorts of occasions , sometimes most surprising ones . 
Though the fare was not recherche , it was abundant . 
The fish-pies were excellent , and the wine made up in quantity for what it lacked in quality . 
The first room his guests entered was a well fitted billiard-room , with pictures of English race horses , in black frames on the walls , an essential decoration , as we all know , for a bachelor 's billiard-room . 
There was card playing every evening at his house , if only at one table . 
But at frequent intervals , all the society of our town , with the mammas and young ladies , assembled at his house to dance . 
Mihail Makarovitch was a widower , he did not live alone . 
His widowed daughter lived with him , with her two unmarried daughters , grown-up girls , who had finished their education . 
They were of agreeable appearance and lively character , and though everyone knew they would have no dowry , they attracted all the young men of fashion to their grandfather 's house . 
Mihail Makarovitch was by no means very efficient in his work , though he performed his duties no worse than many others . 
To speak plainly , he was a man of rather narrow education . 
His understanding of the limits of his administrative power could not always be relied upon . 
It was not so much that he failed to grasp certain reforms enacted during the present reign , as that he made conspicuous blunders in his interpretation of them . 
This was not from any special lack of intelligence , but from carelessness , for he was always in to great a hurry to go into the subject . 
`` I have the heart of a soldier rather than of a civilian , '' he used to say of himself . 
He had not even formed a definite idea of the fundamental principles of the reforms connected with the emancipation of the serfs , and only picked it up , so to speak , from year to year , involuntarily increasing his knowledge by practice . 
And yet he was himself a landowner . 
Pyotr Ilyitch knew for certain that he would meet some of Mihail Makarovitch 's visitors there that evening , but he did n't know which . 
As it happened , at that moment the prosecutor , and Varvinsky , our district doctor , a young man , who had only just come to us from Petersburg after taking a brilliant degree at the Academy of Medicine , were playing whist at the police captain 's . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch , the prosecutor -LRB- he was really the deputy prosecutor , but we always called him the prosecutor -RRB- , was rather a peculiar man , of about five and thirty , inclined to be consumptive , and married to a fat and childless woman . 
He was vain and irritable , though he had a good intellect , and even a kind heart . 
It seemed that all that was wrong with him was that he had a better opinion of himself than his ability warranted . 
And that made him seem constantly uneasy . 
He had , moreover , certain higher , even artistic , leanings , towards psychology , for instance , a special study of the human heart , a special knowledge of the criminal and his crime . 
He cherished a grievance on this ground , considering that he had been passed over in the service , and being firmly persuaded that in higher spheres he had not been properly appreciated , and had enemies . 
In gloomy moments he even threatened to give up his post , and practise as a barrister in criminal cases . 
The unexpected Karamazov case agitated him profoundly : `` It was a case that might well be talked about all over Russia . '' 
But I am anticipating . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov , the young investigating lawyer , who had only come from Petersburg two months before , was sitting in the next room with the young ladies . 
People talked about it afterwards and wondered that all the gentlemen should , as though intentionally , on the evening of `` the crime '' have been gathered together at the house of the executive authority . 
Yet it was perfectly simple and happened quite naturally . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch 's wife had had toothache for the last two days , and he was obliged to go out to escape from her groans . 
The doctor , from the very nature of his being , could not spend an evening except at cards . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov had been intending for three days past to drop in that evening at Mihail Makarovitch 's , so to speak casually , so as slyly to startle the eldest granddaughter , Olga Mihailovna , by showing that he knew her secret , that he knew it was her birthday , and that she was trying to conceal it on purpose , so as not to be obliged to give a dance . 
He anticipated a great deal of merriment , many playful jests about her age , and her being afraid to reveal it , about his knowing her secret and telling everybody , and so on . 
The charming young man was a great adept at such teasing ; the ladies had christened him `` the naughty man , '' and he seemed to be delighted at the name . 
He was extremely well-bred , however , of good family , education and feelings , and , though leading a life of pleasure , his sallies were always innocent and in good taste . 
He was short , and delicate-looking . 
On his white , slender , little fingers he always wore a number of big , glittering rings . 
When he was engaged in his official duties , he always became extraordinarily grave , as though realising his position and the sanctity of the obligations laid upon him . 
He had a special gift for mystifying murderers and other criminals of the peasant class during interrogation , and if he did not win their respect , he certainly succeeded in arousing their wonder . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was simply dumbfounded when he went into the police captain 's . 
He saw instantly that everyone knew . 
They had positively thrown down their cards , all were standing up and talking . 
Even Nikolay Parfenovitch had left the young ladies and run in , looking strenuous and ready for action . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was met with the astounding news that old Fyodor Pavlovitch really had been murdered that evening in his own house , murdered and robbed . 
The news had only just reached them in the following manner : Marfa Ignatyevna , the wife of old Grigory , who had been knocked senseless near the fence , was sleeping soundly in her bed and might well have slept till morning after the draught she had taken . 
But , all of a sudden she waked up , no doubt roused by a fearful epileptic scream from Smerdyakov , who was lying in the next room unconscious . 
That scream always preceded his fits , and always terrified and upset Marfa Ignatyevna . 
She could never get accustomed to it . 
She jumped up and ran half-awake to Smerdyakov 's room . 
But it was dark there , and she could only hear the invalid beginning to gasp and struggle . 
Then Marfa Ignatyevna herself screamed out and was going to call her husband , but suddenly realised that when she had got up , he was not beside her in bed . 
She ran back to the bedstead and began groping with her hands , but the bed was really empty . 
Then he must have gone out where ? 
She ran to the steps and timidly called him . 
She got no answer , of course , but she caught the sound of groans far away in the garden in the darkness . 
She listened . 
The groans were repeated , and it was evident they came from the garden . 
`` Good Lord ! 
just as it was with Lizaveta Smerdyashtchaya ! '' 
she thought distractedly . 
She went timidly down the steps and saw that the gate into the garden was open . 
`` He must be out there , poor dear , '' she thought . 
She went up to the gate and all at once she distinctly heard Grigory calling her by name , Marfa ! 
Marfa ! '' 
in a weak , moaning , dreadful voice . 
`` Lord , preserve us from harm ! '' 
Marfa Ignatyevna murmured , and ran towards the voice , and that was how she found Grigory . 
But she found him not by the fence where he had been knocked down , but about twenty paces off . 
It appeared later , that he had crawled away on coming to himself , and probably had been a long time getting so far , losing consciousness several times . 
She noticed at once that he was covered with blood , and screamed at the top of her voice . 
Grigory was muttering incoherently : `` He has murdered ... his father murdered ... . 
Why scream , silly ... run ... fetch someone ... '' But Marfa continued screaming , and seeing that her master 's window was open and that there was a candle alight in the window , she ran there and began calling Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
But peeping in at the window , she saw a fearful sight . 
Her master was lying on his back , motionless , on the floor . 
His light-coloured dressing-gown and white shirt were soaked with blood . 
The candle on the table brightly lighted up the blood and the motionless dead face of Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Terror-stricken , Marfa rushed away from the window , ran out of the garden , drew the bolt of the big gate and ran headlong by the back way to the neighbour , Marya Konndratyevna . 
Both mother and daughter were asleep , but they waked up at Marfa 's desperate and persistent screaming and knocking at the shutter . 
Marfa , shrieking and screaming incoherently , managed to tell them the main fact , and to beg for assistance . 
It happened that Foma had come back from his wanderings and was staying the night with them . 
They got him up immediately and all three ran to the scene of the crime . 
On the way , Marya Kondratyevna remembered that at about eight o'clock she heard a dreadful scream from their garden , and this was no doubt Grigory 's scream , `` Parricide ! '' 
uttered when he caught hold of Mitya 's leg . 
`` Some one person screamed out and then was silent , '' Marya Kondratyevna explained as she ran . 
Running to the place where Grigory lay , the two women with the help of Foma carried him to the lodge . 
They lighted a candle and saw that Smerdyakov was no better , that he was writhing in convulsions , his eyes fixed in a squint , and that foam was flowing from his lips . 
They moistened Grigory 's forehead with water mixed with vinager , and the water revived him at once . 
He asked immediately : `` Is the master murdered ? '' 
Then Foma and both the women ran to the house and saw this time that not only the window , but also the door into the garden was wide open , though Fyodor Pavlovitch had for the last week locked himself in every night and did not allow even Grigory to come in on any pretext . 
Seeing that door open , they were afraid to go in to Fyodor Pavlovitch `` for fear anything should happen afterwards . '' 
And when they returned to Grigory , the old man told them to go straight to the police captain . 
Marya Kondratyevna ran there and gave the alarm to the whole party at the police captain 's . 
She arrived only five minutes before Pyotr Ilyitch , so that his story came , not as his own surmise and theory , but as the direct conformation by a witness , of the theory held by all , as to the identity of the criminal -LRB- a theory he had in the bottom of his heart refused to believe till that moment -RRB- . 
It was resolved to act with energy . 
The deputy police inspector of the town was commissioned to take four witnesses , to enter Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house and there to open an inquiry on the spot , according to the regular forms , which I will not go into here . 
The district doctor , a zealous man , new to his work , almost insisted on accompanying the police captain , the prosecutor , and the investigating lawyer . 
I will note briefly that Fyodor Pavlovitch was found to be quite dead , with his skull battered in . 
But with what ? 
Most likely with the same weapon with which Grigory had been attacked . 
And immediately that weapon was found , Grigory , to whom all possible medical assistance was at once given , described in a weak and breaking voice how he had been knocked down . 
They began looking with a lantern by the fence and found the brass pestle dropped in a most conspicuous place on the garden path . 
There were no signs of disturbance in the room where Fyodor Pavlovitch was lying . 
But by the bed , behind the screen , they picked up from the floor a big and thick envelope with the inscription : `` A present of three thousand roubles for my angel Grushenka , if she is willing to come . '' 
And below had been added by Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` For my little chicken . '' 
There were three seals of red sealing-wax on the envelope , but it had been torn open and was empty : the money had been removed . 
They found also on the floor a piece of narrow pink ribbon , with which the envelope had been tied up . 
One piece of Pyotr Ilyitch 's evidence made a great impression on the prosecutor and the investigating magistrate , namely , his idea that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would shoot himself before daybreak , that he had resolved to do so , had spoken of it to Ilyitch , had taken the pistols , loaded them before him , written a letter , put it in his pocket , etc. . 
When Pyotr Ilyitch , though still unwilling to believe in it , threatened to tell someone so as to prevent the suicide , Mitya had answered grinning : `` You 'll be too late . '' 
So they must make haste to Mokroe to find the criminal , before he really did shoot himself . 
`` That 's clear , that 's clear ! '' 
repeated the prosecutor in great excitement . 
`` That 's just the way with mad fellows like that : ' I shall kill myself to-morrow , so I 'll make merry till I die ! ' '' 
The story of how he had bought the wine and provisions excited the prosecutor more than ever . 
`` Do you remember the fellow that murdered a merchant called Olsufyev , gentlemen ? 
He stole fifteen hundred , went at once to have his hair curled , and then , without even hiding the money , carrying it almost in his hand in the same way , he went off to the girls . '' 
All were delayed , however , by the inquiry , the search , and the formalities , etc. , in the house of Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It all took time and so , two hours before starting , they sent on ahead to Mokroe the officer of the rural police , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch Schmertsov , who had arrived in the town the morning before to get his pay . 
He was instructed to avoid raising the alarm when he reached Mokroe , but to keep constant watch over the `` criminal '' till the arrival of the proper authorities , to procure also witnesses for the arrest , police constables , and so on . 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch did as he was told , preserving his incognito , and giving no one but his old acquaintance , Trifon Borissovitch , the slightest hint of his secret business . 
He had spoken to him just before Mitya met the landlord in the balcony , looking for him in the dark , and noticed at once a change in Trifon Borissovitch 's face and voice . 
So neither Mitya nor anyone else knew that he was being watched . 
The box with the pistols had been carried off by Trifon Borissovitch and put in a suitable place . 
Only after four o'clock , almost at sunrise , all the officials , the police captain , the prosecutor , the investigating lawyer , drove up in two carriages , each drawn by three horses . 
The doctor remained at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's to make a post-mortem next day on the body . 
But he was particularly interested in the condition of the servant , Smerdyakov . 
`` Such violent and protracted epileptic fits , recurring continually for twenty-four hours , are rarely to be met with , and are of interest to science , '' he declared enthusiastically to his companions , and as they left they laughingly congratulated him on his find . 
The prosecutor and the investigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor 's saying that Smerdyakov could not outlive the night . 
After these long , but I think necessary explanations , we will return to that moment of our tale at which we broke off . 
The Sufferings of a Soul The First Ordeal AND so Mitya sat looking wildly at the people round him , not understanding what was said to him . 
Suddenly he got up , flung up his hands , and shouted aloud : `` I 'm not guilty ! 
I 'm not guilty of that blood ! 
I 'm not guilty of my father 's blood ... . 
I meant to kill him . 
But I 'm not guilty . 
Not I. '' But he had hardly said this , before Grushenka rushed from behind the curtain and flung herself at the police captain 's feet . 
`` It was my fault ! 
Mine ! 
My wickedness ! '' 
she cried , in a heart-rending voice , bathed in tears , stretching out her clasped hands towards them . 
`` He did it through me . 
I tortured him and drove him to it . 
I tortured that poor old man that 's dead , too , in my wickedness , and brought him to this ! 
It 's my fault , mine first , mine most , my fault ! '' 
`` Yes , it 's your fault ! 
You 're the chief criminal ! 
You fury ! 
You harlot ! 
You 're the most to blame ! '' 
shouted the police captain , threatening her with his hand . 
But he was quickly and resolutely suppressed . 
The prosecutor positively seized hold of him . 
`` This is absolutely irregular , Mihail Makarovitch ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You are positively hindering the inquiry ... . 
You 're ruining the case . '' 
he almost gasped . 
`` Follow the regular course ! 
Follow the regular course ! '' 
cried Nikolay Parfenovitch , fearfully excited too , `` otherwise it 's absolutely impossible ! 
... '' `` Judge us together ! '' 
Grushenka cried frantically , still kneeling . 
`` Punish us together . 
I will go with him now , if it 's to death ! '' 
`` Grusha , my life , my blood , my holy one ! '' 
Mitya fell on his knees beside her and held her tight in his arms . 
`` Do n't believe her , '' he cried , `` she 's not guilty of anything , of any blood , of anything ! '' 
He remembered afterwards that he was forcibly dragged away from her by several men , and that she was led out , and that when he recovered himself he was sitting at the table . 
Beside him and behind him stood the men with metal plates . 
Facing him on the other side of the table sat Nikolay Parfenovitch , the investigating lawyer . 
He kept persuading him to drink a little water out of a glass that stood on the table . 
`` That will refresh you , that will calm you . 
Be calm , do n't be frightened , '' he added , extremely politely . 
Mitya -LRB- he remembered it afterwards -RRB- became suddenly intensely interested in his big rings , one with an amethyst , and another with a transparent bright yellow stone , of great brilliance . 
And long afterwards he remembered with wonder how those rings had riveted his attention through all those terrible hours of interrogation , so that he was utterly unable to tear himself away from them and dismiss them , as things that had nothing to do with his position . 
On Mitya 's left side , in the place where Maximov had been sitting at the beginning of the evening , the prosecutor was now seated , and on Mitya 's right hand , where Grushenka had been , was a rosy-cheeked young man in a sort of shabby hunting-jacket , with ink and paper before him . 
This was the secretary of the investigating lawyer , who had brought him with him . 
The police captain was now standing by the window at the other end of the room , beside Kalganov , who was sitting there . 
`` Drink some water , '' said the investigating lawyer softly , for the tenth time . 
`` I have drunk it , gentlemen , I have ... but come gentlemen , crush me , punish me , decide my fate ! '' 
cried Mitya , staring with terribly fixed wide-open eyes at the investigating lawyer . 
`` So you positively declare that you are not guilty of the death of your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
asked the investigating lawyer , softly but insistently . 
`` I am not guilty . 
I am guilty of the blood of another old man , but not of my father 's . 
And I weep for it ! 
I killed , I killed the old man and knocked him down ... . 
But it 's hard to have to answer for that murder with another , a terrible murder of which I am not guilty ... It 's a terrible accusation , gentlemen , a knockdown blow . 
But who has killed my father , who has killed him ? 
Who can have killed him if I did n't ? 
It 's marvellous , extraordinary , impossible . '' 
`` Yes , who can have killed him ? '' 
the investigating lawyer was beginning , but Ippolit Kirillovitch , the prosecutor , glancing at him , addressed Mitya . 
`` You need not worry yourself about the old servant , Grigory Vasilyevitch . 
He is alive , he has recovered , and in spite of the terrible blows inflicted , according to his own and your evidence , by you , there seems no doubt that he will live , so the doctor says , at least . '' 
`` Alive ? 
He 's alive ? '' 
cried Mitya , flinging up his hands . 
His face beamed . 
`` Lord , I thank Thee for the miracle Thou has wrought for me , a sinner and evildoer . 
That 's an answer to my prayer . 
I 've been praying all night . '' 
And he crossed himself three times . 
He was almost breathless . 
`` So from this Grigory we have received such important evidence concerning you , that - '' The prosecutor would have continued , but Mitya suddenly jumped up from his chair . 
`` One minute , gentlemen , for God 's sake , one minute ; I will run to her - '' `` Excuse me , at this moment it 's quite impossible , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch almost shrieked . 
He , too , leapt to his feet . 
Mitya was seized by the men with the metal plates , but he sat down of his own accord ... `` Gentlemen , what a pity ! 
I wanted to see her for one minute only ; I wanted to tell her that it has been washed away , it has gone , that blood that was weighing on my heart all night , and that I am not a murderer now ! 
Gentlemen , she is my betrothed ! '' 
he said ecstatically and reverently , looking round at them all . 
`` Oh , thank you , gentlemen ! 
Oh , in one minute you have given me new life , new heart ! 
... That old man used to carry me in his arms , gentlemen . 
He used to wash me in the tub when I was a baby three years old , abandoned by everyone , he was like a father to me ! 
... '' `` And so you - '' the investigating lawyer began . 
`` Allow me , gentlemen , allow me one minute more , '' interposed Mitya , putting his elbows on the table and covering his face with his hands . 
`` Let me have a moment to think , let me breathe , gentlemen . 
All this is horribly upsetting , horribly . 
A man is not a drum , gentlemen ! '' 
`` Drink a little more water , '' murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
Mitya took his hands from his face and laughed . 
His eyes were confident . 
He seemed completely transformed in a moment . 
His whole bearing was changed ; he was once more the equal of these men , with all of whom he was acquainted , as though they had all met the day before , when nothing had happened , at some social gathering . 
We may note in passing that , on his first arrival , Mitya had been made very welcome at the police captain 's , but later , during the last month especially , Mitya had hardly called at all , and when the police captain met him , in the street , for instance , Mitya noticed that he frowned and only bowed out of politeness . 
His acquaintance with the prosecutor was less intimate , though he sometimes paid his wife , a nervous and fanciful lady , visits of politeness , without quite knowing why , and she always received him graciously and had , for some reason , taken an interest in him up to the last . 
He had not had time to get to know the investigating lawyer , though he had met him and talked to him twice , each time about the fair sex . 
`` You 're a most skilful lawyer , I see , Nikolay Parfenovitch , '' cried Mitya , laughing gaily , `` but I can help you now . 
Oh , gentlemen , I feel like a new man , and do n't be offended at my addressing you so simply and directly . 
I 'm rather drunk , too , I 'll tell you that frankly . 
I believe I 've had the honour and pleasure of meeting you , Nikolay Parfenovitch , at my kinsman Miusov 's . 
Gentlemen , gentlemen , I do n't pretend to be on equal terms with you . 
I understand , of course , in what character I am sitting before you . 
Oh , of course , there 's a horrible suspicion ... hanging over me ... if Grigory has given evidence ... . 
A horrible suspicion ! 
It 's awful , awful , I understand that ! 
But to business , gentlemen , I am ready , and we will make an end of it in one moment ; for , listen , listen , gentlemen ! 
Since I know I 'm innocent , we can put an end to it in a minute . 
Ca n't we ? 
Ca n't we ? '' 
Mitya spoke much and quickly , nervously and effusively , as though he positively took his listeners to be his best friends . 
`` So , for the present , we will write that you absolutely deny the charge brought against you , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , impressively , and bending down to the secretary he dictated to him in an undertone what to write . 
`` Write it down ? 
You want to write that down ? 
Well , write it ; I consent , I give my full consent , gentlemen , only ... do you see ? 
... Stay , stay , write this . 
Of disorderly conduct I am guilty , of violence on a poor old man I am guilty . 
And there is something else at the bottom of my heart , of which I am guilty , too but that you need not write down '' -LRB- he turned suddenly to the secretary -RRB- ; `` that 's my personal life , gentlemen , that does n't concern you , the bottom of my heart , that 's to say ... . 
But of the murder of my old father I 'm not guilty . 
That 's a wild idea . 
It 's quite a wild idea ! 
... I will prove you that and you 'll be convinced directly ... . 
You will laugh , gentlemen . 
You 'll laugh yourselves at your suspicion ! 
... '' `` Be calm , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' said the investigating lawyer evidently trying to allay Mitya 's excitement by his own composure . 
`` Before we go on with our inquiry , I should like , if you will consent to answer , to hear you confirm the statement that you disliked your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch , that you were involved in continual disputes with him . 
Here at least , a quarter of an hour ago , you exclaimed that you wanted to kill him : ' I did n't kill him , ' you said , ` but I wanted to kill him . ' '' 
`` Did I exclaim that ? 
Ach , that may be so , gentlemen ! 
Yes , unhappily , I did want to kill him ... many times I wanted to ... unhappily , unhappily ! '' 
`` You wanted to . 
Would you consent to explain what motives precisely led you to such a sentiment of hatred for your parent ? '' 
`` What is there to explain , gentlemen ? '' 
Mitya shrugged his shoulders sullenly , looking down . 
`` I have never concealed my feelings . 
All the town knows about it - everyone knows in the tavern . 
Only lately I declared them in Father Zossima 's cell . 
And the very same day , in the evening I beat my father . 
I nearly killed him , and I swore I 'd come again and kill him , before witnesses ... . 
Oh , a thousand witnesses ! 
I 've been shouting it aloud for the last month , anyone can tell you that ! 
... The fact stares you in the face , it speaks for itself , it cries aloud , but feelings , gentlemen , feelings are another matter . 
You see , gentlemen '' - Mitya frowned - `` it seemed to me that about feelings you 've no right to question me . 
I know that you are bound by your office , I quite understand that , but that 's my affair , my private , intimate affair , yet ... since I have n't concealed my feelings in the past ... in the tavern , for instance , I 've talked to everyone , so ... so I wo n't make a secret of it now . 
You see , I understand , gentlemen , that there are terrible facts against me in this business . 
I told everyone that I 'd kill him , and now , all of a sudden , he 's been killed . 
So it must have been me ! 
Ha ha ! 
I can make allowances for you , gentlemen , I can quite make allowances . 
I 'm struck all of a heap myself , for who can have murdered him , if not I ? 
That 's what it comes to , is n't it ? 
If not I , who can it be , who ? 
Gentlemen , I want to know , I insist on knowing ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly . 
`` Where was he murdered ? 
How was he murdered ? 
How , and with what ? 
Tell me , '' he asked quickly , looking at the two lawyers . 
`` We found him in his study , lying on his back on the floor , with his head battered in , '' said the prosecutor . 
`` That 's horrible ! '' 
Mitya shuddered and , putting his elbows on the table , hid his face in his right hand . 
`` We will continue , '' interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` So what was it that impelled you to this sentiment of hatred ? 
You have asserted in public , I believe , that it was based upon jealousy ? '' 
`` Well , yes , jealousy . 
not only jealousy . '' 
`` Disputes about money ? '' 
`` Yes , about money , too . '' 
`` There was a dispute about three thousand roubles , I think , which you claimed as part of your inheritance ? '' 
`` Three thousand ! 
More , more , '' cried Mitya hotly ; `` more than six thousand , more than ten , perhaps . 
I told everyone so , shouted it at them . 
But I made up my mind to let it go at three thousand . 
I was desperately in need of that three thousand ... so the bundle of notes for three thousand that I knew he kept under his pillow , ready for Grushenka , I considered as simply stolen from me . 
Yes , gentlemen , I looked upon it as mine , as my own property ... '' The prosecutor looked significantly at the investigating lawyer , and had time to wink at him on the sly . 
`` We will return to that subject later , '' said the lawyer promptly . 
`` You will allow us to note that point and write it down ; that you looked upon that money as your own property ? '' 
`` Write it down , by all means . 
I know that 's another fact that tells against me , but I 'm not afraid of facts and I tell them against myself . 
Do you hear ? 
Do you know , gentlemen , you take me for a different sort of man from what I am , '' he added , suddenly gloomy and dejected . 
`` You have to deal with a man of honour , a man of the highest honour ; above all do n't lose sight of it - a man who 's done a lot of nasty things , but has always been , and still is , honourable at bottom , in his inner being . 
I do n't know how to express it . 
That 's just what 's made me wretched all my life , that I yearned to be honourable , that I was , so to say , a martyr to a sense of honour , seeking for it with a lantern , with the lantern of Diogenes , and yet all my life I 've been doing filthy things like all of us , gentlemen ... that is like me alone . 
That was a mistake , like me alone , me alone ! 
... Gentlemen , my head aches ... '' His brows contracted with pain . 
`` You see , gentlemen , I could n't bear the look of him , there was something in him ignoble , impudent , trampling on everything sacred , something sneering and irreverent , loathsome , loathsome . 
But now that he 's dead , I feel differently . '' 
`` How do you mean ? '' 
`` I do n't feel differently , but I wish I had n't hated him so . '' 
`` You feel penitent ? '' 
`` No , not penitent , do n't write that . 
I 'm not much good myself ; I 'm not very beautiful , so I had no right to consider him repulsive . 
That 's what I mean . 
Write that down , if you like . '' 
Saying this Mitya became very mournful . 
He had grown more and more gloomy as the inquiry continued . 
At that moment another unexpected scene followed . 
Though Grushenka had been removed , she had not been taken far away , only into the room next but one from the blue room , in which the examination was proceeding . 
It was a little room with one window , next beyond the large room in which they had danced and feasted so lavishly . 
She was sitting there with no one by her but Maximov , who was terribly depressed , terribly scared , and clung to her side , as though for security . 
At their door stood one of the peasants with a metal plate on his breast . 
Grushenka was crying , and suddenly her grief was too much for her , she jumped up , flung up her arms and , with a loud wail of sorrow , rushed out of the room to him , to her Mitya , and so unexpectedly that they had not time to stop her . 
Mitya , hearing her cry , trembled , jumped up , and with a yell rushed impetuously to meet her , not knowing what he was doing . 
But they were not allowed to come together , though they saw one another . 
He was seized by the arms . 
He struggled , and tried to tear himself away . 
It took three or four men to hold him . 
She was seized too , and he saw her stretching out her arms to him , crying aloud as they carried her away . 
When the scene was over , he came to himself again , sitting in the same place as before , opposite the investigating lawyer , and crying out to them : `` What do you want with her ? 
Why do you torment her ? 
She 's done nothing , nothing ! 
The lawyers tried to soothe him . 
About ten minutes passed like this . 
At last Mihail Makarovitch , who had been absent , came hurriedly into the room , and said in a loud and excited voice to the prosecutor : `` She 's been removed , she 's downstairs . 
Will you allow me to say one word to this unhappy man , gentlemen ? 
In your presence , gentlemen , in your presence . '' 
`` By all means , Mihail Makarovitch , '' answered the investigating lawyer . 
`` In the present case we have nothing against it . '' 
`` Listen , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , my dear fellow , '' began the police captain , and there was a look of warm , almost fatherly , feeling for the luckless prisoner on his excited face . 
`` I took your Agrafena Alexandrovna downstairs myself , and confided her to the care of the landlord 's daughters , and that old fellow Maximov is with her all the time . 
And I soothed her , do you hear ? 
I soothed and calmed her . 
I impressed on her that you have to clear yourself , so she must n't hinder you , must not depress you , or you may lose your head and say the wrong thing in your evidence . 
In fact , I talked to her and she understood . 
She 's a sensible girl , my boy , a good-hearted girl , she would have kissed my old hands , begging help for you . 
She sent me herself , to tell you not to worry about her . 
And I must go , my dear fellow , I must go and tell her that you are calm and comforted about her . 
And so you must be calm , do you understand ? 
I was unfair to her ; she is a Christian soul , gentlemen , yes , I tell you , she 's a gentle soul , and not to blame for anything . 
So what am I to tell her , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
Will you sit quiet or not ? '' 
The good-natured police captain said a great deal that was irregular , but Grushenka 's suffering , a fellow creature 's suffering , touched his good-natured heart , and tears stood in his eyes . 
Mitya jumped up and rushed towards him . 
`` Forgive me , gentlemen , oh , allow me , allow me ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You 've the heart of an angel , an angel , Mihail Makarovitch , I thank you for her . 
I will , I will be calm , cheerful , in fact . 
Tell her , in the kindness of your heart , that I am cheerful , quite cheerful , that I shall be laughing in a minute , knowing that she has a guardian angel like you . 
I shall have done with all this directly , and as soon as I 'm free , I 'll be with her , she 'll see , let her wait . 
Gentlemen , '' he said , turning to the two lawyers , now I 'll open my whole soul to you ; I 'll pour out everything . 
We 'll finish this off directly , finish it off gaily . 
We shall laugh at it in the end , sha n't we ? 
But gentlemen , that woman is the queen of my heart . 
Oh , let me tell you that . 
That one thing I 'll tell you now ... . 
I see I 'm with honourable men . 
She is my light , she is my holy one , and if only you knew ! 
Did you hear her cry , ` I 'll go to death with you ' ? 
And what have I , a penniless beggar , done for her ? 
Why such love for me ? 
How can a clumsy , ugly brute like me , with my ugly face , deserve such love , that she is ready to go to exile with me ? 
And how she fell down at your feet for my sake , just now ! 
... and yet she 's proud and has done nothing ! 
How can I help adoring her , how can I help crying out and rushing to her as I did just now ? 
Gentlemen , forgive me ! 
But now , now I am comforted . '' 
And he sank back in his chair and , covering his face with his hands , burst into tears . 
But they were happy tears . 
He recovered himself instantly . 
The old police captain seemed much pleased , and the lawyers also . 
They felt that the examination was passing into a new phase . 
When the police captain went out , Mitya was positively gay . 
`` Now , gentlemen , I am at your disposal , entirely at your disposal . 
And if it were not for all these trivial details , we should understand one another in a minute . 
I 'm at those details again . 
I 'm at your disposal , gentlemen , but I declare that we must have mutual confidence , you in me and I in you , or there 'll be no end to it . 
I speak in your interests . 
To business , gentlemen , to business , and do n't rummage in my soul ; do n't tease me with trifles , but only ask me about facts and what matters , and I will satisfy you at once . 
And damn the details ! '' 
So spoke Mitya . 
The interrogation began again . 
The Second Ordeal `` YOU do n't know how you encourage us , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , by your readiness to answer , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , with an animated air , and obvious satisfaction beaming in his very prominent , short-sighted , light grey eyes , from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before . 
`` And you have made a very just remark about the mutual confidence , without which it is sometimes positively impossible to get on in cases of such importance , if the suspected party really hopes and desires to defend himself and is in a position to do so . 
We on our side , will do everything in our power , and you can see for yourself how we are conducting the case . 
You approve , Ippolit Kirillovitch ? '' 
He turned to the prosecutor . 
