And they will have no secrets from us . 
We shall allow or forbid them to live with their wives and mistresses , to have or not to have children according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient - and they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully . 
The most painful secrets of their conscience , all , all they will bring to us , and we shall have an answer for all . 
And they will be glad to believe our answer , for it will save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present in making a free decision for themselves . 
And all will be happy , all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them . 
For only we , we who guard the mystery , shall be unhappy . 
There will be thousands of millions of happy babes , and a hundred thousand sufferers who have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil . 
Peacefully they will die , peacefully they will expire in Thy name , and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death . 
But we shall keep the secret , and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity . 
Though if there were anything in the other world , it certainly would not be for such as they . 
It is prophesied that Thou wilt come again in victory , Thou wilt come with Thy chosen , the proud and strong , but we will say that they have only saved themselves , but we have saved all . 
We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast , and holds in her hands the mystery , shall be put to shame , that the weak will rise up again , and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her loathsome body . 
But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin . 
And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say : `` Judge us if Thou canst and darest . '' 
Know that I fear Thee not . 
Know that I too have been in the wilderness , I too have lived on roots and locusts , I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men , and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect , among the strong and powerful , thirsting `` to make up the number . '' 
But I awakened and would not serve madness . 
I turned back and joined the ranks of those who have corrected Thy work . 
I left the proud and went back to the humble , for the happiness of the humble . 
What I say to Thee will come to pass , and our dominion will be built up . 
I repeat , to-morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us . 
For if anyone has ever deserved our fires , it is Thou . 
To-morrow I shall burn Thee . 
Dixi . ' '' 
* * I have spoken . 
Ivan stopped . 
He was carried away as he talked , and spoke with excitement ; when he had finished , he suddenly smiled . 
Alyosha had listened in silence ; towards the end he was greatly moved and seemed several times on the point of interrupting , but restrained himself . 
Now his words came with a rush . 
`` But ... that 's absurd ! '' 
he cried , flushing . 
`` Your poem is in praise of Jesus , not in blame of Him - as you meant it to be . 
And who will believe you about freedom ? 
Is that the way to understand it ? 
That 's not the idea of it in the Orthodox Church ... . 
That 's Rome , and not even the whole of Rome , it 's false-those are the worst of the Catholics the Inquisitors , the Jesuits ! 
... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your Inquisitor . 
What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves ? 
Who are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves for the happiness of mankind ? 
When have they been seen ? 
We know the Jesuits , they are spoken ill of , but surely they are not what you describe ? 
They are not that at all , not at all ... . 
They are simply the Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future , with the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that 's their ideal , but there 's no sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it ... . 
It 's simple lust of power , of filthy earthly gain , of domination-something like a universal serfdom with them as masters-that 's all they stand for . 
They do n't even believe in God perhaps . 
Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy . '' 
`` Stay , stay , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` how hot you are ! 
A fantasy you say , let it be so ! 
Of course it 's a fantasy . 
But allow me to say : do you really think that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing but the lust of power , of filthy earthly gain ? 
Is that Father Paissy 's teaching ? '' 
`` No , no , on the contrary , Father Paissy did once say something rather the same as you ... but of course it 's not the same , not a bit the same , '' Alyosha hastily corrected himself . 
`` A precious admission , in spite of your ` not a bit the same . ' 
I ask you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material gain ? 
Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow and loving humanity ? 
You see , only suppose that there was one such man among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain-if there 's only one like my old Inquisitor , who had himself eaten roots in the desert and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and perfect . 
But yet all his life he loved humanity , and suddenly his eyes were opened , and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attain perfection and freedom , if at the same time one gains the conviction that millions of God 's creatures have been created as a mockery , that they will never be capable of using their freedom , that these poor rebels can never turn into giants to complete the tower , that it was not for such geese that the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony . 
Seeing all that he turned back and joined - the clever people . 
Surely that could have happened ? '' 
`` Joined whom , what clever people ? '' 
cried Alyosha , completely carried away . 
`` They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets ... . 
Perhaps nothing but Atheism , that 's all their secret . 
Your Inquisitor does not believe in God , that 's his secret ! '' 
`` What if it is so ! 
At last you have guessed it . 
It 's perfectly true , it 's true that that 's the whole secret , but is n't that suffering , at least for a man like that , who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could not shake off his incurable love of humanity ? 
In his old age he reached the clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spirit could build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble , unruly , ` incomplete , empirical creatures created in jest . ' 
And so , convinced of this , he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit , the dread spirit of death and destruction , and therefore accept lying and deception , and lead men consciously to death and destruction , and yet deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being led , that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think themselves happy . 
And note , the deception is in the name of Him in Whose ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long . 
Is not that tragic ? 
And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army ` filled with the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain ' - would not one such be enough to make a tragedy ? 
More than that , one such standing at the head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with all its armies and Jesuits , its highest idea . 
I tell you frankly that I firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood at the head of the movement . 
Who knows , there may have been some such even among the Roman Popes . 
Who knows , perhaps the spirit of that accursed old man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way , is to be found even now in a whole multitude of such old men , existing not by chance but by agreement , as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the mystery , to guard it from the weak and the unhappy , so as to make them happy . 
No doubt it is so , and so it must be indeed . 
I fancy that even among the Masons there 's something of the same mystery at the bottom , and that that 's why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals breaking up the unity of the idea , while it is so essential that there should be one flock and one shepherd ... . 
But from the way I defend my idea I might be an author impatient of your criticism . 
Enough of it . '' 
`` You are perhaps a Mason yourself ! '' 
broke suddenly from Alyosha . 
`` You do n't believe in God , '' he added , speaking this time very sorrowfully . 
He fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically . 
`` How does your poem end ? '' 
he asked , suddenly looking down . 
`` Or was it the end ? '' 
`` I meant to end it like this . 
When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him . 
His silence weighed down upon him . 
He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time , looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply . 
The old man longed for him to say something , however bitter and terrible . 
But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips . 
That was all his answer . 
The old man shuddered . 
His lips moved . 
He went to the door , opened it , and said to Him : ` Go , and come no more ... come not at all , never , never ! ' 
And he let Him out into the dark alleys of the town . 
The Prisoner went away . '' 
`` And the old man ? '' 
`` The kiss glows in his heart , but the old man adheres to his idea . '' 
`` And you with him , you too ? '' 
cried Alyosha , mournfully . 
Ivan laughed . 
`` Why , it 's all nonsense , Alyosha . 
It 's only a senseless poem of a senseless student , who could never write two lines of verse . 
Why do you take it so seriously ? 
Surely you do n't suppose I am going straight off to the Jesuits , to join the men who are correcting His work ? 
Good Lord , it 's no business of mine . 
I told you , all I want is to live on to thirty , and then ... dash the cup to the ground ! '' 
`` But the little sticky leaves , and the precious tombs , and the blue sky , and the woman you love ! 
How will you live , how will you love them ? '' 
Alyosha cried sorrowfully . 
`` With such a hell in your heart and your head , how can you ? 
No , that 's just what you are going away for , to join them ... if not , you will kill yourself , you ca n't endure it ! '' 
`` There is a strength to endure everything , '' Ivan said with a cold smile . 
`` The strength of the Karamazovs - the strength of the Karamazov baseness . '' 
`` To sink into debauchery , to stifle your soul with corruption , yes ? '' 
`` Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it , and then - '' `` How will you escape it ? 
By what will you escape it ? 
That 's impossible with your ideas . '' 
`` In the Karamazov way , again . '' '' 
` Everything is lawful , ' you mean ? 
Everything is lawful , is that it ? '' 
Ivan scowled , and all at once turned strangely pale . 
`` Ah , you 've caught up yesterday 's phrase , which so offended Muisov - and which Dmitri pounced upon so naively and paraphrased ! '' 
he smiled queerly . 
`` Yes , if you like , ` everything is lawful ' since the word has been said , I wo n't deny it . 
And Mitya 's version is n't bad . '' 
Alyosha looked at him in silence . 
`` I thought that going away from here I have you at least , '' Ivan said suddenly , with unexpected feeling ; `` but now I see that there is no place for me even in your heart , my dear hermit . 
The formula , ` all is lawful , ' I wo n't renounce - will you renounce me for that , yes ? '' 
Alyosha got up , went to him and softly kissed him on the lips . 
`` That 's plagiarism , '' cried Ivan , highly delighted . 
`` You stole that from my poem . 
Thank you though . 
Get up , Alyosha , it 's time we were going , both of us . '' 
They went out , but stopped when they reached the entrance of the restaurant . 
`` Listen , Alyosha , '' Ivan began in a resolute voice , `` if I am really able to care for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them , remembering you . 
It 's enough for me that you are somewhere here , and I sha n't lose my desire for life yet . 
Is that enough for you ? 
Take it as a declaration of love if you like . 
And now you go to the right and I to the left . 
And it 's enough , do you hear , enough . 
I mean even if I do n't go away to-morrow -LRB- I think I certainly shall go -RRB- and we meet again , do n't say a word more on these subjects . 
I beg that particularly . 
And about Dmitri too , I ask you specially , never speak to me again , '' he added , with sudden irritation ; `` it 's all exhausted , it has all been said over and over again , has n't it ? 
And I 'll make you one promise in return for it . 
When at thirty , I want to ` dash the cup to the ground , ' wherever I may be I 'll come to have one more talk with you , even though it were from America , you may be sure of that . 
I 'll come on purpose . 
It will be very interesting to have a look at you , to see what you 'll be by that time . 
It 's rather a solemn promise , you see . 
And we really may be parting for seven years or ten . 
Come , go now to your Pater Seraphicus , he is dying . 
If he dies without you , you will be angry with me for having kept you . 
Good-bye , kiss me once more ; that 's right , now go . '' 
Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back . 
It was just as Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before , though the parting had been very different . 
The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha 's mind in the distress and dejection of that moment . 
He waited a little , looking after his brother . 
He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left . 
He had never noticed it before . 
But all at once he turned too , and almost ran to the monastery . 
It was nearly dark , and he felt almost frightened ; something new was growing up in him for which he could not account . 
The wind had risen again as on the previous evening , and the ancient pines murmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse . 
He almost ran . 
`` Pater Seraphicus - he got that name from somewhere - where from ? '' 
Alyosha wondered . 
`` Ivan , poor Ivan , and when shall I see you again ? 
... Here is the hermitage . 
Yes , yes , that he is , Pater Seraphicus , he will save me - from him and for ever ! '' 
Several times afterwards he wondered how he could , on leaving Ivan , so completely forget his brother Dmitri , though he had that morning , only a few hours before , so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing so , even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night . 
For Awhile a Very Obscure One AND Ivan , on parting from Alyosha , went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house . 
But , strange to say , he was overcome by insufferable depression , which grew greater at every step he took towards the house . 
There was nothing strange in his being depressed ; what was strange was that Ivan could not have said what was the cause of it . 
He had often been depressed before , and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment , when he had broken off with everything had brought him here , and was preparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new , unknown future . 
He would again be as solitary as ever , and though he had great hopes , and great - too great - expectations from life , he could not have given any definite account of his hopes , his expectations , or even his desires . 
Yet at that moment , though the apprehension of the new and unknown certainly found place in his heart , what was worrying him was something quite different . 
`` Is it loathing for my father 's house ? '' 
he wondered . 
`` Quite likely ; I am so sick of it ; and though it 's the last time I shall cross its hateful threshold , still I loathe it ... . 
No , it 's not that either . 
Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had with him ? 
For so many years I 've been silent with the whole world and not deigned to speak , and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that . '' 
certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthful inexperience and vanity - vexation at having failed to express himself , especially with such a being as Alyosha , on whom his heart had certainly been reckoning . 
No doubt that came in , that vexation , it must have done indeed ; but yet that was not it , that was not it either . 
`` I feel sick with depression and yet I ca n't tell what I want . 
Better not think , perhaps . '' 
Ivan tried `` not to think , '' but that , too , was no use . 
What made his depression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual , external character - he felt that . 
Some person or thing seemed to be standing out somewhere , just as something will sometimes obtrude itself upon the eye , and though one may be so busy with work or conversation that for a long time one does not notice it , yet it irritates and almost torments one till at last one realises , and removes the offending object , often quite a trifling and ridiculous one - some article left about in the wrong place , a handkerchief on the floor , a book not replaced on the shelf , and so on . 
At last , feeling very cross and ill-humoured , Ivan arrived home , and suddenly , about fifteen paces from the garden gate , he guessed what was fretting and worrying him . 
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the coolness of the evening , and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that the valet Smerdyakov was on his mind , and that it was this man that his soul loathed . 
It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear . 
just before , when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov , he had felt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing , which had immediately stirred responsive anger in his heart . 
Afterwards , as he talked , Smerdyakov had been forgotten for the time ; but still he had been in his mind , and as soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home , the forgotten sensation began to obtrude itself again . 
`` Is it possible that a miserable , contemptible creature like that can worry me so much ? '' 
he wondered , with insufferable irritation . 
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the man , especially during the last few days . 
He had even begun to notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature . 
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came to the neighbourhood he had felt quite differently . 
Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov , and had even thought him very original . 
He had encouraged him to talk to him , although he had always wondered at a certain incoherence , or rather restlessness , in his mind , and could not understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon the brain of `` the contemplative . '' 
They discussed philosophical questions and even how there could have been light on the first day when the sun , moon , and stars were only created on the fourth day , and how that was to be understood . 
But Ivan soon saw that , though the sun , moon , and stars might be an interesting subject , yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov , and that he was looking for something altogether different . 
In one way and another , he began to betray a boundless vanity , and a wounded vanity , too , and that Ivan disliked . 
It had first given rise to his aversion . 
Later on , there had been trouble in the house . 
Grushenka had come on the scene , and there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri - they discussed that , too . 
But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement , it was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it . 
There was , in fact , something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of his desires , accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed . 
Smerdyakov was always inquiring , putting certain indirect but obviously premeditated questions , but what his object was he did not explain , and usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject . 
But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar , revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly . 
Not that he forgot himself and was rude ; on the contrary , he always spoke very respectfully , yet he had obviously begun to consider - goodness knows why ! 
- that there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact , some secret between them , that had at some time been expressed on both sides , only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around them . 
But for a long while Ivan did not recognise the real cause of his growing dislike and he had only lately realised what was at the root of it . 
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov . 
But Smerdyakov rose from the bench , and from that action alone , Ivan knew instantly that he wanted particularly to talk to him . 
Ivan looked at him and stopped , and the fact that he did stop , instead of passing by , as he meant to the minute before , drove him to fury . 
With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov 's emasculate , sickly face , with the little curls combed forward on his forehead . 
His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say , `` Where are you going ? 
You wo n't pass by ; you see that we two clever people have something to say to each other . '' 
Ivan shook . 
`` Get away , miserable idiot . 
What have I to do with you ? '' 
was on the tip of his tongue , but to his profound astonishment he heard himself say , `` Is my father still asleep , or has he waked ? '' 
He asked the question softly and meekly , to his own surprise , and at once , again to his own surprise , sat down on the bench . 
For an instant he felt almost frightened ; he remembered it afterwards . 
Smerdyakov stood facing him , his hands behind his back , looking at him with assurance and almost severity . 
`` His honour is still asleep , '' he articulated deliberately -LRB- `` You were the first to speak , not I , '' he seemed to say -RRB- . 
`` I am surprised at you , sir , '' he added , after a pause , dropping his eyes affectedly , setting his right foot forward , and playing with the tip of his polished boot . 
`` Why are you surprised at me ? '' 
Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly , doing his utmost to restrain himself , and suddenly realising , with disgust , that he was feeling intense curiosity and would not , on any account , have gone away without satisfying it . 
`` Why do n't you go to Tchermashnya , sir ? '' 
Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly . 
`` Why I smile you must understand of yourself , if you are a clever man , '' his screwed-up left eye seemed to say . 
`` Why should I go to Tchermashnya ? '' 
Ivan asked in surprise . 
Smerdyakov was silent again . 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to , '' he said at last , slowly and apparently attaching no significance to his answer . 
`` I put you off with a secondary reason , '' he seemed to suggest , `` simply to say something . '' 
`` Damn you ! 
Speak out what you want ! '' 
Ivan cried angrily at last , passing from meekness to violence . 
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left , pulled himself up , but still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile . 
`` Substantially nothing - but just by way of conversation . '' 
Another silence followed . 
They did not speak for nearly a minute . 
Ivan knew that he ought to get up and show anger , and Smerdyakov stood before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or not . 
So at least it seemed to Ivan . 
At last he moved to get up . 
Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment . 
`` I 'm in an awful position , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't know how to help myself , '' he said resolutely and distinctly , and at his last word he sighed . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again . 
`` They are both utterly crazy , they are no better than little children , '' Smerdyakov went on . 
`` I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin worrying me every minute , ` Has she come ? 
Why has n't she come ? ' 
and so on up till midnight and even after midnight . 
And if Agrafena Alexandrovna does n't come -LRB- for very likely she does not mean to come at all -RRB- then he will be at me again to-morrow morning , ` Why has n't she come ? 
When will she come ? ' 
- as though I were to blame for it . 
On the other side it 's no better . 
As soon as it gets dark , or even before , your brother will appear with his gun in his hands : ` Look out , you rogue , you soup-maker . 
If you miss her and do n't let me know she 's been - I 'll kill you before anyone . ' 
When the night 's over , in the morning , he , too , like Fyodor Pavlovitch , begins worrying me to death . 
` Why has n't she come ? 
Will she come soon ? ' 
And he , too , thinks me to blame because his lady has n't come . 
And every day and every hour they get angrier and angrier , so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a fright . 
I ca n't depend them , sir . '' 
`` And why have you meddled ? 
Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
said Ivan irritably . 
`` How could I help meddling ? 
Though , indeed , I have n't meddled at all , if you want to know the truth of the matter . 
I kept quiet from the very beginning , not daring to answer ; but he pitched on me to be his servant . 
He has had only one thing to say since : ` I 'll kill you , you scoundrel , if you miss her . ' 
I feel certain , sir , that I shall have a long fit to-morrow . '' 
`` What do you mean by ' a long fit ' ? '' 
`` A long fit , lasting a long time - several hours , or perhaps a day or two . 
Once it went on for three days . 
I fell from the garret that time . 
The struggling ceased and then began again , and for three days I could n't come back to my senses . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube , the doctor here , and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy , too ... . 
I might have died . '' 
`` But they say one ca n't tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming . 
What makes you say you will have one to-morrow ? '' 
Ivan inquired , with a peculiar , irritable curiosity . 
`` That 's just so . 
You ca n't tell beforehand . '' 
`` Besides , you fell from the garret then . '' 
`` I climb up to the garret every day . 
I might fall from the garret again to-morrow . 
And , if not , I might fall down the cellar steps . 
I have to go into the cellar every day , too . '' 
Ivan took a long look at him . 
`` You are talking nonsense , I see , and I do n't quite understand you , '' he said softly , but with a sort of menace . 
`` Do you mean to pretend to be ill to-morrow for three days , eh ? '' 
Smerdyakov , who was looking at the ground again , and playing with the toe of his right foot , set the foot down , moved the left one forward , and , grinning , articulated : `` If I were able to play such a trick , that is , pretend to have a fit - and it would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them - I should have a perfect right to use such a means to save myself from death . 
For even if Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill , his honour ca n't blame a sick man for not telling him . 
He 'd be ashamed to . '' 
`` Hang it all ! '' 
Ivan cried , his face working with anger , `` Why are you always in such a funk for your life ? 
All my brother Dmitri 's threats are only hasty words and mean nothing . 
He wo n't kill you ; it 's not you he 'll kill ! '' 
`` He 'd kill me first of all , like a fly . 
But even more than that , I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something crazy to his father . '' 
`` Why should you be taken for an accomplice ? '' 
`` They 'll think I am an accomplice , because I let him know the signals as a great secret . '' 
`` What signals ? 
Whom did you tell ? 
Confound you , speak more plainly . '' 
`` I 'm bound to admit the fact , '' Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure , `` that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business . 
As you know yourself -LRB- if only you do know it -RRB- he has for several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on . 
Of late you 've been going upstairs to your room early every evening , and yesterday you did not come down at all , and so perhaps you do n't know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night , and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he wo n't open to him till he hears his voice . 
But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come , because I wait upon him alone in his room now . 
That 's the arrangement he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began . 
But at night , by his orders , I go away to the lodge so that I do n't get to sleep till midnight , but am on the watch , getting up and walking about the yard , waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come . 
For the last few days he 's been perfectly frantic expecting her . 
What he argues is , she is afraid of him , Dmitri Fyodorovitch -LRB- Mitya , as he calls him -RRB- , ` and so , ' says he , ` she 'll come the back-way , late at night , to me . 
You look out for her , ' says he , 'till midnight and later ; and if she does come , you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden . 
Knock at first twice , rather gently , and then three times more quickly , then , ' says he , ' I shall understand at once that she has come , and will open the door to you quietly . ' 
Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens . 
At first , two knocks , and then , after an interval , another much louder . 
Then he will understand that something has happened suddenly and that I must see him , and he will open to me so that I can go and speak to him . 
That 's all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna ca n't come herself , but sends a message . 
Besides , Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come , too , so I must let him know he is near . 
His honour is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time , I should be bound to let him know at once , knocking three times . 
So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , while the second signal of three knocks means ` something important to tell you . ' 
His honour has shown me them several times and explained them . 
And as in the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his honour , so he 'd open the door without the slightest hesitation and without calling out -LRB- he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud -RRB- . 
Well , those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too , now . '' 
`` How are they known ? 
Did you tell him ? 
How dared you tell him ? '' 
`` It was through fright I did it . 
How could I dare to keep it back from him ? 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day , ` You are deceiving me , you are hiding something from me ! 
I 'll break both your legs for you . ' 
So I told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion , and might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him , but was telling him all I could . '' 
`` If you think that he 'll make use of those signals and try to get in , do n't let him in . '' 
`` But if I should be laid up with a fit , how can I prevent him coming in then , even if I dared prevent him , knowing how desperate he is ? '' 
`` Hang it ! 
How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit , confound you ? 
Are you laughing at me ? '' 
`` How could I dare laugh at you ? 
I am in no laughing humour with this fear on me . 
I feel I am going to have a fit . 
I have a presentiment . 
Fright alone will bring it on . '' 
`` Confound it ! 
If you are laid up , Grigory will be on the watch . 
Let Grigory know beforehand ; he will be sure not to let him in . '' 
`` I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals without orders from my master . 
And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him , he has been ill ever since yesterday , and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow . 
They 've just arranged it . 
It 's a very strange remedy of hers . 
Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a preparation and always keeps it . 
It 's a strong thing made from some herb . 
She has the secret of it , and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago 's so bad he is almost paralysed by it . 
Then she takes a towel , wets it with the stuff , and rubs his whole back for half an hour till it 's quite red and swollen , and what 's left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer ; but not quite all , for on such occasions she leaves some for herself , and drinks it herself . 
And as they never take strong drink , I assure you they both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long time . 
And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after it , but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it . 
So , if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow , they wo n't hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 'll be asleep . '' 
`` What a rigmarole ! 
And it all seems to happen at once , as though it were planned . 
You 'll have a fit and they 'll both be unconscious , '' cried Ivan . 
`` But are n't you trying to arrange it so ? '' 
broke from him suddenly , and he frowned threateningly . 
`` How could I ? 
... And why should I , when it all depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans ? 
... If he means to do anything , he 'll do it ; but if not , I sha n't be thrusting him upon his father . '' 
`` And why should he go to father , especially on the sly , if , as you say yourself , Agrafena Alexandrovna wo n't come at all ? '' 
Ivan went on , turning white with anger . 
`` You say that yourself , and all the while I 've been here , I 've felt sure it was all the old man 's fancy , and the creature wo n't come to him . 
Why should Dmitri break in on him if she does n't come ? 
Speak , I want to know what you are thinking ! '' 
`` You know yourself why he 'll come . 
What 's the use of what I think ? 
His honour will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps , and he 'll dash in , as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms , to see whether she has n't escaped him on the sly . 
He is perfectly well aware , too , that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it , tied up with ribbon and sealed with three seals . 
On it is written in his own hand ` To my angel Grushenka , if she will come , ' to which he added three days later , ` for my little chicken . ' 
There 's no knowing what that might do . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
cried Ivan , almost beside himself . 
`` Dmitri wo n't come to steal money and kill my father to do it . 
He might have killed him yesterday on account of Grushenka , like the frantic , savage fool he is , but he wo n't steal . '' 
`` He is in very great need of money now - the greatest need , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
You do n't know in what need he is , '' Smerdyakov explained , with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness . 
`` He looks on that three thousand as his own , too . 
He said so to me himself . 
` My father still owes me just three thousand , ' he said . 
And besides that , consider , Ivan Fyodorovitch , there is something else perfectly true . 
It 's as good as certain , so to say , that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him , if only she cares to , to marry her - the master himself , I mean , Fyodor Pavlovitch - if only she cares to , and of course she may care to . 
All I 've said is that she wo n't come , but maybe she 's looking for more than that - I mean to be mistress here . 
I know myself that Samsonov , her merchant , was laughing with her about it , telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do . 
And she 's got plenty of sense . 
She would n't marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
So , taking that into consideration , Ivan Fyodorovitch , reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch , would have anything after the master 's death , not a rouble , for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get hold of the whole , all the money there is . 
But if your father were to die now , there 'd be some forty thousand for sure , even for Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so , for he 's made no will ... . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knows all that very well . '' 
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan 's face . 
He suddenly flushed . 
`` Then why on earth , '' he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov , `` do you advise me to go to Tchermashnya ? 
What did you mean by that ? 
If I go away , you see what will happen here . '' 
Ivan drew his breath with difficulty . 
`` Precisely so , '' said Smerdyakov , softly and reasonably , watching Ivan intently , however . 
`` What do you mean by ` precisely so ' ? '' 
Ivan questioned him , with a menacing light in his eyes , restraining himself with difficulty . 
`` I spoke because I felt sorry for you . 
If I were in your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position , '' answered Smerdyakov , with the most candid air looking at Ivan 's flashing eyes . 
They were both silent . 
`` You seem to be a perfect idiot , and what 's more ... an awful scoundrel , too . '' 
Ivan rose suddenly from the bench . 
He was about to pass straight through the gate , but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov . 
Something strange followed . 
Ivan , in a sudden paroxysm , bit his lip , clenched his fists , and , in another minute , would have flung himself on Smerdyakov . 
The latter , anyway , noticed it at the same moment , started , and shrank back . 
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov , and Ivan turned in silence , as it seemed in perplexity , to the gate . 
`` I am going away to Moscow to-morrow , if you care to know - early to-morrow morning . 
That 's all ! '' 
he suddenly said aloud angrily , and wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov . 
`` That 's the best thing you can do , '' he responded , as though he had expected to hear it ; `` except that you can always be telegraphed for from Moscow , if anything should happen here . '' 
Ivan stopped again , and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov . 
But a change had passed over him , too . 
All his familiarity and carelessnes had completely disappeared . 
His face expressed attention and expectation , intent but timid and cringing . 
`` Have n't you something more to say - something to add ? '' 
could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan . 
`` And could n't I be sent for from Tchermashnya , too - in case anything happened ? '' 
Ivan shouted suddenly , for some unknown reason raising his voice . 
`` From Tchermashnya , too ... you could be sent for , '' Smerdyakov muttered , almost in a whisper , looking disconcerted , but gazing intently into Ivan 's eyes . 
`` Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer . 
Is it to save my spending money on the fare , or to save my going so far out of my way , that you insist on Tchermashnya ? '' 
`` Precisely so ... '' muttered Smerdyakov , with a breaking voice . 
He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile , and again made ready to draw back . 
But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh , and went through the gate still laughing . 
Anyone who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart , and he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that instant . 
He moved and walked as though in a nervous frenzy . 
`` It 's Always Worth While Speaking to a Clever Man '' AND in the same nervous frenzy , too , he spoke . 
Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in , he shouted to him , waving his hands , `` I am going upstairs to my room , not in to you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
and passed by , trying not even to look at his father . 
Very possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment ; but such an unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose . 
Receiving this amiable greeting , he stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going upstairs , till he passed out of sight . 
`` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
he promptly asked Smerdyakov , who had followed Ivan . 
`` Angry about something . 
Who can tell ? '' 
the valet muttered evasively . 
`` Confound him ! 
Let him be angry then . 
Bring in the samovar , and get along with you . 
Look sharp ! 
No news ? '' 
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained of to Ivan , all relating to his expected visitor , and these questions we will omit . 
Half an hour later the house was locked , and the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon . 
Now and then he peered out into the darkness , seeing nothing . 
It was very late , but Ivan was still awake and reflecting . 
He sat up late that night , till two o'clock . 
But we will not give an account of his thoughts , and this is not the place to look into that soul - its turn will come . 
And even if one tried , it would be very hard to give an account of them , for there were no thoughts in his brain , but something very vague , and , above all , intense excitement . 
He felt himself that he had lost his bearings . 
He was fretted , too , by all sorts of strange and almost surprising desires ; for instance , after midnight he suddenly had an intense irresistible inclination to go down , open the door , go to the lodge and beat Smerdyakov . 
But if he had been asked why , he could not have given any exact reason , except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than anyone in the world . 
On the other hand , he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror , which he felt positively paralysed his physical powers . 
His head ached and he was giddy . 
A feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart , as though he meant to avenge himself on someone . 
He even hated Alyosha , recalling the conversation he had just had with him . 
At moments he hated himself intensely . 
Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot to think , and wondered greatly at this afterwards , especially as he remembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina Ivanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow , something had whispered in his heart , `` That 's nonsense , you are not going , and it wo n't be so easy to tear yourself away as you are boasting now . '' 
Remembering that night long afterwards , Ivan recalled with peculiar repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily , as though he were afraid of being watched , opened the door , gone out on the staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below , had listened a long while - some five minutes - with a sort of strange curiosity , holding his breath while his heart throbbed . 
And why he had done all this , why he was listening , he could not have said . 
That `` action '' all his life afterwards he called `` infamous , '' and at the bottom of his heart , he thought of it as the basest action of his life . 
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment , but was simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now . 
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room , listening , listening - for someone to knock . 
Ivan went out on the stairs twice to listen like this . 
About two o'clock when everything was quiet , and even Fyodor Pavlovitch had gone to bed , Ivan had got into bed , firmly resolved to fall asleep at once , as he felt fearfully exhausted . 
And he did fall asleep at once , and slept soundly without dreams , but waked early , at seven o'clock , when it was broad daylight . 
Opening his eyes , he was surprised to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous . 
He jumped up at once and dressed quickly ; then dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately . 
His linen had come back from the laundress the previous morning . 
Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure . 
And his departure certainly was sudden . 
Though Ivan had said the day before -LRB- to Katerina Ivanovna , Alyosha , and Smerdyakov -RRB- that he was leaving next day , yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed , or , at least , had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk . 
At last his trunk and bag were ready . 
It was about nine o'clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry , `` Where will your honour take your tea , in your own room or downstairs ? '' 
He looked almost cheerful , but there was about him , about his words and gestures , something hurried and scattered . 
Greeting his father affably , and even inquiring specially after his health , though he did not wait to hear his answer to the end , he announced that he was starting off in an hour to return to Moscow for good , and begged him to send for the horses . 
His father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise , and forgot in an unmannerly way to show regret at losing him . 
Instead of doing so , he flew into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his own . 
`` What a fellow you are ! 
Not to tell me yesterday ! 
