Yet , I did expect you . 
You may marvel at my instinct , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but I was convinced all the morning that you would come . '' 
`` That is certainly wonderful , madam , '' observed Mitya , sitting down limply , `` but I have come to you on a matter of great importance ... . 
On a matter of supreme importance for me , that is , madam ... for me alone ... and I hasten - '' `` I know you 've come on most important business . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch ; it 's not a case of presentiment , no reactionary harking back to the miraculous -LRB- have you heard about Father Zossima ? -RRB- . 
This is a case of mathematics : you could n't help coming , after all that has passed with Katerina Ivanovna ; you could n't , you could n't , that 's a mathematical certainty . '' 
`` The realism of actual life , madam , that 's what it is . 
But allow me to explain - '' `` Realism indeed , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm all for realism now . 
I 've seen too much of miracles . 
You 've heard that Father Zossima is dead ? '' 
`` No , madam , it 's the first time I 've heard of it . '' 
Mitya was a little surprised . 
The image of Alyosha rose to his mind . 
`` Last night , and only imagine - '' `` Madam , '' said Mitya , `` I can imagine nothing except that I 'm in a desperate position , and that if you do n't help me , everything will come to grief , and I first of all . 
Excuse me for the triviality of the expression , but I 'm in a fever - '' `` I know , I know that you 're in a fever . 
You could hardly fail to be , and whatever you may say to me , I know beforehand . 
I have long been thinking over your destiny , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , I am watching over it and studying it ... . 
Oh , believe me , I 'm an experienced doctor of the soul , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Madam , if you are an experienced doctor , I 'm certainly an experienced patient , '' said Mitya , with an effort to be polite , `` and I feel that if you are watching over my destiny in this way , you will come to my help in my ruin , and so allow me , at least to explain to you the plan with which I have ventured to come to you ... and what I am hoping of you ... . 
I have come , madam - '' `` Do n't explain it . 
It 's of secondary importance . 
But as for help , you 're not the first I have helped , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You have most likely heard of my cousin , Madame Belmesov . 
Her husband was ruined , ` had come to grief , ' as you characteristically express it , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I recommended him to take to horse-breeding , and now he 's doing well . 
Have you any idea of horse-breeding , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` Not the faintest , madam ; ah , madam , not the faintest ! '' 
cried Mitya , in nervous impatience , positively starting from his seat . 
`` I simply implore you , madam , to listen to me . 
Only give me two minutes of free speech that I may just explain to you everything , the whole plan with which I have come . 
Besides , I am short of time . 
I 'm in a fearful hurry , '' Mitya cried hysterically , feeling that she was just going to begin talking again , and hoping to cut her short . 
`` I have come in despair ... in the last gasp of despair , to beg you to lend me the sum of three thousand , a loan , but on safe , most safe security , madam , with the most trustworthy guarantees ! 
Only let me explain - '' `` You must tell me all that afterwards , afterwards ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov with a gesture demanded silence in her turn , `` and whatever you may tell me , I know it all beforehand ; I 've told you so already . 
You ask for a certain sum , for three thousand , but I can give you more , immeasurably more ; I will save you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but you must listen to me . '' 
Mitya started from his seat again . 
`` Madam , will you really be so good ! '' 
he cried , with strong feeling . 
`` Good God , you 've saved me ! 
You have saved a man from a violent death , from a bullet ... . 
My eternal gratitude `` I will give you more , infinitely more than three thousand ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , looking with a radiant smile at Mitya 's ecstasy . 
`` Infinitely ? 
But I do n't need so much . 
I only need that fatal three thousand , and on my part I can give security for that sum with infinite gratitude , and I propose a plan which - '' `` Enough , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , it 's said and done . '' 
Madame Hohlakov cut him short , with the modest triumph of beneficence . 
`` I have promised to save you , and I will save you . 
I will save you as I did Belmesov . 
What do you think of the gold mines , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` Of the gold mines , madam ? 
I have never thought anything about them . '' 
`` But I have thought of them for you . 
Thought of them over and over again . 
I have been watching you for the last month . 
I 've watched you a hundred times as you 've walked past , saying to myself : That 's a man of energy who ought to be at the gold mines . 
I 've studied your gait and come to the conclusion : that 's a man who would find gold . '' 
`` From my gait , madam ? '' 
said Mitya , smiling . 
`` Yes , from your gait . 
You surely do n't deny that character can be told from the gait , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
Science supports the idea . 
I 'm all for science and realism now . 
After all this business with Father Zossima , which has so upset me , from this very day I 'm a realist and I want to devote myself to practical usefulness . 
I 'm cured . 
` Enough ! ' 
as Turgeney says . '' 
`` But madam , the three thousand you so generously promised to lend me - '' `` It is yours , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov cut in at once . 
`` The money is as good as in your pocket , not three thousand , but three million , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , in less than no time . 
I 'll make you a present of the idea : you shall find gold mines , make millions , return and become a leading man , and wake us up and lead us to better things . 
Are we to leave it all to the Jews ? 
You will found institutions and enterprises of all sorts . 
You will help the poor , and they will bless you . 
This is the age of railways , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You 'll become famous and indispensable to the Department of Finance , which is so badly off at present . 
The depreciation of the rouble keeps me awake at night , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ; people do n't know that side of me - '' `` Madam , madam ! 
Dmitri interrupted with an uneasy presentiment . 
`` I shall indeed , perhaps , follow your advice , your wise advice , madam ... . 
I shall perhaps set off ... to the gold mines ... . 
I 'll come and see you again about it ... many times , indeed ... but now , that three thousand you so generously ... oh , that would set me free , and if you could to-day ... you see , I have n't a minute , a minute to lose to-day - '' `` Enough , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , enough ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov interrupted emphatically . 
`` The question is , will you go to the gold mines or not ; have you quite made up your mind ? 
Answer yes or no . '' 
`` I will go , madam , afterwards ... . 
I 'll go where you like ... but now - '' `` Wait ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
And jumping up and running to a handsome bureau with numerous little drawers , she began pulling out one drawer after another , looking for something with desperate haste . 
`` The three thousand , '' thought Mitya , his heart almost stopping , `` and at the instant ... without any papers or formalities ... that 's doing things in gentlemanly style ! 
She 's a splendid woman , if only she did n't talk so much ! '' 
`` Here ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , running back joyfully to Mitya , `` here is what I was looking for ! '' 
It was a tiny silver ikon on a cord , such as is sometimes worn next the skin with a cross . 
`` This is from Kiev , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' she went on reverently , `` from the relics of the Holy Martyr , Varvara . 
Let me put it on your neck myself , and with it dedicate you to a new life , to a new career . '' 
And she actually put the cord round his neck , and began arranging it . 
In extreme embarrassment , Mitya bent down and helped her , and at last he got it under his neck-tie and collar through his shirt to his chest . 
`` Now you can set off , '' Madame Hohlakov pronounced , sitting down triumphantly in her place again . 
`` Madam , I am so touched . 
I do n't know how to thank you , indeed ... for such kindness , but ... If only you knew how precious time is to me ... . 
That sum of money , for which I shall be indebted to your generosity ... Oh , madam , since you are so kind , so touchingly generous to me , '' Mitya exclaimed impulsively , `` then let me reveal to you ... though , of course , you 've known it a long time ... that I love somebody here ... . 
I have been false to Katya ... Katerina Ivanovna I should say ... . 
Oh , I 've behaved inhumanly , dishonourably to her , but I fell in love here with another woman ... a woman whom you , madam , perhaps , despise , for you know everything already , but whom I can not leave on any account , and therefore that three thousand now - '' `` Leave everything , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov interrupted in the most decisive tone . 
`` Leave everything , especially women . 
Gold mines are your goal , and there 's no place for women there . 
Afterwards , when you come back rich and famous , you will find the girl of your heart in the highest society . 
That will be a modern girl , a girl of education and advanced ideas . 
By that time the dawning woman question will have gained ground , and the new woman will have appeared . '' 
`` Madam , that 's not the point , not at all ... . 
Mitya clasped his hands in entreaty . 
`` Yes it is , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , just what you need ; the very thing you 're yearning for , though you do n't realise it yourself . 
I am not at all opposed to the present woman movement , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
The development of woman , and even the political emancipation of woman in the near future - that 's my ideal . 
I 've a daughter myself , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , people do n't know that side of me . 
I wrote a letter to the author , Shtchedrin , on that subject . 
He has taught me so much , so much about the vocation of woman . 
So last year I sent him an anonymous letter of two lines : ' I kiss and embrace you , my teacher , for the modern woman . 
Persevere . ' 
And I signed myself , ' A Mother . ' 
I thought of signing myself ' A contemporary Mother , ' and hesitated , but I stuck to the simple ` Mother ' ; there 's more moral beauty in that , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
And the word ` contemporary ' might have reminded him of The Contemporary - a painful recollection owing to the censorship ... . 
Good Heavens , what is the matter ! '' 
`` Madam ! '' 
cried Mitya , jumping up at last , clasping his hands before her in helpless entreaty . 
`` You will make me weep if you delay what you have so generously - '' `` Oh , do weep , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , do weep ! 
That 's a noble feeling ... such a path lies open before you ! 
Tears will ease your heart , and later on you will return rejoicing . 
You will hasten to me from Siberia on purpose to share your joy with me - '' `` But allow me , too ! '' 
Mitya cried suddenly . 
`` For the last time I entreat you , tell me , can I have the sum you promised me to-day , if not , when may I come for it ? '' 
`` What sum , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` The three thousand you promised me ... that you so generously - '' `` Three thousand ? 
Roubles ? 
Oh , no , I have n't got three thousand , '' Madame Hohlakov announced with serene amazement . 
Mitya was stupefied . 
`` Why , you said just now you said ... you said it was as good as in my hands - '' `` Oh , no , you misunderstood me , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
In that case you misunderstood me . 
I was talking of the gold mines . 
It 's true I promised you more , infinitely more than three thousand , I remember it all now , but I was referring to the gold mines . '' 
`` But the money ? 
The three thousand ? '' 
Mitya exclaimed , awkwardly . 
`` Oh , if you meant money , I have n't any . 
I have n't a penny , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm quarrelling with my steward about it , and I 've just borrowed five hundred roubles from Miusov , myself . 
No , no , I 've no money . 
And , do you know , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , if I had , I would n't give it to you . 
In the first place I never lend money . 
Lending money means losing friends . 
And I would n't give it to you particularly . 
I would n't give it you , because I like you and want to save you , for all you need is the gold mines , the gold mines , the gold mines ! '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
roared Mitya , and with all his might brought his fist down on the table . 
`` Aie ! 
Aie ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , alarmed , and she flew to the other end of the drawing-room . 
Mitya spat on the ground , and strode rapidly out of the room , out of the house , into the street , into the darkness ! 
He walked like one possessed , and beating himself on the breast , on the spot where he had struck himself two days previously , before Alyosha , the last time he saw him in the dark , on the road . 
What those blows upon his breast signified , on that spot , and what he meant by it - that was , for the time , a secret which was known to no one in the world , and had not been told even to Alyosha . 
But that secret meant for him more than disgrace ; it meant ruin , suicide . 
So he had determined , if he did not get hold of the three thousand that would pay his debt to Katerina Ivanovna , and so remove from his breast , from that spot on his breast , the shame he carried upon it , that weighed on his conscience . 
All this will be fully explained to the reader later on , but now that his last hope had vanished , this man , so strong in appearance , burst out crying like a little child a few steps from the Hohlakovs ' house . 
He walked on , and not knowing what he was doing , wiped away his tears with his fist . 
In this way he reached the square , and suddenly became aware that he had stumbled against something . 
He heard a piercing wail from an old woman whom he had almost knocked down . 
`` Good Lord , you 've nearly killed me ! 
Why do n't you look where you 're going , scapegrace ? '' 
`` Why , it 's you ! '' 
cried Mitya , recognising the old woman in the dark . 
It was the old servant who waited on Samsonov , whom Mitya had particularly noticed the day before . 
`` And who are you , my good sir ? '' 
said the old woman in quite a different voice . 
`` I do n't know you in the dark . '' 
`` You live at Kuzma Kuzmitch 's . 
You 're the servant there ? '' 
`` Just so , sir , I was only running out to Prohoritch 's ... But I do n't know you now . '' 
`` Tell me , my good woman , is Agrafena Alexandrovna there now ? '' 
said Mitya , beside himself with suspense . 
`` I saw her to the house some time ago . '' 
`` She has been there , sir . 
She stayed a little while , and went off again . '' 
`` What ? 
Went away ? '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` When did she go ? '' 
`` Why , as soon as she came . 
She only stayed a minute . 
She only told Kuzma Kuzmitch a tale that made him laugh , and then she ran away . '' 
`` You 're lying , damn you ! '' 
roared Mitya . 
`` Aie ! 
Aie ! '' 
shrieked the old woman , but Mitya had vanished . 
He ran with all his might to the house where Grushenka lived . 
At the moment he reached it , Grushenka was on her way to Mokroe . 
It was not more than a quarter of an hour after her departure . 
Fenya was sitting with her grandmother , the old cook , Matryona , in the kitchen when `` the captain '' ran in . 
Fenya uttered a piercing shriek on seeing him . 
`` You scream ? '' 
roared Mitya , `` where is she ? '' 
But without giving the terror-stricken Fenya time to utter a word , he fell all of a heap at her feet . 
`` Fenya , for Christ 's sake , tell me , where is she ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , my dear , I do n't know . 
You may kill me but I ca n't tell you . '' 
Fenya swore and protested . 
`` You went out with her yourself not long ago - '' `` She came back ! '' 
`` Indeed she did n't . 
By God I swear she did n't come back . '' 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
shouted Mitya . 
`` From your terror I know where she is . '' 
He rushed away . 
Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily . 
But she knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste , or she might not have fared so well . 
But as he ran , he surprised both Fenya and old Matryona by an unexpected action . 
On the table stood a brass mortar , with a pestle in it , a small brass pestle , not much more than six inches long . 
Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when , with the other , he snatched up the pestle , and thrust it in his side-pocket . 
`` Oh Lord ! 
He 's going to murder someone ! '' 
cried Fenya , flinging up her hands . 
In the Dark WHERE was he running ? 
`` Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
She must have run straight to him from Samsonov 's , that was clear now . 
The whole intrigue , the whole deceit was evident . '' 
... It all rushed whirling through his mind . 
He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna 's . 
`` There was no need to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ... they would run and tell directly ... . 
Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in the plot , Smerdyakov too , he too , all had been bought over ! '' 
He formed another plan of action : he ran a long way round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house , crossing the lane , running down Dmitrovsky Street , then over the little bridge , and so came straight to the deserted alley at the back , which was empty and uninhabited , with , on one side the hurdle fence of a neighbour 's kitchen-garden , on the other the strong high fence that ran all round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
Here he chose a spot , apparently the very place , where according to the tradition , he knew Lizaveta had once climbed over it : `` If she could climb over it , '' the thought , God knows why , occurred to him , `` surely I can . '' 
He did in fact jump up , and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence . 
Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it . 
Close by , in the garden stood the bathhouse , but from the fence he could see the lighted windows of the house too . 
`` Yes , the old man 's bedroom is lighted up . 
She 's there ! 
and he leapt from the fence into the garden . 
Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely Smerdyakov , too , and that there was no one to hear him , he instinctively hid himself , stood still , and began to listen . 
But there was dead silence on all sides and , as though of design , complete stillness , not the slightest breath of wind . 
`` And naught but the whispering silence , '' the line for some reason rose to his mind . 
`` If only no one heard me jump over the fence ! 
I think not . '' 
Standing still for a minute , he walked softly over the grass in the garden , avoiding the trees and shrubs . 
He walked slowly , creeping stealthily at every step , listening to his own footsteps . 
It took him five minutes to reach the lighted window . 
He remembered that just under the window there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam . 
The door from the house into the garden on the left-hand side was shut ; he had carefully looked on purpose to see , in passing . 
At last he reached the bushes and hid behind them . 
He held his breath . 
`` I must wait now , '' he thought , `` to reassure them , in case they heard my footsteps and are listening ... if only I do n't cough or sneeze . '' 
He waited two minutes . 
His heart was beating violently , and , at moments , he could scarcely breathe . 
`` No , this throbbing at my heart wo n't stop , '' he thought . 
`` I ca n't wait any longer . '' 
He was standing behind a bush in the shadow . 
The light of the window fell on the front part of the bush . 
`` How red the whitebeam berries are ! '' 
he murmured , not knowing why . 
Softly and noiselessly , step by step , he approached the window , and raised himself on tiptoe . 
All Fyodor Pavlovitch 's bedroom lay open before him . 
It was not a large room , and was divided in two parts by a red screen , `` Chinese , '' as Fyodor Pavlovitch used to call it . 
The word `` Chinese '' flashed into Mitya 's mind , `` and behind the screen , is Grushenka , '' thought Mitya . 
He began watching Fyodor Pavlovitch who was wearing his new striped-silk dressing-gown , which Mitya had never seen , and a silk cord with tassels round the waist . 
A clean , dandified shirt of fine linen with gold studs peeped out under the collar of the dressing-gown . 
On his head Fyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had seen . 
`` He has got himself up , '' thought Mitya . 
His father was standing near the window , apparently lost in thought . 
Suddenly he jerked up his head , listened a moment , and hearing nothing went up to the table , poured out half a glass of brandy from a decanter and drank it off . 
Then he uttered a deep sigh , again stood still a moment , walked carelessly up to the looking-glass on the wall , with his right hand raised the red bandage on his forehead a little , and began examining his bruises and scars , which had not yet disappeared . 
`` He 's alone , '' thought Mitya , `` in all probability he 's alone . '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the looking-glass , turned suddenly to the window and looked out . 
Mitya instantly slipped away into the shadow . 
`` She may be there behind the screen . 
Perhaps she 's asleep by now , '' he thought , with a pang at his heart . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the window . 
`` He 's looking for her out of the window , so she 's not there . 
Why should he stare out into the dark ? 
He 's wild with impatience . '' 
... Mitya slipped back at once , and fell to gazing in at the window again . 
The old man was sitting down at the table , apparently disappointed . 
At last he put his elbow on the table , and laid his right cheek against his hand . 
Mitya watched him eagerly . 
`` He 's alone , he 's alone ! '' 
he repeated again . 
`` If she were here , his face would be different . '' 
Strange to say , a queer , irrational vexation rose up in his heart that she was not here . 
`` It 's not that she 's not here , '' he explained to himself , immediately , `` but that I ca n't tell for certain whether she is or not . '' 
Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at that moment exceptionally clear , that he took in everything to the slightest detail , and missed no point . 
But a feeling of misery , the misery of uncertainty and indecision , was growing in his heart with every instant . 
`` Is she here or not ? '' 
The angry doubt filled his heart , and suddenly , making up his mind , he put out his hand and softly knocked on the window frame . 
He knocked the signal the old man had agreed upon with Smerdyakov , twice slowly and then three times more quickly , the signal that meant `` Grushenka is here ! '' 
The old man started , jerked up his head , and , jumping up quickly , ran to the window . 
Mitya slipped away into the shadow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch opened the window and thrust his whole head out . 
`` Grushenka , is it you ? 
Is it you ? '' 
he said , in a sort of trembling half-whisper . 
`` Where are you , my angel , where are you ? '' 
He was fearfully agitated and breathless . 
`` He 's alone , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Where are you ? '' 
cried the old man again ; and he thrust his head out farther , thrust it out to the shoulders , gazing in all directions , right and left . 
`` Come here , I 've a little present for you . 
Come , I 'll show you ... '' `` He means the three thousand , '' thought Mitya . 
`` But where are you ? 
Are you at the door ? 
I 'll open it directly . '' 
And the old man almost climbed out of the window , peering out to the right , where there was a door into the garden , trying to see into the darkness . 
In another second he would certainly have run out to open the door without waiting for Grushenka 's answer . 
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring . 
The old man 's profile that he loathed so , his pendent Adam 's apple , his hooked nose , his lips that smiled in greedy expectation , were all brightly lighted up by the slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room . 
A horrible fury of hatred suddenly surged up in Mitya 's heart : `` There he was , his rival , the man who had tormented him , had ruined his life ! '' 
It was a rush of that sudden , furious , revengeful anger of which he had spoken , as though foreseeing it , to Alyosha , four days ago in the arbour , when , in answer to Alyosha 's question , `` How can you say you 'll kill our father ? '' 
`` I do n't know , I do n't know , '' he had said then . 
`` Perhaps I shall not kill him , perhaps I shall . 
I 'm afraid he 'll suddenly be so loathsome to me at that moment . 
I hate his double chin , his nose , his eyes , his shameless grin . 
I feel a personal repulsion . 
That 's what I 'm afraid of , that 's what may be too much for me . '' 
... This personal repulsion was growing unendurable . 
Mitya was beside himself , he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his pocket . 
`` God was watching over me then , '' Mitya himself said afterwards . 
At that very moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness . 
Earlier in the evening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described to Ivan . 
He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret , very strong decoction , had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife repeated a `` certain prayer '' over him , after which he had gone to bed . 
Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff , too , and , being unused to strong drink , slept like the dead beside her husband . 
But Grigory waked up in the night , quite suddenly , and , after a moment 's reflection , though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back , he sat up in bed . 
Then he deliberated again , got up and dressed hurriedly . 
Perhaps his conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house was unguarded `` in such perilous times . '' 
Smerdyakov , exhausted by his fit , lay motionless in the next room . 
Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir . 
`` The stuff 's been too much for the woman , '' Grigory thought , glancing at her , and groaning , he went out on the steps . 
No doubt he only intended to look out from the steps , for he was hardly able to walk , the pain in his back and his right leg was intolerable . 
But he suddenly remembered that he had not locked the little gate into the garden that evening . 
He was the most punctual and precise of men , a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine , and habits that lasted for years . 
Limping and writhing with pain he went down the steps and towards the garden . 
Yes , the gate stood wide open . 
Mechanically he stepped into the garden . 
Perhaps he fancied something , perhaps caught some sound , and , glancing to the left he saw his master 's window open . 
No one was looking out of it then . 
`` What 's it open for ? 
It 's not summer now , '' thought Grigory , and suddenly , at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary before him in the garden . 
Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be running in the dark , a sort of shadow was moving very fast . 
`` Good Lord ! '' 
cried Grigory beside himself , and forgetting the pain in his back , he hurried to intercept the running figure . 
He took a short cut , evidently he knew the garden better ; the flying figure went towards the bath-house , ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence . 
Grigory followed , not losing sight of him , and ran , forgetting everything . 
He reached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it . 
Grigory cried out , beside himself , pounced on him , and clutched his leg in his two hands . 
Yes , his foreboding had not deceived him . 
He recognised him ; it was he , the `` monster , '' the `` parricide . '' 
`` Parricide ! 
the old man shouted so that the whole neighbourhood could hear , but he had not time to shout more , he fell at once , as though struck by lightning . 
Mitya jumped back into the garden and bent over the fallen man . 
In Mitya 's hands was a brass pestle , and he flung it mechanically in the grass . 
The pestle fell two paces from Grigory , not in the grass but on the path , in a most conspicuous place . 
For some seconds he examined the prostrate figure before him . 
The old man 's head was covered with blood . 
Mitya put out his hand and began feeling it . 
He remembered afterwards clearly that he had been awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man 's skull , or simply stunned him with the pestle . 
But the blood was flowing horribly ; and in a moment Mitya 's fingers were drenched with the hot stream . 
He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white handkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame Hohlakov , and putting it to the old man 's head , senselessly trying to wipe the blood from his face and temples . 
But the handkerchief was instantly soaked with blood . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What am I doing it for ? '' 
thought Mitya , suddenly pulling himself together . 
`` If I have broken his skull , how can I find out now ? 
And what difference does it make now ? '' 
he added , hopelessly . 
`` If I 've killed him , I 've killed him ... . 
You 've come to grief , old man , so there you must lie ! '' 
he said aloud . 
And suddenly turning to the fence , he vaulted over it into the lane and fell to running - the handkerchief soaked with blood he held , crushed up in his right fist , and as he ran he thrust it into the back pocket of his coat . 
He ran headlong , and the few passers-by who met him in the dark , in the streets , remembered afterwards that they had met a man running that night . 
He flew back again to the widow Morozov 's house . 
Immediately after he had left it that evening , Fenya had rushed to the chief porter , Nazar Ivanovitch , and besought him , for Christ 's sake , `` not to let the captain in again to-day or to-morrow . '' 
Nazar Ivanovitch promised , but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him , and meeting his nephew , a boy of twenty , who had recently come from the country , on the way up told him to take his place , but forgot to mention `` the captain . '' 
Mitya , running up to the gate , knocked . 
The lad instantly recognised him , for Mitya had more than once tipped him . 
Opening the gate at once , he let him in , and hastened to inform him with a good-humoured smile that `` Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now , you know . '' 
`` Where is she then , Prohor ? '' 
asked Mitya , stopping short . 
`` She set off this evening , some two hours ago , with Timofey , to Mokroe . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` That I ca n't say . 
To see some officer . 
Someone invited her and horses were sent to fetch her . '' 
Mitya left him , and ran like a madman to Fenya . 
A Sudden Resolution SHE was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother ; they were both just going to bed . 
Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch , they had not locked themselves in . 
Mitya ran in , pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat . 
`` Speak at once ! 
Where is she ? 
With whom is she now , at Mokroe ? '' 
he roared furiously . 
Both the women squealed . 
`` Aie ! 
I 'll tell you . 
Aie ! 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , darling , I 'll tell you everything directly , I wo n't hide anything , '' gabbled Fenya , frightened to death ; `` she 's gone to Mokroe , to her officer . '' 
`` What officer ? '' 
roared Mitya . 
`` To her officer , the same one she used to know , the one who threw her over five years ago , '' cackled Fenya , as fast as she could speak . 
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat . 
He stood facing her , pale as death , unable to utter a word , but his eyes showed that he realised it all , all , from the first word , and guessed the whole position . 
Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe whether he understood or not . 
She remained sitting on the trunk as she had been when he ran into the room , trembling all over , holding her hands out before her as though trying to defend herself . 
She seemed to have grown rigid in that position . 
Her wide-opened , scared eyes were fixed immovably upon him . 
And to make matters worse , both his hands were smeared with blood . 
On the way , as he ran , he must have touched his forehead with them , wiping off the perspiration , so that on his forehead and his right cheek were bloodstained patches . 
Fenya was on the verge of hysterics . 
The old cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman , almost unconscious with terror . 
Mitya stood for a moment , then mechanically sank on to a chair next to Fenya . 
He sat , not reflecting but , as it were , terror-stricken , benumbed . 
Yet everything was clear as day : that officer , he knew about him , he knew everything perfectly , he had known it from Grushenka herself , had known that a letter had come from him a month before . 
So that for a month , for a whole month , this had been going on , a secret from him , till the very arrival of this new man , and he had never thought of him ! 
But how could he , how could he not have thought of him ? 
Why was it he had forgotten this officer , like that , forgotten him as soon as he heard of him ? 
That was the question that faced him like some monstrous thing . 
And he looked at this monstrous thing with horror , growing cold with horror . 
But suddenly , as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child , he began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had scared and hurt her just now . 
He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme preciseness , astonishing in his position , and though the girl looked wildly at his blood-stained hands , she , too , with wonderful readiness and rapidity , answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him . 
Little by little , even with a sort of enjoyment , she began explaining every detail , not wanting to torment him , but , as it were , eager to be of the utmost service to him . 
She described the whole of that day , in great detail , the visit of Rakitin and Alyosha , how she , Fenya , had stood on the watch , how the mistress had set off , and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him , Mitya , her greetings , and to tell him `` to remember for ever how she had loved him for an hour . '' 
Hearing of the message , Mitya suddenly smiled , and there was a flush of colour on his pale cheeks . 
At the same moment Fenya said to him , not a bit afraid now to be inquisitive : `` Look at your hands , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 're all over blood ! 
`` Yes , '' answered Mitya mechanically . 
He looked carelessly at his hands and at once forgot them and Fenya 's question . 
He sank into silence again . 
Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in . 
His first horror was over , but evidently some new fixed determination had taken possession of him . 
He suddenly stood up , smiling dreamily . 
`` What has happened to you , sir ? '' 
said Fenya , pointing to his hands again . 
She spoke compassionately , as though she felt very near to him now in his grief . 
Mitya looked at his hands again . 
`` That 's blood , Fenya , '' he said , looking at her with a strange expression . 
`` That 's human blood , and my God ! 
why was it shed ? 
But ... Fenya ... there 's a fence here '' -LRB- he looked at her as though setting her a riddle -RRB- , `` a high fence , and terrible to look at . 
But at dawn to-morrow , when the sun rises , Mitya will leap over that fence ... . 
You do n't understand what fence , Fenya , and , never mind ... . 
You 'll hear to-morrow and understand ... and now , good-bye . 
I wo n't stand in her way . 
I 'll step aside , I know how to step aside . 
Live , my joy ... . 
You loved me for an hour , remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever ... . 
She always used to call me Mityenka , do you remember ? '' 
And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen . 
Fenya was almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in and attacked her . 
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin , the young official with whom he had pawned his pistols . 
It was by now half-past eight , and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea , and had just put his coat on again to go to the Metropolis to play billiards . 
Mitya caught him coming out . 
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood , the young man uttered a cry of surprise . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What is the matter ? '' 
`` I 've come for my pistols , '' said Mitya , `` and brought you the money . 
And thanks very much . 
I 'm in a hurry , Pyotr Ilyitch , please make haste . '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised ; he suddenly caught sight of a bundle of banknotes in Mitya 's hand , and what was more , he had walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money : he had them in his right hand , and held them outstretched as if to show them . 
Perhotin 's servant-boy , who met Mitya in the passage , said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way , with the money outstretched in his hand , so he must have been carrying them like that even in the streets . 
They were all rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes , and the fingers holding them were covered with blood . 
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money , he said that it was difficult to judge at a glance , but that it might have been two thousand , or perhaps three , but it was a big , `` fat '' bundle . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' so he testified afterwards , `` seemed unlike himself , too ; not drunk , but , as it were , exalted , lost to everything , but at the same time , as it were , absorbed , as though pondering and searching for something and unable to come to a decision . 
He was in great haste , answered abruptly and very strangely , and at moments seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful . '' 
`` But what is the matter with you ? 
What 's wrong ? '' 
cried Pyotr Ilyitch , looking wildly at his guest . 
`` How is it that you 're all covered with blood ? 
Have you had a fall ? 
Look at yourself ! '' 
He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass . 
Seeing his blood-stained face , Mitya started and scowled wrathfully . 
`` Damnation ! 
That 's the last straw , '' he muttered angrily , hurriedly changing the notes from his right hand to the left , and impulsively jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket . 
But the handkerchief turned out to be soaked with blood , too -LRB- it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe Grigory 's face -RRB- . 
There was scarcely a white spot on it , and it had not merely begun to dry , but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not be pulled apart . 
Mitya threw it angrily on the floor . 
`` Oh , damn it ! '' 
he said . 
`` Have n't you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my face ? '' 
`` So you 're only stained , not wounded ? 
You 'd better wash , '' said Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` Here 's a wash-stand . 
I 'll pour you out some water . '' 
`` A wash-stand ? 
That 's all right ... but where am I to put this ? '' 
With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble notes , looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to decide what he , Mitya , was to do with his own money . 
`` In your pocket , or on the table here . 
They wo n't be lost . '' 
`` In my pocket ? 
Yes , in my pocket . 
All right ... . 
But , I say , that 's all nonsense , '' he cried , as though suddenly coming out of his absorption . 
`` Look here , let 's first settle that business of the pistols . 
Give them back to me . 
