`` Pierre was right when he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in order to be happy , and now I do believe in it . 
Let the dead bury their dead , but while one has life one must live and be happy ! '' 
thought he . 
One morning Colonel Berg , whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in Moscow and Petersburg , came to see him . 
Berg arrived in an immaculate brand-new uniform , with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair . 
`` I have just been to see the countess , your wife . 
Unfortunately she could not grant my request , but I hope , Count , I shall be more fortunate with you , '' he said with a smile . 
`` What is it you wish , Colonel ? 
I am at your service . '' 
`` I have now quite settled in my new rooms , Count '' -LRB- Berg said this with perfect conviction that this information could not but be agreeable -RRB- , `` and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own and my wife 's friends . '' 
-LRB- He smiled still more pleasantly . -RRB- 
`` I wished to ask the countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper . '' 
Only Countess Helene , considering the society of such people as the Bergs beneath her , could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation . 
Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small but select company , and why this would give him pleasure , and why though he grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful , he was prepared to run into some expense for the sake of good society -- that Pierre could not refuse , and promised to come . 
`` But do n't be late , Count , if I may venture to ask ; about ten minutes to eight , please . 
We shall make up a rubber . 
Our general is coming . 
He is very good to me . 
We shall have supper , Count . 
So you will do me the favor . '' 
Contrary to his habit of being late , Pierre on that day arrived at the Bergs ' house , not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight . 
Having prepared everything necessary for the party , the Bergs were really for their guests ' arrival . 
In their new , clean , and light study with its small busts and pictures and new furniture sat Berg and his wife . 
Berg , closely buttoned up in his new uniform , sat beside his wife explaining to her that one always could and should be acquainted with people above one , because only then does one get satisfaction from acquaintances . 
`` You can get to know something , you can ask for something . 
See how I managed from my first promotion . '' 
-LRB- Berg measured his life not by years but by promotions . -RRB- 
`` My comrades are still nobodies , while I am only waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment , and have the happiness to be your husband . '' 
-LRB- He rose and kissed Vera 's hand , and on the way to her straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet . -RRB- 
`` And how have I obtained all this ? 
Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances . 
It goes without saying that one must be conscientious and methodical . '' 
Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman , and paused , reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weak woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man 's dignity , what it was ein Mann zu sein . 
* Vera at the same time smiling with a sense of superiority over her good , conscientious husband , who all the same understood life wrongly , as according to Vera all men did . 
Berg , judging by his wife , thought all women weak and foolish . 
Vera , judging only by her husband and generalizing from that observation , supposed that all men , though they understand nothing and are conceited and selfish , ascribe common sense to themselves alone . 
* To be a man . 
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully , so as not to crush her lace fichu for which he had paid a good price , kissing her straight on the lips . 
`` The only thing is , we must n't have children too soon , '' he continued , following an unconscious sequence of ideas . 
`` Yes , '' answered Vera , `` I do n't at all want that . 
We must live for society . '' 
`` Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this , '' said Berg , pointing to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile . 
Just then Count Bezukhov was announced . 
Husband and wife glanced at one another , both smiling with self-satisfaction , and each mentally claiming the honor of this visit . 
`` This is what what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances , '' thought Berg . 
`` This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself . '' 
`` But please do n't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests , '' said Vera , `` because I know what interests each of them and what to say to different people . '' 
Berg smiled again . 
`` It ca n't be helped : men must sometimes have masculine conversation , '' said he . 
They received Pierre in their small , new drawing-room , where it was impossible to sit down anywhere without disturbing its symmetry , neatness , and order ; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange that Berg , having generously offered to disturb the symmetry of an armchair or of the sofa for his dear guest , but being apparently painfully undecided on the matter himself , eventually left the visitor to settle the question of selection . 
Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a chair for himself , and Berg and Vera immediately began their evening party , interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain their guest . 
Vera , having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be entertained with conversation about the French embassy , at once began accordingly . 
Berg , having decided that masculine conversation was required , interrupted his wife 's remarks and touched on the question of the war with Austria , and unconsciously jumped from the general subject to personal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in the Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them . 
Though the conversation was very incoherent and Vera was angry at the intrusion of the masculine element , both husband and wife felt with satisfaction that , even if only one guest was present , their evening had begun very well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party with its talk , tea , and lighted candles . 
Before long Boris , Berg 's old comrade , arrived . 
There was a shade of condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera . 
After Boris came a lady with the colonel , then the general himself , then the Rostovs , and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other evening parties . 
Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles of satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room , at the sound of the disconnected talk , the rustling of dresses , and the bowing and scraping . 
Everything was just as everybody always has it , especially so the general , who admired the apartment , patted Berg on the shoulder , and with parental authority superintended the setting out of the table for boston . 
The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov , who was next to himself the most important guest . 
The old people sat with the old , the young with the young , and the hostess at the tea table , on which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as the Panins had at their party . 
Everything was just as it was everywhere else . 
Pierre , as one of the principal guests , had to sit down to boston with Count Rostov , the general , and the colonel . 
At the card table he happened to be directly facing Natasha , and was struck by a curious change that had come over her since the ball . 
She was silent , and not only less pretty than at the ball , but only redeemed from plainness by her look of gentle indifference to everything around . 
`` What 's the matter with her ? '' 
thought Pierre , glancing at her . 
She was sitting by her sister at the tea table , and reluctantly , without looking at him , made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her . 
After playing out a whole suit and to his partner 's delight taking five tricks , Pierre , hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had entered the room while he was picking up his tricks , glanced again at Natasha . 
`` What has happened to her ? '' 
he asked himself with still greater surprise . 
Prince Andrew was standing before her , saying something to her with a look of tender solicitude . 
She , having raised her head , was looking up at him , flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid breathing . 
And the bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was again alight in her . 
She was completely transformed and from a plain girl had again become what she had been at the ball . 
Prince Andrew went up to Pierre , and the latter noticed a new and youthful expression in his friend 's face . 
Pierre changed places several times during the game , sitting now with his back to Natasha and now facing her , but during the whole of the six rubbers he watched her and his friend . 
`` Something very important is happening between them , '' thought Pierre , and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and made him neglect the game . 
After six rubbers the general got up , saying that it was no use playing like that , and Pierre was released . 
Natasha on one side was talking with Sonya and Boris , and Vera with a subtle smile was saying something to Prince Andrew . 
Pierre went up to his friend and , asking whether they were talking secrets , sat down beside them . 
Vera , having noticed Prince Andrew 's attentions to Natasha , decided that at a party , a real evening party , subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessary and , seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone , began a conversation with him about feelings in general and about her sister . 
With so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be , she felt that she had to employ her diplomatic tact . 
When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried away by her self-satisfied talk , but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed , a thing that rarely happened with him . 
`` What do you think ? '' 
Vera was saying with an arch smile . 
`` You are so discerning , Prince , and understand people 's characters so well at a glance . 
What do you think of Natalie ? 
Could she be constant in her attachments ? 
Could she , like other women '' -LRB- Vera meant herself -RRB- , `` love a man once for all and remain true to him forever ? 
That is what I consider true love . 
What do you think , Prince ? '' 
`` I know your sister too little , '' replied Prince Andrew , with a sarcastic smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment , `` to be able to solve so delicate a question , and then I have noticed that the less attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be , '' he added , and looked up Pierre who was just approaching them . 
`` Yes , that is true , Prince . 
In our days , '' continued Vera -- mentioning `` our days '' as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing , imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of `` our days '' and that human characteristics change with the times -- `` in our days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courted often stifles real feeling in her . 
And it must be confessed that Natalie is very susceptible . '' 
This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort : he was about to rise , but Vera continued with a still more subtle smile : `` I think no one has been more courted than she , '' she went on , `` but till quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone . 
Now you know , Count , '' she said to Pierre , `` even our dear cousin Boris , who , between ourselves , was very far gone in the land of tenderness ... '' -LRB- alluding to a map of love much in vogue at that time -RRB- . 
Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent . 
`` You are friendly with Boris , are n't you ? '' 
asked Vera . 
`` Yes , I know him ... '' `` I expect he has told you of his childish love for Natasha ? '' 
`` Oh , there was childish love ? '' 
suddenly asked Prince Andrew , blushing unexpectedly . 
`` Yes , you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love . 
Le cousinage est un dangereux voisinage . 
* Do n't you think so ? '' 
* `` Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood . '' 
`` Oh , undoubtedly ! '' 
said Prince Andrew , and with sudden and unnatural liveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be very careful with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins , and in the midst of these jesting remarks he rose , taking Pierre by the arm , and drew him aside . 
`` Well ? '' 
asked Pierre , seeing his friend 's strange animation with surprise , and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose . 
`` I must ... I must have a talk with you , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` You know that pair of women 's gloves ? '' 
-LRB- He referred to the Masonic gloves given to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved . -RRB- 
`` I. . . 
but no , I will talk to you later on , '' and with a strange light in his eyes and restlessness in his movements , Prince Andrew approached Natasha and sat down beside her . 
Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her something and how she flushed as she replied . 
But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that he should take part in an argument between the general and the colonel on the affairs in Spain . 
Berg was satisfied and happy . 
The smile of pleasure never left his face . 
The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen . 
Everything was similar : the ladies ' subtle talk , the cards , the general raising his voice at the card table , and the samovar and the tea cakes ; only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the evening parties he wished to imitate . 
They had not yet had a loud conversation among the men and a dispute about something important and clever . 
Now the general had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it . 
Next day , having been invited by the count , Prince Andrew dined with the Rostovs and spent the rest of the day there . 
Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came , and without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day . 
Not only in the soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha , but in the whole house , there was a feeling of awe at something important that was bound to happen . 
The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and timidly started some artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way . 
Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of being in the way when she was with them . 
Natasha grew pale , in a panic of expectation , when she remained alone with him for a moment . 
Prince Andrew surprised her by his timidity . 
She felt that he wanted to say something to her but could not bring himself to do so . 
In the evening , when Prince Andrew had left , the countess went up to Natasha and whispered : `` Well , what ? '' 
`` Mamma ! 
For heaven 's sake do n't ask me anything now ! 
One ca n't talk about that , '' said Natasha . 
But all the same that night Natasha , now agitated and now frightened , lay a long time in her mother 's bed gazing straight before her . 
She told her how he had complimented her , how he told her he was going abroad , asked her where they were going to spend the summer , and then how he had asked her about Boris . 
`` But such a. . . 
such a. . . 
never happened to me before ! '' 
she said . 
`` Only I feel afraid in his presence . 
I am always afraid when I 'm with him . 
What does that mean ? 
Does it mean that it 's the real thing ? 
Yes ? 
Mamma , are you asleep ? '' 
`` No , my love ; I am frightened myself , '' answered her mother . 
`` Now go ! '' 
`` All the same I sha n't sleep . 
What silliness , to sleep ! 
Mummy ! 
Mummy ! 
such a thing never happened to me before , '' she said , surprised and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself . 
`` And could we ever have thought ! 
... '' It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him . 
It was as if she feared this strange , unexpected happiness of meeting again the very man she had then chosen -LRB- she was firmly convinced she had done so -RRB- and of finding him , as it seemed , not indifferent to her . 
`` And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg while we are here . 
And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball . 
It is fate . 
Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this ! 
Already then , directly I saw him I felt something peculiar . '' 
`` What else did he say to you ? 
What are those verses ? 
Read them ... '' said her mother , thoughtfully , referring to some verses Prince Andrew had written in Natasha 's album . 
`` Mamma , one need not be ashamed of his being a widower ? '' 
`` Do n't , Natasha ! 
Pray to God . 
` Marriages are made in heaven , ' '' said her mother . 
`` Darling Mummy , how I love you ! 
How happy I am ! '' 
cried Natasha , shedding tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother . 
At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling him of his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make her his wife . 
That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house . 
The French ambassador was there , and a foreign prince of the blood who had of late become a frequent visitor of hers , and many brilliant ladies and gentlemen . 
Pierre , who had come downstairs , walked through the rooms and struck everyone by his preoccupied , absent-minded , and morose air . 
Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression and had made desperate efforts to combat it . 
Since the intimacy of his wife with the royal prince , Pierre had unexpectedly been made a gentleman of the bedchamber , and from that time he had begun to feel oppressed and ashamed in court society , and dark thoughts of the vanity of all things human came to him oftener than before . 
At the same time the feeling he had noticed between his protegee Natasha and Prince Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position and his friend 's . 
He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife , and about Natasha and Prince Andrew ; and again everything seemed to him insignificant in comparison with eternity ; again the question : for what ? 
presented itself ; and he forced himself to work day and night at Masonic labors , hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him . 
Toward midnight , after he had left the countess ' apartments , he was sitting upstairs in a shabby dressing gown , copying out the original transaction of the Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy with tobacco smoke , when someone came in . 
It was Prince Andrew . 
`` Ah , it 's you ! '' 
said Pierre with a preoccupied , dissatisfied air . 
`` And I , you see , am hard at it . '' 
He pointed to his manuscript book with that air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at their work . 
Prince Andrew , with a beaming , ecstatic expression of renewed life on his face , paused in front of Pierre and , not noticing his sad look , smiled at him with the egotism of joy . 
`` Well , dear heart , '' said he , `` I wanted to tell you about it yesterday and I have come to do so today . 
I never experienced anything like it before . 
I am in love , my friend ! '' 
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on the sofa beside Prince Andrew . 
`` With Natasha Rostova , yes ? '' 
said he . 
`` Yes , yes ! 
Who else should it be ? 
I should never have believed it , but the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and suffered , but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in the world , I have not lived till now . 
At last I live , but I ca n't live without her ! 
But can she love me ? 
... I am too old for her ... . 
Why do n't you speak ? '' 
`` I ? 
I ? 
What did I tell you ? '' 
said Pierre suddenly , rising and beginning to pace up and down the room . 
`` I always thought it ... . 
That girl is such a treasure ... she is a rare girl ... . 
My dear friend , I entreat you , do n't philosophize , do n't doubt , marry , marry , marry ... . 
And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you . '' 
`` But what of her ? '' 
`` She loves you . '' 
`` Do n't talk rubbish ... '' said Prince Andrew , smiling and looking into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` She does , I know , '' Pierre cried fiercely . 
`` But do listen , '' returned Prince Andrew , holding him by the arm . 
`` Do you know the condition I am in ? 
I must talk about it to someone . '' 
`` Well , go on , go on . 
I am very glad , '' said Pierre , and his face really changed , his brow became smooth , and he listened gladly to Prince Andrew . 
Prince Andrew seemed , and really was , quite a different , quite a new man . 
Where was his spleen , his contempt for life , his disillusionment ? 
Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind to speak openly ; and to him he told all that was in his soul . 
Now he boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future , said he could not sacrifice his own happiness to his father 's caprice , and spoke of how he would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her , or would do without his consent ; then he marveled at the feeling that had mastered him as at something strange , apart from and independent of himself . 
`` I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of such love , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` It is not at all the same feeling that I knew in the past . 
The whole world is now for me divided into two halves : one half is she , and there all is joy , hope , light : the other half is everything where she is not , and there is all gloom and darkness ... '' `` Darkness and gloom , '' reiterated Pierre : `` yes , yes , I understand that . '' 
`` I can not help loving the light , it is not my fault . 
And I am very happy ! 
You understand me ? 
I know you are glad for my sake . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' Pierre assented , looking at his friend with a touched and sad expression in his eyes . 
The brighter Prince Andrew 's lot appeared to him , the gloomier seemed his own . 
Prince Andrew needed his father 's consent to his marriage , and to obtain this he started for the country next day . 
His father received his son 's communication with external composure , but inward wrath . 
He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his life or introduce anything new into it , when his own life was already ending . 
`` If only they would let me end my days as I want to , '' thought the old man , `` then they might do as they please . '' 
With his son , however , he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and , adopting a quiet tone , discussed the whole matter . 
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards birth , wealth , or rank . 
Secondly , Prince Andrew was no longer as young as he had been and his health was poor -LRB- the old man laid special stress on this -RRB- , while she was very young . 
Thirdly , he had a son whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl . 
`` Fourthly and finally , '' the father said , looking ironically at his son , `` I beg you to put it off for a year : go abroad , take a cure , look out as you wanted to for a German tutor for Prince Nicholas . 
Then if your love or passion or obstinacy -- as you please -- is still as great , marry ! 
And that 's my last word on it . 
Mind , the last ... '' concluded the prince , in a tone which showed that nothing would make him alter his decision . 
Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings , or his fiancee 's , would not stand a year 's test , or that he -LRB- the old prince himself -RRB- would die before then , and he decided to conform to his father 's wish -- to propose , and postpone the wedding for a year . 
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs , Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg . 
Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all day , but he did not come . 
On the second and third day it was the same . 
Pierre did not come either and Natasha , not knowing that Prince Andrew had gone to see his father , could not explain his absence to herself . 
Three weeks passed in this way . 
Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow , idle and listless ; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings . 
She blushed continually and was irritable . 
It seemed to her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her . 
Strong as was her inward grief , this wound to her vanity intensified her misery . 
Once she came to her mother , tried to say something , and suddenly began to cry . 
Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why it is being punished . 
The countess began to soothe Natasha , who after first listening to her mother 's words , suddenly interrupted her : `` Leave off , Mamma ! 
I do n't think , and do n't want to think about it ! 
He just came and then left off , left off ... '' Her voice trembled , and she again nearly cried , but recovered and went on quietly : `` And I do n't at all want to get married . 
And I am afraid of him ; I have now become quite calm , quite calm . '' 
The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the mornings , and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had abandoned since the ball . 
Having finished her morning tea she went to the ballroom , which she particularly liked for its loud resonance , and began singing her solfeggio . 
When she had finished her first exercise she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that particularly pleased her . 
She listened joyfully -LRB- as though she had not expected it -RRB- to the charm of the notes reverberating , filling the whole empty ballroom , and slowly dying away ; and all at once she felt cheerful . 
`` What 's the good of making so much of it ? 
Things are nice as it is , '' she said to herself , and she began walking up and down the room , not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with each step from the heel to the toe -LRB- she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes -RRB- and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice . 
Passing a mirror she glanced into it . 
`` There , that 's me ! '' 
the expression of her face seemed to say as she caught sight of herself . 
`` Well , and very nice too ! 
I need nobody . '' 
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she would not let him , and having closed the door behind him continued her walk . 
That morning she had returned to her favorite mood -- love of , and delight in , herself . 
`` How charming that Natasha is ! '' 
she said again , speaking as some third , collective , male person . 
`` Pretty , a good voice , young , and in nobody 's way if only they leave her in peace . '' 
But however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace , and immediately felt this . 
In the hall the porch door opened , and someone asked , `` At home ? '' 
and then footsteps were heard . 
Natasha was looking at the mirror , but did not see herself . 
She listened to the sounds in the hall . 
When she saw herself , her face was pale . 
It was he . 
She knew this for certain , though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors . 
Pale and agitated , Natasha ran into the drawing room . 
`` Mamma ! 
Bolkonski has come ! '' 
she said . 
`` Mamma , it is awful , it is unbearable ! 
I do n't want ... to be tormented ? 
What am I to do ? 
... '' Before the countess could answer , Prince Andrew entered the room with an agitated and serious face . 
As soon as he saw Natasha his face brightened . 
He kissed the countess ' hand and Natasha 's , and sat down beside the sofa . 
`` It is long since we had the pleasure ... '' began the countess , but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question , obviously in haste to say what he had to . 
`` I have not been to see all this time because I have been at my father 's . 
I had to talk over a very important matter with him . 
I only got back last night , '' he said glancing at Natasha ; `` I want to have a talk with you , Countess , '' he added after a moment 's pause . 
The countess lowered her eyes , sighing deeply . 
`` I am at your disposal , '' she murmured . 
Natasha knew that she ought to go away , but was unable to do so : something gripped her throat , and regardless of manners she stared straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes . 
`` At once ? 
This instant ! 
... No , it ca n't be ! '' 
she thought . 
Again he glanced at her , and that glance convinced her that she was not mistaken . 
Yes , at once , that very instant , her fate would be decided . 
`` Go , Natasha ! 
I will call you , '' said the countess in a whisper . 
Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at her mother and went out . 
`` I have come , Countess , to ask for your daughter 's hand , '' said Prince Andrew . 
The countess ' face flushed hotly , but she said nothing . 
`` Your offer ... '' she began at last sedately . 
He remained silent , looking into her eyes . 
`` Your offer ... '' -LRB- she grew confused -RRB- `` is agreeable to us , and I accept your offer . 
I am glad . 
And my husband ... I hope ... but it will depend on her ... '' `` I will speak to her when I have your consent ... . 
Do you give it to me ? '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` Yes , '' replied the countess . 
She held out her hand to him , and with a mixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lips to his forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand . 
She wished to love him as a son , but felt that to her he was a stranger and a terrifying man . 
`` I am sure my husband will consent , '' said the countess , `` but your father ... '' `` My father , to whom I have told my plans , has made it an express condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a year . 
And I wished to tell you of that , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` It is true that Natasha is still young , but -- so long as that ? 
... '' `` It is unavoidable , '' said Prince Andrew with a sigh . 
`` I will send her to you , '' said the countess , and left the room . 
`` Lord have mercy upon us ! '' 
she repeated while seeking her daughter . 
Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom . 
Natasha was sitting on the bed , pale and dry eyed , and was gazing at the icons and whispering something as she rapidly crossed herself . 
Seeing her mother she jumped up and flew to her . 
`` Well , Mamma ? 
... Well ? 
... '' `` Go , go to him . 
He is asking for your hand , '' said the countess , coldly it seemed to Natasha . 
`` Go ... go , '' said the mother , sadly and reproachfully , with a deep sigh , as her daughter ran away . 
Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room . 
When she came in and saw him she paused . 
`` Is it possible that this stranger has now become everything to me ? '' 
she asked herself , and immediately answered , `` Yes , everything ! 
He alone is now dearer to me than everything in the world . '' 
Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes . 
`` I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you . 
May I hope ? '' 
He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassioned expression of her face . 
Her face said : `` Why ask ? 
Why doubt what you can not but know ? 
Why speak , when words can not express what one feels ? '' 
She drew near to him and stopped . 
He took her hand and kissed it . 
`` Do you love me ? '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
Natasha murmured as if in vexation . 
Then she sighed loudly and , catching her breath more and more quickly , began to sob . 
`` What is it ? 
What 's the matter ? '' 
`` Oh , I am so happy ! '' 
she replied , smiled through her tears , bent over closer to him , paused for an instant as if asking herself whether she might , and then kissed him . 
Prince Andrew held her hands , looked into her eyes , and did not find in his heart his former love for her . 
Something in him had suddenly changed ; there was no longer the former poetic and mystic charm of desire , but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness , fear at her devotion and trustfulness , and an oppressive yet joyful sense of the duty that now bound him to her forever . 
The present feeling , though not so bright and poetic as the former , was stronger and more serious . 
`` Did your mother tell you that it can not be for a year ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew , still looking into her eyes . 
`` Is it possible that I -- the ` chit of a girl , ' as everybody called me , '' thought Natasha -- `` is it possible that I am now to be the wife and the equal of this strange , dear , clever man whom even my father looks up to ? 
Can it be true ? 
Can it be true that there can be no more playing with life , that now I am grown up , that on me now lies a responsibility for my every word and deed ? 
Yes , but what did he ask me ? '' 
`` No , '' she replied , but she had not understood his question . 
`` Forgive me ! '' 
he said . 
`` But you are so young , and I have already been through so much in life . 
I am afraid for you , you do not yet know yourself . '' 
Natasha listened with concentrated attention , trying but failing to take in the meaning of his words . 
`` Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` it will give you time to be sure of yourself . 
I ask you to make me happy in a year , but you are free : our engagement shall remain a secret , and should you find that you do not love me , or should you come to love ... '' said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile . 
`` Why do you say that ? '' 
Natasha interrupted him . 
`` You know that from the very day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you , '' she cried , quite convinced that she spoke the truth . 
`` In a year you will learn to know yourself ... '' `` A whole year ! '' 
Natasha repeated suddenly , only now realizing that the marriage was to be postponed for a year . 
`` But why a year ? 
Why a year ? 
... '' Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay . 
Natasha did not hear him . 
`` And ca n't it be helped ? '' 
she asked . 
Prince Andrew did not reply , but his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision . 
`` It 's awful ! 
Oh , it 's awful ! 
awful ! '' 
Natasha suddenly cried , and again burst into sobs . 
`` I shall die , waiting a year : it 's impossible , it 's awful ! '' 
She looked into her lover 's face and saw in it a look of commiseration and perplexity . 
`` No , no ! 
I 'll do anything ! '' 
she said , suddenly checking her tears . 
`` I am so happy . '' 
The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple their blessing . 
From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs ' as Natasha 's affianced lover . 
No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha 's engagement to Bolkonski was not announced ; Prince Andrew insisted on that . 
He said that as he was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole burden of it ; that he had given his word and bound himself forever , but that he did not wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom . 
If after six months she felt that she did not love him she would have full right to reject him . 
Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of this , but Prince Andrew was firm . 
He came every day to the Rostovs ' , but did not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover : he did not use the familiar thou , but said you to her , and kissed only her hand . 
After their engagement , quite different , intimate , and natural relations sprang up between them . 
It was as if they had not known each other till now . 
Both liked to recall how they had regarded each other when as yet they were nothing to one another ; they felt themselves now quite different beings : then they were artificial , now natural and sincere . 
At first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew ; he seemed a man from another world , and for a long time Natasha trained the family to get used to him , proudly assuring them all that he only appeared to be different , but was really just like all of them , and that she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be . 
After a few days they grew accustomed to him , and without restraint in his presence pursued their usual way of life , in which he took his part . 
He could talk about rural economy with the count , fashions with the countess and Natasha , and about albums and fancywork with Sonya . 
Sometimes the household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their wonder at how it had all happened , and at the evident omens there had been of it : Prince Andrew 's coming to Otradnoe and their coming to Petersburg , and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his first visit , and Andrew 's encounter with Nicholas in 1805 , and many other incidents betokening that it had to be . 
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple . 
Often when all sitting together everyone kept silent . 
Sometimes the others would get up and go away and the couple , left alone , still remained silent . 
They rarely spoke of their future life . 
Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to speak of it . 
Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings , which she constantly divined . 
Once she began questioning him about his son . 
Prince Andrew blushed , as he often did now -- Natasha particularly liked it in him -- and said that his son would not live with them . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked Natasha in a frightened tone . 
`` I can not take him away from his grandfather , and besides ... '' `` How I should have loved him ! '' 
said Natasha , immediately guessing his thought ; `` but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault with us . '' 
Sometimes the old count would come up , kiss Prince Andrew , and ask his advice about Petya 's education or Nicholas ' service . 
The old countess sighed as she looked at them ; Sonya was always getting frightened lest she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving them alone , even when they did not wish it . 
When Prince Andrew spoke -LRB- he could tell a story very well -RRB- , Natasha listened to him with pride ; when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively and scrutinizingly at her . 
She asked herself in perplexity : `` What does he look for in me ? 
He is trying to discover something by looking at me ! 
What if what he seeks in me is not there ? '' 
Sometimes she fell into one of the mad , merry moods characteristic of her , and then she particularly loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed . 
He seldom laughed , but when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter , and after such a laugh she always felt nearer to him . 
Natasha would have been completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and drawing near had not terrified her , just as the mere thought of it made him turn pale and cold . 
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with him Pierre , who had not been to the Rostovs ' once since the ball . 
Pierre seemed disconcerted and embarrassed . 
He was talking to the countess , and Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya , thereby inviting Prince Andrew to come too . 
He did so . 
`` You have known Bezukhov a long time ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Do you like him ? '' 
`` Yes , he 's a dear , but very absurd . '' 
And as usual when speaking of Pierre , she began to tell anecdotes of his absent-mindedness , some of which had even been invented about him . 
`` Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret ? 
I have known him from childhood . 
He has a heart of gold . 
I beg you , Natalie , '' Prince Andrew said with sudden seriousness -- `` I am going away and heaven knows what may happen . 
You may cease to ... all right , I know I am not to say that . 
Only this , then : whatever may happen to you when I am not here ... '' `` What can happen ? '' 
`` Whatever trouble may come , '' Prince Andrew continued , `` I beg you , Mademoiselle Sophie , whatever may happen , to turn to him alone for advice and help ! 
He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow , but he has a heart of gold . '' 
Neither her father , nor her mother , nor Sonya , nor Prince Andrew himself could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on Natasha . 
Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day , dry-eyed , occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding what awaited her . 
She did not even cry when , on taking leave , he kissed her hand for the last time . 
`` Do n't go ! '' 
she said in a tone that made him wonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he remembered long afterwards . 
Nor did she cry when he was gone ; but for several days she sat in her room dry-eyed , taking no interest in anything and only saying now and then , `` Oh , why did he go away ? '' 
But a fortnight after his departure , to the surprise of those around her , she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became her old self again , but with a change in her moral physiognomy , as a child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face . 
During that year after his son 's departure , Prince Nicholas Bolkonski 's health and temper became much worse . 
He grew still more irritable , and it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of his frequent fits of unprovoked anger . 
He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible . 
Princess Mary had two passions and consequently two joys -- her nephew , little Nicholas , and religion -- and these were the favorite subjects of the prince 's attacks and ridicule . 
Whatever was spoken of he would bring round to the superstitiousness of old maids , or the petting and spoiling of children . 
`` You want to make him '' -- little Nicholas -- `` into an old maid like yourself ! 
A pity ! 
Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid , '' he would say . 
Or , turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne , he would ask her in Princess Mary 's presence how she liked our village priests and icons and would joke about them . 
He continually hurt Princess Mary 's feelings and tormented her , but it cost her no effort to forgive him . 
Could he be to blame toward her , or could her father , whom she knew loved her in spite of it all , be unjust ? 
And what is justice ? 
The princess never thought of that proud word `` justice . '' 
All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear and simple law -- the law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by Him who lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God . 
What had she to do with the justice or injustice of other people ? 
She had to endure and love , and that she did . 
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay , gentle , and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a long time past . 
She felt that something had happened to him , but he said nothing to her about his love . 
Before he left he had a long talk with his father about something , and Princess Mary noticed that before his departure they were dissatisfied with one another . 
Soon after Prince Andrew had gone , Princess Mary wrote to her friend Julie Karagina in Petersburg , whom she had dreamed -LRB- as all girls dream -RRB- of marrying to her brother , and who was at that time in mourning for her own brother , killed in Turkey . 
Sorrow , it seems , is our common lot , my dear , tender friend Julie . 
Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a special providence of God who , loving you , wishes to try you and your excellent mother . 
Oh , my friend ! 
Religion , and religion alone , can -- I will not say comfort us -- but save us from despair . 
Religion alone can explain to us what without its help man can not comprehend : why , for what cause , kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life -- not merely harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others -- are called away to God , while cruel , useless , harmful persons , or such as are a burden to themselves and to others , are left living . 
The first death I saw , and one I shall never forget -- that of my dear sister-in-law -- left that impression on me . 
Just as you ask destiny why your splendid brother had to die , so I asked why that angel Lise , who not only never wronged anyone , but in whose soul there were never any unkind thoughts , had to die . 
And what do you think , dear friend ? 
Five years have passed since then , and already I , with my petty understanding , begin to see clearly why she had to die , and in what way that death was but an expression of the infinite goodness of the Creator , whose every action , though generally incomprehensible to us , is but a manifestation of His infinite love for His creatures . 
Perhaps , I often think , she was too angelically innocent to have the strength to perform all a mother 's duties . 
As a young wife she was irreproachable ; perhaps she could not have been so as a mother . 
As it is , not only has she left us , and particularly Prince Andrew , with the purest regrets and memories , but probably she will there receive a place I dare not hope for myself . 
But not to speak of her alone , that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief . 
Then , at the moment of our loss , these thoughts could not occur to me ; I should then have dismissed them with horror , but now they are very clear and certain . 
I write all this to you , dear friend , only to convince you of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life : not a single hair of our heads will fall without His will . 
And His will is governed only by infinite love for us , and so whatever befalls us is for our good . 
You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow . 
In spite of my wish to see you , I do not think so and do not want to do so . 
You will be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte ! 
The case is this : my father 's health is growing noticeably worse , he can not stand any contradiction and is becoming irritable . 
This irritability is , as you know , chiefly directed to political questions . 
He can not endure the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own , the grandson of the Great Catherine ! 
