`` I expected nothing else , '' she told herself , calling her pride to her aid . 
`` I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the old lady , who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many obligations . '' 
But she could not pacify herself with these reflections ; a feeling akin to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit . 
Though she had firmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs again and to forget the whole matter , she felt herself all the time in an awkward position . 
And when she asked herself what distressed her , she had to admit that it was her relation to Rostov . 
His cold , polite manner did not express his feeling for her -LRB- she knew that -RRB- but it concealed something , and until she could discover what that something was , she felt that she could not be at ease . 
One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to her nephew 's lessons , she was informed that Rostov had called . 
With a firm resolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation , she sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room . 
Her first glance at Nicholas ' face told her that he had only come to fulfill the demands of politeness , and she firmly resolved to maintain the tone in which he addressed her . 
They spoke of the countess ' health , of their mutual friends , of the latest war news , and when the ten minutes required by propriety had elapsed after which a visitor may rise , Nicholas got up to say good-by . 
With Mademoiselle Bourienne 's help the princess had maintained the conversation very well , but at the very last moment , just when he rose , she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her , and her mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted so little happiness in life , that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still , her luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her , not noticing that he had risen . 
Nicholas glanced at her and , wishing to appear not to notice her abstraction , made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then again looked at the princess . 
She still sat motionless with a look of suffering on her gentle face . 
He suddenly felt sorry for her and was vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face expressed . 
He wished to help her and say something pleasant , but could think of nothing to say . 
`` Good-by , Princess ! '' 
said he . 
She started , flushed , and sighed deeply . 
`` Oh , I beg your pardon , '' she said as if waking up . 
`` Are you going already , Count ? 
Well then , good-by ! 
Oh , but the cushion for the countess ! '' 
`` Wait a moment , I 'll fetch it , '' said Mademoiselle Bourienne , and she left the room . 
They both sat silent , with an occasional glance at one another . 
`` Yes , Princess , '' said Nicholas at last with a sad smile , `` it does n't seem long ago since we first met at Bogucharovo , but how much water has flowed since then ! 
In what distress we all seemed to be then , yet I would give much to bring back that time ... but there 's no bringing it back . '' 
Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones as he said this . 
She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of his words which would explain his feeling for her . 
`` Yes , yes , '' said she , `` but you have no reason to regret the past , Count . 
As I understand your present life , I think you will always recall it with satisfaction , because the self-sacrifice that fills it now ... '' `` I can not accept your praise , '' he interrupted her hurriedly . 
`` On the contrary I continually reproach myself ... . 
But this is not at all an interesting or cheerful subject . '' 
His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression . 
But the princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved , and it was to him that she now spoke . 
`` I thought you would allow me to tell you this , '' she said . 
`` I had come so near to you ... and to all your family that I thought you would not consider my sympathy misplaced , but I was mistaken , '' and suddenly her voice trembled . 
`` I do n't know why , '' she continued , recovering herself , `` but you used to be different , and ... '' `` There are a thousand reasons why , '' laying special emphasis on the why . 
`` Thank you , Princess , '' he added softly . 
`` Sometimes it is hard . '' 
`` So that 's why ! 
That 's why ! '' 
a voice whispered in Princess Mary 's soul . 
`` No , it was not only that gay , kind , and frank look , not only that handsome exterior , that I loved in him . 
I divined his noble , resolute , self-sacrificing spirit too , '' she said to herself . 
`` Yes , he is poor now and I am rich ... . 
Yes , that 's the only reason ... . 
Yes , were it not for that ... '' And remembering his former tenderness , and looking now at his kind , sorrowful face , she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness . 
`` But why , Count , why ? '' 
she almost cried , unconsciously moving closer to him . 
`` Why ? 
Tell me . 
You must tell me ! '' 
He was silent . 
`` I do n't understand your why , Count , '' she continued , `` but it 's hard for me ... I confess it . 
For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former friendship . 
And that hurts me . '' 
There were tears in her eyes and in her voice . 
`` I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard for me to bear ... . 
Excuse me , good-by ! '' 
and suddenly she began to cry and was hurrying from the room . 
`` Princess , for God 's sake ! '' 
he exclaimed , trying to stop her . 
`` Princess ! '' 
She turned round . 
For a few seconds they gazed silently into one another 's eyes -- and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly became possible , inevitable , and very near . 
In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to Bald Hills with his wife , his mother , and Sonya . 
Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without selling any of his wife 's property , and having received a small inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well . 
In another three years , by 1820 , he had so managed his affairs that he was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating to buy back Otradnoe -- that being his pet dream . 
Having started farming from necessity , he soon grew so devoted to it that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation . 
Nicholas was a plain farmer : he did not like innovations , especially the English ones then coming into vogue . 
He laughed at theoretical treatises on estate management , disliked factories , the raising of expensive products , and the buying of expensive seed corn , and did not make a hobby of any particular part of the work on his estate . 
He always had before his mind 's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it . 
The chief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil , nor the oxygen in the air , nor manures , nor special plows , but that most important agent by which nitrogen , oxygen , manure , and plow were made effective -- the peasant laborer . 
When Nicholas first began farming and began to understand its different branches , it was the serf who especially attracted his attention . 
The peasant seemed to him not merely a tool , but also a judge of farming and an end in himself . 
At first he watched the serfs , trying to understand their aims and what they considered good and bad , and only pretended to direct them and give orders while in reality learning from them their methods , their manner of speech , and their judgment of what was good and bad . 
Only when he had understood the peasants ' tastes and aspirations , had learned to talk their language , to grasp the hidden meaning of their words , and felt akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs , that is , to perform toward them the duties demanded of him . 
And Nicholas ' management produced very brilliant results . 
Guided by some gift of insight , on taking up the management of the estates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff , village elder , and delegate , the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they had the right to choose , and these posts never changed hands . 
Before analyzing the properties of manure , before entering into the debit and credit -LRB- as he ironically called it -RRB- , he found out how many cattle the peasants had and increased the number by all possible means . 
He kept the peasant families together in the largest groups possible , not allowing the family groups to divide into separate households . 
He was hard alike on the lazy , the depraved , and the weak , and tried to get them expelled from the commune . 
He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants ' hay and corn as of his own , and few landowners had their crops sown and harvested so early and so well , or got so good a return , as did Nicholas . 
He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs -- the `` drones '' as he called them -- and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity . 
When a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf , especially if one had to be punished , he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in the house ; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation . 
He never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants . 
He knew that his every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions . 
He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man , or to make things easy for or reward anyone , merely because he felt inclined to do so . 
He could not have said by what standard he judged what he should or should not do , but the standard was quite firm and definite in his own mind . 
Often , speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity , he would say : `` What can one do with our Russian peasants ? '' 
and imagined that he could not bear them . 
Yet he loved `` our Russian peasants '' and their way of life with his whole soul , and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one way and manner of farming which produced good results . 
Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband 's and regretted that she could not share it ; but she could not understand the joys and vexations he derived from that world , to her so remote and alien . 
She could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy when , after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the fields or on the threshing floor , he returned from the sowing or mowing or reaping to have tea with her . 
She did not understand why he spoke with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin , who with his family had carted corn all night ; or of the fact that his -LRB- Nicholas ' -RRB- sheaves were already stacked before anyone else had his harvest in . 
She did not understand why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his mustache and winked so joyfully , when warm steady rain began to fall on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats , or why when the wind carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return from the barn , flushed , sunburned , and perspiring , with a smell of wormwood and gentian in his hair and , gleefully rubbing his hands , would say : `` Well , one more day and my grain and the peasants ' will all be under cover . '' 
Still less did she understand why he , kindhearted and always ready to anticipate her wishes , should become almost desperate when she brought him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her to be excused some work ; why he , that kind Nicholas , should obstinately refuse her , angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her business . 
She felt he had a world apart , which he loved passionately and which had laws she had not fathomed . 
Sometimes when , trying to understand him , she spoke of the good work he was doing for his serfs , he would be vexed and reply : `` Not in the least ; it never entered my head and I would n't do that for their good ! 
That 's all poetry and old wives ' talk -- all that doing good to one 's neighbor ! 
What I want is that our children should not have to go begging . 
I must put our affairs in order while I am alive , that 's all . 
And to do that , order and strictness are essential ... . 
That 's all about it ! '' 
said he , clenching his vigorous fist . 
`` And fairness , of course , '' he added , `` for if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse , he can do no good either for himself or for me . '' 
And all Nicholas did was fruitful -- probably just because he refused to allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue 's sake . 
His means increased rapidly ; serfs from neighboring estates came to beg him to buy them , and long after his death the memory of his administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs . 
`` He was a master ... the peasants ' affairs first and then his own . 
Of course he was not to be trifled with either -- in a word , he was a real master ! '' 
One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas , and that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making free use of his fists . 
At first he saw nothing reprehensible in this , but in the second year of his marriage his view of that form of punishment suddenly changed . 
Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Bogucharovo , a man who had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accused of dishonesty and various irregularities . 
Nicholas went out into the porch to question him , and immediately after the elder had given a few replies the sound of cries and blows were heard . 
On returning to lunch Nicholas went up to his wife , who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery frame , and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing that morning . 
Among other things he spoke of the Bogucharovo elder . 
Countess Mary turned red and then pale , but continued to sit with head bowed and lips compressed and gave her husband no reply . 
`` Such an insolent scoundrel ! '' 
he cried , growing hot again at the mere recollection of him . 
`` If he had told me he was drunk and did not see ... But what is the matter with you , Mary ? '' 
he suddenly asked . 
Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak , but hastily looked down again and her lips puckered . 
`` Why , whatever is the matter , my dearest ? '' 
The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was in tears . 
She never cried from pain or vexation , but always from sorrow or pity , and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm . 
The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herself and began to cry . 
`` Nicholas , I saw it ... he was to blame , but why do you ... Nicholas ! '' 
and she covered her face with her hands . 
Nicholas said nothing . 
He flushed crimson , left her side , and paced up and down the room . 
He understood what she was weeping about , but could not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong . 
`` Is it just sentimentality , old wives ' tales , or is she right ? '' 
he asked himself . 
Before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled with love and pain , and he suddenly realized that she was right and that he had long been sinning against himself . 
`` Mary , '' he said softly , going up to her , `` it will never happen again ; I give you my word . 
Never , '' he repeated in a trembling voice like a boy asking for forgiveness . 
The tears flowed faster still from the countess ' eyes . 
She took his hand and kissed it . 
`` Nicholas , when did you break your cameo ? '' 
she asked to change the subject , looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with a cameo of Laocoon 's head . 
`` Today -- it was the same affair . 
Oh , Mary , do n't remind me of it ! '' 
and again he flushed . 
`` I give you my word of honor it sha n't occur again , and let this always be a reminder to me , '' and he pointed to the broken ring . 
After that , when in discussions with his village elders or stewards the blood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench , Nicholas would turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before the man who was making him angry . 
But he did forget himself once or twice within a twelvemonth , and then he would go and confess to his wife , and would again promise that this should really be the very last time . 
`` Mary , you must despise me ! '' 
he would say . 
`` I deserve it . '' 
`` You should go , go away at once , if you do n't feel strong enough to control yourself , '' she would reply sadly , trying to comfort her husband . 
Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked . 
He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class , and consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid . 
The whole summer , from spring sowing to harvest , he was busy with the work on his farm . 
In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same business like seriousness -- leaving home for a month , or even two , with his hunt . 
In winter he visited his other villages or spent his time reading . 
The books he read were chiefly historical , and on these he spent a certain sum every year . 
He was collecting , as he said , a serious library , and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought . 
He would sit in his study with a grave air , reading -- a task he first imposed upon himself as a duty , but which afterwards became a habit affording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of being occupied with serious matters . 
In winter , except for business excursions , he spent most of his time at home making himself one with his family and entering into all the details of his children 's relations with their mother . 
The harmony between him and his wife grew closer and closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her . 
From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house . 
Before that , Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and Sonya , blaming himself and commending her . 
He had asked Princess Mary to be gentle and kind to his cousin . 
She thoroughly realized the wrong he had done Sonya , felt herself to blame toward her , and imagined that her wealth had influenced Nicholas ' choice . 
She could not find fault with Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her , but often felt ill-will toward her which she could not overcome . 
Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and about her own injustice toward her . 
`` You know , '' said Natasha , `` you have read the Gospels a great deal - there is a passage in them that just fits Sonya . '' 
`` What ? '' 
asked Countess Mary , surprised . '' 
` To him that hath shall be given , and from him that hath not shall be taken away . ' 
You remember ? 
She is one that hath not ; why , I do n't know . 
Perhaps she lacks egotism , I do n't know , but from her is taken away , and everything has been taken away . 
Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her . 
Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her , but I always had a sort of presentiment that it would not come off . 
She is a sterile flower , you know -- like some strawberry blossoms . 
Sometimes I am sorry for her , and sometimes I think she does n't feel it as you or I would . '' 
Though Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the Gospel must be understood differently , yet looking at Sonya she agreed with Natasha 's explanation . 
It really seemed that Sonya did not feel her position trying , and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower . 
She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as a whole . 
Like a cat , she had attached herself not to the people but to the home . 
She waited on the old countess , petted and spoiled the children , was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift , and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient gratitude . 
The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt , though not on the same scale as under the old prince . 
The buildings , begun under straitened circumstances , were more than simple . 
The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood , plastered only inside . 
It had bare deal floors and was furnished with very simple hard sofas , armchairs , tables , and chairs made by their own serf carpenters out of their own birchwood . 
The house was spacious and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors . 
Whole families of the Rostovs ' and Bolkonskis ' relations sometimes came to Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for months . 
Besides that , four times a year , on the name days and birthdays of the hosts , as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day or two . 
The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its ordinary occupations , and its breakfasts , lunches , dinners , and suppers , provided out of the produce of the estate . 
It was the eve of St. Nicholas , the fifth of December , 1820 . 
Natasha had been staying at her brother 's with her husband and children since early autumn . 
Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for three weeks as he said , but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was expected back every minute . 
Besides the Bezukhov family , Nicholas ' old friend the retired General Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth of December . 
On the sixth , which was his name day when the house would be full of visitors , Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for a tail coat , and put on narrow boots with pointed toes , and drive to the new church he had built , and then receive visitors who would come to congratulate him , offer them refreshments , and talk about the elections of the nobility ; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve of that day in his usual way . 
He examined the bailiff 's accounts of the village in Ryazan which belonged to his wife 's nephew , wrote two business letters , and walked over to the granaries , cattle yards and stables before dinner . 
Having taken precautions against the general drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint 's day , he returned to dinner , and without having time for a private talk with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons , at which the whole household had assembled . 
At that table were his mother , his mother 's old lady companion Belova , his wife , their three children with their governess and tutor , his wife 's nephew with his tutor , Sonya , Denisov , Natasha , her three children , their governess , and old Michael Ivanovich , the late prince 's architect , who was living on in retirement at Bald Hills . 
Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table . 
When her husband took his place she concluded , from the rapid manner in which after taking up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing before him , that he was out of humor , as was sometimes the case when he came in to dinner straight from the farm -- especially before the soup . 
Countess Mary well knew that mood of his , and when she herself was in a good frame of mind quietly waited till he had had his soup and then began to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for his ill-humor . 
But today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he should be angry with her without any reason , and she felt unhappy . 
She asked him where he had been . 
He replied . 
She again inquired whether everything was going well on the farm . 
Her unnatural tone made him wince unpleasantly and he replied hastily . 
`` Then I 'm not mistaken , '' thought Countess Mary . 
`` Why is he cross with me ? '' 
She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished to end the conversation . 
She knew her remarks sounded unnatural , but could not refrain from asking some more questions . 
Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became general and lively , and she did not talk to her husband . 
When they left the table and went as usual to thank the old countess , Countess Mary held out her hand and kissed her husband , and asked him why he was angry with her . 
`` You always have such strange fancies ! 
I did n't even think of being angry , '' he replied . 
But the word always seemed to her to imply : `` Yes , I am angry but I wo n't tell you why . '' 
Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sonya and the old countess , who felt jealous and would have liked them to disagree , could find nothing to reproach them with ; but even they had their moments of antagonism . 
Occasionally , and it was always just after they had been happiest together , they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement and hostility , which occurred most frequently during Countess Mary 's pregnancies , and this was such a time . 
`` Well , messieurs et mesdames , '' said Nicholas loudly and with apparent cheerfulness -LRB- it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose to vex her -RRB- , `` I have been on my feet since six this morning . 
Tomorrow I shall have to suffer , so today I 'll go and rest . '' 
And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and lay down on the sofa . 
`` That 's always the way , '' thought Countess Mary . 
`` He talks to everyone except me . 
I see ... I see that I am repulsive to him , especially when I am in this condition . '' 
She looked down at her expanded figure and in the glass at her pale , sallow , emaciated face in which her eyes now looked larger than ever . 
And everything annoyed her -- Denisov 's shouting and laughter , Natasha 's talk , and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her . 
Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feeling irritated . 
Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of what they were saying , she softly left the room and went to the nursery . 
The children were playing at `` going to Moscow '' in a carriage made of chairs and invited her to go with them . 
She sat down and played with them a little , but the thought of her husband and his unreasonable crossness worried her . 
She got up and , walking on tiptoe with difficulty , went to the small sitting room . 
`` Perhaps he is not asleep ; I 'll have an explanation with him , '' she said to herself . 
Little Andrew , her eldest boy , imitating his mother , followed her on tiptoe . 
She not notice him . 
`` Mary , dear , I think he is asleep -- he was so tired , '' said Sonya , meeting her in the large sitting room -LRB- it seemed to Countess Mary that she crossed her path everywhere -RRB- . 
`` Andrew may wake him . '' 
Countess Mary looked round , saw little Andrew following her , felt that Sonya was right , and for that very reason flushed and with evident difficulty refrained from saying something harsh . 
She made no reply , but to avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went to the door . 
Sonya went away by another door . 
From the room in which Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing , every slightest tone of which was familiar to his wife . 
As she listened to it she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead , his mustache , and his whole face , as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night when he slept . 
Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat . 
And at that moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door : `` Papa ! 
Mamma 's standing here ! '' 
Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs to the boy . 
He grew silent , and quiet ensued for a moment , terrible to Countess Mary . 
She knew how Nicholas disliked being waked . 
Then through the door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring , and his voice said crossly : `` I ca n't get a moment 's peace ... . 
Mary , is that you ? 
Why did you bring him here ? '' 
`` I only came in to look and did not notice ... forgive me ... '' Nicholas coughed and said no more . 
Countess Mary moved away from the door and took the boy back to the nursery . 
Five minutes later little black-eyed three-year-old Natasha , her father 's pet , having learned from her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room , ran to her father unobserved by her mother . 
The dark-eyed little girl boldly opened the creaking door , went up to the sofa with energetic steps of her sturdy little legs , and having examined the position of her father , who was asleep with his back to her , rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand which lay under his head . 
Nicholas turned with a tender smile on his face . 
`` Natasha , Natasha ! '' 
came Countess Mary 's frightened whisper from the door . 
`` Papa wants to sleep . '' 
`` No , Mamma , he does n't want to sleep , '' said little Natasha with conviction . 
`` He 's laughing . '' 
Nicholas lowered his legs , rose , and took his daughter in his arms . 
`` Come in , Mary , '' he said to his wife . 
She went in and sat down by her husband . 
`` I did not notice him following me , '' she said timidly . 
`` I just looked in . '' 
Holding his little girl with one arm , Nicholas glanced at his wife and , seeing her guilty expression , put his other arm around her and kissed her hair . 
`` May I kiss Mamma ? '' 
he asked Natasha . 
Natasha smiled bashfully . 
`` Again ! '' 
she commanded , pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spot where Nicholas had placed the kiss . 
`` I do n't know why you think I am cross , '' said Nicholas , replying to the question he knew was in his wife 's mind . 
`` You have no idea how unhappy , how lonely , I feel when you are like that . 
It always seems to me ... '' `` Mary , do n't talk nonsense . 
You ought to be ashamed of yourself ! '' 
he said gaily . 
`` It seems to be that you ca n't love me , that I am so plain ... always ... and now ... in this cond ... '' `` Oh , how absurd you are ! 
It is not beauty that endears , it 's love that makes us see beauty . 
It is only Malvinas and women of that kind who are loved for their beauty . 
But do I love my wife ? 
I do n't love her , but ... I do n't know how to put it . 
Without you , or when something comes between us like this , I seem lost and ca n't do anything . 
Now do I love my finger ? 
I do n't love it , but just try to cut it off ! '' 
`` I 'm not like that myself , but I understand . 
So you 're not angry with me ? '' 
`` Awfully angry ! '' 
he said , smiling and getting up . 
And smoothing his hair he began to pace the room . 
`` Do you know , Mary , what I 've been thinking ? '' 
he began , immediately thinking aloud in his wife 's presence now that they had made it up . 
He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him . 
He did not care . 
A thought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also . 
And he told her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till spring . 
Countess Mary listened till he had finished , made some remark , and in her turn began thinking aloud . 
Her thoughts were about the children . 
`` You can see the woman in her already , '' she said in French , pointing to little Natasha . 
`` You reproach us women with being illogical . 
Here is our logic . 
I say : ` Papa wants to sleep ! ' 
but she says , ` No , he 's laughing . ' 
And she was right , '' said Countess Mary with a happy smile . 
`` Yes , yes . '' 
And Nicholas , taking his little daughter in his strong hand , lifted her high , placed her on his shoulder , held her by the legs , and paced the room with her . 
There was an expression of carefree happiness on the faces of both father and daughter . 
`` But you know you may be unfair . 
You are too fond of this one , '' his wife whispered in French . 
`` Yes , but what am I to do ? 
... I try not to show ... '' At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in the hall and anteroom , as if someone had arrived . 
`` Somebody has come . '' 
`` I am sure it is Pierre . 
I will go and see , '' said Countess Mary and left the room . 
In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter a gallop round the room . 
Out of breath , he took the laughing child quickly from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart . 
His capers reminded him of dancing , and looking at the child 's round happy little face he thought of what she would be like when he was an old man , taking her into society and dancing the mazurka with her as his old father had danced Daniel Cooper with his daughter . 
`` It is he , it is he , Nicholas ! '' 
said Countess Mary , re-entering the room a few minutes later . 
`` Now our Natasha has come to life . 
You should have seen her ecstasy , and how he caught it for having stayed away so long . 
Well , come along now , quick , quick ! 
It 's time you two were parted , '' she added , looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father . 
Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand . 
Countess Mary remained in the sitting room . 
`` I should never , never have believed that one could be so happy , '' she whispered to herself . 
A smile lit up her face but at the same time she sighed , and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as though she felt , through her happiness , that there is another sort of happiness unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thought at that instant . 
Natasha had married in the early spring of 1813 , and in 1820 already had three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was now nursing . 
She had grown stouter and broader , so that it was difficult to recognize in this robust , motherly woman the slim , lively Natasha of former days . 
Her features were more defined and had a calm , soft , and serene expression . 
In her face there was none of the ever-glowing animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm . 
Now her face and body were of all that one saw , and her soul was not visible at all . 
All that struck the eye was a strong , handsome , and fertile woman . 
The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now . 
That happened only when , as was the case that day , her husband returned home , or a sick child was convalescent , or when she and Countess Mary spoke of Prince Andrew -LRB- she never mentioned him to her husband , who she imagined was jealous of Prince Andrew 's memory -RRB- , or on the rare occasions when something happened to induce her to sing , a practice she had quite abandoned since her marriage . 
At the rare moments when the old fire did kindle in her handsome , fully developed body she was even more attractive than in former days . 
Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow , in Petersburg , on their estate near Moscow , or with her mother , that is to say , in Nicholas ' house . 
The young Countess Bezukhova was not often seen in society , and those who met her there were not pleased with her and found her neither attractive nor amiable . 
Not that Natasha liked solitude -- she did not know whether she liked it or not , she even thought that she did not -- but with her pregnancies , her confinements , the nursing of her children , and sharing every moment of her husband 's life , she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing society . 
All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at the change in her as at something extraordinary . 
Only the old countess with her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha 's outbursts had been due to her need of children and a husband -- as she herself had once exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest -- and her mother was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never understood Natasha , and she kept saying that she had always known that Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother . 
`` Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all bounds , '' said the countess , `` so that it even becomes absurd . '' 
Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk , especially by the French , which says that a girl should not let herself go when she marries , should not neglect her accomplishments , should be even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried , and should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her husband . 
Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery , of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part . 
She gave it up just because it was so powerfully seductive . 
She took no pains with her manners or with of speech , or with her toilet , or to show herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes , or to avoid inconveniencing him by being too exacting . 
She acted in contradiction to all those rules . 
She felt that the allurements instinct had formerly taught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of her husband , to whom she had from the first moment given herself up entirely -- that is , with her whole soul , leaving no corner of it hidden from him . 
She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her , but by something else -- indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul . 
To fluff out her curls , put on fashionable dresses , and sing romantic songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn herself to attract herself . 
To adorn herself for others might perhaps have been agreeable -- she did not know -- but she had no time at all for it . 
The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing , to dress , or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for these things . 
We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in a subject however trivial it may be , and that there is no subject so trivial that it will not grow to infinite proportions if one 's entire attention is devoted to it . 
The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha 's attention was her family : that is , her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong entirely to her and to the home , and the children whom she had to bear , bring into the world , nurse , and bring up . 
And the deeper she penetrated , not with her mind only but with her whole soul , her whole being , into the subject that absorbed her , the larger did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate did her powers appear , so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yet was unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary . 
There were then as now conversations and discussions about women 's rights , the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights , though these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now ; but these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha , she positively did not understand them . 
These questions , then as now , existed only for those who see nothing in marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another , that is , only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance , which lies in the family . 
Discussions and questions of that kind , which are like the question of how to get the greatest gratification from one 's dinner , did not then and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is the nourishment it affords ; and the purpose of marriage is the family . 
If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body , a man who eats two dinners at once may perhaps get more enjoyment but will not attain his purpose , for his stomach will not digest the two dinners . 
If the purpose of marriage is the family , the person who wishes to have many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure , but in that case will not have a family . 
If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is the family , the whole question resolves itself into not eating more than one can digest , and not having more wives or husbands than are needed for the family -- that is , one wife or one husband . 
Natasha needed a husband . 
A husband was given her and he gave her a family . 
And she not only saw no need of any other or better husband , but as all the powers of her soul were intent on serving that husband and family , she could not imagine and saw no interest in imagining how it would be if things were different . 
Natasha did not care for society in general , but prized the more the society of her relatives -- Countess Mary , and her brother , her mother , and Sonya . 
She valued the company of those to whom she could come striding disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown , and with joyful face show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby 's napkin , and from whom she could hear reassuring words to the effect that baby was much better . 
To such an extent had Natasha let herself go that the way she dressed and did her hair , her ill-chosen words , and her jealousy - she was jealous of Sonya , of the governess , and of every woman , pretty or plain -- were habitual subjects of jest to those about her . 
The general opinion was that Pierre was under his wife 's thumb , which was really true . 
From the very first days of their married life Natasha had announced her demands . 
Pierre was greatly surprised by his wife 's view , to him a perfectly novel one , that every moment of his life belonged to her and to the family . 
His wife 's demands astonished him , but they also flattered him , and he submitted to them . 
Pierre 's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared not flirt with , but dared not even speak smilingly to , any other woman ; did not dare dine at the Club as a pastime , did not dare spend money a whim , and did not dare absent himself for any length of time , except on business -- in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits , which she did not in the least understand but to which she attributed great importance . 
To make up for this , at home Pierre had the right to regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose . 
At home Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband , and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied -- that is , was reading or writing in his study . 
Pierre had but to show a partiality for anything to get just what he liked done always . 
He had only to express a wish and Natasha would jump up and run to fulfill it . 
The entire household was governed according to Pierre 's supposed orders , that is , by his wishes which Natasha tried to guess . 
Their way of life and place of residence , their acquaintances and ties , Natasha 's occupations , the children 's upbringing , were all selected not merely with regard to Pierre 's expressed wishes , but to what Natasha from the thoughts he expressed in conversation supposed his wishes to be . 
And she deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly , and having once arrived at them clung to them tenaciously . 
When Pierre himself wanted to change his mind she would fight him with his own weapons . 
Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of their first child who was delicate , when they had to change the wet nurse three times and Natasha fell ill from despair , Pierre one day told her of Rousseau 's view , with which he quite agreed , that to have a wet nurse is unnatural and harmful . 
When her next baby was born , despite the opposition of her mother , the doctors , and even of her husband himself -- who were all vigorously opposed to her nursing her baby herself , a thing then unheard of and considered injurious - she insisted on having her own way , and after that nursed all her babies herself . 
It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wife would have a dispute , but long afterwards Pierre to his surprise and delight would find in his wife 's ideas and actions the very thought against which she had argued , but divested of everything superfluous that in the excitement of the dispute he had added when expressing his opinion . 
After seven years of marriage Pierre had the joyous and firm consciousness that he was not a bad man , and he felt this because he saw himself reflected in his wife . 
He felt the good and bad within himself inextricably mingled and overlapping . 
But only what was really good in him was reflected in his wife , all that was not quite good was rejected . 
And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct and mysterious reflection . 
Two months previously when Pierre was already staying with the Rostovs he had received a letter from Prince Theodore , asking him to come to Petersburg to confer on some important questions that were being discussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of the principal founders . 
On reading that letter -LRB- she always read her husband 's letters -RRB- Natasha herself suggested that he should go to Petersburg , though she would feel his absence very acutely . 
She attributed immense importance to all her husband 's intellectual and abstract interests though she did not understand them , and she always dreaded being a hindrance to him in such matters . 
To Pierre 's timid look of inquiry after reading the letter she replied by asking him to go , but to fix a definite date for his return . 
He was given four weeks ' leave of absence . 
Ever since that leave of absence had expired , more than a fortnight before , Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm , depression , and irritability . 
Denisov , now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied with the present state of affairs , had arrived during that fortnight . 
He looked at Natasha with sorrow and surprise as at a bad likeness of a person once dear . 
A dull , dejected look , random replies , and talk about the nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress . 
Natasha was sad and irritable all that time , especially when her mother , her brother , Sonya , or Countess Mary in their efforts to console her tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning . 
`` It 's all nonsense , all rubbish -- those discussions which lead to nothing and all those idiotic societies ! '' 
Natasha declared of the very affairs in the immense importance of which she firmly believed . 
And she would go to the nursery to nurse Petya , her only boy . 
No one else could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as this little three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and she was conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his little nose . 
That creature said : `` You are angry , you are jealous , you would like to pay him out , you are afraid -- but here am I ! 
And I am he ... '' and that was unanswerable . 
It was more than true . 
During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for comfort so often , and fussed over him so much , that she overfed him and he fell ill . 
She was terrified by his illness , and yet that was just what she needed . 
While attending to him she bore the anxiety about her husband more easily . 
She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre 's sleigh was heard at the front door , and the old nurse -- knowing how to please her mistress -- entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming face . 
`` Has he come ? '' 
Natasha asked quickly in a whisper , afraid to move lest she should rouse the dozing baby . 
`` He 's come , ma'am , '' whispered the nurse . 
The blood rushed to Natasha 's face and her feet involuntarily moved , but she could not jump up and run out . 
The baby again opened his eyes and looked at her . 
`` You 're here ? '' 
he seemed to be saying , and again lazily smacked his lips . 
Cautiously withdrawing her breast , Natasha rocked him a little , handed him to the nurse , and went with rapid steps toward the door . 
But at the door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in her joy left the child too soon , and she glanced round . 
The nurse with raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot . 
`` Go , ma'am ! 
Do n't worry , go ! '' 
she whispered , smiling , with the kind of familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress . 
Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom . 
Denisov , who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his pipe , now for the first time recognized the old Natasha . 
A flood of brilliant , joyful light poured from her transfigured face . 
`` He 's come ! '' 
she exclaimed as she ran past , and Denisov felt that he too was delighted that Pierre , whom he did not much care for , had returned . 
On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coat unwinding his scarf . 
`` It 's he ! 
It 's really he ! 
He has come ! '' 
she said to herself , and rushing at him embraced him , pressed his head to her breast , and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy , happy face , covered with hoarfrost . 
`` Yes , it is he , happy and contented ... '' Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had experienced for the last fortnight , and the joy that had lit up her face vanished ; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of reproaches and angry words . 
`` Yes , it 's all very well for you . 
You are pleased , you 've had a good time ... . 
But what about me ? 
You might at least have shown consideration for the children . 
I am nursing and my milk was spoiled ... . 
Petya was at death 's door . 
But you were enjoying yourself . 
Yes , enjoying ... '' Pierre knew he was not to blame , for he could not have come sooner ; he knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two ; above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy . 
He wanted to smile but dared not even think of doing so . 
He made a piteous , frightened face and bent down . 
`` I could not , on my honor . 
But how is Petya ? '' 
`` All right now . 
Come along ! 
I wonder you 're not ashamed ! 
If only you could see what I was like without you , how I suffered ! '' 
`` You are well ? '' 
`` Come , come ! '' 
she said , not letting go of his arm . 
And they went to their rooms . 
When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery holding his baby son , who was again awake , on his huge right palm and dandling him . 
A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby 's broad face with its toothless open mouth . 
The storm was long since over and there was bright , joyous sunshine on Natasha 's face as she gazed tenderly at her husband and child . 
`` And have you talked everything well over with Prince Theodore ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Yes , capitally . '' 
`` You see , he holds it up . '' 
-LRB- She meant the baby 's head . -RRB- 
`` But how he did frighten me ... You 've seen the princess ? 
Is it true she 's in love with that ... '' `` Yes , just fancy ... '' At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in . 
Pierre with the baby on his hand stooped , kissed them , and replied to their inquiries . 
But in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed , the baby with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his attention . 
`` How sweet ! '' 
said Countess Mary , looking at and playing with the baby . 
`` Now , Nicholas , '' she added , turning to her husband , `` I ca n't understand how it is you do n't see the charm of these delicious marvels . '' 
`` I do n't and ca n't , '' replied Nicholas , looking coldly at the baby . 
`` A lump of flesh . 
Come along , Pierre ! '' 
`` And yet he 's such an affectionate father , '' said Countess Mary , vindicating her husband , `` but only after they are a year old or so ... '' `` Now , Pierre nurses them splendidly , '' said Natasha . 
`` He says his hand is just made for a baby 's seat . 
Just look ! '' 
`` Only not for this ... '' Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh , and shifting the baby he gave him to the nurse . 
As in every large household , there were at Bald Hills several perfectly distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole , though each retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others . 
Every event , joyful or sad , that took place in that house was important to all these worlds , but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieve over that occurrence independently of the others . 
For instance , Pierre 's return was a joyful and important event and they all felt it to be so . 
The servants -- the most reliable judges of their masters because they judge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by their acts and way of life -- were glad of Pierre 's return because they knew that when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day to attend to the estate , and would be in better spirits and temper , and also because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays . 
The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre 's return because no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did . 
He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise -LRB- his only piece -RRB- to which , as he said , all possible dances could be danced , and they felt sure he had brought presents for them all . 
Young Nicholas , now a slim lad of fifteen , delicate and intelligent , with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes , was delighted because Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous and passionate affection . 
No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre whom he saw only occasionally . 
Countess Mary who had brought him up had done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him , and little Nicholas did love his uncle , but loved him with just a shade of contempt . 
Pierre , however , he adored . 
He did not want to be an hussar or a Knight of St. George like his uncle Nicholas ; he wanted to be learned , wise , and kind like Pierre . 
In Pierre 's presence his face always shone with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to him . 
He did not miss a single word he uttered , and would afterwards , with Dessalles or by himself , recall and reconsider the meaning of everything Pierre had said . 
Pierre 's past life and his unhappiness prior to 1812 -LRB- of which young Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture from some words he had overheard -RRB- , his adventures in Moscow , his captivity , Platon Karataev -LRB- of whom he had heard from Pierre -RRB- , his love for Natasha -LRB- of whom the lad was also particularly fond -RRB- , and especially Pierre 's friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember -- all this made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint . 
From broken remarks about Natasha and his father , from the emotion with which Pierre spoke of that dead father , and from the careful , reverent tenderness with which Natasha spoke of him , the boy , who was only just beginning to guess what love is , derived the notion that his father had loved Natasha and when dying had left her to his friend . 
But the father whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not be pictured , and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and tears of sadness and rapture . 
So the boy also was happy that Pierre had arrived . 
The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite any company he was in . 
The grown-up members of the family , not to mention his wife , were pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly and peacefully . 
The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them , and especially that Natasha would now be herself again . 
Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made haste to satisfy all their expectations . 
Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men , Pierre , with the aid of a list his wife drew up , had now bought everything , not forgetting his mother -- and brother-in-law 's commissions , nor the dress material for a present to Belova , nor toys for his wife 's nephews . 
In the early days of his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expect him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy , and he had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he forgot everything . 
But in time he grew used to this demand . 
Knowing that Natasha asked nothing for herself , and gave him commissions for others only when he himself had offered to undertake them , he now found an unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for everyone in the house , and never forgot anything . 
If he now incurred Natasha 's censure it was only for buying too many and too expensive things . 
To her other defects -LRB- as most people thought them , but which to Pierre were qualities -RRB- of untidiness and neglect of herself , she now added stinginess . 
From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footing entailing heavy expenditure , he had noticed to his surprise that he spent only half as much as before , and that his affairs -- which had been in disorder of late , chiefly because of his first wife 's debts - had begun to improve . 
