Princess Mary 's embarrassment on her people 's account was quite unnecessary . 
They were not in the least abashed . 
The old woman , lowering her eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers , had turned her cup upside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it , and sat quietly in her armchair , though hoping to be offered another cup of tea . 
Ivanushka , sipping out of her saucer , looked with sly womanish eyes from under her brows at the young men . 
`` Where have you been ? 
To Kiev ? '' 
Prince Andrew asked the old woman . 
`` I have , good sir , '' she answered garrulously . 
`` Just at Christmastime I was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at the shrine of the saint . 
And now I 'm from Kolyazin , master , where a great and wonderful blessing has been revealed . '' 
`` And was Ivanushka with you ? '' 
`` I go by myself , benefactor , '' said Ivanushka , trying to speak in a bass voice . 
`` I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo ... '' Pelageya interrupted her companion ; she evidently wished to tell what she had seen . 
`` In Kolyazin , master , a wonderful blessing has been revealed . '' 
`` What is it ? 
Some new relics ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew . 
`` Andrew , do leave off , '' said Princess Mary . 
`` Do n't tell him , Pelageya . '' 
`` No ... why not , my dear , why should n't I ? 
I like him . 
He is kind , he is one of God 's chosen , he 's a benefactor , he once gave me ten rubles , I remember . 
When I was in Kiev , Crazy Cyril says to me -LRB- he 's one of God 's own and goes barefoot summer and winter -RRB- , he says , ` Why are you not going to the right place ? 
Go to Kolyazin where a wonder-working icon of the Holy Mother of God has been revealed . ' 
On hearing those words I said good-by to the holy folk and went . '' 
All were silent , only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones , drawing in her breath . 
`` So I come , master , and the people say to me : ' A great blessing has been revealed , holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother , the Holy Virgin Mother of God ' ... '' `` All right , all right , you can tell us afterwards , '' said Princess Mary , flushing . 
`` Let me ask her , '' said Pierre . 
`` Did you see it yourselves ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` Oh , yes , master , I was found worthy . 
Such a brightness on the face like the light of heaven , and from the blessed Mother 's cheek it drops and drops ... '' `` But , dear me , that must be a fraud ! '' 
said Pierre , naively , who had listened attentively to the pilgrim . 
`` Oh , master , what are you saying ? '' 
exclaimed the horrified Pelageya , turning to Princess Mary for support . 
`` They impose on the people , '' he repeated . 
`` Lord Jesus Christ ! '' 
exclaimed the pilgrim woman , crossing herself . 
`` Oh , do n't speak so , master ! 
There was a general who did not believe , and said , ` The monks cheat , ' and as soon as he 'd said it he went blind . 
And he dreamed that the Holy Virgin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to him and said , ` Believe in me and I will make you whole . ' 
So he begged : ` Take me to her , take me to her . ' 
It 's the real truth I 'm telling you , I saw it myself . 
So he was brought , quite blind , straight to her , and he goes up to her and falls down and says , ` Make me whole , ' says he , ` and I 'll give thee what the Tsar bestowed on me . ' 
I saw it myself , master , the star is fixed into the icon . 
Well , and what do you think ? 
He received his sight ! 
It 's a sin to speak so . 
God will punish you , '' she said admonishingly , turning to Pierre . 
`` How did the star get into the icon ? '' 
Pierre asked . 
`` And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general ? '' 
said Prince Andrew , with a smile . 
Pelageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands . 
`` Oh , master , master , what a sin ! 
And you who have a son ! '' 
she began , her pallor suddenly turning to a vivid red . 
`` Master , what have you said ? 
God forgive you ! '' 
And she crossed herself . 
`` Lord forgive him ! 
My dear , what does it mean ? 
... '' she asked , turning to Princess Mary . 
She got up and , almost crying , began to arrange her wallet . 
She evidently felt frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such things could be said , and was at the same time sorry to have now to forgo the charity of this house . 
`` Now , why need you do it ? '' 
said Princess Mary . 
`` Why did you come to me ? 
... '' `` Come , Pelageya , I was joking , '' said Pierre . 
`` Princesse , ma parole , je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser . 
* I did not mean anything , I was only joking , '' he said , smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense . 
`` It was all my fault , and Andrew was only joking . '' 
* `` Princess , on my word , I did not wish to offend her . '' 
Pelageya stopped doubtfully , but in Pierre 's face there was such a look of sincere penitence , and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at her and now at Pierre , that she was gradually reassured . 
The pilgrim woman was appeased and , being encouraged to talk , gave a long account of Father Amphilochus , who led so holy a life that his hands smelled of incense , and how on her last visit to Kiev some monks she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs , and how she , taking some dried bread with her , had spent two days in the catacombs with the saints . 
`` I 'd pray awhile to one , ponder awhile , then go on to another . 
I 'd sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics , and there was such peace all around , such blessedness , that one do n't want to come out , even into the light of heaven again . '' 
Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously . 
Prince Andrew went out of the room , and then , leaving `` God 's folk '' to finish their tea , Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room . 
`` You are very kind , '' she said to him . 
`` Oh , I really did not mean to hurt her feelings . 
I understand them so well and have the greatest respect for them . '' 
Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately . 
`` I have known you a long time , you see , and am as fond of you as of a brother , '' she said . 
`` How do you find Andrew ? '' 
she added hurriedly , not giving him time to reply to her affectionate words . 
`` I am very anxious about him . 
His health was better in the winter , but last spring his wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a cure . 
And I am also very much afraid for him spiritually . 
He has not a character like us women who , when we suffer , can weep away our sorrows . 
He keeps it all within him . 
Today he is cheerful and in good spirits , but that is the effect of your visit -- he is not often like that . 
If you could persuade him to go abroad . 
He needs activity , and this quiet regular life is very bad for him . 
Others do n't notice it , but I see it . '' 
Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door , hearing the bells of the old prince 's carriage approaching . 
Prince Andrew and Pierre also went out into the porch . 
`` Who 's that ? '' 
asked the old prince , noticing Pierre as he got out of , the carriage . 
`` Ah ! 
Very glad ! 
Kiss me , '' he said , having learned who the young stranger was . 
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre . 
Before supper , Prince Andrew , coming back to his father 's study , found him disputing hotly with his visitor . 
Pierre was maintaining that a time would come when there would be no more wars . 
The old prince disputed it chaffingly , but without getting angry . 
`` Drain the blood from men 's veins and put in water instead , then there will be no more war ! 
Old women 's nonsense -- old women 's nonsense ! '' 
he repeated , but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder , and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew , evidently not wishing to join in the conversation , was looking over the papers his father had brought from town . 
The old prince went up to him and began to talk business . 
`` The marshal , a Count Rostov , has n't sent half his contingent . 
He came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner -- I gave him a pretty dinner ! 
... And there , look at this ... . 
Well , my boy , '' the old prince went on , addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder . 
`` A fine fellow -- your friend -- I like him ! 
He stirs me up . 
Another says clever things and one does n't care to listen , but this one talks rubbish yet stirs an old fellow up . 
Well , go ! 
Get along ! 
Perhaps I 'll come and sit with you at supper . 
We 'll have another dispute . 
Make friends with my little fool , Princess Mary , '' he shouted after Pierre , through the door . 
Only now , on his visit to Bald Hills , did Pierre fully realize the strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew . 
That charm was not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family and with the household . 
With the stern old prince and the gentle , timid Princess Mary , though he had scarcely known them , Pierre at once felt like an old friend . 
They were all fond of him already . 
Not only Princess Mary , who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims , gave him her most radiant looks , but even the one-year-old `` Prince Nicholas '' -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in his arms , and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince . 
The old prince came in to supper ; this was evidently on Pierre 's account . 
And during the two days of the young man 's visit he was extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again . 
When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together , they began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new acquaintance has left , but as seldom happens , no one said anything but what was good of him . 
When returning from his leave , Rostov felt , for the first time , how close was the bond that united him to Denisov and and the whole regiment . 
On approaching it , Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home in Moscow . 
When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of his regiment , when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the picket ropes of the roan horses , when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his master , `` The count has come ! '' 
and Denisov , who had been asleep on his bed , ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him , and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival , Rostov experienced the same feeling his mother , his father , and his sister had embraced him , and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak . 
The regiment was also a home , and as unalterably dear and precious as his parents ' house . 
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had been reassigned to his former squadron , had been on duty and had gone out foraging , when he had again entered into all the little interests of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one narrow , unchanging frame , he experienced the same sense of peace , of moral support , and the same sense being at home here in his own place , as he had felt under the parental roof . 
But here was none of all that turmoil of the world at large , where he did not know his right place and took mistaken decisions ; here was no Sonya with whom he ought , or ought not , to have an explanation ; here was no possibility of going there or not going there ; here there were not twenty-four hours in the day which could be spent in such a variety of ways ; there was not that innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther from him than another ; there were none of those uncertain and undefined money relations with his father , and nothing to recall that terrible loss to Dolokhov . 
Here , in the regiment , all was clear and simple . 
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts : one , our Pavlograd regiment ; the other , all the rest . 
And the rest was no concern of his . 
In the regiment , everything was definite : who was lieutenant , who captain , who was a good fellow , who a bad one , and most of all , who was a comrade . 
The canteenkeeper gave one credit , one 's pay came every four months , there was nothing to think out or decide , you had only to do nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and , when given an order , to do what was clearly , distinctly , and definitely ordered -- and all would be well . 
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental life , Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to rest . 
Life in the regiment , during this campaign , was all the pleasanter for him , because , after his loss to Dolokhov -LRB- for which , in spite of all his family 's efforts to console him , he could not forgive himself -RRB- , he had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving , not as he had done before , but really well , and by being a perfectly first-rate comrade and officer -- in a word , a splendid man altogether , a thing which seemed so difficult out in the world , but so possible in the regiment . 
After his losses , he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents in five years . 
He received ten thousand rubles a year , but now resolved to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his parents . 
Our army , after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk and Preussisch-Eylau , was concentrated near Bartenstein . 
It was awaiting the Emperor 's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign . 
The Pavlograd regiment , belonging to that part of the army which had served in the 1805 campaign , had been recruiting up to strength in Russia , and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the campaign . 
It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and , when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign , was attached to Platov 's division . 
Platov 's division was acting independently of the main army . 
Several times parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the enemy , had taken prisoners , and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot 's carriages . 
In April the Pavlograds were stationed immovably for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village . 
A thaw had set in , it was muddy and cold , the ice on the river broke , and the roads became impassable . 
For days neither provisions for the men nor fodder for the horses had been issued . 
As no transports could arrive , the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages , searching for potatoes , but found few even of these . 
Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled -- if any remained , they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken from them ; even the soldiers , usually pitiless enough , instead of taking anything from them , often gave them the last of their rations . 
The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action , but had lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness . 
In the hospitals , death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever , or the swelling that came from bad food , preferred to remain on duty , and hardly able to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals . 
When spring came on , the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the ground that looked like asparagus , which , for some reason , they called `` Mashka 's sweet root . '' 
It was very bitter , but they wandered about the fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it , though they were ordered not to do so , as it was a noxious plant . 
That spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers , a swelling of the arms , legs , and face , which the doctors attributed to eating this root . 
But in spite of all this , the soldiers of Denisov 's squadron fed chiefly on `` Mashka 's sweet root , '' because it was the second week that the last of the biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and the last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen . 
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched roofs and had become terribly thin , though still covered with tufts of felty winter hair . 
Despite this destitution , the soldiers and officers went on living just as usual . 
Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms , the hussars formed line for roll call , kept things in order , groomed their horses , polished their arms , brought in straw from the thatched roofs in place of fodder , and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which they rose up hungry , joking about their nasty food and their hunger . 
As usual , in their spare time , they lit bonfires , steamed themselves before them naked ; smoked , picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes , told and listened to stories of Potemkin 's and Suvorov 's campaigns , or to legends of Alesha the Sly , or the priest 's laborer Mikolka . 
The officers , as usual , lived in twos and threes in the roofless , half-ruined houses . 
The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and , in general , food for the men . 
The younger ones occupied themselves as before , some playing cards -LRB- there was plenty of money , though there was no food -RRB- , some with more innocent games , such as quoits and skittles . 
The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of , partly because nothing certain was known about it , partly because there was a vague feeling that in the main it was going badly . 
Rostov lived , as before , with Denisov , and since their furlough they had become more friendly than ever . 
Denisov never spoke of Rostov 's family , but by the tender friendship his commander showed him , Rostov felt that the elder hussar 's luckless love for Natasha played a part in strengthening their friendship . 
Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostov to danger as seldom as possible , and after an action greeted his safe return with evident joy . 
On one of his foraging expeditions , in a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of provisions , Rostov found a family consisting of an old Pole and his daughter with an infant in arms . 
They were half clad , hungry , too weak to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance . 
Rostov brought them to his quarters , placed them in his own lodging , and kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering . 
One of his comrades , talking of women , began chaffing Rostov , saying that he was more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved . 
Rostov took the joke as an insult , flared up , and said such unpleasant things to the officer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel . 
When the officer had gone away , Denisov , who did not himself know what Rostov 's relations with the Polish girl might be , began to upbraid him for his quickness of temper , and Rostov replied : `` Say what you like ... . 
She is like a sister to me , and I ca n't tell you how it offended me ... because ... well , for that reason ... '' Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room without looking at Rostov , as was his way at moments of deep feeling . 
`` Ah , what a mad bweed you Wostovs are ! '' 
he muttered , and Rostov noticed tears in his eyes . 
In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor 's arrival , but Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held at Bartenstein , as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond that place . 
They were bivouacking . 
Denisov and Rostov were living in an earth hut , dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf . 
The hut was made in the following manner , which had then come into vogue . 
A trench was dug three and a half feet wide , four feet eight inches deep , and eight feet long . 
At one end of the trench , steps were cut out and these formed the entrance and vestibule . 
The trench itself was the room , in which the lucky ones , such as the squadron commander , had a board , lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance , to serve as a table . 
On each side of the trench , the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two and a half feet , and this did duty for bedsteads and couches . 
The roof was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table . 
Denisov , who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron liked him , had also a board in the roof at the farther end , with a piece of -LRB- broken but mended -RRB- glass in it for a window . 
When it was very cold , embers from the soldiers ' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron on the steps in the `` reception room '' -- as Denisov called that part of the hut - and it was then so warm that the officers , of whom there were always some with Denisov and Rostov , sat in their shirt sleeves . 
In April , Rostov was on orderly duty . 
One morning , between seven and eight , returning after a sleepless night , he sent for embers , changed his rain-soaked underclothes , said his prayers , drank tea , got warm , then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner , and , his face glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing on but his shirt , lay down on his back , putting his arms under his head . 
He was pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days for his last reconnoitering expedition , and was awaiting Denisov , who had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk . 
Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut , evidently much excited . 
Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was speaking to , and saw the quartermaster , Topcheenko . 
`` I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff ! '' 
Denisov was shouting . 
`` And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some fwom the fields . '' 
`` I have given the order again and again , your honor , but they do n't obey , '' answered the quartermaster . 
Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently : `` Let him fuss and bustle now , my job 's done and I 'm lying down -- capitally ! '' 
He could hear that Lavrushka -- that sly , bold orderly of Denisov 's -- was talking , as well as the quartermaster . 
Lavrushka was saying something about loaded wagons , biscuits , and oxen he had seen when he had gone out for provisions . 
Then Denisov 's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away . 
`` Saddle ! 
Second platoon ! '' 
`` Where are they off to now ? '' 
thought Rostov . 
Five minutes later , Denisov came into the hut , climbed with muddy boots on the bed , lit his pipe , furiously scattered his things about , took his leaded whip , buckled on his saber , and went out again . 
In answer to Rostov 's inquiry where he was going , he answered vaguely and crossly that he had some business . 
`` Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards ! '' 
said Denisov going out , and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing through the mud . 
He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had gone . 
Having got warm in his corner , he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till toward evening . 
Denisov had not yet returned . 
The weather had cleared up , and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playing svayka , laughing as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in the soft mud . 
Rostov joined them . 
In the middle of the game , the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny horses behind them . 
The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picket ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them . 
`` There now , Denisov has been worrying , '' said Rostov , `` and here are the provisions . '' 
`` So they are ! '' 
said the officers . 
`` Wo n't the soldiers be glad ! '' 
A little behind the hussars came Denisov , accompanied by two infantry officers with whom he was talking . 
Rostov went to meet them . 
`` I warn you , Captain , '' one of the officers , a short thin man , evidently very angry , was saying . 
`` Have n't I told you I wo n't give them up ? '' 
replied Denisov . 
`` You will answer for it , Captain . 
It is mutiny -- seizing the transport of one 's own army . 
Our men have had nothing to eat for two days . '' 
`` And mine have had nothing for two weeks , '' said Denisov . 
`` It is robbery ! 
You 'll answer for it , sir ! '' 
said the infantry officer , raising his voice . 
`` Now , what are you pestewing me for ? '' 
cried Denisov , suddenly losing his temper . 
`` I shall answer for it and not you , and you 'd better not buzz about here till you get hurt . 
Be off ! 
Go ! '' 
he shouted at the officers . 
`` Very well , then ! '' 
shouted the little officer , undaunted and not riding away . 
`` If you are determined to rob , I 'll ... '' `` Go to the devil ! 
quick ma ` ch , while you 're safe and sound ! '' 
and Denisov turned his horse on the officer . 
`` Very well , very well ! '' 
muttered the officer , threateningly , and turning his horse he trotted away , jolting in his saddle . 
`` A dog astwide a fence ! 
A weal dog astwide a fence ! '' 
shouted Denisov after him -LRB- the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to a mounted infantryman -RRB- and riding up to Rostov , he burst out laughing . 
`` I 've taken twansports from the infantwy by force ! '' 
he said . 
`` After all , ca n't let our men starve . '' 
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an infantry regiment , but learning from Lavrushka that the transport was unescorted , Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force . 
The soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely , and they even shared them with the other squadrons . 
The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov , and holding his fingers spread out before his eyes said : `` This is how I look at this affair : I know nothing about it and wo n't begin proceedings , but I advise you to ride over to the staff and settle the business there in the commissariat department and if possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received . 
If not , as the demand was booked against an infantry regiment , there will be a row and the affair may end badly . '' 
From the regimental commander 's , Denisov rode straight to the staff with a sincere desire to act on this advice . 
In the evening he came back to his dugout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in . 
Denisov could not speak and gasped for breath . 
When Rostov asked what was the matter , he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse , feeble voice . 
Alarmed at Denisov 's condition , Rostov suggested that he should undress , drink some water , and send for the doctor . 
`` Twy me for wobbewy ... oh ! 
Some more water ... Let them twy me , but I 'll always thwash scoundwels ... and I 'll tell the Empewo ' ... Ice ... '' he muttered . 
The regimental doctor , when he came , said it was absolutely necessary to bleed Denisov . 
A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him . 
`` I get there , '' began Denisov . '' 
` Now then , where 's your chief 's quarters ? ' 
They were pointed out . 
` Please to wait . ' 
` I 've widden twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait . 
Announce me . ' 
Vewy well , so out comes their head chief -- also took it into his head to lecture me : ` It 's wobbewy ! ' 
-- ` Wobbewy , ' I say , ` is not done by man who seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers , but by him who takes them to fill his own pockets ! ' 
` Will you please be silent ? ' 
` Vewy good ! ' 
Then he says : ` Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner , but your affair will be passed on to headquarters . ' 
I go to the commissioner . 
I enter , and at the table ... who do you think ? 
No , but wait a bit ! 
... Who is it that 's starving us ? '' 
shouted Denisov , hitting the table with the fist of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and the tumblers on it jumped about . 
`` Telyanin ! 
` What ? 
So it 's you who 's starving us to death ! 
Is it ? 
Take this and this ! ' 
and I hit him so pat , stwaight on his snout ... ` Ah , what a. . . 
what ... ! ' 
and I sta ` ted fwashing him ... Well , I 've had a bit of fun I can tell you ! '' 
cried Denisov , gleeful and yet angry , his showing under his black mustache . 
`` I 'd have killed him if they had n't taken him away ! '' 
`` But what are you shouting for ? 
Calm yourself , '' said Rostov . 
`` You 've set your arm bleeding afresh . 
Wait , we must tie it up again . '' 
Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed . 
Next day he woke calm and cheerful . 
But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov 's and Denisov 's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimental commander in which inquiries were made about yesterday 's occurrence . 
The adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn : that a court-martial had been appointed , and that in view of the severity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded , degradation to the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for . 
The case , as represented by the offended parties , was that , after seizing the transports , Major Denisov , being drunk , went to the chief quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief , threatened to strike him , and on being led out had rushed into the office and given two officials a thrashing , and dislocated the arm of one of them . 
In answer to Rostov 's renewed questions , Denisov said , laughing , that he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up in it , but that it was all nonsense and rubbish , and he did not in the least fear any kind of trial , and that if those scoundrels dared attack him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget . 
Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter , but Rostov knew him too well not to detect that -LRB- while hiding it from others -RRB- at heart he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair , which was evidently taking a bad turn . 
Every day , letters of inquiry and notices from the court arrived , and on the first of May , Denisov was ordered to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat office . 
On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack regiments and two squadrons of hussars . 
Denisov , as was his wont , rode out in front of the outposts , parading his courage . 
A bullet fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg . 
Perhaps at another time Denisov would not have left the regiment for so slight a wound , but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing at the staff and went into hospital . 
In June the battle of Friedland was fought , in which the Pavlograds did not take part , and after that an armistice was proclaimed . 
Rostov , who felt his friend 's absence very much , having no news of him since he left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his affairs , took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denisov in hospital . 
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated by Russian and French troops . 
Because it was summer , when it is so beautiful out in the fields , the little town presented a particularly dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences , its foul streets , tattered inhabitants , and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about . 
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence that had been pulled to pieces . 
Several bandaged soldiers , with pale swollen faces , were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the yard . 
Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of putrefaction and hospital air . 
On the stairs he met a Russian army doctor smoking a cigar . 
The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant . 
`` I ca n't tear myself to pieces , '' the doctor was saying . 
`` Come to Makar Alexeevich in the evening . 
I shall be there . '' 
The assistant asked some further questions . 
`` Oh , do the best you can ! 
Is n't it all the same ? '' 
The doctor noticed Rostov coming upstairs . 
`` What do you want , sir ? '' 
said the doctor . 
`` What do you want ? 
The bullets having spared you , do you want to try typhus ? 
This is a pesthouse , sir . '' 
`` How so ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Typhus , sir . 
It 's death to go in . 
Only we two , Makeev and I '' -LRB- he pointed to the assistant -RRB- , `` keep on here . 
Some five of us doctors have died in this place ... . 
When a new one comes he is done for in a week , '' said the doctor with evident satisfaction . 
`` Prussian doctors have been invited here , but our allies do n't like it at all . '' 
Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars , who was wounded . 
`` I do n't know . 
I ca n't tell you , sir . 
Only think ! 
I am alone in charge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients ! 
It 's well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some lint each month or we should be lost ! '' 
he laughed . 
`` Four hundred , sir , and they 're always sending me fresh ones . 
There are four hundred ? 
Eh ? '' 
he asked , turning to the assistant . 
The assistant looked fagged out . 
He was evidently vexed and impatient for the talkative doctor to go . 
`` Major Denisov , '' Rostov said again . 
`` He was wounded at Molliten . '' 
`` Dead , I fancy . 
Eh , Makeev ? '' 
queried the doctor , in a tone of indifference . 
The assistant , however , did not confirm the doctor 's words . 
`` Is he tall and with reddish hair ? '' 
asked the doctor . 
Rostov described Denisov 's appearance . 
`` There was one like that , '' said the doctor , as if pleased . 
`` That one is dead , I fancy . 
However , I 'll look up our list . 
We had a list . 
Have you got it , Makeev ? '' 
`` Makar Alexeevich has the list , '' answered the assistant . 
`` But if you 'll step into the officers ' wards you 'll see for yourself , '' he added , turning to Rostov . 
`` Ah , you 'd better not go , sir , '' said the doctor , `` or you may have to stay here yourself . '' 
But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to show him the way . 
`` Only do n't blame me ! '' 
the doctor shouted up after him . 
Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor . 
The smell was so strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect his strength before he could go on . 
A door opened to the right , and an emaciated sallow man on crutches , barefoot and in underclothing , limped out and , leaning against the doorpost , looked with glittering envious eyes at those who were passing . 
Glancing in at the door , Rostov saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats . 
`` May I go in and look ? '' 
`` What is there to see ? '' 
said the assistant . 
But , just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in , Rostov entered the soldiers ' ward . 
The foul air , to which he had already begun to get used in the corridor , was still stronger here . 
It was a little different , more pungent , and one felt that this was where it originated . 
In the long room , brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows , the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls , and leaving a passage in the middle . 
Most of them were unconscious and paid no attention to the newcomers . 
Those who were conscious raised themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces , and all looked intently at Rostov with the same expression of hope , of relief , reproach , and envy of another 's health . 
Rostov went to the middle of the room and looking through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thing there . 
He stood still , looking silently around . 
He had not at all expected such a sight . 
Just before him , almost across the middle of the passage on the bare floor , lay a sick man , probably a Cossack to judge by the cut of his hair . 
The man lay on his back , his huge arms and legs outstretched . 
His face was purple , his eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were seen , and on his bare legs and arms which were still red , the veins stood out like cords . 
He was knocking the back of his head against the floor , hoarsely uttering some word which he kept repeating . 
Rostov listened and made out the word . 
It was `` drink , drink , a drink ! '' 
Rostov glanced round , looking for someone who would put this man back in his place and bring him water . 
`` Who looks after the sick here ? '' 
he asked the assistant . 
Just then a commissariat soldier , a hospital orderly , came in from the next room , marching stiffly , and drew up in front of Rostov . 
`` Good day , your honor ! '' 
he shouted , rolling his eyes at Rostov and evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities . 
`` Get him to his place and give him some water , '' said Rostov , pointing to the Cossack . 
`` Yes , your honor , '' the soldier replied complacently , and rolling his eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter , but did not move . 
`` No , it 's impossible to do anything here , '' thought Rostov , lowering his eyes , and he was going out , but became aware of an intense look fixed on him on his right , and he turned . 
Close to the corner , on an overcoat , sat an old , unshaven , gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton , with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov . 
The man 's neighbor on one side whispered something to him , pointing at Rostov , who noticed that the old man wanted to speak to him . 
He drew nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him , the other had been amputated above the knee . 
His neighbor on the other side , who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back , was a young soldier with a snub nose . 
His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were rolled back . 
Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down his back . 
`` Why , this one seems ... '' he began , turning to the assistant . 
`` And how we 've been begging , your honor , '' said the old soldier , his jaw quivering . 
`` He 's been dead since morning . 
After all we 're men , not dogs . '' 
`` I 'll send someone at once . 
He shall be taken away -- taken away at once , '' said the assistant hurriedly . 
`` Let us go , your honor . '' 
`` Yes , yes , let us go , '' said Rostov hastily , and lowering his eyes and shrinking , he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him , and went out of the room . 
Going along the corridor , the assistant led Rostov to the officers ' wards , consisting of three rooms , the doors of which stood open . 
There were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or sitting on them . 
Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing gowns . 
The first person Rostov met in the officers ' ward was a thin little man with one arm , who was walking about the first room in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown , with a pipe between his teeth . 
Rostov looked at him , trying to remember where he had seen him before . 
`` See where we 've met again ! '' 
said the little man . 
`` Tushin , Tushin , do n't you remember , who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern ? 
And I 've had a bit cut off , you see ... '' he went on with a smile , pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown . 
`` Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov ? 
My neighbor , '' he added , when he heard who Rostov wanted . 
`` Here , here , '' and Tushin led him into the next room , from whence came sounds of several laughing voices . 
`` How can they laugh , or even live at all here ? '' 
thought Rostov , still aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in the soldiers ' ward , and still seeming to see fixed on him those envious looks which had followed him out from both sides , and the face of that young soldier with eyes rolled back . 
Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket , though it was nearly noon . 
`` Ah , Wostov ? 
How are you , how are you ? '' 
he called out , still in the same voice as in the regiment , but Rostov noticed sadly that under this habitual ease and animation some new , sinister , hidden feeling showed itself in the expression of Denisov 's face and the intonations of his voice . 
His wound , though a slight one , had not yet healed even now , six weeks after he had been hit . 
His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces of the other hospital patients , but it was not this that struck Rostov . 
What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him , and smiled at him unnaturally . 
He did not ask about the regiment , nor about the general state of affairs , and when Rostov spoke of these matters did not listen . 
Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the regiment , or in general of that other free life which was going on outside the hospital . 
He seemed to try to forget that old life and was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers . 
On Rostov 's inquiry as to how the matter stood , he at once produced from under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the rough draft of his answer to it . 
He became animated when he began reading his paper and specially drew Rostov 's attention to the stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies . 
His hospital companions , who had gathered round Rostov -- a fresh arrival from the world outside - gradually began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer . 
Rostov noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that story more than once and were tired of it . 
Only the man who had the next bed , a stout Uhlan , continued to sit on his bed , gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe , and little one-armed Tushin still listened , shaking his head disapprovingly . 
In the middle of the reading , the Uhlan interrupted Denisov . 
`` But what I say is , '' he said , turning to Rostov , `` it would be best simply to petition the Emperor for pardon . 
They say great rewards will now be distributed , and surely a pardon would be granted ... '' `` Me petition the Empewo ' ! '' 
exclaimed Denisov , in a voice to which he tried hard to give the old energy and fire , but which sounded like an expression of irritable impotence . 
`` What for ? 
If I were a wobber I would ask mercy , but I 'm being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers to book . 
Let them twy me , I 'm not afwaid of anyone . 
I 've served the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen ! 
And am I to be degwaded ? 
... Listen , I 'm w ` iting to them stwaight . 
This is what I say : ` If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy ... ' '' `` It 's certainly well written , '' said Tushin , `` but that 's not the point , Vasili Dmitrich , '' and he also turned to Rostov . 
`` One has to submit , and Vasili Dmitrich does n't want to . 
You know the auditor told you it was a bad business . '' 
`` Well , let it be bad , '' said Denisov . 
`` The auditor wrote out a petition for you , '' continued Tushin , `` and you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it . 
No doubt he '' -LRB- indicating Rostov -RRB- `` has connections on the staff . 
You wo n't find a better opportunity . '' 
`` Have n't I said I 'm not going to gwovel ? '' 
Denisov interrupted him , went on reading his paper . 
Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov , though he instinctively felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the safest , and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov . 
He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper . 
When the reading of Denisov 's virulent reply , which took more than an hour , was over , Rostov said nothing , and he spent the rest of the day in a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov 's hospital comrades , who had round him , telling them what he knew and listening to their stories . 
Denisov was moodily silent all the evening . 
Late in the evening , when Rostov was about to leave , he asked Denisov whether he had no commission for him . 
`` Yes , wait a bit , '' said Denisov , glancing round at the officers , and taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window , where he had an inkpot , and sat down to write . 
`` It seems it 's no use knocking one 's head against a wall ! '' 
he said , coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope . 
In it was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor , in which Denisov , without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials , simply asked for pardon . 
`` Hand it in . 
It seems ... '' He did not finish , but gave a painfully unnatural smile . 
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of Denisov 's affairs , Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor . 
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in Tilsit . 
Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he was in attendance , to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at Tilsit . 
`` I should like to see the great man , '' he said , alluding to Napoleon , whom hitherto he , like everyone else , had always called Buonaparte . 
`` You are speaking of Buonaparte ? '' 
asked the general , smiling . 
Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was being tested . 
`` I am speaking , Prince , of the Emperor Napoleon , '' he replied . 
The general patted him on the shoulder , with a smile . 
`` You will go far , '' he said , and took him to Tilsit with him . 
Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two Emperors met . 
He saw the raft , decorated with monograms , saw Napoleon pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river , saw the pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon 's arrival , saw both Emperors get into boats , and saw how Napoleon - reaching the raft first -- stepped quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him , and how they both retired into the pavilion . 
Since he had begun to move in the highest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all that went on around him and to note it down . 
At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore , and listened attentively to words spoken by important personages . 
At the moment the Emperors went into the pavilion he looked at his watch , and did not forget to look at it again when Alexander came out . 
The interview had lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes . 
He noted this down that same evening , among other facts he felt to be of historic importance . 
As the Emperor 's suite was a very small one , it was a matter of great importance , for a man who valued his success in the service , to be at Tilsit on the occasion of this interview between the two Emperors , and having succeeded in this , Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured . 
He had not only become known , but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him . 
Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself , so that the latter knew his face , and all those at court , far from cold-shouldering him as at first when they considered him a newcomer , would now have been surprised had he been absent . 
Boris lodged with another adjutant , the Polish Count Zhilinski . 
Zhilinski , a Pole brought up in Paris , was rich , and passionately fond of the French , and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit , French officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and lunching with him and Boris . 
