thought she , as she went slowly along the passage . 
`` Nastasya Ivanovna , what sort of children shall I have ? '' 
she asked the buffoon , who was coming toward her in a woman 's jacket . 
`` Why , fleas , crickets , grasshoppers , '' answered the buffoon . 
`` O Lord , O Lord , it 's always the same ! 
Oh , where am I to go ? 
What am I to do with myself ? '' 
And tapping with her heels , she ran quickly upstairs to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story . 
Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table , on which were plates of raisins , walnuts , and almonds . 
The governesses were discussing whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa . 
Natasha sat down , listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air , and then got up again . 
`` The island of Madagascar , '' she said , `` Ma-da-gas-car , '' she repeated , articulating each syllable distinctly , and , not replying to Madame Schoss who asked her what she was saying , she went out of the room . 
Her brother Petya was upstairs too ; with the man in attendance on him he was preparing fireworks to let off that night . 
`` Petya ! 
Petya ! '' 
she called to him . 
`` Carry me downstairs . '' 
Petya ran up and offered her his back . 
She jumped on it , putting her arms round his neck , and he pranced along with her . 
`` No , do n't ... the island of Madagascar ! '' 
she said , and jumping off his back she went downstairs . 
Having as it were reviewed her kingdom , tested her power , and made sure that everyone was submissive , but that all the same it was dull , Natasha betook herself to the ballroom , picked up her guitar , sat down in a dark corner behind a bookcase , and began to run her fingers over the strings in the bass , picking out a passage she recalled from an opera she had heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew . 
What she drew from the guitar would have had no meaning for other listeners , but in her imagination a whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds . 
She sat behind the bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of light escaping from the pantry door and listened to herself and pondered . 
She was in a mood for brooding on the past . 
Sonya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand . 
Natasha glanced at her and at the crack in the pantry door , and it seemed to her that she remembered the light failing through that crack once before and Sonya passing with a glass in her hand . 
`` Yes it was exactly the same , '' thought Natasha . 
`` Sonya , what is this ? '' 
she cried , twanging a thick string . 
`` Oh , you are there ! '' 
said Sonya with a start , and came near and listened . 
`` I do n't know . 
A storm ? '' 
she ventured timidly , afraid of being wrong . 
`` There ! 
That 's just how she started and just how she came up smiling timidly when all this happened before , '' thought Natasha , `` and in just the same way I thought there was something lacking in her . '' 
`` No , it 's the chorus from The Water-Carrier , listen ! '' 
and Natasha sang the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it . 
`` Where were you going ? '' 
she asked . 
`` To change the water in this glass . 
I am just finishing the design . '' 
`` You always find something to do , but I ca n't , '' said Natasha . 
`` And where 's Nicholas ? '' 
`` Asleep , I think . '' 
`` Sonya , go and wake him , '' said Natasha . 
`` Tell him I want him to come and sing . '' 
She sat awhile , wondering what the meaning of it all having happened before could be , and without solving this problem , or at all regretting not having done so , she again passed in fancy to the time when she was with him and he was looking at her with a lover 's eyes . 
`` Oh , if only he would come quicker ! 
I am so afraid it will never be ! 
And , worst of all , I am growing old -- that 's the thing ! 
There wo n't then be in me what there is now . 
But perhaps he 'll come today , will come immediately . 
Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing room . 
Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it . '' 
She rose , put down the guitar , and went to the drawing room . 
All the domestic circle , tutors , governesses , and guests , were already at the tea table . 
The servants stood round the table -- but Prince Andrew was not there and life was going on as before . 
`` Ah , here she is ! '' 
said the old count , when he saw Natasha enter . 
`` Well , sit down by me . '' 
But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced round as if looking for something . 
`` Mamma ! '' 
she muttered , `` give him to me , give him , Mamma , quickly , quickly ! '' 
and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs . 
She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between the elders and Nicholas , who had also come to the table . 
`` My God , my God ! 
The same faces , the same talk , Papa holding his cup and blowing in the same way ! '' 
thought Natasha , feeling with horror a sense of repulsion rising up in her for the whole household , because they were always the same . 
After tea , Nicholas , Sonya , and Natasha went to the sitting room , to their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began . 
`` Does it ever happen to you , '' said Natasha to her brother , when they settled down in the sitting room , `` does it ever happen to you to feel as if there were nothing more to come -- nothing ; that everything good is past ? 
And to feel not exactly dull , but sad ? '' 
`` I should think so ! '' 
he replied . 
`` I have felt like that when everything was all right and everyone was cheerful . 
The thought has come into my mind that I was already tired of it all , and that we must all die . 
Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there was music ... and suddenly I felt so depressed ... '' `` Oh yes , I know , I know , I know ! '' 
Natasha interrupted him . 
`` When I was quite little that used to be so with me . 
Do you remember when I was punished once about some plums ? 
You were all dancing , and I sat sobbing in the schoolroom ? 
I shall never forget it : I felt sad and sorry for everyone , for myself , and for everyone . 
And I was innocent -- that was the chief thing , '' said Natasha . 
`` Do you remember ? '' 
`` I remember , '' answered Nicholas . 
`` I remember that I came to you afterwards and wanted to comfort you , but do you know , I felt ashamed to . 
We were terribly absurd . 
I had a funny doll then and wanted to give it to you . 
Do you remember ? '' 
`` And do you remember , '' Natasha asked with a pensive smile , `` how once , long , long ago , when we were quite little , Uncle called us into the study -- that was in the old house -- and it was dark -- we went in and suddenly there stood ... '' `` A Negro , '' chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight . 
`` Of course I remember . 
Even now I do n't know whether there really was a Negro , or if we only dreamed it or were told about him . '' 
`` He was gray , you remember , and had white teeth , and stood and looked at us ... '' `` Sonya , do you remember ? '' 
asked Nicholas . 
`` Yes , yes , I do remember something too , '' Sonya answered timidly . 
`` You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro , '' said Natasha , `` and they say there was no Negro at all . 
But you see , you remember ! '' 
`` Of course I do , I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them . '' 
`` How strange it is ! 
It 's as if it were a dream ! 
I like that . '' 
`` And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom , and suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet ? 
Was that real or not ? 
Do you remember what fun it was ? '' 
`` Yes , and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the porch ? '' 
So they went through their memories , smiling with pleasure : not the sad memories of old age , but poetic , youthful ones -- those impressions of one 's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend -- and they laughed with quiet enjoyment . 
Sonya , as always , did not quite keep pace with them , though they shared the same reminiscences . 
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind , and what she recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced . 
She simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it . 
She only really took part when they recalled Sonya 's first arrival . 
She told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded jacket and her nurse had told her that she , too , would be sewn up with cords . 
`` And I remember their telling me that you had been born under a cabbage , '' said Natasha , `` and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it then , but knew that it was not true , and I felt so uncomfortable . '' 
While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of the sitting room . 
`` They have brought the cock , Miss , '' she said in a whisper . 
`` It is n't wanted , Petya . 
Tell them to take it away , '' replied Natasha . 
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room , Dimmler came in and went up to the harp that stood there in a corner . 
He took off its cloth covering , and the harp gave out a jarring sound . 
`` Mr. Dimmler , please play my favorite nocturne by Field , '' came the old countess ' voice from the drawing room . 
Dimmler struck a chord and , turning to Natasha , Nicholas , and Sonya , remarked : `` How quiet you young people are ! '' 
`` Yes , we 're philosophizing , '' said Natasha , glancing round for a moment and then continuing the conversation . 
They were now discussing dreams . 
Dimmler began to play ; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table , took up a candle , carried it out , and returned , seating herself quietly in her former place . 
It was dark in the room especially where they were sitting on the sofa , but through the big windows the silvery light of the full moon fell on the floor . 
Dimmler had finished the piece but still sat softly running his fingers over the strings , evidently uncertain whether to stop or to play something else . 
`` Do you know , '' said Natasha in a whisper , moving closer to Nicholas and Sonya , `` that when one goes on and on recalling memories , one at last begins to remember what happened before one was in the world ... '' `` That is metempsychosis , '' said Sonya , who had always learned well , and remembered everything . 
`` The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived in animals , and will go back into animals again . '' 
`` No , I do n't believe we ever were in animals , '' said Natasha , still in a whisper though the music had ceased . 
`` But I am certain that we were angels somewhere there , and have been here , and that is why we remember ... '' `` May I join you ? '' 
said Dimmler who had come up quietly , and he sat down by them . 
`` If we have been angels , why have we fallen lower ? '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` No , that ca n't be ! '' 
`` Not lower , who said we were lower ? 
... How do I know what I was before ? '' 
Natasha rejoined with conviction . 
`` The soul is immortal -- well then , if I shall always live I must have lived before , lived for a whole eternity . '' 
`` Yes , but it is hard for us to imagine eternity , '' remarked Dimmler , who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now spoke as quietly and seriously as they . 
`` Why is it hard to imagine eternity ? '' 
said Natasha . 
`` It is now today , and it will be tomorrow , and always ; and there was yesterday , and the day before ... '' `` Natasha ! 
Now it 's your turn . 
Sing me something , '' they heard the countess say . 
`` Why are you sitting there like conspirators ? '' 
`` Mamma , I do n't at all want to , '' replied Natasha , but all the same she rose . 
None of them , not even the middle-aged Dimmler , wanted to break off their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room , but Natasha got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord . 
Standing as usual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best , Natasha began to sing her mother 's favorite song . 
She had said she did not want to sing , but it was long since she had sung , and long before she again sang , as she did that evening . 
The count , from his study where he was talking to Mitenka , heard her and , like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play , blundered in his talk while giving orders to the steward , and at last stopped , while Mitenka stood in front of him also listening and smiling . 
Nicholas did not take his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her . 
Sonya , as she listened , thought of the immense difference there was between herself and her friend , and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as bewitching as her cousin . 
The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad smile and with tears in her eyes , occasionally shaking her head . 
She thought of Natasha and of her own youth , and of how there was something unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince Andrew . 
Dimmler , who had seated himself beside the countess , listened with closed eyes . 
`` Ah , Countess , '' he said at last , `` that 's a European talent , she has nothing to learn -- what softness , tenderness , and strength ... '' `` Ah , how afraid I am for her , how afraid I am ! '' 
said the countess , not realizing to whom she was speaking . 
Her maternal instinct told her that Natasha had too much of something , and that because of this she would not be happy . 
Before Natasha had finished singing , fourteen-year-old Petya rushed in delightedly , to say that some mummers had arrived . 
Natasha stopped abruptly . 
`` Idiot ! '' 
she screamed at her brother and , running to a chair , threw herself on it , sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long time . 
`` It 's nothing , Mamma , really it 's nothing ; only Petya startled me , '' she said , trying to smile , but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked her . 
The mummers -LRB- some of the house serfs -RRB- dressed up as bears , Turks , innkeepers , and ladies -- frightening and funny -- bringing in with them the cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety , crowded , at first timidly , into the anteroom , then hiding behind one another they pushed into the ballroom where , shyly at first and then more and more merrily and heartily , they started singing , dancing , and playing Christmas games . 
The countess , when she had identified them and laughed at their costumes , went into the drawing room . 
The count sat in the ballroom , smiling radiantly and applauding the players . 
The young people had disappeared . 
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt -- this was Nicholas . 
A Turkish girl was Petya . 
A clown was Dimmler . 
An hussar was Natasha , and a Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows . 
After the condescending surprise , nonrecognition , and praise , from those who were not themselves dressed up , the young people decided that their costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere . 
Nicholas , who , as the roads were in splendid condition , wanted to take them all for a drive in his troyka , proposed to take with them about a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to `` Uncle 's . '' 
`` No , why disturb the old fellow ? '' 
said the countess . 
`` Besides , you would n't have room to turn round there . 
If you must go , go to the Melyukovs ' . '' 
Melyukova was a widow , who , with her family and their tutors and governesses , lived three miles from the Rostovs . 
`` That 's right , my dear , '' chimed in the old count , thoroughly aroused . 
`` I 'll dress up at once and go with them . 
I 'll make Pashette open her eyes . '' 
But the countess would not agree to his going ; he had had a bad leg all these last days . 
It was decided that the count must not go , but that if Louisa Ivanovna -LRB- Madame Schoss -RRB- would go with them , the young ladies might go to the Melyukovs ' , Sonya , generally so timid and shy , more urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse . 
Sonya 's costume was the best of all . 
Her mustache and eyebrows were extraordinarily becoming . 
Everyone told her she looked very handsome , and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her . 
Some inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided , and in her male attire she seemed quite a different person . 
Louisa Ivanovna consented to go , and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and small bells , their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow , drove up to the porch . 
Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone , which , passing from one to another , grew stronger and reached its climax when they all came out into the frost and got into the sleighs , talking , calling to one another , laughing , and shouting . 
Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs , the third was the old count 's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse , the fourth was Nicholas ' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse . 
Nicholas , in his old lady 's dress over which he had belted his hussar overcoat , stood in the middle of the sleigh , reins in hand . 
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal harness disks and from the eyes of the horses , who looked round in alarm at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof . 
Natasha , Sonya , Madame Schoss , and two maids got into Nicholas ' sleigh ; Dimmler , his wife , and Petya , into the old count 's , and the rest of the mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs . 
`` You go ahead , Zakhar ! '' 
shouted Nicholas to his father 's coachman , wishing for a chance to race past him . 
The old count 's troyka , with Dimmler and his party , started forward , squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow , its deep-toned bell clanging . 
The side horses , pressing against the shafts of the middle horse , sank in the snow , which was dry and glittered like sugar , and threw it up . 
Nicholas set off , following the first sleigh ; behind him the others moved noisily , their runners squeaking . 
At first they drove at a steady trot along the narrow road . 
While they drove past the garden the shadows of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant moonlight , but as soon as they were past the fence , the snowy plain bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows . 
Bang , bang ! 
went the first sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the road , and each of the other sleighs jolted in the same way , and rudely breaking the frost-bound stillness , the troykas began to speed along the road , one after the other . 
`` A hare 's track , a lot of tracks ! '' 
rang out Natasha 's voice through the frost-bound air . 
`` How light it is , Nicholas ! '' 
came Sonya 's voice . 
Nicholas glanced round at Sonya , and bent down to see her face closer . 
Quite a new , sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at him from her sable furs -- so close and yet so distant - in the moonlight . 
`` That used to be Sonya , '' thought he , and looked at her closer and smiled . 
`` What is it , Nicholas ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' said he and turned again to the horses . 
When they came out onto the beaten highroad -- polished by sleigh runners and cut up by rough-shod hoofs , the marks of which were visible in the moonlight -- the horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord and increased their pace . 
The near side horse , arching his head and breaking into a short canter , tugged at his traces . 
The shaft horse swayed from side to side , moving his ears as if asking : `` Is n't it time to begin now ? '' 
In front , already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing farther and farther off , the black horses driven by Zakhar could be clearly seen against the white snow . 
From that sleigh one could hear the shouts , laughter , and voices of the mummers . 
`` Gee up , my darlings ! '' 
shouted Nicholas , pulling the reins to one side and flourishing the whip . 
It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the side horses who pulled harder -- ever increasing their gallop - that one noticed how fast the troyka was flying . 
Nicholas looked back . 
With screams squeals , and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses to gallop -- the other sleighs followed . 
The shaft horse swung steadily beneath the bow over its head , with no thought of slackening pace and ready to put on speed when required . 
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh . 
They were driving downhill and coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow , near a river . 
`` Where are we ? '' 
thought he . 
`` It 's the Kosoy meadow , I suppose . 
But no -- this is something new I 've never seen before . 
This is n't the Kosoy meadow nor the Demkin hill , and heaven only knows what it is ! 
It is something new and enchanted . 
Well , whatever it may be ... '' And shouting to his horses , he began to pass the first sleigh . 
Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face , which was already covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows . 
Nicholas gave the horses the rein , and Zakhar , stretching out his arms , clucked his tongue and let his horses go . 
`` Now , look out , master ! '' 
he cried . 
Faster still the two troykas flew side by side , and faster moved the feet of the galloping side horses . 
Nicholas began to draw ahead . 
Zakhar , while still keeping his arms extended , raised one hand with the reins . 
`` No you wo n't , master ! '' 
he shouted . 
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar . 
The horses showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh - beside them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing . 
The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls shrieking were heard from different sides . 
Again checking his horses , Nicholas looked around him . 
They were still surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with stars . 
`` Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left , but why to the left ? '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` Are we getting to the Melyukovs ' ? 
Is this Melyukovka ? 
Heaven only knows where we are going , and heaven knows what is happening to us -- but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is . '' 
And he looked round in the sleigh . 
`` Look , his mustache and eyelashes are all white ! '' 
said one of the strange , pretty , unfamiliar people -- the one with fine eyebrows and mustache . 
`` I think this used to be Natasha , '' thought Nicholas , `` and that was Madame Schoss , but perhaps it 's not , and this Circassian with the mustache I do n't know , but I love her . '' 
`` Are n't you cold ? '' 
he asked . 
They did not answer but began to laugh . 
Dimmler from the sleigh behind shouted something -- probably something funny -- but they could not make out what he said . 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
some voices answered , laughing . 
`` But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows , and a glitter of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy buildings and the shrill yells of some animals . 
And if this is really Melyukovka , it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and have come to Melyukovka , '' thought Nicholas . 
It really was Melyukovka , and maids and footmen with merry faces came running , out to the porch carrying candles . 
`` Who is it ? '' 
asked someone in the porch . 
`` The mummers from the count 's . 
I know by the horses , '' replied some voices . 
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova , a broadly built , energetic woman wearing spectacles , sat in the drawing room in a loose dress , surrounded by her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull . 
They were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the wax figures would throw on the wall , when they heard the steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule . 
Hussars , ladies , witches , clowns , and bears , after clearing their throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule , came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted . 
The clown -- Dimmler -- and the lady -- Nicholas -- started a dance . 
Surrounded by the screaming children the mummers , covering their faces and disguising their voices , bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the room . 
`` Dear me ! 
there 's no recognizing them ! 
And Natasha ! 
See whom she looks like ! 
She really reminds me of somebody . 
But Herr Dimmler -- is n't he good ! 
I did n't know him ! 
And how he dances . 
Dear me , there 's a Circassian . 
Really , how becoming it is to dear Sonya . 
And who is that ? 
Well , you have cheered us up ! 
Nikita and Vanya -- clear away the tables ! 
And we were sitting so quietly . 
Ha , ha , ha ! 
... The hussar , the hussar ! 
Just like a boy ! 
And the legs ! 
... I ca n't look at him ... '' different voices were saying . 
Natasha , the young Melyukovs ' favorite , disappeared with them into the back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from behind the door . 
Ten minutes later , all the young Melyukovs joined the mummers . 
Pelageya Danilovna , having given orders to clear the rooms for the visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs , went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles , peering into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any of them . 
It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize , she did not even recognize her own daughters , or her late husband 's , dressing gowns and uniforms , which they had put on . 
`` And who is is this ? '' 
she asked her governess , peering into the face of her own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar . 
`` I suppose it is one of the Rostovs ! 
Well , Mr. Hussar , and what regiment do you serve in ? '' 
she asked Natasha . 
`` Here , hand some fruit jelly to the Turk ! '' 
she ordered the butler who was handing things round . 
`` That 's not forbidden by his law . '' 
Sometimes , as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by the dancers , who -- having decided once for all that being disguised , no one would recognize them -- were not at all shy , Pelageya Danilovna hid her face in her handkerchief , and her whole stout body shook with irrepressible , kindly , elderly laughter . 
`` My little Sasha ! 
Look at Sasha ! '' 
she said . 
After Russian country dances and chorus dances , Pelageya Danilovna made the serfs and gentry join in one large circle : a ring , a string , and a silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together . 
In an hour , all the costumes were crumpled and disordered . 
The corked eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring , flushed , and merry faces . 
Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize the mummers , admired their cleverly contrived costumes , and particularly how they suited the young ladies , and she thanked them all for having entertained her so well . 
The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing room , and the serfs had something served to them in the ballroom . 
`` Now to tell one 's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening ! '' 
said an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs , during supper . 
`` Why ? '' 
said the eldest Melyukov girl . 
`` You would n't go , it takes courage ... '' `` I 'll go , '' said Sonya . 
`` Tell what happened to the young lady ! '' 
said the second Melyukov girl . 
`` Well , '' began the old maid , `` a young lady once went out , took a cock , laid the table for two , all properly , and sat down . 
After sitting a while , she suddenly hears someone coming ... a sleigh drives up with harness bells ; she hears him coming ! 
He comes in , just in the shape of a man , like an officer -- comes in and sits down to table with her . '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! '' 
screamed Natasha , rolling her eyes with horror . 
`` Yes ? 
And how ... did he speak ? '' 
`` Yes , like a man . 
Everything quite all right , and he began persuading her ; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow , but she got frightened , just got frightened and hid her face in her hands . 
Then he caught her up . 
It was lucky the maids ran in just then ... '' `` Now , why frighten them ? '' 
said Pelageya Danilovna . 
`` Mamma , you used to try your fate yourself ... '' said her daughter . 
`` And how does one do it in a barn ? '' 
inquired Sonya . 
`` Well , say you went to the barn now , and listened . 
It depends on what you hear ; hammering and knocking -- that 's bad ; but a sound of shifting grain is good and one sometimes hears that , too . '' 
`` Mamma , tell us what happened to you in the barn . '' 
Pelageya Danilovna smiled . 
`` Oh , I 've forgotten ... '' she replied . 
`` But none of you would go ? '' 
`` Yes , I will ; Pelageya Danilovna , let me ! 
I 'll go , '' said Sonya . 
`` Well , why not , if you 're not afraid ? '' 
`` Louisa Ivanovna , may I ? '' 
asked Sonya . 
Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game or talking as now , Nicholas did not leave Sonya 's side , and gazed at her with quite new eyes . 
It seemed to him that it was only today , thanks to that burnt-cork mustache , that he had fully learned to know her . 
And really , that evening , Sonya was brighter , more animated , and prettier than Nicholas had ever seen her before . 
`` So that 's what she is like ; what a fool I have been ! '' 
he thought gazing at her sparkling eyes , and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile dimpled her cheeks , a smile he had never seen before . 
`` I 'm not afraid of anything , '' said Sonya . 
`` May I go at once ? '' 
She got up . 
They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen , and they handed her a fur cloak . 
She threw this over her head and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas . 
`` What a darling that girl is ! '' 
thought he . 
`` And what have I been thinking of till now ? '' 
Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn . 
Nicholas went hastily to the front porch , saying he felt too hot . 
The crowd of people really had made the house stuffy . 
Outside , there was the same cold stillness and the same moon , but even brighter than before . 
The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real stars were unnoticed . 
The sky was black and dreary , while the earth was gay . 
`` I am a fool , a fool ! 
what have I been waiting for ? '' 
thought Nicholas , and running out from the porch he went round the corner of the house and along the path that led to the back porch . 
He knew Sonya would pass that way . 
Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across and along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the snow and on the path . 
This path led to the barn . 
The log walls of the barn and its snow-covered roof , that looked as if hewn out of some precious stone , sparkled in the moonlight . 
A tree in the garden snapped with the frost , and then all was again perfectly silent . 
His bosom seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and gladness . 
From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps , the bottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he heard the voice of an old maidservant saying , `` Straight , straight , along the path , Miss. . 
Only , do n't look back . '' 
`` I am not afraid , '' answered Sonya 's voice , and along the path toward Nicholas came the crunching , whistling sound of Sonya 's feet in her thin shoes . 
Sonya came along , wrapped in her cloak . 
She was only a couple of paces away when she saw him , and to her too he was not the Nicholas she had known and always slightly feared . 
He was in a woman 's dress , with tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya . 
She ran rapidly toward him . 
`` Quite different and yet the same , '' thought Nicholas , looking at her face all lit up by the moonlight . 
He slipped his arms under the cloak that covered her head , embraced her , pressed her to him , and kissed her on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork . 
Sonya kissed him full on the lips , and disengaging her little hands pressed them to his cheeks . 
`` Sonya ! 
... Nicholas ! '' 
... was all they said . 
They ran to the barn and then back again , re-entering , he by the front and she by the back porch . 
When they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna 's , Natasha , who always saw and noticed everything , arranged that she and Madame Schoss should go back in the sleigh with Dimmler , and Sonya with Nicholas and the maids . 
On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya 's face and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and his present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again . 
He looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new Sonya , and being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss , inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and , looking at the ground flying beneath him and at the sparkling sky , felt himself again in fairyland . 
`` Sonya , is it well with thee ? '' 
he asked from time to time . 
`` Yes ! '' 
she replied . 
`` And with thee ? '' 
When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for a moment to Natasha 's sleigh and stood on its wing . 
`` Natasha ! '' 
he whispered in French , `` do you know I have made up my mind about Sonya ? '' 
`` Have you told her ? '' 
asked Natasha , suddenly beaming all over with joy . 
`` Oh , how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows ! 
... Natasha -- are you glad ? '' 
`` I am so glad , so glad ! 
I was beginning to be vexed with you . 
I did not tell you , but you have been treating her badly . 
What a heart she has , Nicholas ! 
I am horrid sometimes , but I was ashamed to be happy while Sonya was not , '' continued Natasha . 
`` Now I am so glad ! 
Well , run back to her . '' 
`` No , wait a bit ... . 
Oh , how funny you look ! '' 
cried Nicholas , peering into her face and finding in his sister too something new , unusual , and bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before . 
`` Natasha , it 's magical , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes , '' she replied . 
`` You have done splendidly . '' 
`` Had I seen her before as she is now , '' thought Nicholas , `` I should long ago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me , and all would have been well . '' 
`` So you are glad and I have done right ? '' 
`` Oh , quite right ! 
I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it . 
Mamma said she was angling for you . 
How could she say such a thing ! 
I nearly stormed at Mamma . 
I will never let anyone say anything bad of Sonya , for there is nothing but good in her . '' 
`` Then it 's all right ? '' 
said Nicholas , again scrutinizing the expression of his sister 's face to see if she was in earnest . 
Then he jumped down and , his boots scrunching the snow , ran back to his sleigh . 
The same happy , smiling Circassian , with mustache and beaming eyes looking up from under a sable hood , was still sitting there , and that Circassian was Sonya , and that Sonya was certainly his future happy and loving wife . 
When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the evening at the Melyukovs ' , the girls went to their bedroom . 
When they had undressed , but without washing off the cork mustaches , they sat a long time talking of their happiness . 
They talked of how they would live when they were married , how their husbands would be friends , and how happy they would be . 
On Natasha 's table stood two looking glasses which Dunyasha had prepared beforehand . 
`` Only when will all that be ? 
I am afraid never ... . 
It would be too good ! '' 
said Natasha , rising and going to the looking glasses . 
`` Sit down , Natasha ; perhaps you 'll see him , '' said Sonya . 
Natasha lit the candles , one on each side of one of the looking glasses , and sat down . 
`` I see someone with a mustache , '' said Natasha , seeing her own face . 
`` You must n't laugh , Miss , '' said Dunyasha . 
With Sonya 's help and the maid 's , Natasha got the glass she held into the right position opposite the other ; her face assumed a serious expression and she sat silent . 
She sat a long time looking at the receding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting -LRB- from tales she had heard -RRB- to see a coffin , or him , Prince Andrew , in that last dim , indistinctly outlined square . 
But ready as she was to take the smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin , she saw nothing . 
She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses . 
`` Why is it others see things and I do n't ? '' 
she said . 
`` You sit down now , Sonya . 
You absolutely must , tonight ! 
Do it for me ... . 
Today I feel so frightened ! '' 
Sonya sat down before the glasses , got the right position , and began looking . 
`` Now , Miss Sonya is sure to see something , '' whispered Dunyasha ; `` while you do nothing but laugh . '' 
Sonya heard this and Natasha 's whisper : `` I know she will . 
She saw something last year . '' 
For about three minutes all were silent . 
`` Of course she will ! '' 
whispered Natasha , but did not finish ... suddenly Sonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her eyes with her hand . 
`` Oh , Natasha ! '' 
she cried . 
`` Did you see ? 
Did you ? 
What was it ? '' 
exclaimed Natasha , holding up the looking glass . 
Sonya had not seen anything , she was just wanting to blink and to get up when she heard Natasha say , `` Of course she will ! '' 
She did not wish to disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha , but it was hard to sit still . 
She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she covered her eyes . 
`` You saw him ? '' 
urged Natasha , seizing her hand . 
`` Yes . 
Wait a bit ... I. . . 
saw him , '' Sonya could not help saying , not yet knowing whom Natasha meant by him , Nicholas or Prince Andrew . 
`` But why should n't I say I saw something ? 
Others do see ! 
Besides who can tell whether I saw anything or not ? '' 
flashed through Sonya 's mind . 
`` Yes , I saw him , '' she said . 
`` How ? 
Standing or lying ? '' 
`` No , I saw ... At first there was nothing , then I saw him lying down . '' 
`` Andrew lying ? 
Is he ill ? '' 
asked Natasha , her frightened eyes fixed on her friend . 
`` No , on the contrary , on the contrary ! 
His face was cheerful , and he turned to me . '' 
And when saying this she herself fancied she had really seen what she described . 
`` Well , and then , Sonya ? 
... '' `` After that , I could not make out what there was ; something blue and red ... '' `` Sonya ! 
When will he come back ? 
When shall I see him ! 
O , God , how afraid I am for him and for myself and about everything ! 
... '' Natasha began , and without replying to Sonya 's words of comfort she got into bed , and long after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless , gazing at the moonlight through the frosty windowpanes . 
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her . 
The countess , who had long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting this declaration , listened to him in silence and then told her son that he might marry whom he pleased , but that neither she nor his father would give their blessing to such a marriage . 
Nicholas , for the first time , felt that his mother was displeased with him and that , despite her love for him , she would not give way . 
Coldly , without looking at her son , she sent for her husband and , when he came , tried briefly and coldly to inform him of the facts , in her son 's presence , but unable to restrain herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room . 
The old count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose . 
Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word , and his father , sighing and evidently disconcerted , very soon became silent and went in to the countess . 
In all his encounters with his son , the count was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the family fortune , and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to marry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya . 
On this occasion , he was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not been in disorder , no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have been wished for , and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family finances . 
The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again , but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and , with a cruelty neither of them expected , reproached her niece for trying to catch Nicholas and for ingratitude . 
