The New Building contained four dormitories , one above the other , and a top story which was called the Bel-Air -LRB- FineAir -RRB- . 
A large chimney-flue , probably from some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de la Force , started from the groundfloor , traversed all four stories , cut the dormitories , where it figured as a flattened pillar , into two portions , and finally pierced the roof . 
Guelemer and Brujon were in the same dormitory . 
They had been placed , by way of precaution , on the lower story . 
Chance ordained that the heads of their beds should rest against the chimney . 
Thenardier was directly over their heads in the top story known as Fine-Air . 
The pedestrian who halts on the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , after passing the barracks of the firemen , in front of the porte-cochere of the bathing establishment , beholds a yard full of flowers and shrubs in wooden boxes , at the extremity of which spreads out a little white rotunda with two wings , brightened up with green shutters , the bucolic dream of Jean Jacques . 
Not more than ten years ago , there rose above that rotunda an enormous black , hideous , bare wall by which it was backed up . 
This was the outer wall of La Force . 
This wall , beside that rotunda , was Milton viewed through Berquin . 
Lofty as it was , this wall was overtopped by a still blacker roof , which could be seen beyond . 
This was the roof of the New Building . 
There one could descry four dormer-windows , guarded with bars ; they were the windows of the Fine-Air . 
A chimney pierced the roof ; this was the chimney which traversed the dormitories . 
The Bel-Air , that top story of the New Building , was a sort of large hall , with a Mansard roof , guarded with triple gratings and double doors of sheet iron , which were studded with enormous bolts . 
When one entered from the north end , one had on one 's left the four dormer-windows , on one 's right , facing the windows , at regular intervals , four square , tolerably vast cages , separated by narrow passages , built of masonry to about the height of the elbow , and the rest , up to the roof , of iron bars . 
Thenardier had been in solitary confinement in one of these cages since the night of the 3d of February . 
No one was ever able to discover how , and by what connivance , he succeeded in procuring , and secreting a bottle of wine , invented , so it is said , by Desrues , with which a narcotic is mixed , and which the band of the Endormeurs , or Sleep-compellers , rendered famous . 
There are , in many prisons , treacherous employees , half-jailers , half-thieves , who assist in escapes , who sell to the police an unfaithful service , and who turn a penny whenever they can . 
On that same night , then , when Little Gavroche picked up the two lost children , Brujon and Guelemer , who knew that Babet , who had escaped that morning , was waiting for them in the street as well as Montparnasse , rose softly , and with the nail which Brujon had found , began to pierce the chimney against which their beds stood . 
The rubbish fell on Brujon 's bed , so that they were not heard . 
Showers mingled with thunder shook the doors on their hinges , and created in the prison a terrible and opportune uproar . 
Those of the prisoners who woke , pretended to fall asleep again , and left Guelemer and Brujon to their own devices . 
Brujon was adroit ; Guelemer was vigorous . 
Before any sound had reached the watcher , who was sleeping in the grated cell which opened into the dormitory , the wall had , been pierced , the chimney scaled , the iron grating which barred the upper orifice of the flue forced , and the two redoubtable ruffians were on the roof . 
The wind and rain redoubled , the roof was slippery . 
`` What a good night to leg it ! '' 
said Brujon . 
An abyss six feet broad and eighty feet deep separated them from the surrounding wall . 
At the bottom of this abyss , they could see the musket of a sentinel gleaming through the gloom . 
They fastened one end of the rope which Brujon had spun in his dungeon to the stumps of the iron bars which they had just wrenched off , flung the other over the outer wall , crossed the abyss at one bound , clung to the coping of the wall , got astride of it , let themselves slip , one after the other , along the rope , upon a little roof which touches the bath-house , pulled their rope after them , jumped down into the courtyard of the bath-house , traversed it , pushed open the porter 's wicket , beside which hung his rope , pulled this , opened the porte-cochere , and found themselves in the street . 
Three-quarters of an hour had not elapsed since they had risen in bed in the dark , nail in hand , and their project in their heads . 
A few moments later they had joined Babet and Montparnasse , who were prowling about the neighborhood . 
They had broken their rope in pulling it after them , and a bit of it remained attached to the chimney on the roof . 
They had sustained no other damage , however , than that of scratching nearly all the skin off their hands . 
That night , Thenardier was warned , without any one being able to explain how , and was not asleep . 
Towards one o'clock in the morning , the night being very dark , he saw two shadows pass along the roof , in the rain and squalls , in front of the dormer-window which was opposite his cage . 
One halted at the window , long enough to dart in a glance . 
This was Brujon . 
Thenardier recognized him , and understood . 
This was enough . 
Thenardier , rated as a burglar , and detained as a measure of precaution under the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush , with armed force , was kept in sight . 
The sentry , who was relieved every two hours , marched up and down in front of his cage with loaded musket . 
The Fine-Air was lighted by a skylight . 
The prisoner had on his feet fetters weighing fifty pounds . 
Every day , at four o'clock in the afternoon , a jailer , escorted by two dogs , -- this was still in vogue at that time , -- entered his cage , deposited beside his bed a loaf of black bread weighing two pounds , a jug of water , a bowl filled with rather thin bouillon , in which swam a few Mayagan beans , inspected his irons and tapped the bars . 
This man and his dogs made two visits during the night . 
Thenardier had obtained permission to keep a sort of iron bolt which he used to spike his bread into a crack in the wall , `` in order to preserve it from the rats , '' as he said . 
As Thenardier was kept in sight , no objection had been made to this spike . 
Still , it was remembered afterwards , that one of the jailers had said : `` It would be better to let him have only a wooden spike . '' 
At two o'clock in the morning , the sentinel , who was an old soldier , was relieved , and replaced by a conscript . 
A few moments later , the man with the dogs paid his visit , and went off without noticing anything , except , possibly , the excessive youth and `` the rustic air '' of the `` raw recruit . '' 
Two hours afterwards , at four o'clock , when they came to relieve the conscript , he was found asleep on the floor , lying like a log near Thenardier 's cage . 
As for Thenardier , he was no longer there . 
There was a hole in the ceiling of his cage , and , above it , another hole in the roof . 
One of the planks of his bed had been wrenched off , and probably carried away with him , as it was not found . 
They also seized in his cell a half-empty bottle which contained the remains of the stupefying wine with which the soldier had been drugged . 
The soldier 's bayonet had disappeared . 
At the moment when this discovery was made , it was assumed that Thenardier was out of reach . 
The truth is , that he was no longer in the New Building , but that he was still in great danger . 
Thenardier , on reaching the roof of the New Building , had found the remains of Brujon 's rope hanging to the bars of the upper trap of the chimney , but , as this broken fragment was much too short , he had not been able to escape by the outer wall , as Brujon and Guelemer had done . 
When one turns from the Rue des Ballets into the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile , one almost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin . 
There stood on that spot , in the last century , a house of which only the back wall now remains , a regular wall of masonry , which rises to the height of the third story between the adjoining buildings . 
This ruin can be recognized by two large square windows which are still to be seen there ; the middle one , that nearest the right gable , is barred with a worm-eaten beam adjusted like a prop . 
Through these windows there was formerly visible a lofty and lugubrious wall , which was a fragment of the outer wall of La Force . 
The empty space on the street left by the demolished house is half-filled by a fence of rotten boards , shored up by five stone posts . 
In this recess lies concealed a little shanty which leans against the portion of the ruin which has remained standing . 
The fence has a gate , which , a few years ago , was fastened only by a latch . 
It was the crest of this ruin that Thenardier had succeeded in reaching , a little after one o'clock in the morning . 
How had he got there ? 
That is what no one has ever been able to explain or understand . 
The lightning must , at the same time , have hindered and helped him . 
Had he made use of the ladders and scaffoldings of the slaters to get from roof to roof , from enclosure to enclosure , from compartment to compartment , to the buildings of the Charlemagne court , then to the buildings of the Saint-Louis court , to the outer wall , and thence to the hut on the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile ? 
But in that itinerary there existed breaks which seemed to render it an impossibility . 
Had he placed the plank from his bed like a bridge from the roof of the Fine-Air to the outer wall , and crawled flat , on his belly on the coping of the outer wall the whole distance round the prison as far as the hut ? 
But the outer wall of La Force formed a crenellated and unequal line ; it mounted and descended , it dropped at the firemen 's barracks , it rose towards the bath-house , it was cut in twain by buildings , it was not even of the same height on the Hotel Lamoignon as on the Rue Pavee ; everywhere occurred falls and right angles ; and then , the sentinels must have espied the dark form of the fugitive ; hence , the route taken by Thenardier still remains rather inexplicable . 
In two manners , flight was impossible . 
Had Thenardier , spurred on by that thirst for liberty which changes precipices into ditches , iron bars into wattles of osier , a legless man into an athlete , a gouty man into a bird , stupidity into instinct , instinct into intelligence , and intelligence into genius , had Thenardier invented a third mode ? 
No one has ever found out . 
The marvels of escape can not always be accounted for . 
The man who makes his escape , we repeat , is inspired ; there is something of the star and of the lightning in the mysterious gleam of flight ; the effort towards deliverance is no less surprising than the flight towards the sublime , and one says of the escaped thief : `` How did he contrive to scale that wall ? '' 
in the same way that one says of Corneille : `` Where did he find the means of dying ? '' 
At all events , dripping with perspiration , drenched with rain , with his clothes hanging in ribbons , his hands flayed , his elbows bleeding , his knees torn , Thenardier had reached what children , in their figurative language , call the edge of the wall of the ruin , there he had stretched himself out at full length , and there his strength had failed him . 
A steep escarpment three stories high separated him from the pavement of the street . 
The rope which he had was too short . 
There he waited , pale , exhausted , desperate with all the despair which he had undergone , still hidden by the night , but telling himself that the day was on the point of dawning , alarmed at the idea of hearing the neighboring clock of Saint-Paul strike four within a few minutes , an hour when the sentinel was relieved and when the latter would be found asleep under the pierced roof , staring in horror at a terrible depth , at the light of the street lanterns , the wet , black pavement , that pavement longed for yet frightful , which meant death , and which meant liberty . 
He asked himself whether his three accomplices in flight had succeeded , if they had heard him , and if they would come to his assistance . 
He listened . 
With the exception of the patrol , no one had passed through the street since he had been there . 
Nearly the whole of the descent of the market-gardeners from Montreuil , from Charonne , from Vincennes , and from Bercy to the markets was accomplished through the Rue Saint-Antoine . 
Four o'clock struck . 
Thenardier shuddered . 
A few moments later , that terrified and confused uproar which follows the discovery of an escape broke forth in the prison . 
The sound of doors opening and shutting , the creaking of gratings on their hinges , a tumult in the guard-house , the hoarse shouts of the turnkeys , the shock of musket-butts on the pavement of the courts , reached his ears . 
Lights ascended and descended past the grated windows of the dormitories , a torch ran along the ridge-pole of the top story of the New Building , the firemen belonging in the barracks on the right had been summoned . 
Their helmets , which the torch lighted up in the rain , went and came along the roofs . 
At the same time , Thenardier perceived in the direction of the Bastille a wan whiteness lighting up the edge of the sky in doleful wise . 
He was on top of a wall ten inches wide , stretched out under the heavy rains , with two gulfs to right and left , unable to stir , subject to the giddiness of a possible fall , and to the horror of a certain arrest , and his thoughts , like the pendulum of a clock , swung from one of these ideas to the other : `` Dead if I fall , caught if I stay . '' 
In the midst of this anguish , he suddenly saw , the street being still dark , a man who was gliding along the walls and coming from the Rue Pavee , halt in the recess above which Thenardier was , as it were , suspended . 
Here this man was joined by a second , who walked with the same caution , then by a third , then by a fourth . 
When these men were re-united , one of them lifted the latch of the gate in the fence , and all four entered the enclosure in which the shanty stood . 
They halted directly under Thenardier . 
These men had evidently chosen this vacant space in order that they might consult without being seen by the passers-by or by the sentinel who guards the wicket of La Force a few paces distant . 
It must be added , that the rain kept this sentinel blocked in his box . 
Thenardier , not being able to distinguish their visages , lent an ear to their words with the desperate attention of a wretch who feels himself lost . 
Thenardier saw something resembling a gleam of hope flash before his eyes , -- these men conversed in slang . 
The first said in a low but distinct voice : -- `` Let 's cut . 
What are we up to here ? '' 
The second replied : `` It 's raining hard enough to put out the very devil 's fire . 
And the bobbies will be along instanter . 
There 's a soldier on guard yonder . 
We shall get nabbed here . '' 
These two words , icigo and icicaille , both of which mean ici , and which belong , the first to the slang of the barriers , the second to the slang of the Temple , were flashes of light for Thenardier . 
By the icigo he recognized Brujon , who was a prowler of the barriers , by the icicaille he knew Babet , who , among his other trades , had been an old-clothes broker at the Temple . 
The antique slang of the great century is no longer spoken except in the Temple , and Babet was really the only person who spoke it in all its purity . 
Had it not been for the icicaille , Thenardier would not have recognized him , for he had entirely changed his voice . 
In the meanwhile , the third man had intervened . 
`` There 's no hurry yet , let 's wait a bit . 
How do we know that he does n't stand in need of us ? '' 
By this , which was nothing but French , Thenardier recognized Montparnasse , who made it a point in his elegance to understand all slangs and to speak none of them . 
As for the fourth , he held his peace , but his huge shoulders betrayed him . 
Thenardier did not hesitate . 
It was Guelemer . 
Brujon replied almost impetuously but still in a low tone : -- `` What are you jabbering about ? 
The tavern-keeper has n't managed to cut his stick . 
He do n't tumble to the racket , that he do n't ! 
You have to be a pretty knowing cove to tear up your shirt , cut up your sheet to make a rope , punch holes in doors , get up false papers , make false keys , file your irons , hang out your cord , hide yourself , and disguise yourself ! 
The old fellow has n't managed to play it , he does n't understand how to work the business . '' 
Babet added , still in that classical slang which was spoken by Poulailler and Cartouche , and which is to the bold , new , highly colored and risky argot used by Brujon what the language of Racine is to the language of Andre Chenier : -- `` Your tavern-keeper must have been nabbed in the act . 
You have to be knowing . 
He 's only a greenhorn . 
He must have let himself be taken in by a bobby , perhaps even by a sheep who played it on him as his pal . 
Listen , Montparnasse , do you hear those shouts in the prison ? 
You have seen all those lights . 
He 's recaptured , there ! 
He 'll get off with twenty years . 
I ai n't afraid , I ai n't a coward , but there ai n't anything more to do , or otherwise they 'd lead us a dance . 
Do n't get mad , come with us , let 's go drink a bottle of old wine together . '' 
`` One does n't desert one 's friends in a scrape , '' grumbled Montparnasse . 
`` I tell you he 's nabbed ! '' 
retorted Brujon . 
`` At the present moment , the inn-keeper ai n't worth a ha ` penny . 
We ca n't do nothing for him . 
Let 's be off . 
Every minute I think a bobby has got me in his fist . '' 
Montparnasse no longer offered more than a feeble resistance ; the fact is , that these four men , with the fidelity of ruffians who never abandon each other , had prowled all night long about La Force , great as was their peril , in the hope of seeing Thenardier make his appearance on the top of some wall . 
But the night , which was really growing too fine , -- for the downpour was such as to render all the streets deserted , -- the cold which was overpowering them , their soaked garments , their hole-ridden shoes , the alarming noise which had just burst forth in the prison , the hours which had elapsed , the patrol which they had encountered , the hope which was vanishing , all urged them to beat a retreat . 
Montparnasse himself , who was , perhaps , almost Thenardier 's son-in-law , yielded . 
A moment more , and they would be gone . 
Thenardier was panting on his wall like the shipwrecked sufferers of the Meduse on their raft when they beheld the vessel which had appeared in sight vanish on the horizon . 
He dared not call to them ; a cry might be heard and ruin everything . 
An idea occurred to him , a last idea , a flash of inspiration ; he drew from his pocket the end of Brujon 's rope , which he had detached from the chimney of the New Building , and flung it into the space enclosed by the fence . 
This rope fell at their feet . 
`` A widow , '' -LSB- 37 -RSB- said Babet . 
-LSB- 37 -RSB- Argot of the Temple . 
`` My tortouse ! '' 
-LSB- 38 -RSB- said Brujon . 
-LSB- 38 -RSB- Argot of the barriers . 
`` The tavern-keeper is there , '' said Montparnasse . 
They raised their eyes . 
Thenardier thrust out his head a very little . 
`` Quick ! '' 
said Montparnasse , `` have you the other end of the rope , Brujon ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Knot the two pieces together , we 'll fling him the rope , he can fasten it to the wall , and he 'll have enough of it to get down with . '' 
Thenardier ran the risk , and spoke : -- `` I am paralyzed with cold . '' 
`` We 'll warm you up . '' 
`` I ca n't budge . '' 
`` Let yourself slide , we 'll catch you . '' 
`` My hands are benumbed . '' 
`` Only fasten the rope to the wall . '' 
`` I ca n't . '' 
`` Then one of us must climb up , '' said Montparnasse . 
`` Three stories ! '' 
ejaculated Brujon . 
An ancient plaster flue , which had served for a stove that had been used in the shanty in former times , ran along the wall and mounted almost to the very spot where they could see Thenardier . 
This flue , then much damaged and full of cracks , has since fallen , but the marks of it are still visible . 
It was very narrow . 
`` One might get up by the help of that , '' said Montparnasse . 
`` By that flue ? '' 
exclaimed Babet , `` a grown-up cove , never ! 
it would take a brat . '' 
`` A brat must be got , '' resumed Brujon . 
`` Where are we to find a young ` un ? '' 
said Guelemer . 
`` Wait , '' said Montparnasse . 
`` I 've got the very article . '' 
He opened the gate of the fence very softly , made sure that no one was passing along the street , stepped out cautiously , shut the gate behind him , and set off at a run in the direction of the Bastille . 
Seven or eight minutes elapsed , eight thousand centuries to Thenardier ; Babet , Brujon , and Guelemer did not open their lips ; at last the gate opened once more , and Montparnasse appeared , breathless , and followed by Gavroche . 
The rain still rendered the street completely deserted . 
Little Gavroche entered the enclosure and gazed at the forms of these ruffians with a tranquil air . 
The water was dripping from his hair . 
Guelemer addressed him : -- `` Are you a man , young ` un ? '' 
Gavroche shrugged his shoulders , and replied : -- `` A young ` un like me 's a man , and men like you are babes . '' 
`` The brat 's tongue 's well hung ! '' 
exclaimed Babet . 
`` The Paris brat ai n't made of straw , '' added Brujon . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
asked Gavroche . 
Montparnasse answered : -- `` Climb up that flue . '' 
`` With this rope , '' said Babet . 
`` And fasten it , '' continued Brujon . 
`` To the top of the wall , '' went on Babet . 
`` To the cross-bar of the window , '' added Brujon . 
`` And then ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` There ! '' 
said Guelemer . 
The gamin examined the rope , the flue , the wall , the windows , and made that indescribable and disdainful noise with his lips which signifies : -- `` Is that all ! '' 
`` There 's a man up there whom you are to save , '' resumed Montparnasse . 
`` Will you ? '' 
began Brujon again . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
replied the lad , as though the question appeared a most unprecedented one to him . 
And he took off his shoes . 
Guelemer seized Gavroche by one arm , set him on the roof of the shanty , whose worm-eaten planks bent beneath the urchin 's weight , and handed him the rope which Brujon had knotted together during Montparnasse 's absence . 
The gamin directed his steps towards the flue , which it was easy to enter , thanks to a large crack which touched the roof . 
At the moment when he was on the point of ascending , Thenardier , who saw life and safety approaching , bent over the edge of the wall ; the first light of dawn struck white upon his brow dripping with sweat , upon his livid cheek-bones , his sharp and savage nose , his bristling gray beard , and Gavroche recognized him . 
`` Hullo ! 
it 's my father ! 
Oh , that wo n't hinder . '' 
And taking the rope in his teeth , he resolutely began the ascent . 
He reached the summit of the hut , bestrode the old wall as though it had been a horse . 
and knotted the rope firmly to the upper cross-bar of the window . 
A moment later , Thenardier was in the street . 
As soon as he touched the pavement , as soon as he found himself out of danger , he was no longer either weary , or chilled or trembling ; the terrible things from which he had escaped vanished like smoke , all that strange and ferocious mind awoke once more , and stood erect and free , ready to march onward . 
These were this man 's first words : -- `` Now , whom are we to eat ? '' 
It is useless to explain the sense of this frightfully transparent remark , which signifies both to kill , to assassinate , and to plunder . 
To eat , true sense : to devour . 
`` Let 's get well into a corner , '' said Brujon . 
`` Let 's settle it in three words , and part at once . 
There was an affair that promised well in the Rue Plumet , a deserted street , an isolated house , an old rotten gate on a garden , and lone women . '' 
`` Well ! 
why not ? '' 
demanded Thenardier . 
`` Your girl , Eponine , went to see about the matter , '' replied Babet . 
`` And she brought a biscuit to Magnon , '' added Guelemer . 
`` Nothing to be made there . '' 
`` The girl 's no fool , '' said Thenardier . 
`` Still , it must be seen to . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' said Brujon , `` it must be looked up . '' 
In the meanwhile , none of the men seemed to see Gavroche , who , during this colloquy , had seated himself on one of the fence-posts ; he waited a few moments , thinking that perhaps his father would turn towards him , then he put on his shoes again , and said : -- `` Is that all ? 
You do n't want any more , my men ? 
Now you 're out of your scrape . 
I 'm off . 
I must go and get my brats out of bed . '' 
And off he went . 
The five men emerged , one after another , from the enclosure . 
When Gavroche had disappeared at the corner of the Rue des Ballets , Babet took Thenardier aside . 
`` Did you take a good look at that young ` un ? '' 
he asked . 
`` What young ` un ? '' 
`` The one who climbed the wall and carried you the rope . '' 
`` Not particularly . '' 
`` Well , I do n't know , but it strikes me that it was your son . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
said Thenardier , `` do you think so ? '' 
BOOK SEVENTH . 
-- SLANG ORIGIN Pigritia is a terrible word . 
It engenders a whole world , la pegre , for which read theft , and a hell , la pegrenne , for which read hunger . 
Thus , idleness is the mother . 
She has a son , theft , and a daughter , hunger . 
Where are we at this moment ? 
In the land of slang . 
What is slang ? 
It is at one and the same time , a nation and a dialect ; it is theft in its two kinds ; people and language . 
When , four and thirty years ago , the narrator of this grave and sombre history introduced into a work written with the same aim as this -LSB- 39 -RSB- a thief who talked argot , there arose amazement and clamor . 
-- `` What ! 
How ! 
Argot ! 
Why , argot is horrible ! 
It is the language of prisons , galleys , convicts , of everything that is most abominable in society ! '' 
etc. , etc. -LSB- 39 -RSB- The Last Day of a Condemned Man . 
We have never understood this sort of objections . 
Since that time , two powerful romancers , one of whom is a profound observer of the human heart , the other an intrepid friend of the people , Balzac and Eugene Sue , having represented their ruffians as talking their natural language , as the author of The Last Day of a Condemned Man did in 1828 , the same objections have been raised . 
People repeated : `` What do authors mean by that revolting dialect ? 
Slang is odious ! 
Slang makes one shudder ! '' 
Who denies that ? 
Of course it does . 
When it is a question of probing a wound , a gulf , a society , since when has it been considered wrong to go too far ? 
to go to the bottom ? 
We have always thought that it was sometimes a courageous act , and , at least , a simple and useful deed , worthy of the sympathetic attention which duty accepted and fulfilled merits . 
Why should one not explore everything , and study everything ? 
Why should one halt on the way ? 
The halt is a matter depending on the sounding-line , and not on the leadsman . 
Certainly , too , it is neither an attractive nor an easy task to undertake an investigation into the lowest depths of the social order , where terra firma comes to an end and where mud begins , to rummage in those vague , murky waves , to follow up , to seize and to fling , still quivering , upon the pavement that abject dialect which is dripping with filth when thus brought to the light , that pustulous vocabulary each word of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of the mire and the shadows . 
Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus in its nudity , in the broad light of thought , of the horrible swarming of slang . 
It seems , in fact , to be a sort of horrible beast made for the night which has just been torn from its cesspool . 
One thinks one beholds a frightful , living , and bristling thicket which quivers , rustles , wavers , returns to shadow , threatens and glares . 
One word resembles a claw , another an extinguished and bleeding eye , such and such a phrase seems to move like the claw of a crab . 
All this is alive with the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out of disorganization . 
Now , when has horror ever excluded study ? 
Since when has malady banished medicine ? 
Can one imagine a naturalist refusing to study the viper , the bat , the scorpion , the centipede , the tarantula , and one who would cast them back into their darkness , saying : `` Oh ! 
how ugly that is ! '' 
The thinker who should turn aside from slang would resemble a surgeon who should avert his face from an ulcer or a wart . 
He would be like a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language , a philosopher hesitating to scrutinize a fact in humanity . 
For , it must be stated to those who are ignorant of the case , that argot is both a literary phenomenon and a social result . 
What is slang , properly speaking ? 
It is the language of wretchedness . 
We may be stopped ; the fact may be put to us in general terms , which is one way of attenuating it ; we may be told , that all trades , professions , it may be added , all the accidents of the social hierarchy and all forms of intelligence , have their own slang . 
The merchant who says : `` Montpellier not active , Marseilles fine quality , '' the broker on ` change who says : `` Assets at end of current month , '' the gambler who says : `` Tiers et tout , refait de pique , '' the sheriff of the Norman Isles who says : The holder in fee reverting to his landed estate can not claim the fruits of that estate during the hereditary seizure of the real estate by the mortgagor , '' the playwright who says : `` The piece was hissed , '' the comedian who says : `` I 've made a hit , '' the philosopher who says : `` Phenomenal triplicity , '' the huntsman who says : `` Voileci allais , Voileci fuyant , '' the phrenologist who says : `` Amativeness , combativeness , secretiveness , '' the infantry soldier who says : `` My shooting-iron , '' the cavalry-man who says : `` My turkey-cock , '' the fencing-master who says : `` Tierce , quarte , break , '' the printer who says : `` My shooting-stick and galley , '' -- all , printer , fencing-master , cavalry dragoon , infantry-man , phrenologist , huntsman , philosopher , comedian , playwright , sheriff , gambler , stock-broker , and merchant , speak slang . 
The painter who says : `` My grinder , '' the notary who says : `` My Skip-the-Gutter , '' the hairdresser who says : `` My mealyback , '' the cobbler who says : `` My cub , '' talks slang . 
Strictly speaking , if one absolutely insists on the point , all the different fashions of saying the right and the left , the sailor 's port and starboard , the scene-shifter 's court-side , and garden-side , the beadle 's Gospel-side and Epistle-side , are slang . 
There is the slang of the affected lady as well as of the precieuses . 
The Hotel Rambouillet nearly adjoins the Cour des Miracles . 
There is a slang of duchesses , witness this phrase contained in a love-letter from a very great lady and a very pretty woman of the Restoration : `` You will find in this gossip a fultitude of reasons why I should libertize . '' 
-LSB- 40 -RSB- Diplomatic ciphers are slang ; the pontifical chancellery by using 26 for Rome , grkztntgzyal for despatch , and abfxustgrnogrkzu tu XI . 
for the Due de Modena , speaks slang . 
The physicians of the Middle Ages who , for carrot , radish , and turnip , said Opoponach , perfroschinum , reptitalmus , dracatholicum , angelorum , postmegorum , talked slang . 
The sugar-manufacturer who says : `` Loaf , clarified , lumps , bastard , common , burnt , '' -- this honest manufacturer talks slang . 
A certain school of criticism twenty years ago , which used to say : `` Half of the works of Shakespeare consists of plays upon words and puns , '' -- talked slang . 
The poet , and the artist who , with profound understanding , would designate M. de Montmorency as `` a bourgeois , '' if he were not a judge of verses and statues , speak slang . 
The classic Academician who calls flowers `` Flora , '' fruits , `` Pomona , '' the sea , `` Neptune , '' love , `` fires , '' beauty , `` charms , '' a horse , `` a courser , '' the white or tricolored cockade , `` the rose of Bellona , '' the three-cornered hat , `` Mars ' triangle , '' -- that classical Academician talks slang . 
Algebra , medicine , botany , have each their slang . 
The tongue which is employed on board ship , that wonderful language of the sea , which is so complete and so picturesque , which was spoken by Jean Bart , Duquesne , Suffren , and Duperre , which mingles with the whistling of the rigging , the sound of the speaking-trumpets , the shock of the boarding-irons , the roll of the sea , the wind , the gale , the cannon , is wholly a heroic and dazzling slang , which is to the fierce slang of the thieves what the lion is to the jackal . 
-LSB- 40 -RSB- `` Vous trouverez dans ces potains-la , une foultitude de raisons pour que je me libertise . '' 
No doubt . 
But say what we will , this manner of understanding the word slang is an extension which every one will not admit . 
For our part , we reserve to the word its ancient and precise , circumscribed and determined significance , and we restrict slang to slang . 
The veritable slang and the slang that is pre-eminently slang , if the two words can be coupled thus , the slang immemorial which was a kingdom , is nothing else , we repeat , than the homely , uneasy , crafty , treacherous , venomous , cruel , equivocal , vile , profound , fatal tongue of wretchedness . 
There exists , at the extremity of all abasement and all misfortunes , a last misery which revolts and makes up its mind to enter into conflict with the whole mass of fortunate facts and reigning rights ; a fearful conflict , where , now cunning , now violent , unhealthy and ferocious at one and the same time , it attacks the social order with pin-pricks through vice , and with club-blows through crime . 
To meet the needs of this conflict , wretchedness has invented a language of combat , which is slang . 
To keep afloat and to rescue from oblivion , to hold above the gulf , were it but a fragment of some language which man has spoken and which would , otherwise , be lost , that is to say , one of the elements , good or bad , of which civilization is composed , or by which it is complicated , to extend the records of social observation ; is to serve civilization itself . 
This service Plautus rendered , consciously or unconsciously , by making two Carthaginian soldiers talk Phoenician ; that service Moliere rendered , by making so many of his characters talk Levantine and all sorts of dialects . 
Here objections spring up afresh . 
Phoenician , very good ! 
Levantine , quite right ! 
Even dialect , let that pass ! 
They are tongues which have belonged to nations or provinces ; but slang ! 
What is the use of preserving slang ? 
What is the good of assisting slang `` to survive '' ? 
To this we reply in one word , only . 
Assuredly , if the tongue which a nation or a province has spoken is worthy of interest , the language which has been spoken by a misery is still more worthy of attention and study . 
It is the language which has been spoken , in France , for example , for more than four centuries , not only by a misery , but by every possible human misery . 
And then , we insist upon it , the study of social deformities and infirmities , and the task of pointing them out with a view to remedy , is not a business in which choice is permitted . 
The historian of manners and ideas has no less austere a mission than the historian of events . 
The latter has the surface of civilization , the conflicts of crowns , the births of princes , the marriages of kings , battles , assemblages , great public men , revolutions in the daylight , everything on the exterior ; the other historian has the interior , the depths , the people who toil , suffer , wait , the oppressed woman , the agonizing child , the secret war between man and man , obscure ferocities , prejudices , plotted iniquities , the subterranean , the indistinct tremors of multitudes , the die-of-hunger , the counter-blows of the law , the secret evolution of souls , the go-bare-foot , the bare-armed , the disinherited , the orphans , the unhappy , and the infamous , all the forms which roam through the darkness . 
He must descend with his heart full of charity , and severity at the same time , as a brother and as a judge , to those impenetrable casemates where crawl , pell-mell , those who bleed and those who deal the blow , those who weep and those who curse , those who fast and those who devour , those who endure evil and those who inflict it . 
Have these historians of hearts and souls duties at all inferior to the historians of external facts ? 
Does any one think that Alighieri has any fewer things to say than Machiavelli ? 
Is the under side of civilization any less important than the upper side merely because it is deeper and more sombre ? 
Do we really know the mountain well when we are not acquainted with the cavern ? 
Let us say , moreover , parenthetically , that from a few words of what precedes a marked separation might be inferred between the two classes of historians which does not exist in our mind . 
No one is a good historian of the patent , visible , striking , and public life of peoples , if he is not , at the same time , in a certain measure , the historian of their deep and hidden life ; and no one is a good historian of the interior unless he understands how , at need , to be the historian of the exterior also . 
The history of manners and ideas permeates the history of events , and this is true reciprocally . 
They constitute two different orders of facts which correspond to each other , which are always interlaced , and which often bring forth results . 
All the lineaments which providence traces on the surface of a nation have their parallels , sombre but distinct , in their depths , and all convulsions of the depths produce ebullitions on the surface . 
True history being a mixture of all things , the true historian mingles in everything . 
Man is not a circle with a single centre ; he is an ellipse with a double focus . 
Facts form one of these , and ideas the other . 
Slang is nothing but a dressing-room where the tongue having some bad action to perform , disguises itself . 
There it clothes itself in word-masks , in metaphor-rags . 
In this guise it becomes horrible . 
One finds it difficult to recognize . 
Is it really the French tongue , the great human tongue ? 
Behold it ready to step upon the stage and to retort upon crime , and prepared for all the employments of the repertory of evil . 
It no longer walks , it hobbles ; it limps on the crutch of the Court of Miracles , a crutch metamorphosable into a club ; it is called vagrancy ; every sort of spectre , its dressers , have painted its face , it crawls and rears , the double gait of the reptile . 
Henceforth , it is apt at all roles , it is made suspicious by the counterfeiter , covered with verdigris by the forger , blacked by the soot of the incendiary ; and the murderer applies its rouge . 
When one listens , by the side of honest men , at the portals of society , one overhears the dialogues of those who are on the outside . 
One distinguishes questions and replies . 
One perceives , without understanding it , a hideous murmur , sounding almost like human accents , but more nearly resembling a howl than an articulate word . 
It is slang . 
The words are misshapen and stamped with an indescribable and fantastic bestiality . 
One thinks one hears hydras talking . 
It is unintelligible in the dark . 
It gnashes and whispers , completing the gloom with mystery . 
It is black in misfortune , it is blacker still in crime ; these two blacknesses amalgamated , compose slang . 
Obscurity in the atmosphere , obscurity in acts , obscurity in voices . 
Terrible , toad-like tongue which goes and comes , leaps , crawls , slobbers , and stirs about in monstrous wise in that immense gray fog composed of rain and night , of hunger , of vice , of falsehood , of injustice , of nudity , of suffocation , and of winter , the high noonday of the miserable . 
Let us have compassion on the chastised . 
Alas ! 
Who are we ourselves ? 
Who am I who now address you ? 
Who are you who are listening to me ? 
And are you very sure that we have done nothing before we were born ? 
The earth is not devoid of resemblance to a jail . 
Who knows whether man is not a recaptured offender against divine justice ? 
Look closely at life . 
It is so made , that everywhere we feel the sense of punishment . 
Are you what is called a happy man ? 
Well ! 
you are sad every day . 
Each day has its own great grief or its little care . 
Yesterday you were trembling for a health that is dear to you , to-day you fear for your own ; to-morrow it will be anxiety about money , the day after to-morrow the diatribe of a slanderer , the day after that , the misfortune of some friend ; then the prevailing weather , then something that has been broken or lost , then a pleasure with which your conscience and your vertebral column reproach you ; again , the course of public affairs . 
This without reckoning in the pains of the heart . 
And so it goes on . 
One cloud is dispelled , another forms . 
There is hardly one day out of a hundred which is wholly joyous and sunny . 
And you belong to that small class who are happy ! 
As for the rest of mankind , stagnating night rests upon them . 
Thoughtful minds make but little use of the phrase : the fortunate and the unfortunate . 
In this world , evidently the vestibule of another , there are no fortunate . 
The real human division is this : the luminous and the shady . 
To diminish the number of the shady , to augment the number of the luminous , -- that is the object . 
That is why we cry : Education ! 
science ! 
To teach reading , means to light the fire ; every syllable spelled out sparkles . 
However , he who says light does not , necessarily , say joy . 
People suffer in the light ; excess burns . 
The flame is the enemy of the wing . 
To burn without ceasing to fly , -- therein lies the marvel of genius . 
When you shall have learned to know , and to love , you will still suffer . 
The day is born in tears . 
The luminous weep , if only over those in darkness . 
ROOTS Slang is the tongue of those who sit in darkness . 
Thought is moved in its most sombre depths , social philosophy is bidden to its most poignant meditations , in the presence of that enigmatic dialect at once so blighted and rebellious . 
Therein lies chastisement made visible . 
Every syllable has an air of being marked . 
The words of the vulgar tongue appear therein wrinkled and shrivelled , as it were , beneath the hot iron of the executioner . 
Some seem to be still smoking . 
Such and such a phrase produces upon you the effect of the shoulder of a thief branded with the fleur-de-lys , which has suddenly been laid bare . 
Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these substantives which are fugitives from justice . 
Metaphor is sometimes so shameless , that one feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter . 
Moreover , in spite of all this , and because of all this , this strange dialect has by rights , its own compartment in that great impartial case of pigeon-holes where there is room for the rusty farthing as well as for the gold medal , and which is called literature . 
Slang , whether the public admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry . 
It is a language . 
Yes , by the deformity of certain terms , we recognize the fact that it was chewed by Mandrin , and by the splendor of certain metonymies , we feel that Villon spoke it . 
That exquisite and celebrated verse -- Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan ? 
But where are the snows of years gone by ? 
is a verse of slang . 
Antam -- ante annum -- is a word of Thunes slang , which signified the past year , and by extension , formerly . 
Thirty-five years ago , at the epoch of the departure of the great chain-gang , there could be read in one of the cells at Bicetre , this maxim engraved with a nail on the wall by a king of Thunes condemned to the galleys : Les dabs d'antan trimaient siempre pour la pierre du Coesre . 
This means Kings in days gone by always went and had themselves anointed . 
In the opinion of that king , anointment meant the galleys . 
The word decarade , which expresses the departure of heavy vehicles at a gallop , is attributed to Villon , and it is worthy of him . 
This word , which strikes fire with all four of its feet , sums up in a masterly onomatopoeia the whole of La Fontaine 's admirable verse : -- Six forts chevaux tiraient un coche . 
Six stout horses drew a coach . 
From a purely literary point of view , few studies would prove more curious and fruitful than the study of slang . 
It is a whole language within a language , a sort of sickly excrescence , an unhealthy graft which has produced a vegetation , a parasite which has its roots in the old Gallic trunk , and whose sinister foliage crawls all over one side of the language . 
This is what may be called the first , the vulgar aspect of slang . 
But , for those who study the tongue as it should be studied , that is to say , as geologists study the earth , slang appears like a veritable alluvial deposit . 
According as one digs a longer or shorter distance into it , one finds in slang , below the old popular French , Provencal , Spanish , Italian , Levantine , that language of the Mediterranean ports , English and German , the Romance language in its three varieties , French , Italian , and Romance Romance , Latin , and finally Basque and Celtic . 
A profound and unique formation . 
A subterranean edifice erected in common by all the miserable . 
Each accursed race has deposited its layer , each suffering has dropped its stone there , each heart has contributed its pebble . 
A throng of evil , base , or irritated souls , who have traversed life and have vanished into eternity , linger there almost entirely visible still beneath the form of some monstrous word . 
Do you want Spanish ? 
The old Gothic slang abounded in it . 
Here is boffete , a box on the ear , which is derived from bofeton ; vantane , window -LRB- later on vanterne -RRB- , which comes from vantana ; gat , cat , which comes from gato ; acite , oil , which comes from aceyte . 
Do you want Italian ? 
Here is spade , sword , which comes from spada ; carvel , boat , which comes from caravella . 
Do you want English ? 
Here is bichot , which comes from bishop ; raille , spy , which comes from rascal , rascalion ; pilche , a case , which comes from pilcher , a sheath . 
Do you want German ? 
Here is the caleur , the waiter , kellner ; the hers , the master , herzog -LRB- duke -RRB- . 
Do you want Latin ? 
Here is frangir , to break , frangere ; affurer , to steal , fur ; cadene , chain , catena . 
There is one word which crops up in every language of the continent , with a sort of mysterious power and authority . 
It is the word magnus ; the Scotchman makes of it his mac , which designates the chief of the clan ; Mac-Farlane , Mac-Callumore , the great Farlane , the great Callumore -LSB- 41 -RSB- ; slang turns it into meck and later le meg , that is to say , God . 
Would you like Basque ? 
Here is gahisto , the devil , which comes from gaiztoa , evil ; sorgabon , good night , which comes from gabon , good evening . 
Do you want Celtic ? 
Here is blavin , a handkerchief , which comes from blavet , gushing water ; menesse , a woman -LRB- in a bad sense -RRB- , which comes from meinec , full of stones ; barant , brook , from baranton , fountain ; goffeur , locksmith , from goff , blacksmith ; guedouze , death , which comes from guenn-du , black-white . 
Finally , would you like history ? 
Slang calls crowns les malteses , a souvenir of the coin in circulation on the galleys of Malta . 
-LSB- 41 -RSB- It must be observed , however , that mac in Celtic means son . 
In addition to the philological origins just indicated , slang possesses other and still more natural roots , which spring , so to speak , from the mind of man itself . 
In the first place , the direct creation of words . 
Therein lies the mystery of tongues . 
To paint with words , which contains figures one knows not how or why , is the primitive foundation of all human languages , what may be called their granite . 
Slang abounds in words of this description , immediate words , words created instantaneously no one knows either where or by whom , without etymology , without analogies , without derivatives , solitary , barbarous , sometimes hideous words , which at times possess a singular power of expression and which live . 
The executioner , le taule ; the forest , le sabri ; fear , flight , taf ; the lackey , le larbin ; the mineral , the prefect , the minister , pharos ; the devil , le rabouin . 
Nothing is stranger than these words which both mask and reveal . 
Some , le rabouin , for example , are at the same time grotesque and terrible , and produce on you the effect of a cyclopean grimace . 
ln the second place , metaphor . 
The peculiarity of a language which is desirous of saying all yet concealing all is that it is rich in figures . 
Metaphor is an enigma , wherein the thief who is plotting a stroke , the prisoner who is arranging an escape , take refuge . 
No idiom is more metaphorical than slang : devisser le coco -LRB- to unscrew the nut -RRB- , to twist the neck ; tortiller -LRB- to wriggle -RRB- , to eat ; etre gerbe , to be tried ; a rat , a bread thief ; il lansquine , it rains , a striking , ancient figure which partly bears its date about it , which assimilates long oblique lines of rain , with the dense and slanting pikes of the lancers , and which compresses into a single word the popular expression : it rains halberds . 
Sometimes , in proportion as slang progresses from the first epoch to the second , words pass from the primitive and savage sense to the metaphorical sense . 
The devil ceases to be le rabouin , and becomes le boulanger -LRB- the baker -RRB- , who puts the bread into the oven . 
This is more witty , but less grand , something like Racine after Corneille , like Euripides after AEschylus . 
Certain slang phrases which participate in the two epochs and have at once the barbaric character and the metaphorical character resemble phantasmagories . 
Les sorgueuers vont solliciter des gails a la lune -- the prowlers are going to steal horses by night , -- this passes before the mind like a group of spectres . 
One knows not what one sees . 
In the third place , the expedient . 
Slang lives on the language . 
It uses it in accordance with its fancy , it dips into it hap-hazard , and it often confines itself , when occasion arises , to alter it in a gross and summary fashion . 
Occasionally , with the ordinary words thus deformed and complicated with words of pure slang , picturesque phrases are formed , in which there can be felt the mixture of the two preceding elements , the direct creation and the metaphor : le cab jaspine , je marronne que la roulotte de Pantin trime dans le sabri , the dog is barking , I suspect that the diligence for Paris is passing through the woods . 
Le dab est sinve , la dabuge est merloussiere , la fee est bative , the bourgeois is stupid , the bourgeoise is cunning , the daughter is pretty . 
Generally , to throw listeners off the track , slang confines itself to adding to all the words of the language without distinction , an ignoble tail , a termination in aille , in orgue , in iergue , or in uche . 
Thus : Vousiergue trouvaille bonorgue ce gigotmuche ? 
Do you think that leg of mutton good ? 
A phrase addressed by Cartouche to a turnkey in order to find out whether the sum offered for his escape suited him . 
The termination in mar has been added recently . 
Slang , being the dialect of corruption , quickly becomes corrupted itself . 
Besides this , as it is always seeking concealment , as soon as it feels that it is understood , it changes its form . 
Contrary to what happens with every other vegetation , every ray of light which falls upon it kills whatever it touches . 
Thus slang is in constant process of decomposition and recomposition ; an obscure and rapid work which never pauses . 
It passes over more ground in ten years than a language in ten centuries . 
Thus le larton -LRB- bread -RRB- becomes le lartif ; le gail -LRB- horse -RRB- becomes le gaye ; la fertanche -LRB- straw -RRB- becomes la fertille ; le momignard -LRB- brat -RRB- , le momacque ; les fiques -LRB- duds -RRB- , frusques ; la chique -LRB- the church -RRB- , l'egrugeoir ; le colabre -LRB- neck -RRB- , le colas . 
The devil is at first , gahisto , then le rabouin , then the baker ; the priest is a ratichon , then the boar -LRB- le sanglier -RRB- ; the dagger is le vingt-deux -LRB- twenty-two -RRB- , then le surin , then le lingre ; the police are railles , then roussins , then rousses , then marchands de lacets -LRB- dealers in stay-laces -RRB- , then coquers , then cognes ; the executioner is le taule , then Charlot , l'atigeur , then le becquillard . 
In the seventeenth century , to fight was `` to give each other snuff '' ; in the nineteenth it is `` to chew each other 's throats . '' 
There have been twenty different phrases between these two extremes . 
Cartouche 's talk would have been Hebrew to Lacenaire . 
All the words of this language are perpetually engaged in flight like the men who utter them . 
Still , from time to time , and in consequence of this very movement , the ancient slang crops up again and becomes new once more . 
It has its headquarters where it maintains its sway . 
The Temple preserved the slang of the seventeenth century ; Bicetre , when it was a prison , preserved the slang of Thunes . 
There one could hear the termination in anche of the old Thuneurs . 
Boyanches-tu -LRB- bois-tu -RRB- , do you drink ? 
But perpetual movement remains its law , nevertheless . 
If the philosopher succeeds in fixing , for a moment , for purposes of observation , this language which is incessantly evaporating , he falls into doleful and useful meditation . 
No study is more efficacious and more fecund in instruction . 
There is not a metaphor , not an analogy , in slang , which does not contain a lesson . 
Among these men , to beat means to feign ; one beats a malady ; ruse is their strength . 
For them , the idea of the man is not separated from the idea of darkness . 
The night is called la sorgue ; man , l'orgue . 
Man is a derivative of the night . 
They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light of an atmosphere which kills them , of a fatal force , and they speak of their liberty as one would speak of his health . 
A man under arrest is a sick man ; one who is condemned is a dead man . 
The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in which he is buried , is a sort of glacial chastity , and he calls the dungeon the castus . 
In that funereal place , life outside always presents itself under its most smiling aspect . 
The prisoner has irons on his feet ; you think , perhaps , that his thought is that it is with the feet that one walks ? 
No ; he is thinking that it is with the feet that one dances ; so , when he has succeeded in severing his fetters , his first idea is that now he can dance , and he calls the saw the bastringue -LRB- public-house ball -RRB- . 
-- A name is a centre ; profound assimilation . 
-- The ruffian has two heads , one of which reasons out his actions and leads him all his life long , and the other which he has upon his shoulders on the day of his death ; he calls the head which counsels him in crime la sorbonne , and the head which expiates it la tronche . 
-- When a man has no longer anything but rags upon his body and vices in his heart , when he has arrived at that double moral and material degradation which the word blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations , he is ripe for crime ; he is like a well-whetted knife ; he has two cutting edges , his distress and his malice ; so slang does not say a blackguard , it says un reguise . 
-- What are the galleys ? 
A brazier of damnation , a hell . 
The convict calls himself a fagot . 
-- And finally , what name do malefactors give to their prison ? 
The college . 
A whole penitentiary system can be evolved from that word . 
Does the reader wish to know where the majority of the songs of the galleys , those refrains called in the special vocabulary lirlonfa , have had their birth ? 
Let him listen to what follows : -- There existed at the Chatelet in Paris a large and long cellar . 
This cellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine . 
It had neither windows nor air-holes , its only aperture was the door ; men could enter there , air could not . 
This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone , and for floor ten inches of mud . 
It was flagged ; but the pavement had rotted and cracked under the oozing of the water . 
Eight feet above the floor , a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavation from side to side ; from this beam hung , at short distances apart , chains three feet long , and at the end of these chains there were rings for the neck . 
In this vault , men who had been condemned to the galleys were incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon . 
They were thrust under this beam , where each one found his fetters swinging in the darkness and waiting for him . 
The chains , those pendant arms , and the necklets , those open hands , caught the unhappy wretches by the throat . 
They were rivetted and left there . 
As the chain was too short , they could not lie down . 
They remained motionless in that cavern , in that night , beneath that beam , almost hanging , forced to unheard-of efforts to reach their bread , jug , or their vault overhead , mud even to mid-leg , filth flowing to their very calves , broken asunder with fatigue , with thighs and knees giving way , clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtain some rest , unable to sleep except when standing erect , and awakened every moment by the strangling of the collar ; some woke no more . 
In order to eat , they pushed the bread , which was flung to them in the mud , along their leg with their heel until it reached their hand . 
How long did they remain thus ? 
One month , two months , six months sometimes ; one stayed a year . 
It was the antechamber of the galleys . 
Men were put there for stealing a hare from the king . 
In this sepulchre-hell , what did they do ? 
What man can do in a sepulchre , they went through the agonies of death , and what can man do in hell , they sang ; for song lingers where there is no longer any hope . 
In the waters of Malta , when a galley was approaching , the song could be heard before the sound of the oars . 
Poor Survincent , the poacher , who had gone through the prison-cellar of the Chatelet , said : `` It was the rhymes that kept me up . '' 
Uselessness of poetry . 
What is the good of rhyme ? 
It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth . 
It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Chatelet of Paris that comes the melancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley : `` Timaloumisaine , timaloumison . '' 
The majority of these Icicaille est la theatre Here is the theatre Du petit dardant . 
Of the little archer -LRB- Cupid -RRB- . 
Do what you will , you can not annihilate that eternal relic in the heart of man , love . 
In this world of dismal deeds , people keep their secrets . 
The secret is the thing above all others . 
The secret , in the eyes of these wretches , is unity which serves as a base of union . 
To betray a secret is to tear from each member of this fierce community something of his own personality . 
To inform against , in the energetic slang dialect , is called : `` to eat the bit . '' 
As though the informer drew to himself a little of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit of each one 's flesh . 
What does it signify to receive a box on the ear ? 
Commonplace metaphor replies : `` It is to see thirty-six candles . '' 
Here slang intervenes and takes it up : Candle , camoufle . 
Thereupon , the ordinary tongue gives camouflet -LSB- 42 -RSB- as the synonym for soufflet . 
Thus , by a sort of infiltration from below upwards , with the aid of metaphor , that incalculable , trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the Academy ; and Poulailler saying : `` I light my camoufle , '' causes Voltaire to write : `` Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred camouflets . '' 
-LSB- 42 -RSB- Smoke puffed in the face of a person asleep . 
Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step . 
Study and investigation of this strange idiom lead to the mysterious point of intersection of regular society with society which is accursed . 
The thief also has his food for cannon , stealable matter , you , I , whoever passes by ; le pantre . 
-LRB- Pan , everybody . -RRB- 
Slang is language turned convict . 
That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low , that it can be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality , that it can be bound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss , is sufficient to create consternation . 
Oh , poor thought of miserable wretches ! 
Alas ! 
will no one come to the succor of the human soul in that darkness ? 
Is it her destiny there to await forever the mind , the liberator , the immense rider of Pegasi and hippo-griffs , the combatant of heroes of the dawn who shall descend from the azure between two wings , the radiant knight of the future ? 
Will she forever summon in vain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal ? 
Is she condemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density of the gulf , and to catch glimpses , nearer and nearer at hand , beneath the hideous water of that dragon 's head , that maw streaked with foam , and that writhing undulation of claws , swellings , and rings ? 
Must it remain there , without a gleam of light , without hope , given over to that terrible approach , vaguely scented out by the monster , shuddering , dishevelled , wringing its arms , forever chained to the rock of night , a sombre Andromeda white and naked amid the shadows ! 
SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS As the reader perceives , slang in its entirety , slang of four hundred years ago , like the slang of to-day , is permeated with that sombre , symbolical spirit which gives to all words a mien which is now mournful , now menacing . 
One feels in it the wild and ancient sadness of those vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packs of their own , some of which have come down to us . 
The eight of clubs , for instance , represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous trefoil leaves , a sort of fantastic personification of the forest . 
At the foot of this tree a fire was burning , over which three hares were roasting a huntsman on a spit , and behind him , on another fire , hung a steaming pot , whence emerged the head of a dog . 
Nothing can be more melancholy than these reprisals in painting , by a pack of cards , in the presence of stakes for the roasting of smugglers and of the cauldron for the boiling of counterfeiters . 
The diverse forms assumed by thought in the realm of slang , even song , even raillery , even menace , all partook of this powerless and dejected character . 
All the songs , the melodies of some of which have been collected , were humble and lamentable to the point of evoking tears . 
The pegre is always the poor pegre , and he is always the hare in hiding , the fugitive mouse , the flying bird . 
He hardly complains , he contents himself with sighing ; one of his moans has come down to us : `` I do not understand how God , the father of men , can torture his children and his grandchildren and hear them cry , without himself suffering torture . '' 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- The wretch , whenever he has time to think , makes himself small before the low , and frail in the presence of society ; he lies down flat on his face , he entreats , he appeals to the side of compassion ; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt . 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- Je n'entrave que le dail comment meck , le daron des orgues , peut atiger ses momes et ses momignards et les locher criblant sans etre agite lui-meme . 
Towards the middle of the last century a change took place , prison songs and thieves ' ritournelles assumed , so to speak , an insolent and jovial mien . 
The plaintive malure was replaced by the larifla . 
We find in the eighteenth century , in nearly all the songs of the galleys and prisons , a diabolical and enigmatical gayety . 
We hear this strident and lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a phosphorescent gleam , and which seems to have been flung into the forest by a will-o ' - the-wisp playing the fife : -- Miralabi suslababo Mirliton ribonribette Surlababi mirlababo Mirliton ribonribo . 
This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a man 's throat . 
A serious symptom . 
In the eighteenth century , the ancient melancholy of the dejected classes vanishes . 
They began to laugh . 
They rally the grand meg and the grand dab . 
Given Louis XV . 
they call the King of France `` le Marquis de Pantin . '' 
And behold , they are almost gay . 
A sort of gleam proceeds from these miserable wretches , as though their consciences were not heavy within them any more . 
These lamentable tribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate audacity of actions , they possess the heedless audacity of mind . 
A sign that they are losing the sense of their criminality , and that they feel , even among thinkers and dreamers , some indefinable support which the latter themselves know not of . 
A sign that theft and pillage are beginning to filter into doctrines and sophisms , in such a way as to lose somewhat of their ugliness , while communicating much of it to sophisms and doctrines . 
A sign , in short , of some outbreak which is prodigious and near unless some diversion shall arise . 
Let us pause a moment . 
Whom are we accusing here ? 
Is it the eighteenth century ? 
Is it philosophy ? 
Certainly not . 
The work of the eighteenth century is healthy and good and wholesome . 
The encyclopedists , Diderot at their head ; the physiocrates , Turgot at their head ; the philosophers , Voltaire at their head ; the Utopians , Rousseau at their head , -- these are four sacred legions . 
Humanity 's immense advance towards the light is due to them . 
They are the four vanguards of the human race , marching towards the four cardinal points of progress . 
Diderot towards the beautiful , Turgot towards the useful , Voltaire towards the true , Rousseau towards the just . 
But by the side of and above the philosophers , there were the sophists , a venomous vegetation mingled with a healthy growth , hemlock in the virgin forest . 
While the executioner was burning the great books of the liberators of the century on the grand staircase of the court-house , writers now forgotten were publishing , with the King 's sanction , no one knows what strangely disorganizing writings , which were eagerly read by the unfortunate . 
Some of these publications , odd to say , which were patronized by a prince , are to be found in the Secret Library . 
These facts , significant but unknown , were imperceptible on the surface . 
Sometimes , in the very obscurity of a fact lurks its danger . 
It is obscure because it is underhand . 
Of all these writers , the one who probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was Restif de La Bretonne . 
This work , peculiar to the whole of Europe , effected more ravages in Germany than anywhere else . 
In Germany , during a given period , summed up by Schiller in his famous drama The Robbers , theft and pillage rose up in protest against property and labor , assimilated certain specious and false elementary ideas , which , though just in appearance , were absurd in reality , enveloped themselves in these ideas , disappeared within them , after a fashion , assumed an abstract name , passed into the state of theory , and in that shape circulated among the laborious , suffering , and honest masses , unknown even to the imprudent chemists who had prepared the mixture , unknown even to the masses who accepted it . 
Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself , the case is grave . 
Suffering engenders wrath ; and while the prosperous classes blind themselves or fall asleep , which is the same thing as shutting one 's eyes , the hatred of the unfortunate classes lights its torch at some aggrieved or ill-made spirit which dreams in a corner , and sets itself to the scrutiny of society . 
The scrutiny of hatred is a terrible thing . 
Hence , if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it , those fearful commotions which were formerly called jacqueries , beside which purely political agitations are the merest child 's play , which are no longer the conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor , but the revolt of discomfort against comfort . 
Then everything crumbles . 
Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people . 
It is this peril , possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenth century , which the French Revolution , that immense act of probity , cut short . 
The French Revolution , which is nothing else than the idea armed with the sword , rose erect , and , with the same abrupt movement , closed the door of ill and opened the door of good . 
It put a stop to torture , promulgated the truth , expelled miasma , rendered the century healthy , crowned the populace . 
It may be said of it that it created man a second time , by giving him a second soul , the right . 
The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work , and to-day , the social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simply impossible . 
Blind is he who announces it ! 
Foolish is he who fears it ! 
Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie . 
Thanks to the Revolution , social conditions have changed . 
Feudal and monarchical maladies no longer run in our blood . 
There is no more of the Middle Ages in our constitution . 
We no longer live in the days when terrible swarms within made irruptions , when one heard beneath his feet the obscure course of a dull rumble , when indescribable elevations from mole-like tunnels appeared on the surface of civilization , where the soil cracked open , where the roofs of caverns yawned , and where one suddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the earth . 
The revolutionary sense is a moral sense . 
The sentiment of right , once developed , develops the sentiment of duty . 
The law of all is liberty , which ends where the liberty of others begins , according to Robespierre 's admirable definition . 
Since ' 89 , the whole people has been dilating into a sublime individual ; there is not a poor man , who , possessing his right , has not his ray of sun ; the die-of-hunger feels within him the honesty of France ; the dignity of the citizen is an internal armor ; he who is free is scrupulous ; he who votes reigns . 
Hence incorruptibility ; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts ; hence eyes heroically lowered before temptations . 
The revolutionary wholesomeness is such , that on a day of deliverance , a 14th of July , a 10th of August , there is no longer any populace . 
The first cry of the enlightened and increasing throngs is : death to thieves ! 
Progress is an honest man ; the ideal and the absolute do not filch pocket-handkerchiefs . 
By whom were the wagons containing the wealth of the Tuileries escorted in 1848 ? 
By the rag-pickers of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
Rags mounted guard over the treasure . 
Virtue rendered these tatterdemalions resplendent . 
In those wagons in chests , hardly closed , and some , even , half-open , amid a hundred dazzling caskets , was that ancient crown of France , studded with diamonds , surmounted by the carbuncle of royalty , by the Regent diamond , which was worth thirty millions . 
Barefooted , they guarded that crown . 
Hence , no more Jacquerie . 
I regret it for the sake of the skilful . 
The old fear has produced its last effects in that quarter ; and henceforth it can no longer be employed in politics . 
The principal spring of the red spectre is broken . 
Every one knows it now . 
The scare-crow scares no longer . 
The birds take liberties with the mannikin , foul creatures alight upon it , the bourgeois laugh at it . 
THE TWO DUTIES : TO WATCH AND TO HOPE This being the case , is all social danger dispelled ? 
Certainly not . 
There is no Jacquerie ; society may rest assured on that point ; blood will no longer rush to its head . 
But let society take heed to the manner in which it breathes . 
Apoplexy is no longer to be feared , but phthisis is there . 
Social phthisis is called misery . 
One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck by lightning . 
Let us not weary of repeating , and sympathetic souls must not forget that this is the first of fraternal obligations , and selfish hearts must understand that the first of political necessities consists in thinking first of all of the disinherited and sorrowing throngs , in solacing , airing , enlightening , loving them , in enlarging their horizon to a magnificent extent , in lavishing upon them education in every form , in offering them the example of labor , never the example of idleness , in diminishing the individual burden by enlarging the notion of the universal aim , in setting a limit to poverty without setting a limit to wealth , in creating vast fields of public and popular activity , in having , like Briareus , a hundred hands to extend in all directions to the oppressed and the feeble , in employing the collective power for that grand duty of opening workshops for all arms , schools for all aptitudes , and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence , in augmenting salaries , diminishing trouble , balancing what should be and what is , that is to say , in proportioning enjoyment to effort and a glut to need ; in a word , in evolving from the social apparatus more light and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and those who are ignorant . 
And , let us say it , all this is but the beginning . 
The true question is this : labor can not be a law without being a right . 
We will not insist upon this point ; this is not the proper place for that . 
If nature calls itself Providence , society should call itself foresight . 
Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than material improvement . 
To know is a sacrament , to think is the prime necessity , truth is nourishment as well as grain . 
A reason which fasts from science and wisdom grows thin . 
Let us enter equal complaint against stomachs and minds which do not eat . 
If there is anything more heart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of bread , it is a soul which is dying from hunger for the light . 
The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution . 
Some day we shall be amazed . 
As the human race mounts upward , the deep layers emerge naturally from the zone of distress . 
The obliteration of misery will be accomplished by a simple elevation of level . 
We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation . 
The past is very strong , it is true , at the present moment . 
It censures . 
This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising . 
Behold , it is walking and advancing . 
It seems a victor ; this dead body is a conqueror . 
He arrives with his legions , superstitions , with his sword , despotism , with his banner , ignorance ; a while ago , he won ten battles . 
He advances , he threatens , he laughs , he is at our doors . 
Let us not despair , on our side . 
Let us sell the field on which Hannibal is encamped . 
What have we to fear , we who believe ? 
No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there exists a return of a river on its course . 
But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter . 
When they say `` no '' to progress , it is not the future but themselves that they are condemning . 
They are giving themselves a sad malady ; they are inoculating themselves with the past . 
There is but one way of rejecting To-morrow , and that is to die . 
Now , no death , that of the body as late as possible , that of the soul never , -- this is what we desire . 
Yes , the enigma will utter its word , the sphinx will speak , the problem will be solved . 
Yes , the people , sketched out by the eighteenth century , will be finished by the nineteenth . 
He who doubts this is an idiot ! 
The future blossoming , the near blossoming forth of universal well-being , is a divinely fatal phenomenon . 
Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct them within a given time to a logical state , that is to say , to a state of equilibrium ; that is to say , to equity . 
A force composed of earth and heaven results from humanity and governs it ; this force is a worker of miracles ; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it than extraordinary vicissitudes . 
Aided by science , which comes from one man , and by the event , which comes from another , it is not greatly alarmed by these contradictions in the attitude of problems , which seem impossibilities to the vulgar herd . 
It is no less skilful at causing a solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas , than a lesson from the reconciliation of facts , and we may expect anything from that mysterious power of progress , which brought the Orient and the Occident face to face one fine day , in the depths of a sepulchre , and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte in the interior of the Great Pyramid . 
In the meantime , let there be no halt , no hesitation , no pause in the grandiose onward march of minds . 
Social philosophy consists essentially in science and peace . 
Its object is , and its result must be , to dissolve wrath by the study of antagonisms . 
It examines , it scrutinizes , it analyzes ; then it puts together once more , it proceeds by means of reduction , discarding all hatred . 
More than once , a society has been seen to give way before the wind which is let loose upon mankind ; history is full of the shipwrecks of nations and empires ; manners , customs , laws , religions , -- and some fine day that unknown force , the hurricane , passes by and bears them all away . 
The civilizations of India , of Chaldea , of Persia , of Syria , of Egypt , have disappeared one after the other . 
Why ? 
We know not . 
What are the causes of these disasters ? 
We do not know . 
Could these societies have been saved ? 
Was it their fault ? 
Did they persist in the fatal vice which destroyed them ? 
What is the amount of suicide in these terrible deaths of a nation and a race ? 
Questions to which there exists no reply . 
Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations . 
They sprung a leak , then they sank . 
We have nothing more to say ; and it is with a sort of terror that we look on , at the bottom of that sea which is called the past , behind those colossal waves , at the shipwreck of those immense vessels , Babylon , Nineveh , Tarsus , Thebes , Rome , beneath the fearful gusts which emerge from all the mouths of the shadows . 
But shadows are there , and light is here . 
We are not acquainted with the maladies of these ancient civilizations , we do not know the infirmities of our own . 
Everywhere upon it we have the right of light , we contemplate its beauties , we lay bare its defects . 
Where it is ill , we probe ; and the sickness once diagnosed , the study of the cause leads to the discovery of the remedy . 
Our civilization , the work of twenty centuries , is its law and its prodigy ; it is worth the trouble of saving . 
It will be saved . 
It is already much to have solaced it ; its enlightenment is yet another point . 
All the labors of modern social philosophies must converge towards this point . 
The thinker of to-day has a great duty -- to auscultate civilization . 
We repeat , that this auscultation brings encouragement ; it is by this persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages , an austere interlude in a mournful drama . 
Beneath the social mortality , we feel human imperishableness . 
The globe does not perish , because it has these wounds , craters , eruptions , sulphur pits , here and there , nor because of a volcano which ejects its pus . 
The maladies of the people do not kill man . 
And yet , any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes his head at times . 
The strongest , the tenderest , the most logical have their hours of weakness . 
Will the future arrive ? 
It seems as though we might almost put this question , when we behold so much terrible darkness . 
Melancholy face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched . 
On the part of the selfish , the prejudices , shadows of costly education , appetite increasing through intoxication , a giddiness of prosperity which dulls , a fear of suffering which , in some , goes as far as an aversion for the suffering , an implacable satisfaction , the I so swollen that it bars the soul ; on the side of the wretched covetousness , envy , hatred of seeing others enjoy , the profound impulses of the human beast towards assuaging its desires , hearts full of mist , sadness , need , fatality , impure and simple ignorance . 
Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven ? 
is the luminous point which we distinguish there one of those which vanish ? 
The ideal is frightful to behold , thus lost in the depths , small , isolated , imperceptible , brilliant , but surrounded by those great , black menaces , monstrously heaped around it ; yet no more in danger than a star in the maw of the clouds . 
FULL LIGHT The reader has probably understood that Eponine , having recognized through the gate , the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had sent her , had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet , and had then conducted Marius thither , and that , after many days spent in ecstasy before that gate , Marius , drawn on by that force which draws the iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is built the house of her whom he loves , had finally entered Cosette 's garden as Romeo entered the garden of Juliet . 
This had even proved easier for him than for Romeo ; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall , Marius had only to use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which vacillated in its rusty recess , after the fashion of old people 's teeth . 
Marius was slender and readily passed through . 
As there was never any one in the street , and as Marius never entered the garden except at night , he ran no risk of being seen . 
Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed these two souls , Marius was there every evening . 
If , at that period of her existence , Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least unscrupulous or debauched , she would have been lost ; for there are generous natures which yield themselves , and Cosette was one of them . 
One of woman 's magnanimities is to yield . 
Love , at the height where it is absolute , is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindness of modesty . 
But what dangers you run , O noble souls ! 
Often you give the heart , and we take the body . 
Your heart remains with you , you gaze upon it in the gloom with a shudder . 
Love has no middle course ; it either ruins or it saves . 
All human destiny lies in this dilemma . 
This dilemma , ruin , or safety , is set forth no more inexorably by any fatality than by love . 
Love is life , if it is not death . 
Cradle ; also coffin . 
The same sentiment says `` yes '' and `` no '' in the human heart . 
Of all the things that God has made , the human heart is the one which sheds the most light , alas ! 
and the most darkness . 
God willed that Cosette 's love should encounter one of the loves which save . 
Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832 , there were there , in every night , in that poor , neglected garden , beneath that thicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day , two beings composed of all chastity , all innocence , overflowing with all the felicity of heaven , nearer to the archangels than to mankind , pure , honest , intoxicated , radiant , who shone for each other amid the shadows . 
It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown , and to Marius that Cosette had a nimbus . 
They touched each other , they gazed at each other , they clasped each other 's hands , they pressed close to each other ; but there was a distance which they did not pass . 
Not that they respected it ; they did not know of its existence . 
Marius was conscious of a barrier , Cosette 's innocence ; and Cosette of a support , Marius ' loyalty . 
The first kiss had also been the last . 
Marius , since that time , had not gone further than to touch Cosette 's hand , or her kerchief , or a lock of her hair , with his lips . 
For him , Cosette was a perfume and not a woman . 
He inhaled her . 
She refused nothing , and he asked nothing . 
Cosette was happy , and Marius was satisfied . 
They lived in this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one soul by another soul . 
It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden souls in the ideal . 
Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau . 
At that hour of love , an hour when voluptuousness is absolutely mute , beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy , Marius , the pure and seraphic Marius , would rather have gone to a woman of the town than have raised Cosette 's robe to the height of her ankle . 
Once , in the moonlight , Cosette stooped to pick up something on the ground , her bodice fell apart and permitted a glimpse of the beginning of her throat . 
Marius turned away his eyes . 
What took place between these two beings ? 
Nothing . 
They adored each other . 
At night , when they were there , that garden seemed a living and a sacred spot . 
All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense ; and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers . 
The wanton and vigorous vegetation quivered , full of strength and intoxication , around these two innocents , and they uttered words of love which set the trees to trembling . 
What words were these ? 
Breaths . 
Nothing more . 
These breaths sufficed to trouble and to touch all nature round about . 
Magic power which we should find it difficult to understand were we to read in a book these conversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smoke wreaths by the breeze beneath the leaves . 
Take from those murmurs of two lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and which accompanies them like a lyre , and what remains is nothing more than a shade ; you say : `` What ! 
is that all ! '' 
eh ! 
yes , childish prattle , repetitions , laughter at nothing , nonsense , everything that is deepest and most sublime in the world ! 
The only things which are worth the trouble of saying and hearing ! 
The man who has never heard , the man who has never uttered these absurdities , these paltry remarks , is an imbecile and a malicious fellow . 
Cosette said to Marius : -- `` Dost thou know ? 
-- '' -LSB- In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness , and without either of them being able to say how it had come about , they had begun to call each other thou . -RSB- 
`` Dost thou know ? 
My name is Euphrasie . '' 
`` Euphrasie ? 
Why , no , thy name is Cosette . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was a little thing . 
But my real name is Euphrasie . 
Dost thou like that name -- Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Yes . 
But Cosette is not ugly . '' 
`` Do you like it better than Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Why , yes . '' 
`` Then I like it better too . 
Truly , it is pretty , Cosette . 
Call me Cosette . '' 
And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of a grove situated in heaven . 
On another occasion she gazed intently at him and exclaimed : -- `` Monsieur , you are handsome , you are good-looking , you are witty , you are not at all stupid , you are much more learned than I am , but I bid you defiance with this word : I love you ! '' 
And Marius , in the very heavens , thought he heard a strain sung by a star . 
Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed , and she said to him : -- `` Do n't cough , sir ; I will not have people cough on my domain without my permission . 
It 's very naughty to cough and to disturb me . 
I want you to be well , because , in the first place , if you were not well , I should be very unhappy . 
What should I do then ? '' 
And this was simply divine . 
Once Marius said to Cosette : -- `` Just imagine , I thought at one time that your name was Ursule . '' 
This made both of them laugh the whole evening . 
In the middle of another conversation , he chanced to exclaim : -- `` Oh ! 
One day , at the Luxembourg , I had a good mind to finish breaking up a veteran ! '' 
But he stopped short , and went no further . 
He would have been obliged to speak to Cosette of her garter , and that was impossible . 
This bordered on a strange theme , the flesh , before which that immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright . 
Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this , without anything else ; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet , to displace the old and accommodating bar of the chief-justice 's gate , to sit elbow to elbow on that bench , to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of the on-coming night , to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the ample fall of Cosette 's gown , to caress her thumb-nail , to call her thou , to smell of the same flower , one after the other , forever , indefinitely . 
During this time , clouds passed above their heads . 
Every time that the wind blows it bears with it more of the dreams of men than of the clouds of heaven . 
This chaste , almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry , by any means . 
To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of bestowing caresses , and he is half audacious who tries it . 
A compliment is something like a kiss through a veil . 
Voluptuousness mingles there with its sweet tiny point , while it hides itself . 
The heart draws back before voluptuousness only to love the more . 
Marius ' blandishments , all saturated with fancy , were , so to speak , of azure hue . 
The birds when they fly up yonder , in the direction of the angels , must hear such words . 
There were mingled with them , nevertheless , life , humanity , all the positiveness of which Marius was capable . 
It was what is said in the bower , a prelude to what will be said in the chamber ; a lyrical effusion , strophe and sonnet intermingled , pleasing hyperboles of cooing , all the refinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet and exhaling a celestial perfume , an ineffable twitter of heart to heart . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured Marius , `` how beautiful you are ! 
I dare not look at you . 
It is all over with me when I contemplate you . 
You are a grace . 
I know not what is the matter with me . 
The hem of your gown , when the tip of your shoe peeps from beneath , upsets me . 
And then , what an enchanted gleam when you open your thought even but a little ! 
You talk astonishingly good sense . 
It seems to me at times that you are a dream . 
Speak , I listen , I admire . 
Oh Cosette ! 
how strange it is and how charming ! 
I am really beside myself . 
You are adorable , Mademoiselle . 
I study your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope . '' 
And Cosette answered : -- `` I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since this morning . '' 
Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue , which always turned with mutual consent upon love , as the little pith figures always turn on their peg . 
Cosette 's whole person was ingenuousness , ingenuity , transparency , whiteness , candor , radiance . 
It might have been said of Cosette that she was clear . 
She produced on those who saw her the sensation of April and dawn . 
There was dew in her eyes . 
Cosette was a condensation of the auroral light in the form of a woman . 
It was quite simple that Marius should admire her , since he adored her . 
But the truth is , that this little school-girl , fresh from the convent , talked with exquisite penetration and uttered , at times , all sorts of true and delicate sayings . 
Her prattle was conversation . 
She never made a mistake about anything , and she saw things justly . 
The woman feels and speaks with the tender instinct of the heart , which is infallible . 
No one understands so well as a woman , how to say things that are , at once , both sweet and deep . 
Sweetness and depth , they are the whole of woman ; in them lies the whole of heaven . 
In this full felicity , tears welled up to their eyes every instant . 
A crushed lady-bug , a feather fallen from a nest , a branch of hawthorn broken , aroused their pity , and their ecstasy , sweetly mingled with melancholy , seemed to ask nothing better than to weep . 
The most sovereign symptom of love is a tenderness that is , at times , almost unbearable . 
And , in addition to this , -- all these contradictions are the lightning play of love , -- they were fond of laughing , they laughed readily and with a delicious freedom , and so familiarly that they sometimes presented the air of two boys . 
Still , though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity , nature is always present and will not be forgotten . 
She is there with her brutal and sublime object ; and however great may be the innocence of souls , one feels in the most modest private interview , the adorable and mysterious shade which separates a couple of lovers from a pair of friends . 
They idolized each other . 
The permanent and the immutable are persistent . 
People live , they smile , they laugh , they make little grimaces with the tips of their lips , they interlace their fingers , they call each other thou , and that does not prevent eternity . 
Two lovers hide themselves in the evening , in the twilight , in the invisible , with the birds , with the roses ; they fascinate each other in the darkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes , they murmur , they whisper , and in the meantime , immense librations of the planets fill the infinite universe . 
THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS They existed vaguely , frightened at their happiness . 
They did not notice the cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that very month . 
They had confided in each other as far as possible , but this had not extended much further than their names . 
Marius had told Cosette that he was an orphan , that his name was Marius Pontmercy , that he was a lawyer , that he lived by writing things for publishers , that his father had been a colonel , that the latter had been a hero , and that he , Marius , was on bad terms with his grandfather who was rich . 
He had also hinted at being a baron , but this had produced no effect on Cosette . 
She did not know the meaning of the word . 
Marius was Marius . 
On her side , she had confided to him that she had been brought up at the Petit-Picpus convent , that her mother , like his own , was dead , that her father 's name was M. Fauchelevent , that he was very good , that he gave a great deal to the poor , but that he was poor himself , and that he denied himself everything though he denied her nothing . 
Strange to say , in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since he had been in the habit of seeing Cosette , the past , even the most recent past , had become so confused and distant to him , that what Cosette told him satisfied him completely . 
It did not even occur to him to tell her about the nocturnal adventure in the hovel , about Thenardier , about the burn , and about the strange attitude and singular flight of her father . 
Marius had momentarily forgotten all this ; in the evening he did not even know that there had been a morning , what he had done , where he had breakfasted , nor who had spoken to him ; he had songs in his ears which rendered him deaf to every other thought ; he only existed at the hours when he saw Cosette . 
Then , as he was in heaven , it was quite natural that he should forget earth . 
Both bore languidly the indefinable burden of immaterial pleasures . 
Thus lived these somnambulists who are called lovers . 
Alas ! 
Who is there who has not felt all these things ? 
Why does there come an hour when one emerges from this azure , and why does life go on afterwards ? 
Loving almost takes the place of thinking . 
Love is an ardent forgetfulness of all the rest . 
Then ask logic of passion if you will . 
There is no more absolute logical sequence in the human heart than there is a perfect geometrical figure in the celestial mechanism . 
For Cosette and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette . 
The universe around them had fallen into a hole . 
They lived in a golden minute . 
There was nothing before them , nothing behind . 
It hardly occurred to Marius that Cosette had a father . 
His brain was dazzled and obliterated . 
Of what did these lovers talk then ? 
We have seen , of the flowers , and the swallows , the setting sun and the rising moon , and all sorts of important things . 
They had told each other everything except everything . 
The everything of lovers is nothing . 
But the father , the realities , that lair , the ruffians , that adventure , to what purpose ? 
And was he very sure that this nightmare had actually existed ? 
They were two , and they adored each other , and beyond that there was nothing . 
Nothing else existed . 
It is probable that this vanishing of hell in our rear is inherent to the arrival of paradise . 
Have we beheld demons ? 
Are there any ? 
Have we trembled ? 
Have we suffered ? 
We no longer know . 
A rosy cloud hangs over it . 
So these two beings lived in this manner , high aloft , with all that improbability which is in nature ; neither at the nadir nor at the zenith , between man and seraphim , above the mire , below the ether , in the clouds ; hardly flesh and blood , soul and ecstasy from head to foot ; already too sublime to walk the earth , still too heavily charged with humanity to disappear in the blue , suspended like atoms which are waiting to be precipitated ; apparently beyond the bounds of destiny ; ignorant of that rut ; yesterday , to-day , to-morrow ; amazed , rapturous , floating , soaring ; at times so light that they could take their flight out into the infinite ; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity . 
They slept wide-awake , thus sweetly lulled . 
Oh ! 
splendid lethargy of the real overwhelmed by the ideal . 
Sometimes , beautiful as Cosette was , Marius shut his eyes in her presence . 
The best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes . 
Marius and Cosette never asked themselves whither this was to lead them . 
They considered that they had already arrived . 
It is a strange claim on man 's part to wish that love should lead to something . 
THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW Jean Valjean suspected nothing . 
Cosette , who was rather less dreamy than Marius , was gay , and that sufficed for Jean Valjean 's happiness . 
The thoughts which Cosette cherished , her tender preoccupations , Marius ' image which filled her heart , took away nothing from the incomparable purity of her beautiful , chaste , and smiling brow . 
She was at the age when the virgin bears her love as the angel his lily . 
So Jean Valjean was at ease . 
And then , when two lovers have come to an understanding , things always go well ; the third party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfect blindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the same in the case of all lovers . 
Thus , Cosette never objected to any of Jean Valjean 's proposals . 
Did she want to take a walk ? 
`` Yes , dear little father . '' 
Did she want to stay at home ? 
Very good . 
Did he wish to pass the evening with Cosette ? 
She was delighted . 
As he always went to bed at ten o'clock , Marius did not come to the garden on such occasions until after that hour , when , from the street , he heard Cosette open the long glass door on the veranda . 
Of course , no one ever met Marius in the daytime . 
Jean Valjean never even dreamed any longer that Marius was in existence . 
Only once , one morning , he chanced to say to Cosette : `` Why , you have whitewash on your back ! '' 
On the previous evening , Marius , in a transport , had pushed Cosette against the wall . 
Old Toussaint , who retired early , thought of nothing but her sleep , and was as ignorant of the whole matter as Jean Valjean . 
Marius never set foot in the house . 
When he was with Cosette , they hid themselves in a recess near the steps , in order that they might neither be seen nor heard from the street , and there they sat , frequently contenting themselves , by way of conversation , with pressing each other 's hands twenty times a minute as they gazed at the branches of the trees . 
At such times , a thunderbolt might have fallen thirty paces from them , and they would not have noticed it , so deeply was the revery of the one absorbed and sunk in the revery of the other . 
Limpid purity . 
Hours wholly white ; almost all alike . 
This sort of love is a recollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove . 
The whole extent of the garden lay between them and the street . 
Every time that Marius entered and left , he carefully adjusted the bar of the gate in such a manner that no displacement was visible . 
He usually went away about midnight , and returned to Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
Courfeyrac said to Bahorel : -- `` Would you believe it ? 
Marius comes home nowadays at one o'clock in the morning . '' 
Bahorel replied : -- `` What do you expect ? 
There 's always a petard in a seminary fellow . '' 
At times , Courfeyrac folded his arms , assumed a serious air , and said to Marius : -- `` You are getting irregular in your habits , young man . '' 
Courfeyrac , being a practical man , did not take in good part this reflection of an invisible paradise upon Marius ; he was not much in the habit of concealed passions ; it made him impatient , and now and then he called upon Marius to come back to reality . 
One morning , he threw him this admonition : -- `` My dear fellow , you produce upon me the effect of being located in the moon , the realm of dreams , the province of illusions , capital , soap-bubble . 
Come , be a good boy , what 's her name ? '' 
But nothing could induce Marius `` to talk . '' 
They might have torn out his nails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffable name , Cosette , was composed . 
True love is as luminous as the dawn and as silent as the tomb . 
Only , Courfeyrac saw this change in Marius , that his taciturnity was of the beaming order . 
During this sweet month of May , Marius and Cosette learned to know these immense delights . 
To dispute and to say you for thou , simply that they might say thou the better afterwards . 
To talk at great length with very minute details , of persons in whom they took not the slightest interest in the world ; another proof that in that ravishing opera called love , the libretto counts for almost nothing ; For Marius , to listen to Cosette discussing finery ; For Cosette , to listen to Marius talk in politics ; To listen , knee pressed to knee , to the carriages rolling along the Rue de Babylone ; To gaze upon the same planet in space , or at the same glowworm gleaming in the grass ; To hold their peace together ; a still greater delight than conversation ; Etc. , etc. . 
In the meantime , divers complications were approaching . 
One evening , Marius was on his way to the rendezvous , by way of the Boulevard des Invalides . 
He habitually walked with drooping head . 
As he was on the point of turning the corner of the Rue Plumet , he heard some one quite close to him say : -- `` Good evening , Monsieur Marius . '' 
He raised his head and recognized Eponine . 
This produced a singular effect upon him . 
He had not thought of that girl a single time since the day when she had conducted him to the Rue Plumet , he had not seen her again , and she had gone completely out of his mind . 
He had no reasons for anything but gratitude towards her , he owed her his happiness , and yet , it was embarrassing to him to meet her . 
It is an error to think that passion , when it is pure and happy , leads man to a state of perfection ; it simply leads him , as we have noted , to a state of oblivion . 
In this situation , man forgets to be bad , but he also forgets to be good . 
Gratitude , duty , matters essential and important to be remembered , vanish . 
At any other time , Marius would have behaved quite differently to Eponine . 
Absorbed in Cosette , he had not even clearly put it to himself that this Eponine was named Eponine Thenardier , and that she bore the name inscribed in his father 's will , that name , for which , but a few months before , he would have so ardently sacrificed himself . 
We show Marius as he was . 
His father himself was fading out of his soul to some extent , under the splendor of his love . 
He replied with some embarrassment : -- `` Ah ! 
so it 's you , Eponine ? '' 
