Some combatants , having discovered a few crusts of rather mouldy bread , in a drawer , were eagerly devouring them . 
Marius was disturbed with regard to what his father was about to say to him . 
THE VULTURE BECOME PREY We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades . 
Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets should be omitted . 
Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we have just mentioned , the barricade , for those who are inside it , remains , none the less , a vision . 
There is something of the apocalypse in civil war , all the mists of the unknown are commingled with fierce flashes , revolutions are sphinxes , and any one who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traversed a dream . 
The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointed out in the case of Marius , and we shall see the consequences ; they are both more and less than life . 
On emerging from a barricade , one no longer knows what one has seen there . 
One has been terrible , but one knows it not . 
One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which had human faces ; one 's head has been in the light of the future . 
There were corpses lying prone there , and phantoms standing erect . 
The hours were colossal and seemed hours of eternity . 
One has lived in death . 
Shadows have passed by . 
What were they ? 
One has beheld hands on which there was blood ; there was a deafening horror ; there was also a frightful silence ; there were open mouths which shouted , and other open mouths which held their peace ; one was in the midst of smoke , of night , perhaps . 
One fancied that one had touched the sinister ooze of unknown depths ; one stares at something red on one 's finger nails . 
One no longer remembers anything . 
Let us return to the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
All at once , between two discharges , the distant sound of a clock striking the hour became audible . 
`` It is midday , '' said Combeferre . 
The twelve strokes had not finished striking when Enjolras sprang to his feet , and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thundering shout : `` Carry stones up into the houses ; line the windowsills and the roofs with them . 
Half the men to their guns , the other half to the paving-stones . 
There is not a minute to be lost . '' 
A squad of sappers and miners , axe on shoulder , had just made their appearance in battle array at the end of the street . 
This could only be the head of a column ; and of what column ? 
The attacking column , evidently ; the sappers charged with the demolition of the barricade must always precede the soldiers who are to scale it . 
They were , evidently , on the brink of that moment which M. Clermont-Tonnerre , in 1822 , called `` the tug of war . '' 
Enjolras ' order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiar to ships and barricades , the only two scenes of combat where escape is impossible . 
In less than a minute , two thirds of the stones which Enjolras had had piled up at the door of Corinthe had been carried up to the first floor and the attic , and before a second minute had elapsed , these stones , artistically set one upon the other , walled up the sash-window on the first floor and the windows in the roof to half their height . 
A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly , the principal architect , allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels . 
This armament of the windows could be effected all the more easily since the firing of grape-shot had ceased . 
The two cannons were now discharging ball against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there , and , if possible , a breach for the assault . 
When the stones destined to the final defence were in place , Enjolras had the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay , carried to the first floor . 
`` Who is to drink that ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
`` They , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then they barricaded the window below , and held in readiness the iron cross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night . 
The fortress was complete . 
The barricade was the rampart , the wine-shop was the dungeon . 
With the stones which remained they stopped up the outlet . 
As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing of their ammunition , and as the assailants know this , the assailants combine their arrangements with a sort of irritating leisure , expose themselves to fire prematurely , though in appearance more than in reality , and take their ease . 
The preparations for attack are always made with a certain methodical deliberation ; after which , the lightning strikes . 
This deliberation permitted Enjolras to take a review of everything and to perfect everything . 
He felt that , since such men were to die , their death ought to be a masterpiece . 
He said to Marius : `` We are the two leaders . 
I will give the last orders inside . 
Do you remain outside and observe . '' 
Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade . 
Enjolras had the door of the kitchen , which was the ambulance , as the reader will remember , nailed up . 
`` No splashing of the wounded , '' he said . 
He issued his final orders in the tap-room in a curt , but profoundly tranquil tone ; Feuilly listened and replied in the name of all . 
`` On the first floor , hold your axes in readiness to cut the staircase . 
Have you them ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Feuilly . 
`` How many ? '' 
`` Two axes and a pole-axe . '' 
`` That is good . 
There are now twenty-six combatants of us on foot . 
How many guns are there ? '' 
`` Thirty-four . '' 
`` Eight too many . 
Keep those eight guns loaded like the rest and at hand . 
Swords and pistols in your belts . 
Twenty men to the barricade . 
Six ambushed in the attic windows , and at the window on the first floor to fire on the assailants through the loop-holes in the stones . 
Let not a single worker remain inactive here . 
Presently , when the drum beats the assault , let the twenty below stairs rush to the barricade . 
The first to arrive will have the best places . '' 
These arrangements made , he turned to Javert and said : `` I am not forgetting you . '' 
And , laying a pistol on the table , he added : `` The last man to leave this room will smash the skull of this spy . '' 
`` Here ? '' 
inquired a voice . 
`` No , let us not mix their corpses with our own . 
The little barricade of the Mondetour lane can be scaled . 
It is only four feet high . 
The man is well pinioned . 
He shall be taken thither and put to death . '' 
There was some one who was more impassive at that moment than Enjolras , it was Javert . 
Here Jean Valjean made his appearance . 
He had been lost among the group of insurgents . 
He stepped forth and said to Enjolras : `` You are the commander ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You thanked me a while ago . '' 
`` In the name of the Republic . 
The barricade has two saviors , Marius Pontmercy and yourself . '' 
`` Do you think that I deserve a recompense ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` Well , I request one . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I may blow that man 's brains out . '' 
Javert raised his head , saw Jean Valjean , made an almost imperceptible movement , and said : `` That is just . '' 
As for Enjolras , he had begun to re-load his rifle ; he cut his eyes about him : `` No objections . '' 
And he turned to Jean Valjean : `` Take the spy . '' 
Jean Valjean did , in fact , take possession of Javert , by seating himself on the end of the table . 
He seized the pistol , and a faint click announced that he had cocked it . 
Almost at the same moment , a blast of trumpets became audible . 
`` Take care ! '' 
shouted Marius from the top of the barricade . 
Javert began to laugh with that noiseless laugh which was peculiar to him , and gazing intently at the insurgents , he said to them : `` You are in no better case than I am . '' 
`` All out ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The insurgents poured out tumultuously , and , as they went , received in the back , -- may we be permitted the expression , -- this sally of Javert 's : `` We shall meet again shortly ! '' 
JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert , he untied the rope which fastened the prisoner across the middle of the body , and the knot of which was under the table . 
After this he made him a sign to rise . 
Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy of enchained authority is condensed . 
Jean Valjean took Javert by the martingale , as one would take a beast of burden by the breast-band , and , dragging the latter after him , emerged from the wine-shop slowly , because Javert , with his impeded limbs , could take only very short steps . 
Jean Valjean had the pistol in his hand . 
In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade . 
The insurgents , all intent on the attack , which was imminent , had their backs turned to these two . 
Marius alone , stationed on one side , at the extreme left of the barricade , saw them pass . 
This group of victim and executioner was illuminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul . 
Jean Valjean with some difficulty , but without relaxing his hold for a single instant , made Javert , pinioned as he was , scale the little entrenchment in the Mondetour lane . 
When they had crossed this barrier , they found themselves alone in the lane . 
No one saw them . 
Among the heap they could distinguish a livid face , streaming hair , a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a woman . 
It was Eponine . 
The corner of the houses hid them from the insurgents . 
The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a terrible pile a few paces distant . 
Javert gazed askance at this body , and , profoundly calm , said in a low tone : `` It strikes me that I know that girl . '' 
Then he turned to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean thrust the pistol under his arm and fixed on Javert a look which it required no words to interpret : `` Javert , it is I. '' Javert replied : `` Take your revenge . '' 
Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife , and opened it . 
`` A clasp-knife ! '' 
exclaimed Javert , `` you are right . 
That suits you better . '' 
Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck , then he cut the cords on his wrists , then , stooping down , he cut the cord on his feet ; and , straightening himself up , he said to him : `` You are free . '' 
Javert was not easily astonished . 
Still , master of himself though he was , he could not repress a start . 
He remained open-mouthed and motionless . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` I do not think that I shall escape from this place . 
But if , by chance , I do , I live , under the name of Fauchelevent , in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Javert snarled like a tiger , which made him half open one corner of his mouth , and he muttered between his teeth : `` Have a care . '' 
`` Go , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert began again : `` Thou saidst Fauchelevent , Rue de l'Homme Arme ? '' 
`` Number 7 . '' 
Javert repeated in a low voice : -- `` Number 7 . '' 
He buttoned up his coat once more , resumed the military stiffness between his shoulders , made a half turn , folded his arms and , supporting his chin on one of his hands , he set out in the direction of the Halles . 
Jean Valjean followed him with his eyes : A few minutes later , Javert turned round and shouted to Jean Valjean : `` You annoy me . 
Kill me , rather . '' 
Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjean as `` thou . '' 
`` Be off with you , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert retreated slowly . 
A moment later he turned the corner of the Rue des Precheurs . 
When Javert had disappeared , Jean Valjean fired his pistol in the air . 
Then he returned to the barricade and said : `` It is done . '' 
In the meanwhile , this is what had taken place . 
Marius , more intent on the outside than on the interior , had not , up to that time , taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark background of the tap-room . 
When he beheld him in broad daylight , striding over the barricade in order to proceed to his death , he recognized him . 
Something suddenly recurred to his mind . 
He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise , and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he , Marius , had used in this very barricade , and not only did he recall his face , but his name as well . 
This recollection was misty and troubled , however , like all his ideas . 
It was not an affirmation that he made , but a question which he put to himself : `` Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was Javert ? '' 
Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man . 
But , in the first place , he must know whether this was Javert . 
Marius called to Enjolras , who had just stationed himself at the other extremity of the barricade : `` Enjolras ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` What is the name of yonder man ? '' 
`` What man ? '' 
`` The police agent . 
Do you know his name ? '' 
`` Of course . 
He told us . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Marius sprang to his feet . 
At that moment , they heard the report of the pistol . 
Jean Valjean re-appeared and cried : `` It is done . '' 
A gloomy chill traversed Marius ' heart . 
THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THE WRONG The death agony of the barricade was about to begin . 
Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment ; a thousand mysterious crashes in the air , the breath of armed masses set in movement in the streets which were not visible , the intermittent gallop of cavalry , the heavy shock of artillery on the march , the firing by squads , and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris , the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs , indescribable and vaguely terrible cries , lightnings of menace everywhere , the tocsin of Saint-Merry , which now had the accents of a sob , the mildness of the weather , the splendor of the sky filled with sun and clouds , the beauty of the day , and the alarming silence of the houses . 
For , since the preceding evening , the two rows of houses in the Rue de la Chanvrerie had become two walls ; ferocious walls , doors closed , windows closed , shutters closed . 
In those days , so different from those in which we live , when the hour was come , when the people wished to put an end to a situation , which had lasted too long , with a charter granted or with a legal country , when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere , when the city consented to the tearing up of the pavements , when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear , then the inhabitant , thoroughly penetrated with the revolt , so to speak , was the auxiliary of the combatant , and the house fraternized with the improvised fortress which rested on it . 
When the situation was not ripe , when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted , when the masses disowned the movement , all was over with the combatants , the city was changed into a desert around the revolt , souls grew chilled , refuges were nailed up , and the street turned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade . 
A people can not be forced , through surprise , to walk more quickly than it chooses . 
Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand ! 
A people does not let itself go at random . 
Then it abandons the insurrection to itself . 
The insurgents become noxious , infected with the plague . 
A house is an escarpment , a door is a refusal , a facade is a wall . 
This wall hears , sees and will not . 
It might open and save you . 
No . 
This wall is a judge . 
It gazes at you and condemns you . 
What dismal things are closed houses . 
They seem dead , they are living . 
Life which is , as it were , suspended there , persists there . 
No one has gone out of them for four and twenty hours , but no one is missing from them . 
In the interior of that rock , people go and come , go to bed and rise again ; they are a family party there ; there they eat and drink ; they are afraid , a terrible thing ! 
Fear excuses this fearful lack of hospitality ; terror is mixed with it , an extenuating circumstance . 
Sometimes , even , and this has been actually seen , fear turns to passion ; fright may change into fury , as prudence does into rage ; hence this wise saying : `` The enraged moderates . '' 
There are outbursts of supreme terror , whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke . 
-- `` What do these people want ? 
What have they come there to do ? 
Let them get out of the scrape . 
So much the worse for them . 
It is their fault . 
They are only getting what they deserve . 
It does not concern us . 
Here is our poor street all riddled with balls . 
They are a pack of rascals . 
Above all things , do n't open the door . '' 
-- And the house assumes the air of a tomb . 
The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house ; he sees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near ; if he cries , he knows that they are listening to him , and that no one will come ; there stand walls which might protect him , there are men who might save him ; and these walls have ears of flesh , and these men have bowels of stone . 
Whom shall he reproach ? 
No one and every one . 
The incomplete times in which we live . 
It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into revolution , and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest , and from Minerva turns to Pallas . 
The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits it ; it almost always comes too soon . 
Then it becomes resigned , and stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph . 
It serves those who deny it without complaint , even excusing them , and even disculpates them , and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment . 
It is indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude . 
Is this ingratitude , however ? 
Yes , from the point of view of the human race . 
No , from the point of view of the individual . 
Progress is man 's mode of existence . 
The general life of the human race is called Progress , the collective stride of the human race is called Progress . 
Progress advances ; it makes the great human and terrestrial journey towards the celestial and the divine ; it has its halting places where it rallies the laggard troop , it has its stations where it meditates , in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on its horizon , it has its nights when it sleeps ; and it is one of the poignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow resting on the human soul , and that he gropes in darkness without being able to awaken that slumbering Progress . 
`` God is dead , perhaps , '' said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer of these lines , confounding progress with God , and taking the interruption of movement for the death of Being . 
He who despairs is in the wrong . 
Progress infallibly awakes , and , in short , we may say that it marches on , even when it is asleep , for it has increased in size . 
When we behold it erect once more , we find it taller . 
To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more than it does on the stream ; erect no barriers , cast in no boulders ; obstacles make water froth and humanity boil . 
Hence arise troubles ; but after these troubles , we recognize the fact that ground has been gained . 
Until order , which is nothing else than universal peace , has been established , until harmony and unity reign , progress will have revolutions as its halting-places . 
What , then , is progress ? 
We have just enunciated it ; the permanent life of the peoples . 
Now , it sometimes happens , that the momentary life of individuals offers resistance to the eternal life of the human race . 
Let us admit without bitterness , that the individual has his distinct interests , and can , without forfeiture , stipulate for his interest , and defend it ; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism ; momentary life has its rights , and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to the future . 
The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth , is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations , its equal , after all , who will have their turn later on . 
-- `` I exist , '' murmurs that some one whose name is All . 
`` I am young and in love , I am old and I wish to repose , I am the father of a family , I toil , I prosper , I am successful in business , I have houses to lease , I have money in the government funds , I am happy , I have a wife and children , I have all this , I desire to live , leave me in peace . '' 
-- Hence , at certain hours , a profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race . 
Utopia , moreover , we must admit , quits its radiant sphere when it makes war . 
It , the truth of to-morrow , borrows its mode of procedure , battle , from the lie of yesterday . 
It , the future , behaves like the past . 
It , pure idea , becomes a deed of violence . 
It complicates its heroism with a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer ; a violence of occasion and expedient , contrary to principle , and for which it is fatally punished . 
The Utopia , insurrection , fights with the old military code in its fist ; it shoots spies , it executes traitors ; it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness . 
It makes use of death , a serious matter . 
It seems as though Utopia had no longer any faith in radiance , its irresistible and incorruptible force . 
It strikes with the sword . 
Now , no sword is simple . 
Every blade has two edges ; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other . 
Having made this reservation , and made it with all severity , it is impossible for us not to admire , whether they succeed or not , those the glorious combatants of the future , the confessors of Utopia . 
Even when they miscarry , they are worthy of veneration ; and it is , perhaps , in failure , that they possess the most majesty . 
Victory , when it is in accord with progress , merits the applause of the people ; but a heroic defeat merits their tender compassion . 
The one is magnificent , the other sublime . 
For our own part , we prefer martyrdom to success . 
John Brown is greater than Washington , and Pisacane is greater than Garibaldi . 
It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the vanquished . 
We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future , when they fail . 
Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad . 
Every barricade seems a crime . 
Their theories are incriminated , their aim suspected , their ulterior motive is feared , their conscience denounced . 
They are reproached with raising , erecting , and heaping up , against the reigning social state , a mass of miseries , of griefs , of iniquities , of wrongs , of despairs , and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow in order therein to embattle themselves and to combat . 
People shout to them : `` You are tearing up the pavements of hell ! '' 
They might reply : `` That is because our barricade is made of good intentions . '' 
The best thing , assuredly , is the pacific solution . 
In short , let us agree that when we behold the pavement , we think of the bear , and it is a good will which renders society uneasy . 
But it depends on society to save itself , it is to its own good will that we make our appeal . 
No violent remedy is necessary . 
To study evil amiably , to prove its existence , then to cure it . 
It is to this that we invite it . 
However that may be , even when fallen , above all when fallen , these men , who at every point of the universe , with their eyes fixed on France , are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal , are august ; they give their life a free offering to progress ; they accomplish the will of providence ; they perform a religious act . 
At the appointed hour , with as much disinterestedness as an actor who answers to his cue , in obedience to the divine stage-manager , they enter the tomb . 
And this hopeless combat , this stoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme and universal consequences , the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 14th of July , 1789 ; these soldiers are priests . 
The French revolution is an act of God . 
Moreover , there are , and it is proper to add this distinction to the distinctions already pointed out in another chapter , -- there are accepted revolutions , revolutions which are called revolutions ; there are refused revolutions , which are called riots . 
An insurrection which breaks out , is an idea which is passing its examination before the people . 
If the people lets fall a black ball , the idea is dried fruit ; the insurrection is a mere skirmish . 
Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it , is not the thing for the peoples . 
Nations have not always and at every hour the temperament of heroes and martyrs . 
They are positive . 
A priori , insurrection is repugnant to them , in the first place , because it often results in a catastrophe , in the second place , because it always has an abstraction as its point of departure . 
Because , and this is a noble thing , it is always for the ideal , and for the ideal alone , that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice themselves . 
An insurrection is an enthusiasm . 
Enthusiasm may wax wroth ; hence the appeal to arms . 
But every insurrection , which aims at a government or a regime , aims higher . 
Thus , for instance , and we insist upon it , what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832 , and , in particular , the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie were combating , was not precisely Louis Philippe . 
The majority of them , when talking freely , did justice to this king who stood midway between monarchy and revolution ; no one hated him . 
But they attacked the younger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had attacked its elder branch in Charles X. ; and that which they wished to overturn in overturning royalty in France , was , as we have explained , the usurpation of man over man , and of privilege over right in the entire universe . 
Paris without a king has as result the world without despots . 
This is the manner in which they reasoned . 
Their aim was distant no doubt , vague perhaps , and it retreated in the face of their efforts ; but it was great . 
Thus it is . 
And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions , which are almost always illusions for the sacrificed , but illusions with which , after all , the whole of human certainty is mingled . 
We throw ourselves into these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we are about to do . 
Who knows ? 
We may succeed . 
We are few in number , we have a whole army arrayed against us ; but we are defending right , the natural law , the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdication is possible , justice and truth , and in case of need , we die like the three hundred Spartans . 
We do not think of Don Quixote but of Leonidas . 
And we march straight before us , and once pledged , we do not draw back , and we rush onwards with head held low , cherishing as our hope an unprecedented victory , revolution completed , progress set free again , the aggrandizement of the human race , universal deliverance ; and in the event of the worst , Thermopylae . 
These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck , and we have just explained why . 
The crowd is restive in the presence of the impulses of paladins . 
Heavy masses , the multitudes which are fragile because of their very weight , fear adventures ; and there is a touch of adventure in the ideal . 
Moreover , and we must not forget this , interests which are not very friendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way . 
Sometimes the stomach paralyzes the heart . 
The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this , that she takes less from the stomach than other nations : she more easily knots the rope about her loins . 
She is the first awake , the last asleep . 
She marches forwards . 
She is a seeker . 
This arises from the fact that she is an artist . 
The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic , the same as the beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true . 
Artistic peoples are also consistent peoples . 
To love beauty is to see the light . 
That is why the torch of Europe , that is to say of civilization , was first borne by Greece , who passed it on to Italy , who handed it on to France . 
Divine , illuminating nations of scouts ! 
Vitaelampada tradunt . 
It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element of its progress . 
The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of imagination . 
Only , a civilizing people should remain a manly people . 
Corinth , yes ; Sybaris , no . 
Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a bastard . 
He must be neither a dilettante nor a virtuoso : but he must be artistic . 
In the matter of civilization , he must not refine , but he must sublime . 
On this condition , one gives to the human race the pattern of the ideal . 
The modern ideal has its type in art , and its means is science . 
It is through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets , the socially beautiful . 
Eden will be reconstructed by A+B . 
At the point which civilization has now reached , the exact is a necessary element of the splendid , and the artistic sentiment is not only served , but completed by the scientific organ ; dreams must be calculated . 
Art , which is the conqueror , should have for support science , which is the walker ; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance . 
The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India as its vehicle ; Alexander on the elephant . 
Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to guide civilization . 
Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes away the muscles which walk and the will which advances . 
Hieratic or mercantile absorption lessens a people 's power of radiance , lowers its horizon by lowering its level , and deprives it of that intelligence , at once both human and divine of the universal goal , which makes missionaries of nations . 
Babylon has no ideal ; Carthage has no ideal . 
Athens and Rome have and keep , throughout all the nocturnal darkness of the centuries , halos of civilization . 
France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy . 
She is Athenian in the matter of beauty , and Roman in her greatness . 
Moreover , she is good . 
She gives herself . 
Oftener than is the case with other races , is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice . 
Only , this humor seizes upon her , and again abandons her . 
And therein lies the great peril for those who run when she desires only to walk , or who walk on when she desires to halt . 
France has her relapses into materialism , and , at certain instants , the ideas which obstruct that sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness and are of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina . 
What is to be done in such a case ? 
The giantess plays at being a dwarf ; immense France has her freaks of pettiness . 
That is all . 
To this there is nothing to say . 
Peoples , like planets , possess the right to an eclipse . 
And all is well , provided that the light returns and that the eclipse does not degenerate into night . 
Dawn and resurrection are synonymous . 
The reappearance of the light is identical with the persistence of the I. Let us state these facts calmly . 
Death on the barricade or the tomb in exile , is an acceptable occasion for devotion . 
The real name of devotion is disinterestedness . 
Let the abandoned allow themselves to be abandoned , let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled , and let us confine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far , when they do retreat . 
One must not push too far in descent under pretext of a return to reason . 
Matter exists , the minute exists , interest exists , the stomach exists ; but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom . 
The life of the moment has its rights , we admit , but permanent life has its rights also . 
Alas ! 
the fact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall . 
This can be seen in history more frequently than is desirable : A nation is great , it tastes the ideal , then it bites the mire , and finds it good ; and if it be asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff , it replies : `` Because I love statesmen . '' 
One word more before returning to our subject , the conflict . 
A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing else than a convulsion towards the ideal . 
Progress trammelled is sickly , and is subject to these tragic epilepsies . 
With that malady of progress , civil war , we have been obliged to come in contact in our passage . 
This is one of the fatal phases , at once act and entr ` acte of that drama whose pivot is a social condemnation , and whose veritable title is Progress . 
Progress ! 
The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought ; and , at the point of this drama which we have now reached , the idea which it contains having still more than one trial to undergo , it is , perhaps , permitted to us , if not to lift the veil from it , to at least allow its light to shine through . 
The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is , from one end to the other , as a whole and in detail , whatever may be its intermittences , exceptions and faults , the march from evil to good , from the unjust to the just , from night to day , from appetite to conscience , from rottenness to life , from hell to heaven , from nothingness to God . 
Point of departure : matter ; point of arrival : the soul . 
The hydra at the beginning , the angel at the end . 
THE HEROES All at once , the drum beat the charge . 
The attack was a hurricane . 
On the evening before , in the darkness , the barricade had been approached silently , as by a boa . 
Now , in broad daylight , in that widening street , surprise was decidedly impossible , rude force had , moreover , been unmasked , the cannon had begun the roar , the army hurled itself on the barricade . 
Fury now became skill . 
A powerful detachment of infantry of the line , broken at regular intervals , by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot , and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen , debauched into the street at a run , with drums beating , trumpets braying , bayonets levelled , the sappers at their head , and , imperturbable under the projectiles , charged straight for the barricade with the weight of a brazen beam against a wall . 
The wall held firm . 
The insurgents fired impetuously . 
The barricade once scaled had a mane of lightning flashes . 
The assault was so furious , that for one moment , it was inundated with assailants ; but it shook off the soldiers as the lion shakes off the dogs , and it was only covered with besiegers as the cliff is covered with foam , to re-appear , a moment later , beetling , black and formidable . 
The column , forced to retreat , remained massed in the street , unprotected but terrible , and replied to the redoubt with a terrible discharge of musketry . 
Any one who has seen fireworks will recall the sheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet . 
Let the reader picture to himself this bouquet , no longer vertical but horizontal , bearing a bullet , buck-shot or a biscaien at the tip of each one of its jets of flame , and picking off dead men one after another from its clusters of lightning . 
The barricade was underneath it . 
On both sides , the resolution was equal . 
The bravery exhibited there was almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity which began by the sacrifice of self . 
This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave . 
The troop wished to make an end of it , insurrection was desirous of fighting . 
The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and in the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy . 
In this fray , each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour . 
The street was strewn with corpses . 
The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the other . 
Enjolras , who carried the whole barricade in his head , reserved and sheltered himself ; three soldiers fell , one after the other , under his embrasure , without having even seen him ; Marius fought unprotected . 
He made himself a target . 
He stood with more than half his body above the breastworks . 
There is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious man who takes the bit in his teeth ; there is no man more terrible in action than a dreamer . 
Marius was formidable and pensive . 
In battle he was as in a dream . 
One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in firing a gun . 
The insurgents ' cartridges were giving out ; but not their sarcasms . 
In this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood , they laughed . 
Courfeyrac was bare-headed . 
`` What have you done with your hat ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
Courfeyrac replied : `` They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls . '' 
Or they uttered haughty comments . 
`` Can any one understand , '' exclaimed Feuilly bitterly , `` those men , -- -LSB- and he cited names , well-known names , even celebrated names , some belonging to the old army -RSB- -- who had promised to join us , and taken an oath to aid us , and who had pledged their honor to it , and who are our generals , and who abandon us ! '' 
And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile . 
`` There are people who observe the rules of honor as one observes the stars , from a great distance . '' 
The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges that one would have said that there had been a snowstorm . 
The assailants had numbers in their favor ; the insurgents had position . 
They were at the top of a wall , and they thundered point-blank upon the soldiers tripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in the escarpment . 
This barricade , constructed as it was and admirably buttressed , was really one of those situations where a handful of men hold a legion in check . 
Nevertheless , the attacking column , constantly recruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets , drew inexorably nearer , and now , little by little , step by step , but surely , the army closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press . 
One assault followed another . 
The horror of the situation kept increasing . 
Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones , in that Rue de la Chanvrerie , a battle worthy of a wall of Troy . 
These haggard , ragged , exhausted men , who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours , who had not slept , who had but a few more rounds to fire , who were fumbling in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges , nearly all of whom were wounded , with head or arm bandaged with black and blood-stained linen , with holes in their clothes from which the blood trickled , and who were hardly armed with poor guns and notched swords , became Titans . 
The barricade was ten times attacked , approached , assailed , scaled , and never captured . 
In order to form an idea of this struggle , it is necessary to imagine fire set to a throng of terrible courages , and then to gaze at the conflagration . 
It was not a combat , it was the interior of a furnace ; there mouths breathed the flame ; there countenances were extraordinary . 
The human form seemed impossible there , the combatants flamed forth there , and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that red glow of those salamanders of the fray . 
The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter we renounce all attempts at depicting . 
The epic alone has the right to fill twelve thousand verses with a battle . 
One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism , the most redoubtable of the seventeen abysses , which the Veda calls the Forest of Swords . 
They fought hand to hand , foot to foot , with pistol shots , with blows of the sword , with their fists , at a distance , close at hand , from above , from below , from everywhere , from the roofs of the houses , from the windows of the wine-shop , from the cellar windows , whither some had crawled . 
They were one against sixty . 
The facade of Corinthe , half demolished , was hideous . 
The window , tattooed with grape-shot , had lost glass and frame and was nothing now but a shapeless hole , tumultuously blocked with paving-stones . 
Bossuet was killed ; Feuilly was killed ; Courfeyrac was killed ; Combeferre , transfixed by three blows from a bayonet in the breast at the moment when he was lifting up a wounded soldier , had only time to cast a glance to heaven when he expired . 
Marius , still fighting , was so riddled with wounds , particularly in the head , that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood , and one would have said that his face was covered with a red kerchief . 
Enjolras alone was not struck . 
When he had no longer any weapon , he reached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust some arm or other into his fist . 
All he had left was the stumps of four swords ; one more than Francois I. at Marignan . 
Homer says : `` Diomedes cuts the throat of Axylus , son of Teuthranis , who dwelt in happy Arisba ; Euryalus , son of Mecistaeus , exterminates Dresos and Opheltios , Esepius , and that Pedasus whom the naiad Abarbarea bore to the blameless Bucolion ; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of Percosius ; Antilochus , Ablerus ; Polypaetes , Astyalus ; Polydamas , Otos , of Cyllene ; and Teucer , Aretaon . 
Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus ' pike . 
Agamemnon , king of the heroes , flings to earth Elatos , born in the rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnois . '' 
In our old poems of exploits , Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler 's shoulder-stick of fire , and the latter defends himself by stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots . 
Our ancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon , armed , emblazoned and crested in war-like guise , on horseback and approaching each other , their battle-axes in hand , masked with iron , gloved with iron , booted with iron , the one caparisoned in ermine , the other draped in azure : Bretagne with his lion between the two horns of his crown , Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor . 
But , in order to be superb , it is not necessary to wear , like Yvon , the ducal morion , to have in the fist , like Esplandian , a living flame , or , like Phyles , father of Polydamas , to have brought back from Ephyra a good suit of mail , a present from the king of men , Euphetes ; it suffices to give one 's life for a conviction or a loyalty . 
This ingenuous little soldier , yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin , who prowls with his clasp-knife by his side , around the children 's nurses in the Luxembourg garden , this pale young student bent over a piece of anatomy or a book , a blond youth who shaves his beard with scissors , -- take both of them , breathe upon them with a breath of duty , place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blind alley Planche-Mibray , and let the one fight for his flag , and the other for his ideal , and let both of them imagine that they are fighting for their country ; the struggle will be colossal ; and the shadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grand epic field where humanity is striving , will equal the shadow cast by Megaryon , King of Lycia , tiger-filled , crushing in his embrace the immense body of Ajax , equal to the gods . 
FOOT TO FOOT When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive , except Enjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade , the centre , which had so long sustained Courfeyrac , Joly , Bossuet , Feuilly and Combeferre , gave way . 
The cannon , though it had not effected a practicable breach , had made a rather large hollow in the middle of the redoubt ; there , the summit of the wall had disappeared before the balls , and had crumbled away ; and the rubbish which had fallen , now inside , now outside , had , as it accumulated , formed two piles in the nature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier , one on the inside , the other on the outside . 
The exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the attack . 
A final assault was there attempted , and this assault succeeded . 
The mass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run , came up with irresistible force , and the serried front of battle of the attacking column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the battlements . 
This time , it was decisive . 
The group of insurgents who were defending the centre retreated in confusion . 
Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them . 
Many , finding themselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns , did not wish to die . 
This is a moment when the instinct of self-preservation emits howls , when the beast re-appears in men . 
They were hemmed in by the lofty , six-story house which formed the background of their redoubt . 
This house might prove their salvation . 
The building was barricaded , and walled , as it were , from top to bottom . 
Before the troops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt , there was time for a door to open and shut , the space of a flash of lightning was sufficient for that , and the door of that house , suddenly opened a crack and closed again instantly , was life for these despairing men . 
Behind this house , there were streets , possible flight , space . 
They set to knocking at that door with the butts of their guns , and with kicks , shouting , calling , entreating , wringing their hands . 
No one opened . 
From the little window on the third floor , the head of the dead man gazed down upon them . 
But Enjolras and Marius , and the seven or eight rallied about them , sprang forward and protected them . 
Enjolras had shouted to the soldiers : `` Do n't advance ! '' 
and as an officer had not obeyed , Enjolras had killed the officer . 
He was now in the little inner court of the redoubt , with his back planted against the Corinthe building , a sword in one hand , a rifle in the other , holding open the door of the wine-shop which he barred against assailants . 
He shouted to the desperate men : -- `` There is but one door open ; this one . '' 
-- And shielding them with his body , and facing an entire battalion alone , he made them pass in behind him . 
All precipitated themselves thither . 
Enjolras , executing with his rifle , which he now used like a cane , what single-stick players call a `` covered rose '' round his head , levelled the bayonets around and in front of him , and was the last to enter ; and then ensued a horrible moment , when the soldiers tried to make their way in , and the insurgents strove to bar them out . 
The door was slammed with such violence , that , as it fell back into its frame , it showed the five fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it , cut off and glued to the post . 
Marius remained outside . 
A shot had just broken his collar bone , he felt that he was fainting and falling . 
At that moment , with eyes already shut , he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him , and the swoon in which his senses vanished , hardly allowed him time for the thought , mingled with a last memory of Cosette : -- `` I am taken prisoner . 
I shall be shot . '' 
Enjolras , not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in the wine-shop , had the same idea . 
But they had reached a moment when each man has not the time to meditate on his own death . 
Enjolras fixed the bar across the door , and bolted it , and double-locked it with key and chain , while those outside were battering furiously at it , the soldiers with the butts of their muskets , the sappers with their axes . 
The assailants were grouped about that door . 
The siege of the wine-shop was now beginning . 
The soldiers , we will observe , were full of wrath . 
The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them , and then , a still more melancholy circumstance . 
during the few hours which had preceded the attack , it had been reported among them that the insurgents were mutilating their prisoners , and that there was the headless body of a soldier in the wine-shop . 
This sort of fatal rumor is the usual accompaniment of civil wars , and it was a false report of this kind which , later on , produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain . 
When the door was barricaded , Enjolras said to the others : `` Let us sell our lives dearly . '' 
Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche . 
Beneath the black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible , one large , the other small , and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the cold folds of the shroud . 
A hand projected from beneath the winding sheet and hung near the floor . 
It was that of the old man . 
Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand , just as he had kissed his brow on the preceding evening . 
These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of his life . 
Let us abridge the tale . 
The barricade had fought like a gate of Thebes ; the wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa . 
These resistances are dogged . 
No quarter . 
No flag of truce possible . 
Men are willing to die , provided their opponent will kill them . 
When Suchet says : -- `` Capitulate , '' -- Palafox replies : `` After the war with cannon , the war with knives . '' 
Nothing was lacking in the capture by assault of the Hucheloup wine-shop ; neither paving-stones raining from the windows and the roof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiers by crushing them horribly , nor shots fired from the attic-windows and the cellar , nor the fury of attack , nor , finally , when the door yielded , the frenzied madness of extermination . 
The assailants , rushing into the wine-shop , their feet entangled in the panels of the door which had been beaten in and flung on the ground , found not a single combatant there . 
The spiral staircase , hewn asunder with the axe , lay in the middle of the tap-room , a few wounded men were just breathing their last , every one who was not killed was on the first floor , and from there , through the hole in the ceiling , which had formed the entrance of the stairs , a terrific fire burst forth . 
It was the last of their cartridges . 
When they were exhausted , when these formidable men on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball , each grasped in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved , and of which we have spoken , and held the scaling party in check with these frightfully fragile clubs . 
They were bottles of aquafortis . 
We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred . 
The besieged man , alas ! 
converts everything into a weapon . 
Greek fire did not disgrace Archimedes , boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard . 
All war is a thing of terror , and there is no choice in it . 
The musketry of the besiegers , though confined and embarrassed by being directed from below upwards , was deadly . 
The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedily surrounded by heads of the slain , whence dripped long , red and smoking streams , the uproar was indescribable ; a close and burning smoke almost produced night over this combat . 
Words are lacking to express horror when it has reached this pitch . 
There were no longer men in this conflict , which was now infernal . 
They were no longer giants matched with colossi . 
It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer . 
Demons attacked , spectres resisted . 
It was heroism become monstrous . 
ORESTES FASTING AND PYLADES DRUNK At length , by dint of mounting on each other 's backs , aiding themselves with the skeleton of the staircase , climbing up the walls , clinging to the ceiling , slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door , the last one who offered resistance , a score of assailants , soldiers , National Guardsmen , municipal guardsmen , in utter confusion , the majority disfigured by wounds in the face during that redoubtable ascent , blinded by blood , furious , rendered savage , made an irruption into the apartment on the first floor . 
There they found only one man still on his feet , Enjolras . 
Without cartridges , without sword , he had nothing in his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he had broken over the head of those who were entering . 
He had placed the billiard table between his assailants and himself ; he had retreated into the corner of the room , and there , with haughty eye , and head borne high , with this stump of a weapon in his hand , he was still so alarming as to speedily create an empty space around him . 
A cry arose : `` He is the leader ! 
It was he who slew the artillery-man . 
It is well that he has placed himself there . 
Let him remain there . 
Let us shoot him down on the spot . '' 
`` Shoot me , '' said Enjolras . 
And flinging away his bit of gun-barrel , and folding his arms , he offered his breast . 
The audacity of a fine death always affects men . 
As soon as Enjolras folded his arms and accepted his end , the din of strife ceased in the room , and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral solemnity . 
The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless , appeared to oppress this tumult , and this young man , haughty , bloody , and charming , who alone had not a wound , who was as indifferent as an invulnerable being , seemed , by the authority of his tranquil glance , to constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully . 
His beauty , at that moment augmented by his pride , was resplendent , and he was fresh and rosy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had just elapsed , as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded . 
It was of him , possibly , that a witness spoke afterwards , before the council of war : `` There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo . '' 
A National Guardsman who had taken aim at Enjolras , lowered his gun , saying : `` It seems to me that I am about to shoot a flower . '' 
Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras , and silently made ready their guns . 
Then a sergeant shouted : `` Take aim ! '' 
An officer intervened . 
`` Wait . '' 
And addressing Enjolras : `` Do you wish to have your eyes bandaged ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Was it you who killed the artillery sergeant ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Grantaire had waked up a few moments before . 
Grantaire , it will be remembered , had been asleep ever since the preceding evening in the upper room of the wine-shop , seated on a chair and leaning on the table . 
He realized in its fullest sense the old metaphor of `` dead drunk . '' 
The hideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a lethargy . 
His table being small , and not suitable for the barricade , he had been left in possession of it . 
He was still in the same posture , with his breast bent over the table , his head lying flat on his arms , surrounded by glasses , beer-jugs and bottles . 
His was the overwhelming slumber of the torpid bear and the satiated leech . 
Nothing had had any effect upon it , neither the fusillade , nor the cannon-balls , nor the grape-shot which had made its way through the window into the room where he was . 
Nor the tremendous uproar of the assault . 
He merely replied to the cannonade , now and then , by a snore . 
He seemed to be waiting there for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of waking . 
Many corpses were strewn around him ; and , at the first glance , there was nothing to distinguish him from those profound sleepers of death . 
Noise does not rouse a drunken man ; silence awakens him . 
The fall of everything around him only augmented Grantaire 's prostration ; the crumbling of all things was his lullaby . 
The sort of halt which the tumult underwent in the presence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavy slumber . 
It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed , which suddenly comes to a dead stop . 
The persons dozing within it wake up . 
Grantaire rose to his feet with a start , stretched out his arms , rubbed his eyes , stared , yawned , and understood . 
A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is torn away . 
One beholds , at a single glance and as a whole , all that it has concealed . 
All suddenly presents itself to the memory ; and the drunkard who has known nothing of what has been taking place during the last twenty-four hours , has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly informed . 
Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity ; the obliteration of intoxication , a sort of steam which has obscured the brain , is dissipated , and makes way for the clear and sharply outlined importunity of realities . 
Relegated , as he was , to one corner , and sheltered behind the billiard-table , the soldiers whose eyes were fixed on Enjolras , had not even noticed Grantaire , and the sergeant was preparing to repeat his order : `` Take aim ! '' 
when all at once , they heard a strong voice shout beside them : `` Long live the Republic ! 
I 'm one of them . '' 
Grantaire had risen . 
The immense gleam of the whole combat which he had missed , and in which he had had no part , appeared in the brilliant glance of the transfigured drunken man . 
He repeated : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
crossed the room with a firm stride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras . 
`` Finish both of us at one blow , '' said he . 
And turning gently to Enjolras , he said to him : `` Do you permit it ? '' 
Enjolras pressed his hand with a smile . 
This smile was not ended when the report resounded . 
Enjolras , pierced by eight bullets , remained leaning against the wall , as though the balls had nailed him there . 
Only , his head was bowed . 
Grantaire fell at his feet , as though struck by a thunderbolt . 
A few moments later , the soldiers dislodged the last remaining insurgents , who had taken refuge at the top of the house . 
They fired into the attic through a wooden lattice . 
They fought under the very roof . 
They flung bodies , some of them still alive , out through the windows . 
Two light-infantrymen , who tried to lift the shattered omnibus , were slain by two shots fired from the attic . 
A man in a blouse was flung down from it , with a bayonet wound in the abdomen , and breathed his last on the ground . 
A soldier and an insurgent slipped together on the sloping slates of the roof , and , as they would not release each other , they fell , clasped in a ferocious embrace . 
A similar conflict went on in the cellar . 
Shouts , shots , a fierce trampling . 
Then silence . 
The barricade was captured . 
The soldiers began to search the houses round about , and to pursue the fugitives . 
PRISONER Marius was , in fact , a prisoner . 
The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt at the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to expose himself in it . 
Had it not been for him , no one , in that supreme phase of agony , would have thought of the wounded . 
Thanks to him , everywhere present in the carnage , like a providence , those who fell were picked up , transported to the tap-room , and cared for . 
In the intervals , he reappeared on the barricade . 
But nothing which could resemble a blow , an attack or even personal defence proceeded from his hands . 
He held his peace and lent succor . 
Moreover he had received only a few scratches . 
The bullets would have none of him . 
If suicide formed part of what he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre , to that spot , he had not succeeded . 
But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide , an irreligious act . 
Jean Valjean , in the thick cloud of the combat , did not appear to see Marius ; the truth is , that he never took his eyes from the latter . 
When a shot laid Marius low , Jean Valjean leaped forward with the agility of a tiger , fell upon him as on his prey , and bore him off . 
The whirlwind of the attack was , at that moment , so violently concentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop , that no one saw Jean Valjean sustaining the fainting Marius in his arms , traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind the angle of the Corinthe building . 
The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on the street ; it afforded shelter from the bullets , the grape-shot , and all eyes , and a few square feet of space . 
There is sometimes a chamber which does not burn in the midst of a conflagration , and in the midst of raging seas , beyond a promontory or at the extremity of a blind alley of shoals , a tranquil nook . 
It was in this sort of fold in the interior trapezium of the barricade , that Eponine had breathed her last . 
There Jean Valjean halted , let Marius slide to the ground , placed his back against the wall , and cast his eyes about him . 
The situation was alarming . 
For an instant , for two or three perhaps , this bit of wall was a shelter , but how was he to escape from this massacre ? 
He recalled the anguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before , and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape ; it was difficult then , to-day it was impossible . 
He had before him that deaf and implacable house , six stories in height , which appeared to be inhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window ; he had on his right the rather low barricade , which shut off the Rue de la Petite Truanderie ; to pass this obstacle seemed easy , but beyond the crest of the barrier a line of bayonets was visible . 
The troops of the line were posted on the watch behind that barricade . 
It was evident , that to pass the barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon , and that any head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of stones would serve as a target for sixty shots . 
On his left he had the field of battle . 
Death lurked round the corner of that wall . 
What was to be done ? 
Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament . 
And it was necessary to decide on the instant , to devise some expedient , to come to some decision . 
Fighting was going on a few paces away ; fortunately , all were raging around a single point , the door of the wine-shop ; but if it should occur to one soldier , to one single soldier , to turn the corner of the house , or to attack him on the flank , all was over . 
Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him , he gazed at the barricade at one side of him , then he looked at the ground , with the violence of the last extremity , bewildered , and as though he would have liked to pierce a hole there with his eyes . 
By dint of staring , something vaguely striking in such an agony began to assume form and outline at his feet , as though it had been a power of glance which made the thing desired unfold . 
A few paces distant he perceived , at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and watched on the exterior , beneath a disordered mass of paving-stones which partly concealed it , an iron grating , placed flat and on a level with the soil . 
This grating , made of stout , transverse bars , was about two feet square . 
The frame of paving-stones which supported it had been torn up , and it was , as it were , unfastened . 
Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture , something like the flue of a chimney , or the pipe of a cistern . 
Jean Valjean darted forward . 
His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination . 
To thrust aside the stones , to raise the grating , to lift Marius , who was as inert as a dead body , upon his shoulders , to descend , with this burden on his loins , and with the aid of his elbows and knees into that sort of well , fortunately not very deep , to let the heavy trap , upon which the loosened stones rolled down afresh , fall into its place behind him , to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres below the surface , -- all this was executed like that which one does in dreams , with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle ; this took only a few minutes . 
Jean Valjean found himself with Marius , who was still unconscious , in a sort of long , subterranean corridor . 
There reigned profound peace , absolute silence , night . 
The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the wall into the convent recurred to him . 
Only , what he was carrying to-day was not Cosette ; it was Marius . 
He could barely hear the formidable tumult in the wine-shop , taken by assault , like a vague murmur overhead . 
THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water . 
And this without metaphor . 
How , and in what manner ? 
Day and night . 
With what object ? 
With no object . 
With what intention ? 
With no intention . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
By means of what organ ? 
By means of its intestine . 
What is its intestine ? 
The sewer . 
Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which the valuations of special science have set upon it . 
Science , after having long groped about , now knows that the most fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure . 
The Chinese , let us confess it to our shame , knew it before us . 
Not a Chinese peasant -- it is Eckberg who says this , -- goes to town without bringing back with him , at the two extremities of his bamboo pole , two full buckets of what we designate as filth . 
Thanks to human dung , the earth in China is still as young as in the days of Abraham . 
Chinese wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed . 
There is no guano comparable in fertility with the detritus of a capital . 
A great city is the most mighty of dung-makers . 
Certain success would attend the experiment of employing the city to manure the plain . 
If our gold is manure , our manure , on the other hand , is gold . 
What is done with this golden manure ? 
It is swept into the abyss . 
Fleets of vessels are despatched , at great expense , to collect the dung of petrels and penguins at the South Pole , and the incalculable element of opulence which we have on hand , we send to the sea . 
All the human and animal manure which the world wastes , restored to the land instead of being cast into the water , would suffice to nourish the world . 
Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts , those tumbrils of mud which jolt through the street by night , those terrible casks of the street department , those fetid drippings of subterranean mire , which the pavements hide from you , -- do you know what they are ? 
They are the meadow in flower , the green grass , wild thyme , thyme and sage , they are game , they are cattle , they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in the evening , they are perfumed hay , they are golden wheat , they are the bread on your table , they are the warm blood in your veins , they are health , they are joy , they are life . 
This is the will of that mysterious creation which is transformation on earth and transfiguration in heaven . 
Restore this to the great crucible ; your abundance will flow forth from it . 
The nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men . 
You have it in your power to lose this wealth , and to consider me ridiculous to boot . 
This will form the master-piece of your ignorance . 
Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of half a milliard every year , in the Atlantic , through the mouths of her rivers . 
Note this : with five hundred millions we could pay one quarter of the expenses of our budget . 
The cleverness of man is such that he prefers to get rid of these five hundred millions in the gutter . 
It is the very substance of the people that is carried off , here drop by drop , there wave after wave , the wretched outpour of our sewers into the rivers , and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean . 
Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs . 
From this spring two results , the land impoverished , and the water tainted . 
Hunger arising from the furrow , and disease from the stream . 
It is notorious , for example , that at the present hour , the Thames is poisoning London . 
So far as Paris is concerned , it has become indispensable of late , to transport the mouths of the sewers down stream , below the last bridge . 
A double tubular apparatus , provided with valves and sluices , sucking up and driving back , a system of elementary drainage , simple as the lungs of a man , and which is already in full working order in many communities in England , would suffice to conduct the pure water of the fields into our cities , and to send back to the fields the rich water of the cities , and this easy exchange , the simplest in the world , would retain among us the five hundred millions now thrown away . 
People are thinking of other things . 
The process actually in use does evil , with the intention of doing good . 
The intention is good , the result is melancholy . 
Thinking to purge the city , the population is blanched like plants raised in cellars . 
A sewer is a mistake . 
When drainage , everywhere , with its double function , restoring what it takes , shall have replaced the sewer , which is a simple impoverishing washing , then , this being combined with the data of a now social economy , the product of the earth will be increased tenfold , and the problem of misery will be singularly lightened . 
Add the suppression of parasitism , and it will be solved . 
In the meanwhile , the public wealth flows away to the river , and leakage takes place . 
Leakage is the word . 
Europe is being ruined in this manner by exhaustion . 
As for France , we have just cited its figures . 
Now , Paris contains one twenty-fifth of the total population of France , and Parisian guano being the richest of all , we understate the truth when we value the loss on the part of Paris at twenty-five millions in the half milliard which France annually rejects . 
These twenty-five millions , employed in assistance and enjoyment , would double the splendor of Paris . 
The city spends them in sewers . 
So that we may say that Paris 's great prodigality , its wonderful festival , its Beaujon folly , its orgy , its stream of gold from full hands , its pomp , its luxury , its magnificence , is its sewer system . 
It is in this manner that , in the blindness of a poor political economy , we drown and allow to float down stream and to be lost in the gulfs the well-being of all . 
There should be nets at Saint-Cloud for the public fortune . 
Economically considered , the matter can be summed up thus : Paris is a spendthrift . 
Paris , that model city , that patron of well-arranged capitals , of which every nation strives to possess a copy , that metropolis of the ideal , that august country of the initiative , of impulse and of effort , that centre and that dwelling of minds , that nation-city , that hive of the future , that marvellous combination of Babylon and Corinth , would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug his shoulders , from the point of view which we have just indicated . 
Imitate Paris and you will ruin yourselves . 
Moreover , and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste , Paris is itself an imitator . 
These surprising exhibitions of stupidity are not novel ; this is no young folly . 
The ancients did like the moderns . 
`` The sewers of Rome , '' says Liebig , `` have absorbed all the well-being of the Roman peasant . '' 
When the Campagna of Rome was ruined by the Roman sewer , Rome exhausted Italy , and when she had put Italy in her sewer , she poured in Sicily , then Sardinia , then Africa . 
The sewer of Rome has engulfed the world . 
This cess-pool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe . 
Urbi et orbi . 
Eternal city , unfathomable sewer . 
Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others . 
Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to intelligent towns . 
For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have just explained our views , Paris has beneath it another Paris ; a Paris of sewers ; which has its streets , its cross-roads , its squares , its blind-alleys , its arteries , and its circulation , which is of mire and minus the human form . 
For nothing must be flattered , not even a great people ; where there is everything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity ; and , if Paris contains Athens , the city of light , Tyre , the city of might , Sparta , the city of virtue , Nineveh , the city of marvels , it also contains Lutetia , the city of mud . 
However , the stamp of its power is there also , and the Titanic sink of Paris realizes , among monuments , that strange ideal realized in humanity by some men like Macchiavelli , Bacon and Mirabeau , grandiose vileness . 
The sub-soil of Paris , if the eye could penetrate its surface , would present the aspect of a colossal madrepore . 
A sponge has no more partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six leagues round about , on which rests the great and ancient city . 
Not to mention its catacombs , which are a separate cellar , not to mention the inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes , without reckoning the vast tubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in the pillar fountains , the sewers alone form a tremendous , shadowy net-work under the two banks ; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding thread . 
There appears , in the humid mist , the rat which seems the product to which Paris has given birth . 
ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover , the subterranean net-work of sewers , from a bird 's eye view , will outline on the banks a species of large branch grafted on the river . 
On the right bank , the belt sewer will form the trunk of this branch , the secondary ducts will form the branches , and those without exit the twigs . 
This figure is but a summary one and half exact , the right angle , which is the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications , being very rare in vegetation . 
A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by supposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet , as intricate as a thicket , against a background of shadows , and the misshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparent confusion , and as at haphazard , now by their angles , again by their extremities . 
Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages , in the Lower Empire and in the Orient of old . 
The masses regarded these beds of decomposition , these monstrous cradles of death , with a fear that was almost religious . 
The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to giddiness than the lions ' ditch of Babylon . 
Teglath-Phalasar , according to the rabbinical books , swore by the sink of Nineveh . 
It was from the sewer of Munster that John of Leyden produced his false moon , and it was from the cess-pool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme , Mokanna , the veiled prophet of Khorassan , caused his false sun to emerge . 
The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers . 
The Germoniae -LSB- 58 -RSB- narrated Rome . 
The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and formidable thing . 
It has been a sepulchre , it has served as an asylum . 
Crime , intelligence , social protest , liberty of conscience , thought , theft , all that human laws persecute or have persecuted , is hidden in that hole ; the maillotins in the fourteenth century , the tire-laine of the fifteenth , the Huguenots in the sixteenth , Morin 's illuminated in the seventeenth , the chauffeurs -LSB- brigands -RSB- in the eighteenth . 
A hundred years ago , the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence , the pickpocket in danger slipped thither ; the forest had its cave , Paris had its sewer . 
Vagrancy , that Gallic picareria , accepted the sewer as the adjunct of the Cour des Miracles , and at evening , it returned thither , fierce and sly , through the Maubuee outlet , as into a bed-chamber . 
-LSB- 58 -RSB- Steps on the Aventine Hill , leading to the Tiber , to which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be thrown into the Tiber . 
It was quite natural , that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset , -LSB- Empty-Pocket -RSB- or the Rue Coupe-Gorge -LSB- Cut-Throat -RSB- , for the scene of their daily labor , should have for their domicile by night the culvert of the Chemin-Vert , or the catch basin of Hurepoix . 
Hence a throng of souvenirs . 
All sorts of phantoms haunt these long , solitary corridors ; everywhere is putrescence and miasma ; here and there are breathing-holes , where Villon within converses with Rabelais without . 
The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of all attempts . 
Political economy therein spies a detritus , social philosophy there beholds a residuum . 
The sewer is the conscience of the city . 
Everything there converges and confronts everything else . 
In that livid spot there are shades , but there are no longer any secrets . 
Each thing bears its true form , or at least , its definitive form . 
The mass of filth has this in its favor , that it is not a liar . 
Ingenuousness has taken refuge there . 
The mask of Basil is to be found there , but one beholds its cardboard and its strings and the inside as well as the outside , and it is accentuated by honest mud . 
Scapin 's false nose is its next-door neighbor . 
All the uncleannesses of civilization , once past their use , fall into this trench of truth , where the immense social sliding ends . 
They are there engulfed , but they display themselves there . 
This mixture is a confession . 
There , no more false appearances , no plastering over is possible , filth removes its shirt , absolute denudation puts to the rout all illusions and mirages , there is nothing more except what really exists , presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end . 
There , the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness , a basket-handle tells a tale of domesticity ; there the core of an apple which has entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more ; the effigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris , Caiphas ' spittle meets Falstaff 's puking , the louis-d'or which comes from the gaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope 's end of the suicide . 
a livid foetus rolls along , enveloped in the spangles which danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday , a cap which has pronounced judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly Margoton 's petticoat ; it is more than fraternization , it is equivalent to addressing each other as thou . 
All which was formerly rouged , is washed free . 
The last veil is torn away . 
A sewer is a cynic . 
It tells everything . 
The sincerity of foulness pleases us , and rests the soul . 
When one has passed one 's time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great airs which reasons of state , the oath , political sagacity , human justice , professional probity , the austerities of situation , incorruptible robes all assume , it solaces one to enter a sewer and to behold the mire which befits it . 
This is instructive at the same time . 
We have just said that history passes through the sewer . 
The Saint-Barthelemys filter through there , drop by drop , between the paving-stones . 
Great public assassinations , political and religious butcheries , traverse this underground passage of civilization , and thrust their corpses there . 
For the eye of the thinker , all historic murderers are to be found there , in that hideous penumbra , on their knees , with a scrap of their winding-sheet for an apron , dismally sponging out their work . 
Louis XI . 
is there with Tristan , Francois I. with Duprat , Charles IX . 
is there with his mother , Richelieu is there with Louis XIII. , Louvois is there , Letellier is there , Hebert and Maillard are there , scratching the stones , and trying to make the traces of their actions disappear . 
Beneath these vaults one hears the brooms of spectres . 
One there breathes the enormous fetidness of social catastrophes . 
One beholds reddish reflections in the corners . 
There flows a terrible stream , in which bloody hands have been washed . 
The social observer should enter these shadows . 
They form a part of his laboratory . 
Philosophy is the microscope of the thought . 
Everything desires to flee from it , but nothing escapes it . 
Tergiversation is useless . 
What side of oneself does one display in evasions ? 
the shameful side . 
Philosophy pursues with its glance , probes the evil , and does not permit it to escape into nothingness . 
In the obliteration of things which disappear , in the watching of things which vanish , it recognizes all . 
It reconstructs the purple from the rag , and the woman from the scrap of her dress . 
From the cess-pool , it re-constitutes the city ; from mud , it reconstructs manners ; from the potsherd it infers the amphora or the jug . 
By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of parchment , it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry of the Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto . 
It re-discovers in what remains that which has been , good , evil , the true , the blood-stain of the palace , the ink-blot of the cavern , the drop of sweat from the brothel , trials undergone , temptations welcomed , orgies cast forth , the turn which characters have taken as they became abased , the trace of prostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable , and on the vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina 's elbowing . 
BRUNESEAU The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary . 
In the sixteenth century , Henri II . 
attempted a bore , which failed . 
Not a hundred years ago , the cess-pool , Mercier attests the fact , was abandoned to itself , and fared as best it might . 
Such was this ancient Paris , delivered over to quarrels , to indecision , and to gropings . 
It was tolerably stupid for a long time . 
Later on , '89 showed how understanding comes to cities . 
But in the good , old times , the capital had not much head . 
It did not know how to manage its own affairs either morally or materially , and could not sweep out filth any better than it could abuses . 
Everything presented an obstacle , everything raised a question . 
The sewer , for example , was refractory to every itinerary . 
One could no more find one 's bearings in the sewer than one could understand one 's position in the city ; above the unintelligible , below the inextricable ; beneath the confusion of tongues there reigned the confusion of caverns ; Daedalus backed up Babel . 
Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow , as though this misunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage . 
There occurred , infamous to relate , inundations of the sewer . 
At times , that stomach of civilization digested badly , the cess-pool flowed back into the throat of the city , and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth . 
These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points ; they were warnings ; very badly accepted , however ; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire , and did not admit that the filth should return . 
Drive it out better . 
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the age of eighty . 
The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires , where stands the statue of Louis XIV. ; it entered the Rue Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer , the Rue Pierre-a-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie , the Rue Popincourt , through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert , the Rue de la Roquette , through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe ; it covered the drain of the Rue des Champs-Elysees to the height of thirty-five centimetres ; and , to the South , through the vent of the Seine , performing its functions in inverse sense , it penetrated the Rue Mazarine , the Rue de l'Echaude , and the Rue des Marais , where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres , a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had lived , respecting , in the seventeenth century , the poet more than the King . 
It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre , where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the water-spout , and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin , where it spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length . 
At the beginning of this century , the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious place . 
Mud can never enjoy a good fame ; but in this case its evil renown reached the verge of the terrible . 
Paris knew , in a confused way , that she had under her a terrible cavern . 
People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length , and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub . 
The great boots of the sewermen never ventured further than certain well-known points . 
We were then very near the epoch when the scavenger 's carts , from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternized with the Marquis de Crequi , discharged their loads directly into the sewer . 
As for cleaning out , -- that function was entrusted to the pouring rains which encumbered rather than swept away . 
Rome left some poetry to her sewer , and called it the Gemoniae ; Paris insulted hers , and entitled it the Polypus-Hole . 
Science and superstition were in accord , in horror . 
The Polypus hole was no less repugnant to hygiene than to legend . 
The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of the Mouffetard sewer ; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into the sewer de la Barillerie ; Fagon attributed the redoubtable malignant fever of 1685 to the great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais , which remained yawning until 1833 in the Rue Saint-Louis , almost opposite the sign of the Gallant Messenger . 
The mouth of the sewer of the Rue de la Mortellerie was celebrated for the pestilences which had their source there ; with its grating of iron , with points simulating a row of teeth , it was like a dragon 's maw in that fatal street , breathing forth hell upon men . 
The popular imagination seasoned the sombre Parisian sink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite . 
The sewer had no bottom . 
The sewer was the lower world . 
The idea of exploring these leprous regions did not even occur to the police . 
To try that unknown thing , to cast the plummet into that shadow , to set out on a voyage of discovery in that abyss -- who would have dared ? 
It was alarming . 
Nevertheless , some one did present himself . 
The cess-pool had its Christopher Columbus . 
One day , in 1805 , during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperor made in Paris , the Minister of the Interior , some Decres or Cretet or other , came to the master 's intimate levee . 
In the Carrousel there was audible the clanking of swords of all those extraordinary soldiers of the great Republic , and of the great Empire ; then Napoleon 's door was blocked with heroes ; men from the Rhine , from the Escaut , from the Adige , and from the Nile ; companions of Joubert , of Desaix , of Marceau , of Hoche , of Kleber ; the aerostiers of Fleurus , the grenadiers of Mayence , the pontoon-builders of Genoa , hussars whom the Pyramids had looked down upon , artillerists whom Junot 's cannon-ball had spattered with mud , cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying at anchor in the Zuyderzee ; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge of Lodi , others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua , others had preceded Lannes in the hollow road of Montebello . 
The whole army of that day was present there , in the court-yard of the Tuileries , represented by a squadron or a platoon , and guarding Napoleon in repose ; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengo behind it and Austerlitz before it . 
-- `` Sire , '' said the Minister of the Interior to Napoleon , `` yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in your Empire . '' 
-- `` What man is that ? '' 
said the Emperor brusquely , `` and what has he done ? '' 
-- `` He wants to do something , Sire . '' 
-- `` What is it ? '' 
-- `` To visit the sewers of Paris . '' 
This man existed and his name was Bruneseau . 
The visit took place . 
It was a formidable campaign ; a nocturnal battle against pestilence and suffocation . 
It was , at the same time , a voyage of discovery . 
One of the survivors of this expedition , an intelligent workingman , who was very young at the time , related curious details with regard to it , several years ago , which Bruneseau thought himself obliged to omit in his report to the prefect of police , as unworthy of official style . 
The processes of disinfection were , at that epoch , extremely rudimentary . 
Hardly had Bruneseau crossed the first articulations of that subterranean network , when eight laborers out of the twenty refused to go any further . 
The operation was complicated ; the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning ; hence it was necessary to cleanse and at the same time , to proceed ; to note the entrances of water , to count the gratings and the vents , to lay out in detail the branches , to indicate the currents at the point where they parted , to define the respective bounds of the divers basins , to sound the small sewers grafted on the principal sewer , to measure the height under the key-stone of each drain , and the width , at the spring of the vaults as well as at the bottom , in order to determine the arrangements with regard to the level of each water-entrance , either of the bottom of the arch , or on the soil of the street . 
They advanced with toil . 
The lanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere . 
From time to time , a fainting sewerman was carried out . 
At certain points , there were precipices . 
The soil had given away , the pavement had crumbled , the sewer had changed into a bottomless well ; they found nothing solid ; a man disappeared suddenly ; they had great difficulty in getting him out again . 
On the advice of Fourcroy , they lighted large cages filled with tow steeped in resin , from time to time , in spots which had been sufficiently disinfected . 
In some places , the wall was covered with misshapen fungi , -- one would have said tumors ; the very stone seemed diseased within this unbreathable atmosphere . 
Bruneseau , in his exploration , proceeded down hill . 
At the point of separation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur , he deciphered upon a projecting stone the date of 1550 ; this stone indicated the limits where Philibert Delorme , charged by Henri II . 
with visiting the subterranean drains of Paris , had halted . 
This stone was the mark of the sixteenth century on the sewer ; Bruneseau found the handiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the Ponceau drain of the old Rue Vielle-du-Temple , vaulted between 1600 and 1650 ; and the handiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collecting canal , walled and vaulted in 1740 . 
These two vaults , especially the less ancient , that of 1740 , were more cracked and decrepit than the masonry of the belt sewer , which dated from 1412 , an epoch when the brook of fresh water of Menilmontant was elevated to the dignity of the Grand Sewer of Paris , an advancement analogous to that of a peasant who should become first valet de chambre to the King ; something like Gros-Jean transformed into Lebel . 
Here and there , particularly beneath the Court-House , they thought they recognized the hollows of ancient dungeons , excavated in the very sewer itself . 
Hideous in-pace . 
An iron neck-collar was hanging in one of these cells . 
They walled them all up . 
Some of their finds were singular ; among others , the skeleton of an ourang-outan , who had disappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 1800 , a disappearance probably connected with the famous and indisputable apparition of the devil in the Rue des Bernardins , in the last year of the eighteenth century . 
The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer . 
Beneath this long , arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion , a perfectly preserved rag-picker 's basket excited the admiration of all connoisseurs . 
Everywhere , the mire , which the sewermen came to handle with intrepidity , abounded in precious objects , jewels of gold and silver , precious stones , coins . 
If a giant had filtered this cesspool , he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair . 
At the point where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye separate , they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper , bearing on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal 's hat , and on the other , a wolf with a tiara on his head . 
The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer . 
This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing but the hinges remained . 
From one of these hinges hung a dirty and shapeless rag which , arrested there in its passage , no doubt , had floated there in the darkness and finished its process of being torn apart . 
Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it . 
It was of very fine batiste , and in one of the corners , less frayed than the rest , they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above these seven letters : LAVBESP . 
The crown was the coronet of a Marquis , and the seven letters signified Laubespine . 
They recognized the fact , that what they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat . 
Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues . 
This was when he was a member of the household of the Comte d'Artois , in the capacity of physician to the Stables . 
From these love affairs , historically proved , with a great lady , he had retained this sheet . 
As a waif or a souvenir . 
At his death , as this was the only linen of any fineness which he had in his house , they buried him in it . 
Some old women had shrouded him for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of the people had enjoyed voluptuousness . 
Bruneseau passed on . 
They left that rag where it hung ; they did not put the finishing touch to it . 
Did this arise from scorn or from respect ? 
Marat deserved both . 
And then , destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch it . 
Besides , the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot which they select . 
In short , the relic was a strange one . 
A Marquise had slept in it ; Marat had rotted in it ; it had traversed the Pantheon to end with the rats of the sewer . 
This chamber rag , of which Watteau would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold , had ended in becoming worthy of the fixed gaze of Dante . 
The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lasted seven years , from 1805 to 1812 . 
As he proceeded , Bruneseau drew , directed , and completed considerable works ; in 1808 he lowered the arch of the Ponceau , and , everywhere creating new lines , he pushed the sewer , in 1809 , under the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the fountain of the Innocents ; in 1810 , under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the Salpetriere ; in 1811 under the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Peres , under the Rue du Mail , under the Rue de l'Echarpe , under the Place Royale ; in 1812 , under the Rue de la Paix , and under the Chaussee d'Antin . 
At the same time , he had the whole net-work disinfected and rendered healthful . 
In the second year of his work , Bruneseau engaged the assistance of his son-in-law Nargaud . 
It was thus that , at the beginning of the century , ancient society cleansed its double bottom , and performed the toilet of its sewer . 
There was that much clean , at all events . 
Tortuous , cracked , unpaved , full of fissures , intersected by gullies , jolted by eccentric elbows , mounting and descending illogically , fetid , wild , fierce , submerged in obscurity , with cicatrices on its pavements and scars on its walls , terrible , -- such was , retrospectively viewed , the antique sewer of Paris . 
Ramifications in every direction , crossings , of trenches , branches , goose-feet , stars , as in military mines , coecum , blind alleys , vaults lined with saltpetre , pestiferous pools , scabby sweats , on the walls , drops dripping from the ceilings , darkness ; nothing could equal the horror of this old , waste crypt , the digestive apparatus of Babylon , a cavern , ditch , gulf pierced with streets , a titanic mole-burrow , where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind mole , the past , prowling through the shadows , in the filth which has been splendor . 
This , we repeat , was the sewer of the past . 
PRESENT PROGRESS To-day the sewer is clean , cold , straight , correct . 
It almost realizes the ideal of what is understood in England by the word `` respectable . '' 
It is proper and grayish ; laid out by rule and line ; one might almost say as though it came out of a bandbox . 
It resembles a tradesman who has become a councillor of state . 
One can almost see distinctly there . 
The mire there comports itself with decency . 
At first , one might readily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors , which were so common in former days , and so useful in flights of monarchs and princes , in those good old times , `` when the people loved their kings . '' 
The present sewer is a beautiful sewer ; the pure style reigns there ; the classical rectilinear alexandrine which , driven out of poetry , appears to have taken refuge in architecture , seems mingled with all the stones of that long , dark and whitish vault ; each outlet is an arcade ; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer . 
However , if the geometrical line is in place anywhere , it is certainly in the drainage trench of a great city . 
There , everything should be subordinated to the shortest road . 
The sewer has , nowadays , assumed a certain official aspect . 
The very police reports , of which it sometimes forms the subject , no longer are wanting in respect towards it . 
The words which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and dignified . 
What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery ; what used to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice . 
Villon would no longer meet with his ancient temporary provisional lodging . 
This net-work of cellars has its immemorial population of prowlers , rodents , swarming in greater numbers than ever ; from time to time , an aged and veteran rat risks his head at the window of the sewer and surveys the Parisians ; but even these vermin grow tame , so satisfied are they with their subterranean palace . 
The cesspool no longer retains anything of its primitive ferocity . 
The rain , which in former days soiled the sewer , now washes it . 
Nevertheless , do not trust yourself too much to it . 
Miasmas still inhabit it . 
It is more hypocritical than irreproachable . 
The prefecture of police and the commission of health have done their best . 
But , in spite of all the processes of disinfection , it exhales , a vague , suspicious odor like Tartuffe after confession . 
Let us confess , that , taking it all in all , this sweeping is a homage which the sewer pays to civilization , and as , from this point of view , Tartuffe 's conscience is a progress over the Augean stables , it is certain that the sewers of Paris have been improved . 
It is more than progress ; it is transmutation . 
Between the ancient and the present sewer there is a revolution . 
What has effected this revolution ? 
The man whom all the world forgets , and whom we have mentioned , Bruneseau . 
FUTURE PROGRESS The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task . 
The last ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a termination , any more than they have been able to finish Paris . 
The sewer , in fact , receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris . 
Within the bosom of the earth , it is a sort of mysterious polyp with a thousand antennae , which expands below as the city expands above . 
Every time that the city cuts a street , the sewer stretches out an arm . 
The old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundred metres of sewers ; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the first of January , 1806 . 
Beginning with this epoch , of which we shall shortly speak , the work was usefully and energetically resumed and prosecuted ; Napoleon built -- the figures are curious -- four thousand eight hundred and four metres ; Louis XVIII. , five thousand seven hundred and nine ; Charles X. , ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six ; Louis-Philippe , eighty-nine thousand and twenty ; the Republic of 1848 , twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one ; the present government , seventy thousand five hundred ; in all , at the present time , two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres ; sixty leagues of sewers ; the enormous entrails of Paris . 
An obscure ramification ever at work ; a construction which is immense and ignored . 
As the reader sees , the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day more than ten times what it was at the beginning of the century . 
It is difficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the efforts which have been required to bring this cess-pool to the point of relative perfection in which it now is . 
It was with great difficulty that the ancient monarchical provostship and , during the last ten years of the eighteenth century , the revolutionary mayoralty , had succeeded in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 1806 . 
All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation , some peculiar to the soil , others inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious population of Paris . 
Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to the pick , the hoe , the bore , and to human manipulation . 
There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than the geological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historical formation called Paris ; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begun and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium , subterranean resistances abound . 
There are liquid clays , springs , hard rocks , and those soft and deep quagmires which special science calls moutardes . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- The pick advances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with very slender threads of clay , and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells , the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans . 
Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts through a vault that has been begun , and inundates the laborers ; or a layer of marl is laid bare , and rolls down with the fury of a cataract , breaking the stoutest supporting beams like glass . 
Quite recently , at Villette , when it became necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin canal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal , a fissure appeared in the basin of the canal , water suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel , which was beyond the power of the pumping engines ; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure which had been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin , and it was not without great difficulty that it was stopped up . 
Elsewhere near the Seine , and even at a considerable distance from the river , as for instance , at Belleville , Grand-Rue and Lumiere Passage , quicksands are encountered in which one sticks fast , and in which a man sinks visibly . 
Add suffocation by miasmas , burial by slides , and sudden crumbling of the earth . 
Add the typhus , with which the workmen become slowly impregnated . 
In our own day , after having excavated the gallery of Clichy , with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit of Ourcq , a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep ; after having , in the midst of land-slides , and with the aid of excavations often putrid , and of shoring up , vaulted the Bievre from the Boulevard de l'Hopital , as far as the Seine ; after having , in order to deliver Paris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to provide an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent , which crouched near the Barriere des Martyrs , after having , let us state , constructed the line of sewers from the Barriere Blanche to the road of Aubervilliers , in four months , working day and night , at a depth of eleven metres ; after having -- a thing heretofore unseen -- made a subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec , without a trench , six metres below the surface , the superintendent , Monnot , died . 
After having vaulted three thousand metres of sewer in all quarters of the city , from the Rue Traversiere-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l'Ourcine , after having freed the Carrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations of rain by means of the branch of the Arbalete , after having built the Saint-Georges sewer , on rock and concrete in the fluid sands , after having directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch , Duleau the engineer died . 
There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these , which are more useful , nevertheless , than the brutal slaughter of the field of battle . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- Mustards . 
The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day . 
Bruneseau had given the impulse , but the cholera was required to bring about the vast reconstruction which took place later on . 
It is surprising to say , for example , that in 1821 , a part of the belt sewer , called the Grand Canal , as in Venice , still stood stagnating uncovered to the sky , in the Rue des Gourdes . 
It was only in 1821 that the city of Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and sixty-thousand eighty francs and six centimes required for covering this mass of filth . 
The three absorbing wells , of the Combat , the Cunette , and Saint-Mande , with their discharging mouths , their apparatus , their cesspools , and their depuratory branches , only date from 1836 . 
The intestinal sewer of Paris has been made over anew , and , as we have said , it has been extended more than tenfold within the last quarter of a century . 
Thirty years ago , at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6th of June , it was still , in many localities , nearly the same ancient sewer . 
A very great number of streets which are now convex were then sunken causeways . 
At the end of a slope , where the tributaries of a street or cross-roads ended , there were often to be seen large , square gratings with heavy bars , whose iron , polished by the footsteps of the throng , gleamed dangerous and slippery for vehicles , and caused horses to fall . 
The official language of the Roads and Bridges gave to these gratings the expressive name of Cassis . 
-LSB- 60 -RSB- -LSB- 60 -RSB- From casser , to break : break-necks . 
In 1832 , in a number of streets , in the Rue de l'Etoile , the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue du Temple , the Rue Vielle-duTemple , the Rue Notre-Dame de Nazareth , the Rue Folie-Mericourt , the Quai aux Fleurs , the Rue du Petit-Muse , the Rue du Normandie , the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches , the Rue des Marais , the Faubourg Saint-Martin , the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires , the Faubourg Montmartre , the Rue Grange-Bateliere , in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Jacob , the Rue de Tournon , the ancient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw . 
It consisted of enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts , with monumental effrontery . 
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 1663 ; five thousand three hundred fathoms . 
After Bruneseau , on the 1st of January , 1832 , it had forty thousand three hundred metres . 
Between 1806 and 1831 , there had been built , on an average , seven hundred and fifty metres annually , afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were constructed every year , in masonry , of small stones , with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water , on a cement foundation . 
At two hundred francs the metre , the sixty leagues of Paris ' sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions . 
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the beginning , grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense question : the sewers of Paris . 
Paris is the centre of two sheets , a sheet of water and a sheet of air . 
The sheet of water , lying at a tolerably great depth underground , but already sounded by two bores , is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone ; this layer may be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference ; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze there ; one drinks the Seine , the Marne , the Yonne , the Oise , the Aisne , the Cher , the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle . 
The sheet of water is healthy , it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the earth ; the sheet of air is unhealthy , it comes from the sewer . 
All the miasms of the cess-pool are mingled with the breath of the city ; hence this bad breath . 
The air taken from above a dung-heap , as has been scientifically proved , is purer than the air taken from above Paris . 
In a given time , with the aid of progress , mechanisms become perfected , and as light increases , the sheet of water will be employed to purify the sheet of air ; that is to say , to wash the sewer . 
The reader knows , that by `` washing the sewer '' we mean : the restitution of the filth to the earth ; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields . 
Through this simple act , the entire social community will experience a diminution of misery and an augmentation of health . 
At the present hour , the radiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leagues around the Louvre , taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel . 
We might say that , for ten centuries , the cess-pool has been the disease of Paris . 
The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood . 
The popular instinct has never been deceived in it . 
The occupation of sewermen was formerly almost as perilous , and almost as repugnant to the people , as the occupation of knacker , which was so long held in horror and handed over to the executioner . 
High wages were necessary to induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine ; the ladder of the cess-pool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it ; it was said , in proverbial form : `` to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave ; '' and all sorts of hideous legends , as we have said , covered this colossal sink with terror ; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the revolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man , and where are to be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat . 
THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself . 
Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea . 
As in the ocean , the diver may disappear there . 
The transition was an unheard-of one . 
In the very heart of the city , Jean Valjean had escaped from the city , and , in the twinkling of an eye , in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it , he had passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity , from midday to midnight , from tumult to silence , from the whirlwind of thunders to the stagnation of the tomb , and , by a vicissitude far more tremendous even than that of the Rue Polonceau , from the most extreme peril to the most absolute obscurity . 
An abrupt fall into a cavern ; a disappearance into the secret trap-door of Paris ; to quit that street where death was on every side , for that sort of sepulchre where there was life , was a strange instant . 
He remained for several seconds as though bewildered ; listening , stupefied . 
The waste-trap of safety had suddenly yawned beneath him . 
Celestial goodness had , in a manner , captured him by treachery . 
Adorable ambuscades of providence ! 
Only , the wounded man did not stir , and Jean Valjean did not know whether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or a dead corpse . 
His first sensation was one of blindness . 
All of a sudden , he could see nothing . 
It seemed to him too , that , in one instant , he had become deaf . 
He no longer heard anything . 
The frantic storm of murder which had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him , thanks to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it , as we have said , otherwise than faintly and indistinctly , and like a rumbling , in the depths . 
He felt that the ground was solid under his feet ; that was all ; but that was enough . 
He extended one arm and then the other , touched the walls on both sides , and perceived that the passage was narrow ; he slipped , and thus perceived that the pavement was wet . 
He cautiously put forward one foot , fearing a hole , a sink , some gulf ; he discovered that the paving continued . 
A gust of fetidness informed him of the place in which he stood . 
After the lapse of a few minutes , he was no longer blind . 
A little light fell through the man-hole through which he had descended , and his eyes became accustomed to this cavern . 
He began to distinguish something . 
The passage in which he had burrowed -- no other word can better express the situation -- was walled in behind him . 
It was one of those blind alleys , which the special jargon terms branches . 
In front of him there was another wall , a wall like night . 
The light of the air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean stood , and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls of the sewer . 
Beyond , the opaqueness was massive ; to penetrate thither seemed horrible , an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment . 
A man could , however , plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so to do . 
