Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position . 
For his lair he had the sewer of the Arche-Marion . 
He was six feet high , his pectoral muscles were of marble , his biceps of brass , his breath was that of a cavern , his torso that of a colossus , his head that of a bird . 
One thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and a cotton velvet waistcoat . 
Gueulemer , built after this sculptural fashion , might have subdued monsters ; he had found it more expeditious to be one . 
A low brow , large temples , less than forty years of age , but with crow 's - feet , harsh , short hair , cheeks like a brush , a beard like that of a wild boar ; the reader can see the man before him . 
His muscles called for work , his stupidity would have none of it . 
He was a great , idle force . 
He was an assassin through coolness . 
He was thought to be a creole . 
He had , probably , somewhat to do with Marshal Brune , having been a porter at Avignon in 1815 . 
After this stage , he had turned ruffian . 
The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer . 
Babet was thin and learned . 
He was transparent but impenetrable . 
Daylight was visible through his bones , but nothing through his eyes . 
He declared that he was a chemist . 
He had been a jack of all trades . 
He had played in vaudeville at Saint-Mihiel . 
He was a man of purpose , a fine talker , who underlined his smiles and accentuated his gestures . 
His occupation consisted in selling , in the open air , plaster busts and portraits of `` the head of the State . '' 
In addition to this , he extracted teeth . 
He had exhibited phenomena at fairs , and he had owned a booth with a trumpet and this poster : `` Babet , Dental Artist , Member of the Academies , makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids , extracts teeth , undertakes stumps abandoned by his brother practitioners . 
Price : one tooth , one franc , fifty centimes ; two teeth , two francs ; three teeth , two francs , fifty . 
Take advantage of this opportunity . '' 
This Take advantage of this opportunity meant : Have as many teeth extracted as possible . 
He had been married and had had children . 
He did not know what had become of his wife and children . 
He had lost them as one loses his handkerchief . 
Babet read the papers , a striking exception in the world to which he belonged . 
One day , at the period when he had his family with him in his booth on wheels , he had read in the Messager , that a woman had just given birth to a child , who was doing well , and had a calf 's muzzle , and he exclaimed : `` There 's a fortune ! 
my wife has not the wit to present me with a child like that ! '' 
Later on he had abandoned everything , in order to `` undertake Paris . '' 
This was his expression . 
Who was Claquesous ? 
He was night . 
He waited until the sky was daubed with black , before he showed himself . 
At nightfall he emerged from the hole whither he returned before daylight . 
Where was this hole ? 
No one knew . 
He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness , and with his back turned to them . 
Was his name Claquesous ? 
Certainly not . 
If a candle was brought , he put on a mask . 
He was a ventriloquist . 
Babet said : `` Claquesous is a nocturne for two voices . '' 
Claquesous was vague , terrible , and a roamer . 
No one was sure whether he had a name , Claquesous being a sobriquet ; none was sure that he had a voice , as his stomach spoke more frequently than his voice ; no one was sure that he had a face , as he was never seen without his mask . 
He disappeared as though he had vanished into thin air ; when he appeared , it was as though he sprang from the earth . 
A lugubrious being was Montparnasse . 
Montparnasse was a child ; less than twenty years of age , with a handsome face , lips like cherries , charming black hair , the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes ; he had all vices and aspired to all crimes . 
The digestion of evil aroused in him an appetite for worse . 
It was the street boy turned pickpocket , and a pickpocket turned garroter . 
He was genteel , effeminate , graceful , robust , sluggish , ferocious . 
The rim of his hat was curled up on the left side , in order to make room for a tuft of hair , after the style of 1829 . 
He lived by robbery with violence . 
His coat was of the best cut , but threadbare . 
Montparnasse was a fashion-plate in misery and given to the commission of murders . 
The cause of all this youth 's crimes was the desire to be well-dressed . 
The first grisette who had said to him : `` You are handsome ! '' 
had cast the stain of darkness into his heart , and had made a Cain of this Abel . 
Finding that he was handsome , he desired to be elegant : now , the height of elegance is idleness ; idleness in a poor man means crime . 
Few prowlers were so dreaded as Montparnasse . 
At eighteen , he had already numerous corpses in his past . 
More than one passer-by lay with outstretched arms in the presence of this wretch , with his face in a pool of blood . 
Curled , pomaded , with laced waist , the hips of a woman , the bust of a Prussian officer , the murmur of admiration from the boulevard wenches surrounding him , his cravat knowingly tied , a bludgeon in his pocket , a flower in his buttonhole ; such was this dandy of the sepulchre . 
COMPOSITION OF THE TROUPE These four ruffians formed a sort of Proteus , winding like a serpent among the police , and striving to escape Vidocq 's indiscreet glances `` under divers forms , tree , flame , fountain , '' lending each other their names and their traps , hiding in their own shadows , boxes with secret compartments and refuges for each other , stripping off their personalities , as one removes his false nose at a masked ball , sometimes simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but one individual , sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point that Coco-Latour himself took them for a whole throng . 
These four men were not four men ; they were a sort of mysterious robber with four heads , operating on a grand scale on Paris ; they were that monstrous polyp of evil , which inhabits the crypt of society . 
Thanks to their ramifications , and to the network underlying their relations , Babet , Gueulemer , Claquesous , and Montparnasse were charged with the general enterprise of the ambushes of the department of the Seine . 
The inventors of ideas of that nature , men with nocturnal imaginations , applied to them to have their ideas executed . 
They furnished the canvas to the four rascals , and the latter undertook the preparation of the scenery . 
They labored at the stage setting . 
They were always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and suitable to all crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder , and which were sufficiently lucrative . 
When a crime was in quest of arms , they under-let their accomplices . 
They kept a troupe of actors of the shadows at the disposition of all underground tragedies . 
They were in the habit of assembling at nightfall , the hour when they woke up , on the plains which adjoin the Salpetriere . 
There they held their conferences . 
They had twelve black hours before them ; they regulated their employment accordingly . 
Patron-Minette , -- such was the name which was bestowed in the subterranean circulation on the association of these four men . 
In the fantastic , ancient , popular parlance , which is vanishing day by day , Patron-Minette signifies the morning , the same as entre chien et loup -- between dog and wolf -- signifies the evening . 
This appellation , Patron-Minette , was probably derived from the hour at which their work ended , the dawn being the vanishing moment for phantoms and for the separation of ruffians . 
These four men were known under this title . 
When the President of the Assizes visited Lacenaire in his prison , and questioned him concerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied , `` Who did it ? '' 
demanded the President . 
Lacenaire made this response , enigmatical so far as the magistrate was concerned , but clear to the police : `` Perhaps it was Patron-Minette . '' 
A piece can sometimes be divined on the enunciation of the personages ; in the same manner a band can almost be judged from the list of ruffians composing it . 
Here are the appellations to which the principal members of Patron-Minette answered , -- for the names have survived in special memoirs . 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille . 
Brujon . 
-LSB- There was a Brujon dynasty ; we can not refrain from interpolating this word . -RSB- 
Boulatruelle , the road-mender already introduced . 
Laveuve . 
Finistere . 
Homere-Hogu , a negro . 
Mardisoir . 
-LRB- Tuesday evening . -RRB- 
Depeche . 
-LRB- Make haste . -RRB- 
Fauntleroy , alias Bouquetiere -LRB- the Flower Girl -RRB- . 
Glorieux , a discharged convict . 
Barrecarrosse -LRB- Stop-carriage -RRB- , called Monsieur Dupont . 
L'Esplanade-du-Sud . 
Poussagrive . 
Carmagnolet . 
Kruideniers , called Bizarro . 
Mangedentelle . 
-LRB- Lace-eater . -RRB- 
Les-pieds-en-l'Air . 
-LRB- Feet in the air . -RRB- 
Demi-Liard , called Deux-Milliards . 
Etc. , etc. . 
We pass over some , and not the worst of them . 
These names have faces attached . 
They do not express merely beings , but species . 
Each one of these names corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from the under side of civilization . 
Those beings , who were not very lavish with their countenances , were not among the men whom one sees passing along the streets . 
Fatigued by the wild nights which they passed , they went off by day to sleep , sometimes in the lime-kilns , sometimes in the abandoned quarries of Montmatre or Montrouge , sometimes in the sewers . 
They ran to earth . 
What became of these men ? 
They still exist . 
They have always existed . 
Horace speaks of them : Ambubaiarum collegia , pharmacopolae , mendici , mimae ; and so long as society remains what it is , they will remain what they are . 
Beneath the obscure roof of their cavern , they are continually born again from the social ooze . 
They return , spectres , but always identical ; only , they no longer bear the same names and they are no longer in the same skins . 
The individuals extirpated , the tribe subsists . 
They always have the same faculties . 
From the vagrant to the tramp , the race is maintained in its purity . 
They divine purses in pockets , they scent out watches in fobs . 
Gold and silver possess an odor for them . 
There exist ingenuous bourgeois , of whom it might be said , that they have a `` stealable '' air . 
These men patiently pursue these bourgeois . 
They experience the quivers of a spider at the passage of a stranger or of a man from the country . 
These men are terrible , when one encounters them , or catches a glimpse of them , towards midnight , on a deserted boulevard . 
They do not seem to be men but forms composed of living mists ; one would say that they habitually constitute one mass with the shadows , that they are in no wise distinct from them , that they possess no other soul than the darkness , and that it is only momentarily and for the purpose of living for a few minutes a monstrous life , that they have separated from the night . 
What is necessary to cause these spectres to vanish ? 
Light . 
Light in floods . 
Not a single bat can resist the dawn . 
Light up society from below . 
MARIUS , WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET , ENCOUNTERS A MAN IN A CAP Summer passed , then the autumn ; winter came . 
Neither M. Leblanc nor the young girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden . 
Thenceforth , Marius had but one thought , -- to gaze once more on that sweet and adorable face . 
He sought constantly , he sought everywhere ; he found nothing . 
He was no longer Marius , the enthusiastic dreamer , the firm , resolute , ardent man , the bold defier of fate , the brain which erected future on future , the young spirit encumbered with plans , with projects , with pride , with ideas and wishes ; he was a lost dog . 
He fell into a black melancholy . 
All was over . 
Work disgusted him , walking tired him . 
Vast nature , formerly so filled with forms , lights , voices , counsels , perspectives , horizons , teachings , now lay empty before him . 
It seemed to him that everything had disappeared . 
He thought incessantly , for he could not do otherwise ; but he no longer took pleasure in his thoughts . 
To everything that they proposed to him in a whisper , he replied in his darkness : `` What is the use ? '' 
He heaped a hundred reproaches on himself . 
`` Why did I follow her ? 
I was so happy at the mere sight of her ! 
She looked at me ; was not that immense ? 
She had the air of loving me . 
Was not that everything ? 
I wished to have , what ? 
There was nothing after that . 
I have been absurd . 
It is my own fault , '' etc. , etc. . 
Courfeyrac , to whom he confided nothing , -- it was his nature , -- but who made some little guess at everything , -- that was his nature , -- had begun by congratulating him on being in love , though he was amazed at it ; then , seeing Marius fall into this melancholy state , he ended by saying to him : `` I see that you have been simply an animal . 
Here , come to the Chaumiere . '' 
Once , having confidence in a fine September sun , Marius had allowed himself to be taken to the ball at Sceaux by Courfeyrac , Bossuet , and Grantaire , hoping , what a dream ! 
that he might , perhaps , find her there . 
Of course he did not see the one he sought . 
-- `` But this is the place , all the same , where all lost women are found , '' grumbled Grantaire in an aside . 
Marius left his friends at the ball and returned home on foot , alone , through the night , weary , feverish , with sad and troubled eyes , stunned by the noise and dust of the merry wagons filled with singing creatures on their way home from the feast , which passed close to him , as he , in his discouragement , breathed in the acrid scent of the walnut-trees , along the road , in order to refresh his head . 
He took to living more and more alone , utterly overwhelmed , wholly given up to his inward anguish , going and coming in his pain like the wolf in the trap , seeking the absent one everywhere , stupefied by love . 
On another occasion , he had an encounter which produced on him a singular effect . 
He met , in the narrow streets in the vicinity of the Boulevard des Invalides , a man dressed like a workingman and wearing a cap with a long visor , which allowed a glimpse of locks of very white hair . 
Marius was struck with the beauty of this white hair , and scrutinized the man , who was walking slowly and as though absorbed in painful meditation . 
Strange to say , he thought that he recognized M. Leblanc . 
The hair was the same , also the profile , so far as the cap permitted a view of it , the mien identical , only more depressed . 
But why these workingman 's clothes ? 
What was the meaning of this ? 
What signified that disguise ? 
Marius was greatly astonished . 
When he recovered himself , his first impulse was to follow the man ; who knows whether he did not hold at last the clue which he was seeking ? 
In any case , he must see the man near at hand , and clear up the mystery . 
But the idea occurred to him too late , the man was no longer there . 
He had turned into some little side street , and Marius could not find him . 
This encounter occupied his mind for three days and then was effaced . 
`` After all , '' he said to himself , `` it was probably only a resemblance . '' 
TREASURE TROVE Marius had not left the Gorbeau house . 
He paid no attention to any one there . 
At that epoch , to tell the truth , there were no other inhabitants in the house , except himself and those Jondrettes whose rent he had once paid , without , moreover , ever having spoken to either father , mother , or daughters . 
The other lodgers had moved away or had died , or had been turned out in default of payment . 
One day during that winter , the sun had shown itself a little in the afternoon , but it was the 2d of February , that ancient Candlemas day whose treacherous sun , the precursor of a six weeks ' cold spell , inspired Mathieu Laensberg with these two lines , which have with justice remained classic : -- Qu'il luise ou qu'il luiserne , L'ours rentre dans en sa caverne . 
-LSB- 26 -RSB- -LSB- 26 -RSB- Whether the sun shines brightly or dim , the bear returns to his cave . 
Marius had just emerged from his : night was falling . 
It was the hour for his dinner ; for he had been obliged to take to dining again , alas ! 
oh , infirmities of ideal passions ! 
He had just crossed his threshold , where Ma'am Bougon was sweeping at the moment , as she uttered this memorable monologue : -- `` What is there that is cheap now ? 
Everything is dear . 
There is nothing in the world that is cheap except trouble ; you can get that for nothing , the trouble of the world ! '' 
Marius slowly ascended the boulevard towards the barrier , in order to reach the Rue Saint-Jacques . 
He was walking along with drooping head . 
All at once , he felt some one elbow him in the dusk ; he wheeled round , and saw two young girls clad in rags , the one tall and slim , the other a little shorter , who were passing rapidly , all out of breath , in terror , and with the appearance of fleeing ; they had been coming to meet him , had not seen him , and had jostled him as they passed . 
Through the twilight , Marius could distinguish their livid faces , their wild heads , their dishevelled hair , their hideous bonnets , their ragged petticoats , and their bare feet . 
They were talking as they ran . 
The taller said in a very low voice : -- `` The bobbies have come . 
They came near nabbing me at the half-circle . '' 
The other answered : `` I saw them . 
I bolted , bolted , bolted ! '' 
Through this repulsive slang , Marius understood that gendarmes or the police had come near apprehending these two children , and that the latter had escaped . 
They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him , and there created , for a few minutes , in the gloom , a sort of vague white spot , then disappeared . 
Marius had halted for a moment . 
He was about to pursue his way , when his eye lighted on a little grayish package lying on the ground at his feet . 
He stooped and picked it up . 
It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers . 
`` Good , '' he said to himself , `` those unhappy girls dropped it . '' 
He retraced his steps , he called , he did not find them ; he reflected that they must already be far away , put the package in his pocket , and went off to dine . 
On the way , he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard , a child 's coffin , covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs , and illuminated by a candle . 
The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind . 
`` Poor mothers ! '' 
he thought . 
`` There is one thing sadder than to see one 's children die ; it is to see them leading an evil life . '' 
Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from his thoughts , and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations . 
He fell to thinking once more of his six months of love and happiness in the open air and the broad daylight , beneath the beautiful trees of Luxembourg . 
`` How gloomy my life has become ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Young girls are always appearing to me , only formerly they were angels and now they are ghouls . '' 
QUADRIFRONS That evening , as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed , his hand came in contact , in the pocket of his coat , with the packet which he had picked up on the boulevard . 
He had forgotten it . 
He thought that it would be well to open it , and that this package might possibly contain the address of the young girls , if it really belonged to them , and , in any case , the information necessary to a restitution to the person who had lost it . 
He opened the envelope . 
It was not sealed and contained four letters , also unsealed . 
They bore addresses . 
All four exhaled a horrible odor of tobacco . 
The first was addressed : `` To Madame , Madame la Marquise de Grucheray , the place opposite the Chamber of Deputies , No . 
-- '' Marius said to himself , that he should probably find in it the information which he sought , and that , moreover , the letter being open , it was probable that it could be read without impropriety . 
It was conceived as follows : -- Madame la Marquise : The virtue of clemency and piety is that which most closely unites sosiety . 
Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look of compassion on this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachment to the sacred cause of legitimacy , who has given with his blood , consecrated his fortune , evverything , to defend that cause , and to-day finds himself in the greatest missery . 
He doubts not that your honorable person will grant succor to preserve an existence exteremely painful for a military man of education and honor full of wounds , counts in advance on the humanity which animates you and on the interest which Madame la Marquise bears to a nation so unfortunate . 
Their prayer will not be in vain , and their gratitude will preserve theirs charming souvenir . 
My respectful sentiments , with which I have the honor to be Madame , Don Alvares , Spanish Captain of Cavalry , a royalist who has take refuge in France , who finds himself on travells for his country , and the resources are lacking him to continue his travells . 
No address was joined to the signature . 
Marius hoped to find the address in the second letter , whose superscription read : A Madame , Madame la Comtesse de Montvernet , Rue Cassette , No. 9 . 
This is what Marius read in it : -- Madame la Comtesse : It is an unhappy mother of a family of six children the last of which is only eight months old . 
I sick since my last confinement , abandoned by my husband five months ago , haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance . 
In the hope of Madame la Comtesse , she has the honor to be , Madame , with profound respect , Mistress Balizard . 
Marius turned to the third letter , which was a petition like the preceding ; he read : -- Monsieur Pabourgeot , Elector , wholesale stocking merchant , Rue Saint-Denis on the corner of the Rue aux Fers . 
I permit myself to address you this letter to beg you to grant me the pretious favor of your simpaties and to interest yourself in a man of letters who has just sent a drama to the Theatre-Francais . 
The subject is historical , and the action takes place in Auvergne in the time of the Empire ; the style , I think , is natural , laconic , and may have some merit . 
There are couplets to be sung in four places . 
The comic , the serious , the unexpected , are mingled in a variety of characters , and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the intrigue which proceeds misteriously , and ends , after striking altarations , in the midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes . 
My principal object is to satisfi the desire which progressively animates the man of our century , that is to say , the fashion , that capritious and bizarre weathervane which changes at almost every new wind . 
In spite of these qualities I have reason to fear that jealousy , the egotism of priviliged authors , may obtaine my exclusion from the theatre , for I am not ignorant of the mortifications with which new-comers are treated . 
Monsiuer Pabourgeot , your just reputation as an enlightened protector of men of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter who will explain our indigant situation to you , lacking bread and fire in this wynter season . 
When I say to you that I beg you to accept the dedication of my drama which I desire to make to you and of all those that I shall make , is to prove to you how great is my ambition to have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection , and of adorning my writings with your name . 
If you deign to honor me with the most modest offering , I shall immediately occupy myself in making a piesse of verse to pay you my tribute of gratitude . 
Which I shall endeavor to render this piesse as perfect as possible , will be sent to you before it is inserted at the beginning of the drama and delivered on the stage . 
To Monsieur and Madame Pabourgeot , My most respectful complements , Genflot , man of letters . 
P. S. Even if it is only forty sous . 
Excuse me for sending my daughter and not presenting myself , but sad motives connected with the toilet do not permit me , alas ! 
to go out . 
Finally , Marius opened the fourth letter . 
The address ran : To the benevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-haut-Pas . 
It contained the following lines : -- Benevolent Man : If you deign to accompany my daughter , you will behold a misserable calamity , and I will show you my certificates . 
At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be moved with a sentiment of obvious benevolence , for true philosophers always feel lively emotions . 
Admit , compassionate man , that it is necessary to suffer the most cruel need , and that it is very painful , for the sake of obtaining a little relief , to get oneself attested by the authorities as though one were not free to suffer and to die of inanition while waiting to have our misery relieved . 
Destinies are very fatal for several and too prodigal or too protecting for others . 
I await your presence or your offering , if you deign to make one , and I beseech you to accept the respectful sentiments with which I have the honor to be , truly magnanimous man , your very humble and very obedient servant , P. Fabantou , dramatic artist . 
After perusing these four letters , Marius did not find himself much further advanced than before . 
In the first place , not one of the signers gave his address . 
Then , they seemed to come from four different individuals , Don Alveras , Mistress Balizard , the poet Genflot , and dramatic artist Fabantou ; but the singular thing about these letters was , that all four were written by the same hand . 
What conclusion was to be drawn from this , except that they all come from the same person ? 
Moreover , and this rendered the conjecture all the more probable , the coarse and yellow paper was the same in all four , the odor of tobacco was the same , and , although an attempt had been made to vary the style , the same orthographical faults were reproduced with the greatest tranquillity , and the man of letters Genflot was no more exempt from them than the Spanish captain . 
It was waste of trouble to try to solve this petty mystery . 
Had it not been a chance find , it would have borne the air of a mystification . 
Marius was too melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well , and to lend himself to a game which the pavement of the street seemed desirous of playing with him . 
It seemed to him that he was playing the part of the blind man in blind man 's buff between the four letters , and that they were making sport of him . 
Nothing , however , indicated that these letters belonged to the two young girls whom Marius had met on the boulevard . 
After all , they were evidently papers of no value . 
Marius replaced them in their envelope , flung the whole into a corner and went to bed . 
About seven o'clock in the morning , he had just risen and breakfasted , and was trying to settle down to work , when there came a soft knock at his door . 
As he owned nothing , he never locked his door , unless occasionally , though very rarely , when he was engaged in some pressing work . 
Even when absent he left his key in the lock . 
`` You will be robbed , '' said Ma'am Bougon . 
`` Of what ? '' 
said Marius . 
The truth is , however , that he had , one day , been robbed of an old pair of boots , to the great triumph of Ma'am Bougon . 
There came a second knock , as gentle as the first . 
`` Come in , '' said Marius . 
The door opened . 
`` What do you want , Ma'am Bougon ? '' 
asked Marius , without raising his eyes from the books and manuscripts on his table . 
A voice which did not belong to Ma'am Bougon replied : -- `` Excuse me , sir -- '' It was a dull , broken , hoarse , strangled voice , the voice of an old man , roughened with brandy and liquor . 
Marius turned round hastily , and beheld a young girl . 
A ROSE IN MISERY A very young girl was standing in the half-open door . 
The dormer window of the garret , through which the light fell , was precisely opposite the door , and illuminated the figure with a wan light . 
She was a frail , emaciated , slender creature ; there was nothing but a chemise and a petticoat upon that chilled and shivering nakedness . 
Her girdle was a string , her head ribbon a string , her pointed shoulders emerged from her chemise , a blond and lymphatic pallor , earth-colored collar-bones , red hands , a half-open and degraded mouth , missing teeth , dull , bold , base eyes ; she had the form of a young girl who has missed her youth , and the look of a corrupt old woman ; fifty years mingled with fifteen ; one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible , and which cause those to shudder whom they do not cause to weep . 
Marius had risen , and was staring in a sort of stupor at this being , who was almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams . 
The most heart-breaking thing of all was , that this young girl had not come into the world to be homely . 
In her early childhood she must even have been pretty . 
The grace of her age was still struggling against the hideous , premature decrepitude of debauchery and poverty . 
The remains of beauty were dying away in that face of sixteen , like the pale sunlight which is extinguished under hideous clouds at dawn on a winter 's day . 
That face was not wholly unknown to Marius . 
He thought he remembered having seen it somewhere . 
`` What do you wish , Mademoiselle ? '' 
he asked . 
The young girl replied in her voice of a drunken convict : -- `` Here is a letter for you , Monsieur Marius . '' 
She called Marius by his name ; he could not doubt that he was the person whom she wanted ; but who was this girl ? 
How did she know his name ? 
Without waiting for him to tell her to advance , she entered . 
She entered resolutely , staring , with a sort of assurance that made the heart bleed , at the whole room and the unmade bed . 
Her feet were bare . 
Large holes in her petticoat permitted glimpses of her long legs and her thin knees . 
She was shivering . 
She held a letter in her hand , which she presented to Marius . 
Marius , as he opened the letter , noticed that the enormous wafer which sealed it was still moist . 
The message could not have come from a distance . 
He read : -- My amiable neighbor , young man : I have learned of your goodness to me , that you paid my rent six months ago . 
I bless you , young man . 
My eldest daughter will tell you that we have been without a morsel of bread for two days , four persons and my spouse ill . 
If I am not deseaved in my opinion , I think I may hope that your generous heart will melt at this statement and the desire will subjugate you to be propitious to me by daigning to lavish on me a slight favor . 
I am with the distinguished consideration which is due to the benefactors of humanity , -- Jondrette . 
P.S. My eldest daughter will await your orders , dear Monsieur Marius . 
This letter , coming in the very midst of the mysterious adventure which had occupied Marius ' thoughts ever since the preceding evening , was like a candle in a cellar . 
All was suddenly illuminated . 
This letter came from the same place as the other four . 
There was the same writing , the same style , the same orthography , the same paper , the same odor of tobacco . 
There were five missives , five histories , five signatures , and a single signer . 
The Spanish Captain Don Alvares , the unhappy Mistress Balizard , the dramatic poet Genflot , the old comedian Fabantou , were all four named Jondrette , if , indeed , Jondrette himself were named Jondrette . 
Marius had lived in the house for a tolerably long time , and he had had , as we have said , but very rare occasion to see , to even catch a glimpse of , his extremely mean neighbors . 
His mind was elsewhere , and where the mind is , there the eyes are also . 
He had been obliged more than once to pass the Jondrettes in the corridor or on the stairs ; but they were mere forms to him ; he had paid so little heed to them , that , on the preceding evening , he had jostled the Jondrette girls on the boulevard , without recognizing them , for it had evidently been they , and it was with great difficulty that the one who had just entered his room had awakened in him , in spite of disgust and pity , a vague recollection of having met her elsewhere . 
Now he saw everything clearly . 
He understood that his neighbor Jondrette , in his distress , exercised the industry of speculating on the charity of benevolent persons , that he procured addresses , and that he wrote under feigned names to people whom he judged to be wealthy and compassionate , letters which his daughters delivered at their risk and peril , for this father had come to such a pass , that he risked his daughters ; he was playing a game with fate , and he used them as the stake . 
Marius understood that probably , judging from their flight on the evening before , from their breathless condition , from their terror and from the words of slang which he had overheard , these unfortunate creatures were plying some inexplicably sad profession , and that the result of the whole was , in the midst of human society , as it is now constituted , two miserable beings who were neither girls nor women , a species of impure and innocent monsters produced by misery . 
Sad creatures , without name , or sex , or age , to whom neither good nor evil were any longer possible , and who , on emerging from childhood , have already nothing in this world , neither liberty , nor virtue , nor responsibility . 
Souls which blossomed out yesterday , and are faded to-day , like those flowers let fall in the streets , which are soiled with every sort of mire , while waiting for some wheel to crush them . 
Nevertheless , while Marius bent a pained and astonished gaze on her , the young girl was wandering back and forth in the garret with the audacity of a spectre . 
She kicked about , without troubling herself as to her nakedness . 
Occasionally her chemise , which was untied and torn , fell almost to her waist . 
She moved the chairs about , she disarranged the toilet articles which stood on the commode , she handled Marius ' clothes , she rummaged about to see what there was in the corners . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said she , `` you have a mirror ! '' 
And she hummed scraps of vaudevilles , as though she had been alone , frolicsome refrains which her hoarse and guttural voice rendered lugubrious . 
An indescribable constraint , weariness , and humiliation were perceptible beneath this hardihood . 
Effrontery is a disgrace . 
Nothing could be more melancholy than to see her sport about the room , and , so to speak , flit with the movements of a bird which is frightened by the daylight , or which has broken its wing . 
One felt that under other conditions of education and destiny , the gay and over-free mien of this young girl might have turned out sweet and charming . 
Never , even among animals , does the creature born to be a dove change into an osprey . 
That is only to be seen among men . 
Marius reflected , and allowed her to have her way . 
She approached the table . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said she , `` books ! '' 
A flash pierced her glassy eye . 
She resumed , and her accent expressed the happiness which she felt in boasting of something , to which no human creature is insensible : -- `` I know how to read , I do ! '' 
She eagerly seized a book which lay open on the table , and read with tolerable fluency : -- '' -- General Bauduin received orders to take the chateau of Hougomont which stands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo , with five battalions of his brigade . '' 
She paused . 
`` Ah ! 
Waterloo ! 
I know about that . 
It was a battle long ago . 
My father was there . 
My father has served in the armies . 
We are fine Bonapartists in our house , that we are ! 
Waterloo was against the English . '' 
She laid down the book , caught up a pen , and exclaimed : -- `` And I know how to write , too ! '' 
She dipped her pen in the ink , and turning to Marius : -- `` Do you want to see ? 
Look here , I 'm going to write a word to show you . '' 
And before he had time to answer , she wrote on a sheet of white paper , which lay in the middle of the table : `` The bobbies are here . '' 
Then throwing down the pen : -- `` There are no faults of orthography . 
You can look . 
We have received an education , my sister and I . 
We have not always been as we are now . 
We were not made -- '' Here she paused , fixed her dull eyes on Marius , and burst out laughing , saying , with an intonation which contained every form of anguish , stifled by every form of cynicism : -- `` Bah ! '' 
And she began to hum these words to a gay air : -- `` J'ai faim , mon pere . '' 
I am hungry , father . 
Pas de fricot . 
I have no food . 
J'ai froid , ma mere . 
I am cold , mother . 
Pas de tricot . 
I have no clothes . 
Grelotte , Lolotte ! 
Lolotte ! 
Shiver , Sanglote , Sob , Jacquot ! '' 
Jacquot ! '' 
She had hardly finished this couplet , when she exexclaimed : -- `` Do you ever go to the play , Monsieur Marius ? 
I do . 
I have a little brother who is a friend of the artists , and who gives me tickets sometimes . 
But I do n't like the benches in the galleries . 
One is cramped and uncomfortable there . 
There are rough people there sometimes ; and people who smell bad . '' 
Then she scrutinized Marius , assumed a singular air and said : -- `` Do you know , Mr. Marius , that you are a very handsome fellow ? '' 
And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both , and made her smile and him blush . 
She stepped up to him , and laid her hand on his shoulder : `` You pay no heed to me , but I know you , Mr. Marius . 
I meet you here on the staircase , and then I often see you going to a person named Father Mabeuf who lives in the direction of Austerlitz , sometimes when I have been strolling in that quarter . 
It is very becoming to you to have your hair tumbled thus . '' 
She tried to render her voice soft , but only succeeded in making it very deep . 
A portion of her words was lost in the transit from her larynx to her lips , as though on a piano where some notes are missing . 
Marius had retreated gently . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' said he , with his cool gravity , `` I have here a package which belongs to you , I think . 
Permit me to return it to you . '' 
And he held out the envelope containing the four letters . 
She clapped her hands and exclaimed : -- `` We have been looking everywhere for that ! '' 
Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope , saying as she did so : -- `` Dieu de Dieu ! 
how my sister and I have hunted ! 
And it was you who found it ! 
On the boulevard , was it not ? 
It must have been on the boulevard ? 
You see , we let it fall when we were running . 
It was that brat of a sister of mine who was so stupid . 
When we got home , we could not find it anywhere . 
As we did not wish to be beaten , as that is useless , as that is entirely useless , as that is absolutely useless , we said that we had carried the letters to the proper persons , and that they had said to us : ` Nix . ' 
So here they are , those poor letters ! 
And how did you find out that they belonged to me ? 
Ah ! 
yes , the writing . 
So it was you that we jostled as we passed last night . 
We could n't see . 
I said to my sister : ` Is it a gentleman ? ' 
My sister said to me : ` I think it is a gentleman . ' '' 
In the meanwhile she had unfolded the petition addressed to `` the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
`` Here ! '' 
said she , `` this is for that old fellow who goes to mass . 
By the way , this is his hour . 
I 'll go and carry it to him . 
Perhaps he will give us something to breakfast on . '' 
Then she began to laugh again , and added : -- `` Do you know what it will mean if we get a breakfast today ? 
It will mean that we shall have had our breakfast of the day before yesterday , our breakfast of yesterday , our dinner of to-day , and all that at once , and this morning . 
Come ! 
Parbleu ! 
if you are not satisfied , dogs , burst ! '' 
This reminded Marius of the wretched girl 's errand to himself . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , and found nothing there . 
The young girl went on , and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius ' presence . 
`` I often go off in the evening . 
Sometimes I do n't come home again . 
Last winter , before we came here , we lived under the arches of the bridges . 
We huddled together to keep from freezing . 
My little sister cried . 
How melancholy the water is ! 
When I thought of drowning myself , I said to myself : ` No , it 's too cold . ' 
I go out alone , whenever I choose , I sometimes sleep in the ditches . 
Do you know , at night , when I walk along the boulevard , I see the trees like forks , I see houses , all black and as big as Notre Dame , I fancy that the white walls are the river , I say to myself : ` Why , there 's water there ! ' 
The stars are like the lamps in illuminations , one would say that they smoked and that the wind blew them out , I am bewildered , as though horses were breathing in my ears ; although it is night , I hear hand-organs and spinning-machines , and I do n't know what all . 
I think people are flinging stones at me , I flee without knowing whither , everything whirls and whirls . 
You feel very queer when you have had no food . '' 
And then she stared at him with a bewildered air . 
By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets , Marius had finally collected five francs sixteen sous . 
This was all he owned in the world for the moment . 
`` At all events , '' he thought , `` there is my dinner for to-day , and to-morrow we will see . '' 
He kept the sixteen sous , and handed the five francs to the young girl . 
She seized the coin . 
`` Good ! '' 
said she , `` the sun is shining ! '' 
And , as though the sun had possessed the property of melting the avalanches of slang in her brain , she went on : -- `` Five francs ! 
the shiner ! 
a monarch ! 
in this hole ! 
Ai n't this fine ! 
You 're a jolly thief ! 
I 'm your humble servant ! 
Bravo for the good fellows ! 
Two days ' wine ! 
and meat ! 
and stew ! 
we 'll have a royal feast ! 
and a good fill ! '' 
She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders , made a low bow to Marius , then a familiar sign with her hand , and went towards the door , saying : -- `` Good morning , sir . 
It 's all right . 
I 'll go and find my old man . '' 
As she passed , she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode , which was moulding there amid the dust ; she flung herself upon it and bit into it , muttering : -- `` That 's good ! 
it 's hard ! 
it breaks my teeth ! '' 
Then she departed . 
A PROVIDENTIAL PEEP-HOLE Marius had lived for five years in poverty , in destitution , even in distress , but he now perceived that he had not known real misery . 
True misery he had but just had a view of . 
It was its spectre which had just passed before his eyes . 
In fact , he who has only beheld the misery of man has seen nothing ; the misery of woman is what he must see ; he who has seen only the misery of woman has seen nothing ; he must see the misery of the child . 
When a man has reached his last extremity , he has reached his last resources at the same time . 
Woe to the defenceless beings who surround him ! 
Work , wages , bread , fire , courage , good will , all fail him simultaneously . 
The light of day seems extinguished without , the moral light within ; in these shadows man encounters the feebleness of the woman and the child , and bends them violently to ignominy . 
Then all horrors become possible . 
Despair is surrounded with fragile partitions which all open on either vice or crime . 
Health , youth , honor , all the shy delicacies of the young body , the heart , virginity , modesty , that epidermis of the soul , are manipulated in sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources , which encounters opprobrium , and which accomodates itself to it . 
Fathers , mothers , children , brothers , sisters , men , women , daughters , adhere and become incorporated , almost like a mineral formation , in that dusky promiscuousness of sexes , relationships , ages , infamies , and innocences . 
They crouch , back to back , in a sort of hut of fate . 
They exchange woe-begone glances . 
Oh , the unfortunate wretches ! 
How pale they are ! 
How cold they are ! 
It seems as though they dwelt in a planet much further from the sun than ours . 
This young girl was to Marius a sort of messenger from the realm of sad shadows . 
She revealed to him a hideous side of the night . 
Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of revery and passion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors up to that day . 
The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement , which any one would have yielded to ; but he , Marius , should have done better than that . 
What ! 
only a wall separated him from those abandoned beings who lived gropingly in the dark outside the pale of the rest of the world , he was elbow to elbow with them , he was , in some sort , the last link of the human race which they touched , he heard them live , or rather , rattle in the death agony beside him , and he paid no heed to them ! 
Every day , every instant , he heard them walking on the other side of the wall , he heard them go , and come , and speak , and he did not even lend an ear ! 
And groans lay in those words , and he did not even listen to them , his thoughts were elsewhere , given up to dreams , to impossible radiances , to loves in the air , to follies ; and all the while , human creatures , his brothers in Jesus Christ , his brothers in the people , were agonizing in vain beside him ! 
He even formed a part of their misfortune , and he aggravated it . 
For if they had had another neighbor who was less chimerical and more attentive , any ordinary and charitable man , evidently their indigence would have been noticed , their signals of distress would have been perceived , and they would have been taken hold of and rescued ! 
They appeared very corrupt and very depraved , no doubt , very vile , very odious even ; but those who fall without becoming degraded are rare ; besides , there is a point where the unfortunate and the infamous unite and are confounded in a single word , a fatal word , the miserable ; whose fault is this ? 
And then should not the charity be all the more profound , in proportion as the fall is great ? 
While reading himself this moral lesson , for there were occasions on which Marius , like all truly honest hearts , was his own pedagogue and scolded himself more than he deserved , he stared at the wall which separated him from the Jondrettes , as though he were able to make his gaze , full of pity , penetrate that partition and warm these wretched people . 
The wall was a thin layer of plaster upheld by lathes and beams , and , as the reader had just learned , it allowed the sound of voices and words to be clearly distinguished . 
Only a man as dreamy as Marius could have failed to perceive this long before . 
There was no paper pasted on the wall , either on the side of the Jondrettes or on that of Marius ; the coarse construction was visible in its nakedness . 
Marius examined the partition , almost unconsciously ; sometimes revery examines , observes , and scrutinizes as thought would . 
All at once he sprang up ; he had just perceived , near the top , close to the ceiling , a triangular hole , which resulted from the space between three lathes . 
The plaster which should have filled this cavity was missing , and by mounting on the commode , a view could be had through this aperture into the Jondrettes ' attic . 
Commiseration has , and should have , its curiosity . 
This aperture formed a sort of peep-hole . 
It is permissible to gaze at misfortune like a traitor in order to succor it . 
-LSB- 27 -RSB- -LSB- 27 -RSB- The peep-hole is a Judas in French . 
Hence the half-punning allusion . 
`` Let us get some little idea of what these people are like , '' thought Marius , `` and in what condition they are . '' 
He climbed upon the commode , put his eye to the crevice , and looked . 
THE WILD MAN IN HIS LAIR Cities , like forests , have their caverns in which all the most wicked and formidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves . 
Only , in cities , that which thus conceals itself is ferocious , unclean , and petty , that is to say , ugly ; in forests , that which conceals itself is ferocious , savage , and grand , that is to say , beautiful . 
Taking one lair with another , the beast 's is preferable to the man 's . 
Caverns are better than hovels . 
What Marius now beheld was a hovel . 
Marius was poor , and his chamber was poverty-stricken , but as his poverty was noble , his garret was neat . 
The den upon which his eye now rested was abject , dirty , fetid , pestiferous , mean , sordid . 
The only furniture consisted of a straw chair , an infirm table , some old bits of crockery , and in two of the corners , two indescribable pallets ; all the light was furnishd by a dormer window of four panes , draped with spiders ' webs . 
Through this aperture there penetrated just enough light to make the face of a man appear like the face of a phantom . 
The walls had a leprous aspect , and were covered with seams and scars , like a visage disfigured by some horrible malady ; a repulsive moisture exuded from them . 
Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could be distinguished upon them . 
The chamber which Marius occupied had a dilapidated brick pavement ; this one was neither tiled nor planked ; its inhabitants stepped directly on the antique plaster of the hovel , which had grown black under the long-continued pressure of feet . 
Upon this uneven floor , where the dirt seemed to be fairly incrusted , and which possessed but one virginity , that of the broom , were capriciously grouped constellations of old shoes , socks , and repulsive rags ; however , this room had a fireplace , so it was let for forty francs a year . 
There was every sort of thing in that fireplace , a brazier , a pot , broken boards , rags suspended from nails , a bird-cage , ashes , and even a little fire . 
Two brands were smouldering there in a melancholy way . 
One thing which added still more to the horrors of this garret was , that it was large . 
It had projections and angles and black holes , the lower sides of roofs , bays , and promontories . 
Hence horrible , unfathomable nooks where it seemed as though spiders as big as one 's fist , wood-lice as large as one 's foot , and perhaps even -- who knows ? 
-- some monstrous human beings , must be hiding . 
One of the pallets was near the door , the other near the window . 
One end of each touched the fireplace and faced Marius . 
In a corner near the aperture through which Marius was gazing , a colored engraving in a black frame was suspended to a nail on the wall , and at its bottom , in large letters , was the inscription : THE DREAM . 
This represented a sleeping woman , and a child , also asleep , the child on the woman 's lap , an eagle in a cloud , with a crown in his beak , and the woman thrusting the crown away from the child 's head , without awaking the latter ; in the background , Napoleon in a glory , leaning on a very blue column with a yellow capital ornamented with this inscription : MARINGO AUSTERLITS IENA WAGRAMME ELOT Beneath this frame , a sort of wooden panel , which was no longer than it was broad , stood on the ground and rested in a sloping attitude against the wall . 
It had the appearance of a picture with its face turned to the wall , of a frame probably showing a daub on the other side , of some pier-glass detached from a wall and lying forgotten there while waiting to be rehung . 
Near the table , upon which Marius descried a pen , ink , and paper , sat a man about sixty years of age , small , thin , livid , haggard , with a cunning , cruel , and uneasy air ; a hideous scoundrel . 
If Lavater had studied this visage , he would have found the vulture mingled with the attorney there , the bird of prey and the pettifogger rendering each other mutually hideous and complementing each other ; the pettifogger making the bird of prey ignoble , the bird of prey making the pettifogger horrible . 
This man had a long gray beard . 
He was clad in a woman 's chemise , which allowed his hairy breast and his bare arms , bristling with gray hair , to be seen . 
Beneath this chemise , muddy trousers and boots through which his toes projected were visible . 
He had a pipe in his mouth and was smoking . 
There was no bread in the hovel , but there was still tobacco . 
He was writing probably some more letters like those which Marius had read . 
On the corner of the table lay an ancient , dilapidated , reddish volume , and the size , which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms , betrayed a romance . 
On the cover sprawled the following title , printed in large capitals : GOD ; THE KING ; HONOR AND THE LADIES ; BY DUCRAY DUMINIL , 1814 . 
As the man wrote , he talked aloud , and Marius heard his words : -- `` The idea that there is no equality , even when you are dead ! 
Just look at Pere Lachaise ! 
The great , those who are rich , are up above , in the acacia alley , which is paved . 
They can reach it in a carriage . 
The little people , the poor , the unhappy , well , what of them ? 
they are put down below , where the mud is up to your knees , in the damp places . 
They are put there so that they will decay the sooner ! 
You can not go to see them without sinking into the earth . '' 
He paused , smote the table with his fist , and added , as he ground his teeth : -- `` Oh ! 
I could eat the whole world ! '' 
A big woman , who might be forty years of age , or a hundred , was crouching near the fireplace on her bare heels . 
She , too , was clad only in a chemise and a knitted petticoat patched with bits of old cloth . 
A coarse linen apron concealed the half of her petticoat . 
Although this woman was doubled up and bent together , it could be seen that she was of very lofty stature . 
She was a sort of giant , beside her husband . 
She had hideous hair , of a reddish blond which was turning gray , and which she thrust back from time to time , with her enormous shining hands , with their flat nails . 
Beside her , on the floor , wide open , lay a book of the same form as the other , and probably a volume of the same romance . 
On one of the pallets , Marius caught a glimpse of a sort of tall pale young girl , who sat there half naked and with pendant feet , and who did not seem to be listening or seeing or living . 
No doubt the younger sister of the one who had come to his room . 
She seemed to be eleven or twelve years of age . 
On closer scrutiny it was evident that she really was fourteen . 
She was the child who had said , on the boulevard the evening before : `` I bolted , bolted , bolted ! '' 
She was of that puny sort which remains backward for a long time , then suddenly starts up rapidly . 
It is indigence which produces these melancholy human plants . 
These creatures have neither childhood nor youth . 
At fifteen years of age they appear to be twelve , at sixteen they seem twenty . 
To-day a little girl , to-morrow a woman . 
One might say that they stride through life , in order to get through with it the more speedily . 
At this moment , this being had the air of a child . 
Moreover , no trace of work was revealed in that dwelling ; no handicraft , no spinning-wheel , not a tool . 
In one corner lay some ironmongery of dubious aspect . 
It was the dull listlessness which follows despair and precedes the death agony . 
Marius gazed for a while at this gloomy interior , more terrifying than the interior of a tomb , for the human soul could be felt fluttering there , and life was palpitating there . 
The garret , the cellar , the lowly ditch where certain indigent wretches crawl at the very bottom of the social edifice , is not exactly the sepulchre , but only its antechamber ; but , as the wealthy display their greatest magnificence at the entrance of their palaces , it seems that death , which stands directly side by side with them , places its greatest miseries in that vestibule . 
The man held his peace , the woman spoke no word , the young girl did not even seem to breathe . 
The scratching of the pen on the paper was audible . 
The man grumbled , without pausing in his writing . 
`` Canaille ! 
canaille ! 
everybody is canaille ! '' 
This variation to Solomon 's exclamation elicited a sigh from the woman . 
`` Calm yourself , my little friend , '' she said . 
`` Do n't hurt yourself , my dear . 
You are too good to write to all those people , husband . '' 
Bodies press close to each other in misery , as in cold , but hearts draw apart . 
This woman must have loved this man , to all appearance , judging from the amount of love within her ; but probably , in the daily and reciprocal reproaches of the horrible distress which weighed on the whole group , this had become extinct . 
There no longer existed in her anything more than the ashes of affection for her husband . 
Nevertheless , caressing appellations had survived , as is often the case . 
She called him : My dear , my little friend , my good man , etc. , with her mouth while her heart was silent . 
The man resumed his writing . 
STRATEGY AND TACTICS Marius , with a load upon his breast , was on the point of descending from the species of observatory which he had improvised , when a sound attracted his attention and caused him to remain at his post . 
The door of the attic had just burst open abruptly . 
The eldest girl made her appearance on the threshold . 
On her feet , she had large , coarse , men 's shoes , bespattered with mud , which had splashed even to her red ankles , and she was wrapped in an old mantle which hung in tatters . 
Marius had not seen it on her an hour previously , but she had probably deposited it at his door , in order that she might inspire the more pity , and had picked it up again on emerging . 
She entered , pushed the door to behind her , paused to take breath , for she was completely breathless , then exclaimed with an expression of triumph and joy : -- `` He is coming ! '' 
The father turned his eyes towards her , the woman turned her head , the little sister did not stir . 
`` Who ? '' 
demanded her father . 
`` The gentleman ! '' 
`` The philanthropist ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` From the church of Saint-Jacques ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That old fellow ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And he is coming ? '' 
`` He is following me . '' 
`` You are sure ? '' 
`` I am sure . '' 
`` There , truly , he is coming ? '' 
`` He is coming in a fiacre . '' 
`` In a fiacre . 
He is Rothschild . '' 
The father rose . 
`` How are you sure ? 
If he is coming in a fiacre , how is it that you arrive before him ? 
You gave him our address at least ? 
Did you tell him that it was the last door at the end of the corridor , on the right ? 
If he only does not make a mistake ! 
So you found him at the church ? 
Did he read my letter ? 
What did he say to you ? '' 
`` Ta , ta , ta , '' said the girl , `` how you do gallop on , my good man ! 
See here : I entered the church , he was in his usual place , I made him a reverence , and I handed him the letter ; he read it and said to me : ` Where do you live , my child ? ' 
I said : ` Monsieur , I will show you . ' 
He said to me : ` No , give me your address , my daughter has some purchases to make , I will take a carriage and reach your house at the same time that you do . ' 
I gave him the address . 
When I mentioned the house , he seemed surprised and hesitated for an instant , then he said : ` Never mind , I will come . ' 
When the mass was finished , I watched him leave the church with his daughter , and I saw them enter a carriage . 
I certainly did tell him the last door in the corridor , on the right . '' 
`` And what makes you think that he will come ? '' 
`` I have just seen the fiacre turn into the Rue Petit-Banquier . 
That is what made me run so . '' 
`` How do you know that it was the same fiacre ? '' 
`` Because I took notice of the number , so there ! '' 
`` What was the number ? '' 
`` 440 . '' 
`` Good , you are a clever girl . '' 
The girl stared boldly at her father , and showing the shoes which she had on her feet : -- `` A clever girl , possibly ; but I tell you I wo n't put these shoes on again , and that I wo n't , for the sake of my health , in the first place , and for the sake of cleanliness , in the next . 
I do n't know anything more irritating than shoes that squelch , and go ghi , ghi , ghi , the whole time . 
I prefer to go barefoot . '' 
`` You are right , '' said her father , in a sweet tone which contrasted with the young girl 's rudeness , `` but then , you will not be allowed to enter churches , for poor people must have shoes to do that . 
One can not go barefoot to the good God , '' he added bitterly . 
Then , returning to the subject which absorbed him : -- `` So you are sure that he will come ? '' 
`` He is following on my heels , '' said she . 
The man started up . 
A sort of illumination appeared on his countenance . 
`` Wife ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` you hear . 
Here is the philanthropist . 
Extinguish the fire . '' 
The stupefied mother did not stir . 
The father , with the agility of an acrobat , seized a broken-nosed jug which stood on the chimney , and flung the water on the brands . 
Then , addressing his eldest daughter : -- `` Here you ! 
Pull the straw off that chair ! '' 
His daughter did not understand . 
He seized the chair , and with one kick he rendered it seatless . 
His leg passed through it . 
As he withdrew his leg , he asked his daughter : -- `` Is it cold ? '' 
`` Very cold . 
It is snowing . '' 
The father turned towards the younger girl who sat on the bed near the window , and shouted to her in a thundering voice : -- `` Quick ! 
get off that bed , you lazy thing ! 
will you never do anything ? 
Break a pane of glass ! '' 
The little girl jumped off the bed with a shiver . 
`` Break a pane ! '' 
he repeated . 
The child stood still in bewilderment . 
`` Do you hear me ? '' 
repeated her father , `` I tell you to break a pane ! '' 
The child , with a sort of terrified obedience , rose on tiptoe , and struck a pane with her fist . 
The glass broke and fell with a loud clatter . 
`` Good , '' said the father . 
He was grave and abrupt . 
His glance swept rapidly over all the crannies of the garret . 
One would have said that he was a general making the final preparation at the moment when the battle is on the point of beginning . 
The mother , who had not said a word so far , now rose and demanded in a dull , slow , languid voice , whence her words seemed to emerge in a congealed state : -- `` What do you mean to do , my dear ? '' 
`` Get into bed , '' replied the man . 
His intonation admitted of no deliberation . 
The mother obeyed , and threw herself heavily on one of the pallets . 
In the meantime , a sob became audible in one corner . 
`` What 's that ? '' 
cried the father . 
The younger daughter exhibited her bleeding fist , without quitting the corner in which she was cowering . 
She had wounded herself while breaking the window ; she went off , near her mother 's pallet and wept silently . 
It was now the mother 's turn to start up and exclaim : -- `` Just see there ! 
What follies you commit ! 
She has cut herself breaking that pane for you ! '' 
`` So much the better ! '' 
said the man . 
`` I foresaw that . '' 
`` What ? 
So much the better ? '' 
retorted his wife . 
`` Peace ! '' 
replied the father , `` I suppress the liberty of the press . '' 
Then tearing the woman 's chemise which he was wearing , he made a strip of cloth with which he hastily swathed the little girl 's bleeding wrist . 
That done , his eye fell with a satisfied expression on his torn chemise . 
`` And the chemise too , '' said he , `` this has a good appearance . '' 
An icy breeze whistled through the window and entered the room . 
The outer mist penetrated thither and diffused itself like a whitish sheet of wadding vaguely spread by invisible fingers . 
Through the broken pane the snow could be seen falling . 
The snow promised by the Candlemas sun of the preceding day had actually come . 
The father cast a glance about him as though to make sure that he had forgotten nothing . 
He seized an old shovel and spread ashes over the wet brands in such a manner as to entirely conceal them . 
Then drawing himself up and leaning against the chimney-piece : -- `` Now , '' said he , `` we can receive the philanthropist . '' 
THE RAY OF LIGHT IN THE HOVEL The big girl approached and laid her hand in her father 's . 
`` Feel how cold I am , '' said she . 
`` Bah ! '' 
replied the father , `` I am much colder than that . '' 
The mother exclaimed impetuously : -- `` You always have something better than any one else , so you do ! 
even bad things . '' 
`` Down with you ! '' 
said the man . 
The mother , being eyed after a certain fashion , held her tongue . 
Silence reigned for a moment in the hovel . 
The elder girl was removing the mud from the bottom of her mantle , with a careless air ; her younger sister continued to sob ; the mother had taken the latter 's head between her hands , and was covering it with kisses , whispering to her the while : -- `` My treasure , I entreat you , it is nothing of consequence , do n't cry , you will anger your father . '' 
`` No ! '' 
exclaimed the father , `` quite the contrary ! 
sob ! 
sob ! 
that 's right . '' 
Then turning to the elder : -- `` There now ! 
He is not coming ! 
What if he were not to come ! 
I shall have extinguished my fire , wrecked my chair , torn my shirt , and broken my pane all for nothing . '' 
`` And wounded the child ! '' 
murmured the mother . 
`` Do you know , '' went on the father , `` that it 's beastly cold in this devil 's garret ! 
What if that man should not come ! 
Oh ! 
See there , you ! 
He makes us wait ! 
He says to himself : ` Well ! 
they will wait for me ! 
That 's what they 're there for . ' 
Oh ! 
how I hate them , and with what joy , jubilation , enthusiasm , and satisfaction I could strangle all those rich folks ! 
all those rich folks ! 
These men who pretend to be charitable , who put on airs , who go to mass , who make presents to the priesthood , preachy , preachy , in their skullcaps , and who think themselves above us , and who come for the purpose of humiliating us , and to bring us ` clothes , ' as they say ! 
old duds that are not worth four sous ! 
And bread ! 
That 's not what I want , pack of rascals that they are , it 's money ! 
Ah ! 
money ! 
Never ! 
Because they say that we would go off and drink it up , and that we are drunkards and idlers ! 
And they ! 
What are they , then , and what have they been in their time ! 
Thieves ! 
They never could have become rich otherwise ! 
Oh ! 
Society ought to be grasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air , all of it ! 
It would all be smashed , very likely , but at least , no one would have anything , and there would be that much gained ! 
But what is that blockhead of a benevolent gentleman doing ? 
Will he come ? 
Perhaps the animal has forgotten the address ! 
I 'll bet that that old beast -- '' At that moment there came a light tap at the door , the man rushed to it and opened it , exclaiming , amid profound bows and smiles of adoration : -- `` Enter , sir ! 
Deign to enter , most respected benefactor , and your charming young lady , also . '' 
A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on the threshold of the attic . 
Marius had not quitted his post . 
His feelings for the moment surpassed the powers of the human tongue . 
It was She ! 
Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in those three letters of that word : She . 
It was certainly she . 
Marius could hardly distinguish her through the luminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes . 
It was that sweet , absent being , that star which had beamed upon him for six months ; it was those eyes , that brow , that mouth , that lovely vanished face which had created night by its departure . 
The vision had been eclipsed , now it reappeared . 
It reappeared in that gloom , in that garret , in that misshapen attic , in all that horror . 
Marius shuddered in dismay . 
What ! 
It was she ! 
The palpitations of his heart troubled his sight . 
He felt that he was on the brink of bursting into tears ! 
What ! 
He beheld her again at last , after having sought her so long ! 
It seemed to him that he had lost his soul , and that he had just found it again . 
She was the same as ever , only a little pale ; her delicate face was framed in a bonnet of violet velvet , her figure was concealed beneath a pelisse of black satin . 
Beneath her long dress , a glimpse could be caught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot . 
She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc . 
She had taken a few steps into the room , and had deposited a tolerably bulky parcel on the table . 
The eldest Jondrette girl had retired behind the door , and was staring with sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet , that silk mantle , and that charming , happy face . 
JONDRETTE COMES NEAR WEEPING The hovel was so dark , that people coming from without felt on entering it the effect produced on entering a cellar . 
The two new-comers advanced , therefore , with a certain hesitation , being hardly able to distinguish the vague forms surrounding them , while they could be clearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes of the inhabitants of the garret , who were accustomed to this twilight . 
M. Leblanc approached , with his sad but kindly look , and said to Jondrette the father : -- `` Monsieur , in this package you will find some new clothes and some woollen stockings and blankets . '' 
`` Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us , '' said Jondrette , bowing to the very earth . 
Then , bending down to the ear of his eldest daughter , while the two visitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior , he added in a low and rapid voice : -- `` Hey ? 
What did I say ? 
Duds ! 
No money ! 
They are all alike ! 
By the way , how was the letter to that old blockhead signed ? '' 
`` Fabantou , '' replied the girl . 
`` The dramatic artist , good ! '' 
It was lucky for Jondrette , that this had occurred to him , for at the very moment , M. Leblanc turned to him , and said to him with the air of a person who is seeking to recall a name : -- `` I see that you are greatly to be pitied , Monsieur -- '' `` Fabantou , '' replied Jondrette quickly . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , yes , that is it . 
I remember . '' 
`` Dramatic artist , sir , and one who has had some success . '' 
Here Jondrette evidently judged the moment propitious for capturing the `` philanthropist . '' 
He exclaimed with an accent which smacked at the same time of the vainglory of the mountebank at fairs , and the humility of the mendicant on the highway : -- `` A pupil of Talma ! 
Sir ! 
I am a pupil of Talma ! 
Fortune formerly smiled on me -- Alas ! 
Now it is misfortune 's turn . 
You see , my benefactor , no bread , no fire . 
My poor babes have no fire ! 
My only chair has no seat ! 
A broken pane ! 
And in such weather ! 
My spouse in bed ! 
Ill ! '' 
`` Poor woman ! '' 
said M. Leblanc . 
`` My child wounded ! '' 
added Jondrette . 
The child , diverted by the arrival of the strangers , had fallen to contemplating `` the young lady , '' and had ceased to sob . 
`` Cry ! 
bawl ! '' 
said Jondrette to her in a low voice . 
At the same time he pinched her sore hand . 
All this was done with the talent of a juggler . 
The little girl gave vent to loud shrieks . 
The adorable young girl , whom Marius , in his heart , called `` his Ursule , '' approached her hastily . 
`` Poor , dear child ! '' 
said she . 
`` You see , my beautiful young lady , '' pursued Jondrette `` her bleeding wrist ! 
It came through an accident while working at a machine to earn six sous a day . 
It may be necessary to cut off her arm . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
said the old gentleman , in alarm . 
The little girl , taking this seriously , fell to sobbing more violently than ever . 
`` Alas ! 
yes , my benefactor ! '' 
replied the father . 
For several minutes , Jondrette had been scrutinizing `` the benefactor '' in a singular fashion . 
As he spoke , he seemed to be examining the other attentively , as though seeking to summon up his recollections . 
All at once , profiting by a moment when the new-comers were questioning the child with interest as to her injured hand , he passed near his wife , who lay in her bed with a stupid and dejected air , and said to her in a rapid but very low tone : -- `` Take a look at that man ! '' 
Then , turning to M. Leblanc , and continuing his lamentations : -- `` You see , sir ! 
All the clothing that I have is my wife 's chemise ! 
And all torn at that ! 
In the depths of winter ! 
I ca n't go out for lack of a coat . 
If I had a coat of any sort , I would go and see Mademoiselle Mars , who knows me and is very fond of me . 
Does she not still reside in the Rue de la Tour-des-Dames ? 
Do you know , sir ? 
We played together in the provinces . 
I shared her laurels . 
Celimene would come to my succor , sir ! 
Elmire would bestow alms on Belisaire ! 
But no , nothing ! 
And not a sou in the house ! 
My wife ill , and not a sou ! 
My daughter dangerously injured , not a sou ! 
My wife suffers from fits of suffocation . 
It comes from her age , and besides , her nervous system is affected . 
She ought to have assistance , and my daughter also ! 
But the doctor ! 
But the apothecary ! 
How am I to pay them ? 
I would kneel to a penny , sir ! 
Such is the condition to which the arts are reduced . 
And do you know , my charming young lady , and you , my generous protector , do you know , you who breathe forth virtue and goodness , and who perfume that church where my daughter sees you every day when she says her prayers ? 
-- For I have brought up my children religiously , sir . 
I did not want them to take to the theatre . 
Ah ! 
the hussies ! 
If I catch them tripping ! 
I do not jest , that I do n't ! 
I read them lessons on honor , on morality , on virtue ! 
Ask them ! 
They have got to walk straight . 
They are none of your unhappy wretches who begin by having no family , and end by espousing the public . 
One is Mamselle Nobody , and one becomes Madame Everybody . 
Deuce take it ! 
None of that in the Fabantou family ! 
I mean to bring them up virtuously , and they shall be honest , and nice , and believe in God , by the sacred name ! 
Well , sir , my worthy sir , do you know what is going to happen to-morrow ? 
To-morrow is the fourth day of February , the fatal day , the last day of grace allowed me by my landlord ; if by this evening I have not paid my rent , to-morrow my oldest daughter , my spouse with her fever , my child with her wound , -- we shall all four be turned out of here and thrown into the street , on the boulevard , without shelter , in the rain , in the snow . 
There , sir . 
I owe for four quarters -- a whole year ! 
that is to say , sixty francs . '' 
Jondrette lied . 
Four quarters would have amounted to only forty francs , and he could not owe four , because six months had not elapsed since Marius had paid for two . 
M. Leblanc drew five francs from his pocket and threw them on the table . 
Jondrette found time to mutter in the ear of his eldest daughter : -- `` The scoundrel ! 
What does he think I can do with his five francs ? 
That wo n't pay me for my chair and pane of glass ! 
That 's what comes of incurring expenses ! '' 
In the meanwhile , M. Leblanc had removed the large brown great-coat which he wore over his blue coat , and had thrown it over the back of the chair . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , '' he said , `` these five francs are all that I have about me , but I shall now take my daughter home , and I will return this evening , -- it is this evening that you must pay , is it not ? '' 
Jondrette 's face lighted up with a strange expression . 
He replied vivaciously : -- `` Yes , respected sir . 
At eight o'clock , I must be at my landlord 's . '' 
`` I will be here at six , and I will fetch you the sixty francs . '' 
`` My benefactor ! '' 
exclaimed Jondrette , overwhelmed . 
And he added , in a low tone : `` Take a good look at him , wife ! '' 
M. Leblanc had taken the arm of the young girl , once more , and had turned towards the door . 
`` Farewell until this evening , my friends ! '' 
said he . 
`` Six o'clock ? '' 
said Jondrette . 
`` Six o'clock precisely . '' 
At that moment , the overcoat lying on the chair caught the eye of the elder Jondrette girl . 
`` You are forgetting your coat , sir , '' said she . 
Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter , accompanied by a formidable shrug of the shoulders . 
M. Leblanc turned back and said , with a smile : -- `` I have not forgotten it , I am leaving it . '' 
`` O my protector ! '' 
said Jondrette , `` my august benefactor , I melt into tears ! 
Permit me to accompany you to your carriage . '' 
`` If you come out , '' answered M. Leblanc , `` put on this coat . 
It really is very cold . '' 
Jondrette did not need to be told twice . 
He hastily donned the brown great-coat . 
And all three went out , Jondrette preceding the two strangers . 
TARIFF OF LICENSED CABS : TWO FRANCS AN HOUR Marius had lost nothing of this entire scene , and yet , in reality , had seen nothing . 
His eyes had remained fixed on the young girl , his heart had , so to speak , seized her and wholly enveloped her from the moment of her very first step in that garret . 
During her entire stay there , he had lived that life of ecstasy which suspends material perceptions and precipitates the whole soul on a single point . 
He contemplated , not that girl , but that light which wore a satin pelisse and a velvet bonnet . 
The star Sirius might have entered the room , and he would not have been any more dazzled . 
While the young girl was engaged in opening the package , unfolding the clothing and the blankets , questioning the sick mother kindly , and the little injured girl tenderly , he watched her every movement , he sought to catch her words . 
He knew her eyes , her brow , her beauty , her form , her walk , he did not know the sound of her voice . 
He had once fancied that he had caught a few words at the Luxembourg , but he was not absolutely sure of the fact . 
He would have given ten years of his life to hear it , in order that he might bear away in his soul a little of that music . 
But everything was drowned in the lamentable exclamations and trumpet bursts of Jondrette . 
This added a touch of genuine wrath to Marius ' ecstasy . 
He devoured her with his eyes . 
He could not believe that it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst of those vile creatures in that monstrous lair . 
It seemed to him that he beheld a humming-bird in the midst of toads . 
When she took her departure , he had but one thought , to follow her , to cling to her trace , not to quit her until he learned where she lived , not to lose her again , at least , after having so miraculously re-discovered her . 
He leaped down from the commode and seized his hat . 
As he laid his hand on the lock of the door , and was on the point of opening it , a sudden reflection caused him to pause . 
The corridor was long , the staircase steep , Jondrette was talkative , M. Leblanc had , no doubt , not yet regained his carriage ; if , on turning round in the corridor , or on the staircase , he were to catch sight of him , Marius , in that house , he would , evidently , take the alarm , and find means to escape from him again , and this time it would be final . 
What was he to do ? 
Should he wait a little ? 
But while he was waiting , the carriage might drive off . 
Marius was perplexed . 
At last he accepted the risk and quitted his room . 
There was no one in the corridor . 
He hastened to the stairs . 
There was no one on the staircase . 
He descended in all haste , and reached the boulevard in time to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier , on its way back to Paris . 
Marius rushed headlong in that direction . 
On arriving at the angle of the boulevard , he caught sight of the fiacre again , rapidly descending the Rue Mouffetard ; the carriage was already a long way off , and there was no means of overtaking it ; what ! 
run after it ? 
Impossible ; and besides , the people in the carriage would assuredly notice an individual running at full speed in pursuit of a fiacre , and the father would recognize him . 
At that moment , wonderful and unprecedented good luck , Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the boulevard . 
There was but one thing to be done , to jump into this cab and follow the fiacre . 
That was sure , efficacious , and free from danger . 
Marius made the driver a sign to halt , and called to him : -- `` By the hour ? '' 
Marius wore no cravat , he had on his working-coat , which was destitute of buttons , his shirt was torn along one of the plaits on the bosom . 
The driver halted , winked , and held out his left hand to Marius , rubbing his forefinger gently with his thumb . 
`` What is it ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` Pay in advance , '' said the coachman . 
Marius recollected that he had but sixteen sous about him . 
`` How much ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` Forty sous . '' 
`` I will pay on my return . '' 
The driver 's only reply was to whistle the air of La Palisse and to whip up his horse . 
Marius stared at the retreating cabriolet with a bewildered air . 
For the lack of four and twenty sous , he was losing his joy , his happiness , his love ! 
He had seen , and he was becoming blind again . 
He reflected bitterly , and it must be confessed , with profound regret , on the five francs which he had bestowed , that very morning , on that miserable girl . 
If he had had those five francs , he would have been saved , he would have been born again , he would have emerged from the limbo and darkness , he would have made his escape from isolation and spleen , from his widowed state ; he might have re-knotted the black thread of his destiny to that beautiful golden thread , which had just floated before his eyes and had broken at the same instant , once more ! 
He returned to his hovel in despair . 
He might have told himself that M. Leblanc had promised to return in the evening , and that all he had to do was to set about the matter more skilfully , so that he might follow him on that occasion ; but , in his contemplation , it is doubtful whether he had heard this . 
As he was on the point of mounting the staircase , he perceived , on the other side of the boulevard , near the deserted wall skirting the Rue De la Barriere-des-Gobelins , Jondrette , wrapped in the `` philanthropist 's '' great-coat , engaged in conversation with one of those men of disquieting aspect who have been dubbed by common consent , prowlers of the barriers ; people of equivocal face , of suspicious monologues , who present the air of having evil minds , and who generally sleep in the daytime , which suggests the supposition that they work by night . 
These two men , standing there motionless and in conversation , in the snow which was falling in whirlwinds , formed a group that a policeman would surely have observed , but which Marius hardly noticed . 
Still , in spite of his mournful preoccupation , he could not refrain from saying to himself that this prowler of the barriers with whom Jondrette was talking resembled a certain Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a very dangerous nocturnal roamer . 
This man 's name the reader has learned in the preceding book . 
This Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , figured later on in many criminal trials , and became a notorious rascal . 
He was at that time only a famous rascal . 
To-day he exists in the state of tradition among ruffians and assassins . 
He was at the head of a school towards the end of the last reign . 
And in the evening , at nightfall , at the hour when groups form and talk in whispers , he was discussed at La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions . 
One might even , in that prison , precisely at the spot where the sewer which served the unprecedented escape , in broad daylight , of thirty prisoners , in 1843 , passes under the culvert , read his name , PANCHAUD , audaciously carved by his own hand on the wall of the sewer , during one of his attempts at flight . 
In 1832 , the police already had their eye on him , but he had not as yet made a serious beginning . 
OFFERS OF SERVICE FROM MISERY TO WRETCHEDNESS Marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps ; at the moment when he was about to re-enter his cell , he caught sight of the elder Jondrette girl following him through the corridor . 
The very sight of this girl was odious to him ; it was she who had his five francs , it was too late to demand them back , the cab was no longer there , the fiacre was far away . 
Moreover , she would not have given them back . 
As for questioning her about the residence of the persons who had just been there , that was useless ; it was evident that she did not know , since the letter signed Fabantou had been addressed `` to the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
Marius entered his room and pushed the door to after him . 
It did not close ; he turned round and beheld a hand which held the door half open . 
`` What is it ? '' 
he asked , `` who is there ? '' 
