She turned towards him ; she was making a visible effort to be calm and `` very good , '' as she expressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy , in order that , seeing her so peaceable , they might make no difficulty about bringing Cosette to her . 
But while she controlled herself she could not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine . 
`` Did you have a pleasant trip , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Oh ! 
how good you were to go and get her for me ! 
Only tell me how she is . 
Did she stand the journey well ? 
Alas ! 
she will not recognize me . 
She must have forgotten me by this time , poor darling ! 
Children have no memories . 
They are like birds . 
A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow , and thinks of nothing any longer . 
And did she have white linen ? 
Did those Thenardiers keep her clean ? 
How have they fed her ? 
Oh ! 
if you only knew how I have suffered , putting such questions as that to myself during all the time of my wretchedness . 
Now , it is all past . 
I am happy . 
Oh , how I should like to see her ! 
Do you think her pretty , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Is not my daughter beautiful ? 
You must have been very cold in that diligence ! 
Could she not be brought for just one little instant ? 
She might be taken away directly afterwards . 
Tell me ; you are the master ; it could be so if you chose ! '' 
He took her hand . 
`` Cosette is beautiful , '' he said , `` Cosette is well . 
You shall see her soon ; but calm yourself ; you are talking with too much vivacity , and you are throwing your arms out from under the clothes , and that makes you cough . '' 
In fact , fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word . 
Fantine did not murmur ; she feared that she had injured by her too passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of inspiring , and she began to talk of indifferent things . 
`` Montfermeil is quite pretty , is it not ? 
People go there on pleasure parties in summer . 
Are the Thenardiers prosperous ? 
There are not many travellers in their parts . 
That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop . '' 
M. Madeleine was still holding her hand , and gazing at her with anxiety ; it was evident that he had come to tell her things before which his mind now hesitated . 
The doctor , having finished his visit , retired . 
Sister Simplice remained alone with them . 
But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed : -- `` I hear her ! 
mon Dieu , I hear her ! '' 
She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her , held her breath , and began to listen with rapture . 
There was a child playing in the yard -- the child of the portress or of some work-woman . 
It was one of those accidents which are always occurring , and which seem to form a part of the mysterious stage-setting of mournful scenes . 
The child -- a little girl -- was going and coming , running to warm herself , laughing , singing at the top of her voice . 
Alas ! 
in what are the plays of children not intermingled . 
It was this little girl whom Fantine heard singing . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is my Cosette ! 
I recognize her voice . '' 
The child retreated as it had come ; the voice died away . 
Fantine listened for a while longer , then her face clouded over , and M. Madeleine heard her say , in a low voice : `` How wicked that doctor is not to allow me to see my daughter ! 
That man has an evil countenance , that he has . '' 
But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again . 
She continued to talk to herself , with her head resting on the pillow : `` How happy we are going to be ! 
We shall have a little garden the very first thing ; M. Madeleine has promised it to me . 
My daughter will play in the garden . 
She must know her letters by this time . 
I will make her spell . 
She will run over the grass after butterflies . 
I will watch her . 
Then she will take her first communion . 
Ah ! 
when will she take her first communion ? '' 
She began to reckon on her fingers . 
`` One , two , three , four -- she is seven years old . 
In five years she will have a white veil , and openwork stockings ; she will look like a little woman . 
O my good sister , you do not know how foolish I become when I think of my daughter 's first communion ! '' 
She began to laugh . 
He had released Fantine 's hand . 
He listened to her words as one listens to the sighing of the breeze , with his eyes on the ground , his mind absorbed in reflection which had no bottom . 
All at once she ceased speaking , and this caused him to raise his head mechanically . 
Fantine had become terrible . 
She no longer spoke , she no longer breathed ; she had raised herself to a sitting posture , her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise ; her face , which had been radiant but a moment before , was ghastly , and she seemed to have fixed her eyes , rendered large with terror , on something alarming at the other extremity of the room . 
`` Good God ! '' 
he exclaimed ; `` what ails you , Fantine ? '' 
She made no reply ; she did not remove her eyes from the object which she seemed to see . 
She removed one hand from his arm , and with the other made him a sign to look behind him . 
He turned , and beheld Javert . 
JAVERT SATISFIED This is what had taken place . 
The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quitted the Hall of Assizes in Arras . 
He regained his inn just in time to set out again by the mail-wagon , in which he had engaged his place . 
A little before six o'clock in the morning he had arrived at M. sur M. , and his first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte , then to enter the infirmary and see Fantine . 
However , he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court of Assizes , when the district-attorney , recovering from his first shock , had taken the word to deplore the mad deed of the honorable mayor of M. sur M. , to declare that his convictions had not been in the least modified by that curious incident , which would be explained thereafter , and to demand , in the meantime , the condemnation of that Champmathieu , who was evidently the real Jean Valjean . 
The district-attorney 's persistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of every one , of the public , of the court , and of the jury . 
The counsel for the defence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and in establishing that , in consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine , that is to say , of the real Jean Valjean , the aspect of the matter had been thoroughly altered , and that the jury had before their eyes now only an innocent man . 
Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas , not very fresh , unfortunately , upon judicial errors , etc. , etc. ; the President , in his summing up , had joined the counsel for the defence , and in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case . 
Nevertheless , the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean ; and as he had no longer Champmathieu , he took Madeleine . 
Immediately after Champmathieu had been set at liberty , the district-attorney shut himself up with the President . 
They conferred `` as to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M. '' This phrase , in which there was a great deal of of , is the district-attorney 's , written with his own hand , on the minutes of his report to the attorney-general . 
His first emotion having passed off , the President did not offer many objections . 
Justice must , after all , take its course . 
And then , when all was said , although the President was a kindly and a tolerably intelligent man , he was , at the same time , a devoted and almost an ardent royalist , and he had been shocked to hear the Mayor of M. sur M. say the Emperor , and not Bonaparte , when alluding to the landing at Cannes . 
The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched . 
The district-attorney forwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger , at full speed , and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert . 
The reader knows that Javert had returned to M. sur M. immediately after having given his deposition . 
Javert was just getting out of bed when the messenger handed him the order of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner . 
The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police , who , in two words , informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras . 
The order of arrest , signed by the district-attorney , was couched in these words : `` Inspector Javert will apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. , who , in this day 's session of the court , was recognized as the liberated convict , Jean Valjean . '' 
Any one who did not know Javert , and who had chanced to see him at the moment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary , could have divined nothing of what had taken place , and would have thought his air the most ordinary in the world . 
He was cool , calm , grave , his gray hair was perfectly smooth upon his temples , and he had just mounted the stairs with his habitual deliberation . 
Any one who was thoroughly acquainted with him , and who had examined him attentively at the moment , would have shuddered . 
The buckle of his leather stock was under his left ear instead of at the nape of his neck . 
This betrayed unwonted agitation . 
Javert was a complete character , who never had a wrinkle in his duty or in his uniform ; methodical with malefactors , rigid with the buttons of his coat . 
That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry , it was indispensable that there should have taken place in him one of those emotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes . 
He had come in a simple way , had made a requisition on the neighboring post for a corporal and four soldiers , had left the soldiers in the courtyard , had had Fantine 's room pointed out to him by the portress , who was utterly unsuspicious , accustomed as she was to seeing armed men inquiring for the mayor . 
On arriving at Fantine 's chamber , Javert turned the handle , pushed the door open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy , and entered . 
Properly speaking , he did not enter . 
He stood erect in the half-open door , his hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat , which was buttoned up to the chin . 
In the bend of his elbow the leaden head of his enormous cane , which was hidden behind him , could be seen . 
Thus he remained for nearly a minute , without his presence being perceived . 
All at once Fantine raised her eyes , saw him , and made M. Madeleine turn round . 
The instant that Madeleine 's glance encountered Javert 's glance , Javert , without stirring , without moving from his post , without approaching him , became terrible . 
No human sentiment can be as terrible as joy . 
It was the visage of a demon who has just found his damned soul . 
The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused all that was in his soul to appear in his countenance . 
The depths having been stirred up , mounted to the surface . 
The humiliation of having , in some slight degree , lost the scent , and of having indulged , for a few moments , in an error with regard to Champmathieu , was effaced by pride at having so well and accurately divined in the first place , and of having for so long cherished a just instinct . 
Javert 's content shone forth in his sovereign attitude . 
The deformity of triumph overspread that narrow brow . 
All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied face can afford were there . 
Javert was in heaven at that moment . 
Without putting the thing clearly to himself , but with a confused intuition of the necessity of his presence and of his success , he , Javert , personified justice , light , and truth in their celestial function of crushing out evil . 
Behind him and around him , at an infinite distance , he had authority , reason , the case judged , the legal conscience , the public prosecution , all the stars ; he was protecting order , he was causing the law to yield up its thunders , he was avenging society , he was lending a helping hand to the absolute , he was standing erect in the midst of a glory . 
There existed in his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat . 
Erect , haughty , brilliant , he flaunted abroad in open day the superhuman bestiality of a ferocious archangel . 
The terrible shadow of the action which he was accomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visible in his clenched fist ; happy and indignant , he held his heel upon crime , vice , rebellion , perdition , hell ; he was radiant , he exterminated , he smiled , and there was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint Michael . 
Javert , though frightful , had nothing ignoble about him . 
Probity , sincerity , candor , conviction , the sense of duty , are things which may become hideous when wrongly directed ; but which , even when hideous , remain grand : their majesty , the majesty peculiar to the human conscience , clings to them in the midst of horror ; they are virtues which have one vice , -- error . 
The honest , pitiless joy of a fanatic in the full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriously venerable radiance . 
Without himself suspecting the fact , Javert in his formidable happiness was to be pitied , as is every ignorant man who triumphs . 
Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as this face , wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of the good . 
AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had torn her from the man . 
Her ailing brain comprehended nothing , but the only thing which she did not doubt was that he had come to get her . 
She could not endure that terrible face ; she felt her life quitting her ; she hid her face in both hands , and shrieked in her anguish : -- `` Monsieur Madeleine , save me ! '' 
Jean Valjean -- we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise -- had risen . 
He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices : -- `` Be at ease ; it is not for you that he is come . '' 
Then he addressed Javert , and said : -- `` I know what you want . '' 
Javert replied : -- `` Be quick about it ! '' 
There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these words something indescribably fierce and frenzied . 
Javert did not say , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
he said `` Bequiabouit . '' 
No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered : it was no longer a human word : it was a roar . 
He did not proceed according to his custom , he did not enter into the matter , he exhibited no warrant of arrest . 
In his eyes , Jean Valjean was a sort of mysterious combatant , who was not to be laid hands upon , a wrestler in the dark whom he had had in his grasp for the last five years , without being able to throw him . 
This arrest was not a beginning , but an end . 
He confined himself to saying , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
As he spoke thus , he did not advance a single step ; he hurled at Jean Valjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook , and with which he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him . 
It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the very marrow of her bones two months previously . 
At Javert 's exclamation , Fantine opened her eyes once more . 
But the mayor was there ; what had she to fear ? 
Javert advanced to the middle of the room , and cried : -- `` See here now ! 
Art thou coming ? '' 
The unhappy woman glanced about her . 
No one was present excepting the nun and the mayor . 
To whom could that abject use of `` thou '' be addressed ? 
To her only . 
She shuddered . 
Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing , a thing so unprecedented that nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest deliriums of fever . 
She beheld Javert , the police spy , seize the mayor by the collar ; she saw the mayor bow his head . 
It seemed to her that the world was coming to an end . 
Javert had , in fact , grasped Jean Valjean by the collar . 
`` Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
shrieked Fantine . 
Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed all his gums . 
`` There is no longer any Monsieur le Maire here ! '' 
Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped the collar of his coat . 
He said : -- `` Javert -- '' Javert interrupted him : `` Call me Mr. Inspector . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I should like to say a word to you in private . '' 
`` Aloud ! 
Say it aloud ! '' 
replied Javert ; `` people are in the habit of talking aloud to me . '' 
Jean Valjean went on in a lower tone : -- `` I have a request to make of you -- '' `` I tell you to speak loud . '' 
`` But you alone should hear it -- '' `` What difference does that make to me ? 
I shall not listen . '' 
Jean Valjean turned towards him and said very rapidly and in a very low voice : -- `` Grant me three days ' grace ! 
three days in which to go and fetch the child of this unhappy woman . 
I will pay whatever is necessary . 
You shall accompany me if you choose . '' 
`` You are making sport of me ! '' 
cried Javert . 
`` Come now , I did not think you such a fool ! 
You ask me to give you three days in which to run away ! 
You say that it is for the purpose of fetching that creature 's child ! 
Ah ! 
Ah ! 
That 's good ! 
That 's really capital ! '' 
Fantine was seized with a fit of trembling . 
`` My child ! '' 
she cried , `` to go and fetch my child ! 
She is not here , then ! 
Answer me , sister ; where is Cosette ? 
I want my child ! 
Monsieur Madeleine ! 
Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
Javert stamped his foot . 
`` And now there 's the other one ! 
Will you hold your tongue , you hussy ? 
It 's a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates , and where women of the town are cared for like countesses ! 
Ah ! 
But we are going to change all that ; it is high time ! '' 
He stared intently at Fantine , and added , once more taking into his grasp Jean Valjean 's cravat , shirt and collar : -- `` I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is no Monsieur le Maire . 
There is a thief , a brigand , a convict named Jean Valjean ! 
And I have him in my grasp ! 
That 's what there is ! '' 
Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound , supporting herself on her stiffened arms and on both hands : she gazed at Jean Valjean , she gazed at Javert , she gazed at the nun , she opened her mouth as though to speak ; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat , her teeth chattered ; she stretched out her arms in her agony , opening her hands convulsively , and fumbling about her like a drowning person ; then suddenly fell back on her pillow . 
Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her breast , with gaping mouth and staring , sightless eyes . 
She was dead . 
Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert , and opened it as he would have opened the hand of a baby ; then he said to Javert : -- `` You have murdered that woman . '' 
`` Let 's have an end of this ! '' 
shouted Javert , in a fury ; `` I am not here to listen to argument . 
Let us economize all that ; the guard is below ; march on instantly , or you 'll get the thumb-screws ! '' 
In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead , which was in a decidedly decrepit state , and which served the sisters as a camp-bed when they were watching with the sick . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to this bed , in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece , which was already in a dilapidated condition , an easy matter to muscles like his , grasped the principal rod like a bludgeon , and glanced at Javert . 
Javert retreated towards the door . 
Jean Valjean , armed with his bar of iron , walked slowly up to Fantine 's couch . 
When he arrived there he turned and said to Javert , in a voice that was barely audible : -- `` I advise you not to disturb me at this moment . '' 
One thing is certain , and that is , that Javert trembled . 
It did occur to him to summon the guard , but Jean Valjean might avail himself of that moment to effect his escape ; so he remained , grasped his cane by the small end , and leaned against the door-post , without removing his eyes from Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed , and his brow on his hand , and began to contemplate the motionless body of Fantine , which lay extended there . 
He remained thus , mute , absorbed , evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life . 
Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressible pity . 
After a few moments of this meditation he bent towards Fantine , and spoke to her in a low voice . 
What did he say to her ? 
What could this man , who was reproved , say to that woman , who was dead ? 
What words were those ? 
No one on earth heard them . 
Did the dead woman hear them ? 
There are some touching illusions which are , perhaps , sublime realities . 
The point as to which there exists no doubt is , that Sister Simplice , the sole witness of the incident , often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered in Fantine 's ear , she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on those pale lips , and in those dim eyes , filled with the amazement of the tomb . 
Jean Valjean took Fantine 's head in both his hands , and arranged it on the pillow as a mother might have done for her child ; then he tied the string of her chemise , and smoothed her hair back under her cap . 
That done , he closed her eyes . 
Fantine 's face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment . 
Death , that signifies entrance into the great light . 
Fantine 's hand was hanging over the side of the bed . 
Jean Valjean knelt down before that hand , lifted it gently , and kissed it . 
Then he rose , and turned to Javert . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` I am at your disposal . '' 
A SUITABLE TOMB Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison . 
The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation , or rather , an extraordinary commotion in M. sur M . 
We are sorry that we can not conceal the fact , that at the single word , `` He was a convict , '' nearly every one deserted him . 
In less than two hours all the good that he had done had been forgotten , and he was nothing but a `` convict from the galleys . '' 
It is just to add that the details of what had taken place at Arras were not yet known . 
All day long conversations like the following were to be heard in all quarters of the town : -- `` You do n't know ? 
He was a liberated convict ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` The mayor . '' 
`` Bah ! 
M. Madeleine ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` His name was not Madeleine at all ; he had a frightful name , Bejean , Bojean , Boujean . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Good God ! '' 
`` He has been arrested . '' 
`` Arrested ! '' 
`` In prison , in the city prison , while waiting to be transferred . '' 
`` Until he is transferred ! '' 
`` He is to be transferred ! '' 
`` Where is he to be taken ? '' 
`` He will be tried at the Assizes for a highway robbery which he committed long ago . '' 
`` Well ! 
I suspected as much . 
That man was too good , too perfect , too affected . 
He refused the cross ; he bestowed sous on all the little scamps he came across . 
I always thought there was some evil history back of all that . '' 
The `` drawing-rooms '' particularly abounded in remarks of this nature . 
One old lady , a subscriber to the Drapeau Blanc , made the following remark , the depth of which it is impossible to fathom : -- `` I am not sorry . 
It will be a lesson to the Bonapartists ! '' 
It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleine vanished from M. sur M. Only three or four persons in all the town remained faithful to his memory . 
The old portress who had served him was among the number . 
On the evening of that day the worthy old woman was sitting in her lodge , still in a thorough fright , and absorbed in sad reflections . 
The factory had been closed all day , the carriage gate was bolted , the street was deserted . 
There was no one in the house but the two nuns , Sister Perpetue and Sister Simplice , who were watching beside the body of Fantine . 
Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home , the good portress rose mechanically , took from a drawer the key of M. Madeleine 's chamber , and the flat candlestick which he used every evening to go up to his quarters ; then she hung the key on the nail whence he was accustomed to take it , and set the candlestick on one side , as though she was expecting him . 
Then she sat down again on her chair , and became absorbed in thought once more . 
The poor , good old woman bad done all this without being conscious of it . 
It was only at the expiration of two hours that she roused herself from her revery , and exclaimed , `` Hold ! 
My good God Jesus ! 
And I hung his key on the nail ! '' 
At that moment the small window in the lodge opened , a hand passed through , seized the key and the candlestick , and lighted the taper at the candle which was burning there . 
The portress raised her eyes , and stood there with gaping mouth , and a shriek which she confined to her throat . 
She knew that hand , that arm , the sleeve of that coat . 
It was M. Madeleine . 
It was several seconds before she could speak ; she had a seizure , as she said herself , when she related the adventure afterwards . 
`` Good God , Monsieur le Maire , '' she cried at last , `` I thought you were -- '' She stopped ; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking in respect towards the beginning . 
Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maire to her . 
He finished her thought . 
`` In prison , '' said he . 
`` I was there ; I broke a bar of one of the windows ; I let myself drop from the top of a roof , and here I am . 
I am going up to my room ; go and find Sister Simplice for me . 
She is with that poor woman , no doubt . '' 
The old woman obeyed in all haste . 
He gave her no orders ; he was quite sure that she would guard him better than he should guard himself . 
No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyard without opening the big gates . 
He had , and always carried about him , a pass-key which opened a little side-door ; but he must have been searched , and his latch-key must have been taken from him . 
This point was never explained . 
He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber . 
On arriving at the top , he left his candle on the top step of his stairs , opened his door with very little noise , went and closed his window and his shutters by feeling , then returned for his candle and re-entered his room . 
It was a useful precaution ; it will be recollected that his window could be seen from the street . 
He cast a glance about him , at his table , at his chair , at his bed which had not been disturbed for three days . 
No trace of the disorder of the night before last remained . 
The portress had `` done up '' his room ; only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the two iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had been blackened by the fire . 
He took a sheet of paper , on which he wrote : `` These are the two tips of my iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais , which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes , '' and he arranged this piece of paper , the bits of iron , and the coin in such a way that they were the first things to be seen on entering the room . 
From a cupboard he pulled out one of his old shirts , which he tore in pieces . 
In the strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks . 
He betrayed neither haste nor agitation ; and while he was wrapping up the Bishop 's candlesticks , he nibbled at a piece of black bread . 
It was probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight . 
This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room when the authorities made an examination later on . 
There came two taps at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said he . 
It was Sister Simplice . 
She was pale ; her eyes were red ; the candle which she carried trembled in her hand . 
The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is , that however polished or cool we may be , they wring human nature from our very bowels , and force it to reappear on the surface . 
The emotions of that day had turned the nun into a woman once more . 
She had wept , and she was trembling . 
Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper , which he handed to the nun , saying , `` Sister , you will give this to Monsieur le Cure . '' 
The paper was not folded . 
She cast a glance upon it . 
`` You can read it , '' said he . 
She read : -- `` I beg Monsieur le Cure to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me . 
He will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial , and of the funeral of the woman who died yesterday . 
The rest is for the poor . '' 
The sister tried to speak , but she only managed to stammer a few inarticulate sounds . 
She succeeded in saying , however : -- `` Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor , unhappy woman ? '' 
`` No , '' said he ; `` I am pursued ; it would only end in their arresting me in that room , and that would disturb her . '' 
He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the staircase . 
They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps , and the old portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones : -- `` My good sir , I swear to you by the good God , that not a soul has entered this house all day , nor all the evening , and that I have not even left the door . '' 
A man responded : -- `` But there is a light in that room , nevertheless . '' 
They recognized Javert 's voice . 
The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner of the wall on the right . 
Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed himself in this angle . 
Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table . 
The door opened . 
Javert entered . 
The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress were audible in the corridor . 
The nun did not raise her eyes . 
She was praying . 
The candle was on the chimney-piece , and gave but very little light . 
Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement . 
It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert , his element , the very air he breathed , was veneration for all authority . 
This was impregnable , and admitted of neither objection nor restriction . 
In his eyes , of course , the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all ; he was religious , superficial and correct on this point as on all others . 
In his eyes , a priest was a mind , who never makes a mistake ; a nun was a creature who never sins ; they were souls walled in from this world , with a single door which never opened except to allow the truth to pass through . 
On perceiving the sister , his first movement was to retire . 
But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him imperiously in the opposite direction . 
His second movement was to remain and to venture on at least one question . 
This was Sister Simplice , who had never told a lie in her life . 
Javert knew it , and held her in special veneration in consequence . 
`` Sister , '' said he , `` are you alone in this room ? '' 
A terrible moment ensued , during which the poor portress felt as though she should faint . 
The sister raised her eyes and answered : -- `` Yes . '' 
`` Then , '' resumed Javert , `` you will excuse me if I persist ; it is my duty ; you have not seen a certain person -- a man -- this evening ? 
He has escaped ; we are in search of him -- that Jean Valjean ; you have not seen him ? '' 
The sister replied : -- `` No . '' 
She lied . 
She had lied twice in succession , one after the other , without hesitation , promptly , as a person does when sacrificing herself . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Javert , and he retired with a deep bow . 
O sainted maid ! 
you left this world many years ago ; you have rejoined your sisters , the virgins , and your brothers , the angels , in the light ; may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise ! 
The sister 's affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did not even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been extinguished , and which was still smoking on the table . 
An hour later , a man , marching amid trees and mists , was rapidly departing from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris . 
That man was Jean Valjean . 
It has been established by the testimony of two or three carters who met him , that he was carrying a bundle ; that he was dressed in a blouse . 
Where had he obtained that blouse ? 
No one ever found out . 
But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few days before , leaving behind him nothing but his blouse . 
Perhaps that was the one . 
One last word about Fantine . 
We all have a mother , -- the earth . 
Fantine was given back to that mother . 
The cure thought that he was doing right , and perhaps he really was , in reserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for the poor . 
Who was concerned , after all ? 
A convict and a woman of the town . 
That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine , and reduced it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper 's grave . 
So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs to anybody and everybody , and where the poor are lost . 
Fortunately , God knows where to find the soul again . 
Fantine was laid in the shade , among the first bones that came to hand ; she was subjected to the promiscuousness of ashes . 
She was thrown into the public grave . 
Her grave resembled her bed . 
-LSB- The end of Volume I. `` Fantine '' -RSB- COSETTE WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES Last year -LRB- 1861 -RRB- , on a beautiful May morning , a traveller , the person who is telling this story , was coming from Nivelles , and directing his course towards La Hulpe . 
He was on foot . 
He was pursuing a broad paved road , which undulated between two rows of trees , over the hills which succeed each other , raise the road and let it fall again , and produce something in the nature of enormous waves . 
He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac . 
In the west he perceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud , which has the form of a reversed vase . 
He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence ; and at the angle of the cross-road , by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription Ancient Barrier No. 4 , a public house , bearing on its front this sign : At the Four Winds -LRB- Aux Quatre Vents -RRB- . 
Echabeau , Private Cafe . 
A quarter of a league further on , he arrived at the bottom of a little valley , where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through the embankment of the road . 
The clump of sparsely planted but very green trees , which fills the valley on one side of the road , is dispersed over the meadows on the other , and disappears gracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud . 
On the right , close to the road , was an inn , with a four-wheeled cart at the door , a large bundle of hop-poles , a plough , a heap of dried brushwood near a flourishing hedge , lime smoking in a square hole , and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions . 
A young girl was weeding in a field , where a huge yellow poster , probably of some outside spectacle , such as a parish festival , was fluttering in the wind . 
At one corner of the inn , beside a pool in which a flotilla of ducks was navigating , a badly paved path plunged into the bushes . 
The wayfarer struck into this . 
After traversing a hundred paces , skirting a wall of the fifteenth century , surmounted by a pointed gable , with bricks set in contrast , he found himself before a large door of arched stone , with a rectilinear impost , in the sombre style of Louis XIV. , flanked by two flat medallions . 
A severe facade rose above this door ; a wall , perpendicular to the facade , almost touched the door , and flanked it with an abrupt right angle . 
In the meadow before the door lay three harrows , through which , in disorder , grew all the flowers of May . 
The door was closed . 
The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker . 
The sun was charming ; the branches had that soft shivering of May , which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind . 
A brave little bird , probably a lover , was carolling in a distracted manner in a large tree . 
The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation , resembling the hollow of a sphere , in the stone on the left , at the foot of the pier of the door . 
At this moment the leaves of the door parted , and a peasant woman emerged . 
She saw the wayfarer , and perceived what he was looking at . 
`` It was a French cannon-ball which made that , '' she said to him . 
And she added : -- `` That which you see there , higher up in the door , near a nail , is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg . 
The bullet did not pierce the wood . '' 
`` What is the name of this place ? '' 
inquired the wayfarer . 
`` Hougomont , '' said the peasant woman . 
The traveller straightened himself up . 
He walked on a few paces , and went off to look over the tops of the hedges . 
On the horizon through the trees , he perceived a sort of little elevation , and on this elevation something which at that distance resembled a lion . 
He was on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
HOUGOMONT Hougomont , -- this was a funereal spot , the beginning of the obstacle , the first resistance , which that great wood-cutter of Europe , called Napoleon , encountered at Waterloo , the first knot under the blows of his axe . 
It was a chateau ; it is no longer anything but a farm . 
For the antiquary , Hougomont is Hugomons . 
This manor was built by Hugo , Sire of Somerel , the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers . 
The traveller pushed open the door , elbowed an ancient calash under the porch , and entered the courtyard . 
The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the sixteenth century , which here simulates an arcade , everything else having fallen prostrate around it . 
A monumental aspect often has its birth in ruin . 
In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door , of the time of Henry IV. , permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard ; beside this door , a manure-hole , some pickaxes , some shovels , some carts , an old well , with its flagstone and its iron reel , a chicken jumping , and a turkey spreading its tail , a chapel surmounted by a small bell-tower , a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the wall of the chapel -- behold the court , the conquest of which was one of Napoleon 's dreams . 
This corner of earth , could he but have seized it , would , perhaps , have given him the world likewise . 
Chickens are scattering its dust abroad with their beaks . 
A growl is audible ; it is a huge dog , who shows his teeth and replaces the English . 
The English behaved admirably there . 
Cooke 's four companies of guards there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army . 
Hougomont viewed on the map , as a geometrical plan , comprising buildings and enclosures , presents a sort of irregular rectangle , one angle of which is nicked out . 
It is this angle which contains the southern door , guarded by this wall , which commands it only a gun 's length away . 
Hougomont has two doors , -- the southern door , that of the chateau ; and the northern door , belonging to the farm . 
Napoleon sent his brother Jerome against Hougomont ; the divisions of Foy , Guilleminot , and Bachelu hurled themselves against it ; nearly the entire corps of Reille was employed against it , and miscarried ; Kellermann 's balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall . 
Bauduin 's brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the north , and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the beginning of a breach on the south , but without taking it . 
The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south . 
A bit of the north door , broken by the French , hangs suspended to the wall . 
It consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams , on which the scars of the attack are visible . 
The northern door , which was beaten in by the French , and which has had a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall , stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock ; it is cut squarely in the wall , built of stone below , of brick above which closes in the courtyard on the north . 
It is a simple door for carts , such as exist in all farms , with the two large leaves made of rustic planks : beyond lie the meadows . 
The dispute over this entrance was furious . 
For a long time , all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on the door-posts . 
It was there that Bauduin was killed . 
The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard ; its horror is visible there ; the confusion of the fray was petrified there ; it lives and it dies there ; it was only yesterday . 
The walls are in the death agony , the stones fall ; the breaches cry aloud ; the holes are wounds ; the drooping , quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee . 
This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day . 
Buildings which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles . 
The English barricaded themselves there ; the French made their way in , but could not stand their ground . 
Beside the chapel , one wing of the chateau , the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont , rises in a crumbling state , -- disembowelled , one might say . 
The chateau served for a dungeon , the chapel for a block-house . 
There men exterminated each other . 
The French , fired on from every point , -- from behind the walls , from the summits of the garrets , from the depths of the cellars , through all the casements , through all the air-holes , through every crack in the stones , -- fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men ; the reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration . 
In the ruined wing , through windows garnished with bars of iron , the dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible ; the English guards were in ambush in these rooms ; the spiral of the staircase , cracked from the ground floor to the very roof , appears like the inside of a broken shell . 
The staircase has two stories ; the English , besieged on the staircase , and massed on its upper steps , had cut off the lower steps . 
These consisted of large slabs of blue stone , which form a heap among the nettles . 
Half a score of steps still cling to the wall ; on the first is cut the figure of a trident . 
These inaccessible steps are solid in their niches . 
All the rest resembles a jaw which has been denuded of its teeth . 
There are two old trees there : one is dead ; the other is wounded at its base , and is clothed with verdure in April . 
Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the staircase . 
A massacre took place in the chapel . 
The interior , which has recovered its calm , is singular . 
The mass has not been said there since the carnage . 
Nevertheless , the altar has been left there -- an altar of unpolished wood , placed against a background of roughhewn stone . 
Four whitewashed walls , a door opposite the altar , two small arched windows ; over the door a large wooden crucifix , below the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay ; on the ground , in one corner , an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces -- such is the chapel . 
Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of Saint Anne , of the fifteenth century ; the head of the infant Jesus has been carried off by a large ball . 
The French , who were masters of the chapel for a moment , and were then dislodged , set fire to it . 
The flames filled this building ; it was a perfect furnace ; the door was burned , the floor was burned , the wooden Christ was not burned . 
The fire preyed upon his feet , of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen ; then it stopped , -- a miracle , according to the assertion of the people of the neighborhood . 
The infant Jesus , decapitated , was less fortunate than the Christ . 
The walls are covered with inscriptions . 
Near the feet of Christ this name is to be read : Henquinez . 
Then these others : Conde de Rio Maior Marques y Marquesa de Almagro -LRB- Habana -RRB- . 
There are French names with exclamation points , -- a sign of wrath . 
The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849 . 
The nations insulted each other there . 
It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which held an axe in its hand ; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros . 
On emerging from the chapel , a well is visible on the left . 
There are two in this courtyard . 
One inquires , Why is there no bucket and pulley to this ? 
It is because water is no longer drawn there . 
Why is water not drawn there ? 
Because it is full of skeletons . 
The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume van Kylsom . 
He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont , and was gardener there . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , his family fled and concealed themselves in the woods . 
The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate people who had been scattered abroad , for many days and nights . 
There are at this day certain traces recognizable , such as old boles of burned trees , which mark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the depths of the thickets . 
Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont , `` to guard the chateau , '' and concealed himself in the cellar . 
The English discovered him there . 
They tore him from his hiding-place , and the combatants forced this frightened man to serve them , by administering blows with the flats of their swords . 
They were thirsty ; this Guillaume brought them water . 
It was from this well that he drew it . 
Many drank there their last draught . 
This well where drank so many of the dead was destined to die itself . 
After the engagement , they were in haste to bury the dead bodies . 
Death has a fashion of harassing victory , and she causes the pest to follow glory . 
The typhus is a concomitant of triumph . 
This well was deep , and it was turned into a sepulchre . 
Three hundred dead bodies were cast into it . 
With too much haste perhaps . 
Were they all dead ? 
Legend says they were not . 
It seems that on the night succeeding the interment , feeble voices were heard calling from the well . 
This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard . 
Three walls , part stone , part brick , and simulating a small , square tower , and folded like the leaves of a screen , surround it on all sides . 
The fourth side is open . 
It is there that the water was drawn . 
The wall at the bottom has a sort of shapeless loophole , possibly the hole made by a shell . 
This little tower had a platform , of which only the beams remain . 
The iron supports of the well on the right form a cross . 
On leaning over , the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a heaped-up mass of shadows . 
The base of the walls all about the well is concealed in a growth of nettles . 
This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms the table for all wells in Belgium . 
The slab has here been replaced by a cross-beam , against which lean five or six shapeless fragments of knotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones . 
There is no longer either pail , chain , or pulley ; but there is still the stone basin which served the overflow . 
The rain-water collects there , and from time to time a bird of the neighboring forests comes thither to drink , and then flies away . 
One house in this ruin , the farmhouse , is still inhabited . 
The door of this house opens on the courtyard . 
Upon this door , beside a pretty Gothic lock-plate , there is an iron handle with trefoils placed slanting . 
At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant , Wilda , grasped this handle in order to take refuge in the farm , a French sapper hewed off his hand with an axe . 
The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume van Kylsom , the old gardener , dead long since . 
A woman with gray hair said to us : `` I was there . 
I was three years old . 
My sister , who was older , was terrified and wept . 
They carried us off to the woods . 
I went there in my mother 's arms . 
We glued our ears to the earth to hear . 
I imitated the cannon , and went boum ! 
boum ! '' 
A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard , so we were told . 
The orchard is terrible . 
It is in three parts ; one might almost say , in three acts . 
The first part is a garden , the second is an orchard , the third is a wood . 
These three parts have a common enclosure : on the side of the entrance , the buildings of the chateau and the farm ; on the left , a hedge ; on the right , a wall ; and at the end , a wall . 
The wall on the right is of brick , the wall at the bottom is of stone . 
One enters the garden first . 
It slopes downwards , is planted with gooseberry bushes , choked with a wild growth of vegetation , and terminated by a monumental terrace of cut stone , with balustrade with a double curve . 
It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded Le Notre ; to-day it is ruins and briars . 
The pilasters are surmounted by globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone . 
Forty-three balusters can still be counted on their sockets ; the rest lie prostrate in the grass . 
Almost all bear scratches of bullets . 
One broken baluster is placed on the pediment like a fractured leg . 
It was in this garden , further down than the orchard , that six light-infantry men of the 1st , having made their way thither , and being unable to escape , hunted down and caught like bears in their dens , accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies , one of which was armed with carbines . 
The Hanoverians lined this balustrade and fired from above . 
The infantry men , replying from below , six against two hundred , intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes , took a quarter of an hour to die . 
One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard , properly speaking . 
There , within the limits of those few square fathoms , fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour . 
The wall seems ready to renew the combat . 
Thirty-eight loopholes , pierced by the English at irregular heights , are there still . 
In front of the sixth are placed two English tombs of granite . 
There are loopholes only in the south wall , as the principal attack came from that quarter . 
The wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge ; the French came up , thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge , crossed it , and found the wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade , with the English guards behind it , the thirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower of grape-shot and balls , and Soye 's brigade was broken against it . 
Thus Waterloo began . 
Nevertheless , the orchard was taken . 
As they had no ladders , the French scaled it with their nails . 
They fought hand to hand amid the trees . 
All this grass has been soaked in blood . 
A battalion of Nassau , seven hundred strong , was overwhelmed there . 
The outside of the wall , against which Kellermann 's two batteries were trained , is gnawed by grape-shot . 
This orchard is sentient , like others , in the month of May . 
It has its buttercups and its daisies ; the grass is tall there ; the cart-horses browse there ; cords of hair , on which linen is drying , traverse the spaces between the trees and force the passer-by to bend his head ; one walks over this uncultivated land , and one 's foot dives into mole-holes . 
In the middle of the grass one observes an uprooted tree-bole which lies there all verdant . 
Major Blackmann leaned against it to die . 
Beneath a great tree in the neighborhood fell the German general , Duplat , descended from a French family which fled on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes . 
An aged and falling apple-tree leans far over to one side , its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and of clayey loam . 
Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age . 
There is not one which has not had its bullet or its biscayan . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- The skeletons of dead trees abound in this orchard . 
Crows fly through their branches , and at the end of it is a wood full of violets . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- A bullet as large as an egg . 
Bauduin , killed , Foy wounded , conflagration , massacre , carnage , a rivulet formed of English blood , French blood , German blood mingled in fury , a well crammed with corpses , the regiment of Nassau and the regiment of Brunswick destroyed , Duplat killed , Blackmann killed , the English Guards mutilated , twenty French battalions , besides the forty from Reille 's corps , decimated , three thousand men in that hovel of Hougomont alone cut down , slashed to pieces , shot , burned , with their throats cut , -- and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to the traveller : Monsieur , give me three francs , and if you like , I will explain to you the affair of Waterloo ! 
THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE , 1815 Let us turn back , -- that is one of the story-teller 's rights , -- and put ourselves once more in the year 1815 , and even a little earlier than the epoch when the action narrated in the first part of this book took place . 
If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th of June , 1815 , the fate of Europe would have been different . 
A few drops of water , more or less , decided the downfall of Napoleon . 
All that Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz was a little more rain , and a cloud traversing the sky out of season sufficed to make a world crumble . 
The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven o'clock , and that gave Blucher time to come up . 
Why ? 
Because the ground was wet . 
The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmer before they could manoeuvre . 
Napoleon was an artillery officer , and felt the effects of this . 
The foundation of this wonderful captain was the man who , in the report to the Directory on Aboukir , said : Such a one of our balls killed six men . 
All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles . 
The key to his victory was to make the artillery converge on one point . 
He treated the strategy of the hostile general like a citadel , and made a breach in it . 
He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot ; he joined and dissolved battles with cannon . 
There was something of the sharpshooter in his genius . 
To beat in squares , to pulverize regiments , to break lines , to crush and disperse masses , -- for him everything lay in this , to strike , strike , strike incessantly , -- and he intrusted this task to the cannon-ball . 
A redoubtable method , and one which , united with genius , rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the space of fifteen years . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , he relied all the more on his artillery , because he had numbers on his side . 
Wellington had only one hundred and fifty-nine mouths of fire ; Napoleon had two hundred and forty . 
Suppose the soil dry , and the artillery capable of moving , the action would have begun at six o'clock in the morning . 
The battle would have been won and ended at two o'clock , three hours before the change of fortune in favor of the Prussians . 
What amount of blame attaches to Napoleon for the loss of this battle ? 
Is the shipwreck due to the pilot ? 
Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated this epoch by an inward diminution of force ? 
Had the twenty years of war worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard , the soul as well as the body ? 
Did the veteran make himself disastrously felt in the leader ? 
In a word , was this genius , as many historians of note have thought , suffering from an eclipse ? 
Did he go into a frenzy in order to disguise his weakened powers from himself ? 
Did he begin to waver under the delusion of a breath of adventure ? 
Had he become -- a grave matter in a general -- unconscious of peril ? 
Is there an age , in this class of material great men , who may be called the giants of action , when genius grows short-sighted ? 
Old age has no hold on the geniuses of the ideal ; for the Dantes and Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness ; is it to grow less for the Hannibals and the Bonapartes ? 
Had Napoleon lost the direct sense of victory ? 
Had he reached the point where he could no longer recognize the reef , could no longer divine the snare , no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses ? 
Had he lost his power of scenting out catastrophes ? 
He who had in former days known all the roads to triumph , and who , from the summit of his chariot of lightning , pointed them out with a sovereign finger , had he now reached that state of sinister amazement when he could lead his tumultuous legions harnessed to it , to the precipice ? 
Was he seized at the age of forty-six with a supreme madness ? 
Was that titanic charioteer of destiny no longer anything more than an immense dare-devil ? 
We do not think so . 
His plan of battle was , by the confession of all , a masterpiece . 
To go straight to the centre of the Allies ' line , to make a breach in the enemy , to cut them in two , to drive the British half back on Hal , and the Prussian half on Tongres , to make two shattered fragments of Wellington and Blucher , to carry Mont-Saint-Jean , to seize Brussels , to hurl the German into the Rhine , and the Englishman into the sea . 
All this was contained in that battle , according to Napoleon . 
Afterwards people would see . 
Of course , we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle of Waterloo ; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which we are relating is connected with this battle , but this history is not our subject ; this history , moreover , has been finished , and finished in a masterly manner , from one point of view by Napoleon , and from another point of view by a whole pleiad of historians . 
-LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 7 -RSB- Walter Scott , Lamartine , Vaulabelle , Charras , Quinet , Thiers . 
As for us , we leave the historians at loggerheads ; we are but a distant witness , a passer-by on the plain , a seeker bending over that soil all made of human flesh , taking appearances for realities , perchance ; we have no right to oppose , in the name of science , a collection of facts which contain illusions , no doubt ; we possess neither military practice nor strategic ability which authorize a system ; in our opinion , a chain of accidents dominated the two leaders at Waterloo ; and when it becomes a question of destiny , that mysterious culprit , we judge like that ingenious judge , the populace . 
A Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloo have only to place , mentally , on the ground , a capital A . 
The left limb of the A is the road to Nivelles , the right limb is the road to Genappe , the tie of the A is the hollow road to Ohain from Braine-l'Alleud . 
The top of the A is Mont-Saint-Jean , where Wellington is ; the lower left tip is Hougomont , where Reille is stationed with Jerome Bonaparte ; the right tip is the Belle-Alliance , where Napoleon was . 
At the centre of this chord is the precise point where the final word of the battle was pronounced . 
It was there that the lion has been placed , the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial Guard . 
The triangle included in the top of the A , between the two limbs and the tie , is the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
The dispute over this plateau constituted the whole battle . 
The wings of the two armies extended to the right and left of the two roads to Genappe and Nivelles ; d'Erlon facing Picton , Reille facing Hill . 
Behind the tip of the A , behind the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , is the forest of Soignes . 
As for the plain itself , let the reader picture to himself a vast undulating sweep of ground ; each rise commands the next rise , and all the undulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean , and there end in the forest . 
Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers . 
It is a question of seizing the opponent round the waist . 
The one seeks to trip up the other . 
They clutch at everything : a bush is a point of support ; an angle of the wall offers them a rest to the shoulder ; for the lack of a hovel under whose cover they can draw up , a regiment yields its ground ; an unevenness in the ground , a chance turn in the landscape , a cross-path encountered at the right moment , a grove , a ravine , can stay the heel of that colossus which is called an army , and prevent its retreat . 
He who quits the field is beaten ; hence the necessity devolving on the responsible leader , of examining the most insignificant clump of trees , and of studying deeply the slightest relief in the ground . 
The two generals had attentively studied the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean , now called the plain of Waterloo . 
In the preceding year , Wellington , with the sagacity of foresight , had examined it as the possible seat of a great battle . 
Upon this spot , and for this duel , on the 18th of June , Wellington had the good post , Napoleon the bad post . 
The English army was stationed above , the French army below . 
It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon on horseback , glass in hand , upon the heights of Rossomme , at daybreak , on June 18 , 1815 . 
All the world has seen him before we can show him . 
That calm profile under the little three-cornered hat of the school of Brienne , that green uniform , the white revers concealing the star of the Legion of Honor , his great coat hiding his epaulets , the corner of red ribbon peeping from beneath his vest , his leather trousers , the white horse with the saddle-cloth of purple velvet bearing on the corners crowned N 's and eagles , Hessian boots over silk stockings , silver spurs , the sword of Marengo , -- that whole figure of the last of the Caesars is present to all imaginations , saluted with acclamations by some , severely regarded by others . 
That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light ; this arose from a certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes , and which always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time ; but to-day history and daylight have arrived . 
That light called history is pitiless ; it possesses this peculiar and divine quality , that , pure light as it is , and precisely because it is wholly light , it often casts a shadow in places where people had hitherto beheld rays ; from the same man it constructs two different phantoms , and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it , and the shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader . 
Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations . 
Babylon violated lessens Alexander , Rome enchained lessens Caesar , Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus , tyranny follows the tyrant . 
It is a misfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears his form . 
THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle ; a beginning which was troubled , uncertain , hesitating , menacing to both armies , but still more so for the English than for the French . 
It had rained all night , the earth had been cut up by the downpour , the water had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as if in casks ; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buried up to the axles , the circingles of the horses were dripping with liquid mud . 
If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort of transports on the march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a litter beneath the wheels , all movement , particularly in the valleys , in the direction of Papelotte would have been impossible . 
The affair began late . 
Napoleon , as we have already explained , was in the habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand , like a pistol , aiming it now at one point , now at another , of the battle ; and it had been his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallop freely . 
In order to do that it was necessary that the sun should come out and dry the soil . 
But the sun did not make its appearance . 
It was no longer the rendezvous of Austerlitz . 
When the first cannon was fired , the English general , Colville , looked at his watch , and noted that it was thirty-five minutes past eleven . 
The action was begun furiously , with more fury , perhaps , than the Emperor would have wished , by the left wing of the French resting on Hougomont . 
At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurling Quiot 's brigade on La Haie-Sainte , and Ney pushed forward the right wing of the French against the left wing of the English , which rested on Papelotte . 
The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint ; the plan was to draw Wellington thither , and to make him swerve to the left . 
This plan would have succeeded if the four companies of the English guards and the brave Belgians of Perponcher 's division had not held the position solidly , and Wellington , instead of massing his troops there , could confine himself to despatching thither , as reinforcements , only four more companies of guards and one battalion from Brunswick . 
The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated , in fact , to overthrow the English left , to cut off the road to Brussels , to bar the passage against possible Prussians , to force Mont-Saint-Jean , to turn Wellington back on Hougomont , thence on Braine-l'Alleud , thence on Hal ; nothing easier . 
With the exception of a few incidents this attack succeeded Papelotte was taken ; La Haie-Sainte was carried . 
A detail to be noted . 
There was in the English infantry , particularly in Kempt 's brigade , a great many raw recruits . 
These young soldiers were valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry ; their inexperience extricated them intrepidly from the dilemma ; they performed particularly excellent service as skirmishers : the soldier skirmisher , left somewhat to himself , becomes , so to speak , his own general . 
These recruits displayed some of the French ingenuity and fury . 
This novice of an infantry had dash . 
This displeased Wellington . 
After the taking of La Haie-Sainte the battle wavered . 
There is in this day an obscure interval , from mid-day to four o'clock ; the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct , and participates in the sombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict . 
Twilight reigns over it . 
We perceive vast fluctuations in that fog , a dizzy mirage , paraphernalia of war almost unknown to-day , pendant colbacks , floating sabre-taches , cross-belts , cartridge-boxes for grenades , hussar dolmans , red boots with a thousand wrinkles , heavy shakos garlanded with torsades , the almost black infantry of Brunswick mingled with the scarlet infantry of England , the English soldiers with great , white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets , the Hanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather , with brass hands and red horse-tails , the Scotch with their bare knees and plaids , the great white gaiters of our grenadiers ; pictures , not strategic lines -- what Salvator Rosa requires , not what is suited to the needs of Gribeauval . 
A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle . 
Quid obscurum , quid divinum . 
Each historian traces , to some extent , the particular feature which pleases him amid this pellmell . 
Whatever may be the combinations of the generals , the shock of armed masses has an incalculable ebb . 
During the action the plans of the two leaders enter into each other and become mutually thrown out of shape . 
Such a point of the field of battle devours more combatants than such another , just as more or less spongy soils soak up more or less quickly the water which is poured on them . 
It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiers than one would like ; a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen . 
The line of battle waves and undulates like a thread , the trails of blood gush illogically , the fronts of the armies waver , the regiments form capes and gulfs as they enter and withdraw ; all these reefs are continually moving in front of each other . 
Where the infantry stood the artillery arrives , the cavalry rushes in where the artillery was , the battalions are like smoke . 
There was something there ; seek it . 
It has disappeared ; the open spots change place , the sombre folds advance and retreat , a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward , hurls back , distends , and disperses these tragic multitudes . 
What is a fray ? 
an oscillation ? 
The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses a minute , not a day . 
In order to depict a battle , there is required one of those powerful painters who have chaos in their brushes . 
Rembrandt is better than Vandermeulen ; Vandermeulen , exact at noon , lies at three o'clock . 
Geometry is deceptive ; the hurricane alone is trustworthy . 
That is what confers on Folard the right to contradict Polybius . 
Let us add , that there is a certain instant when the battle degenerates into a combat , becomes specialized , and disperses into innumerable detailed feats , which , to borrow the expression of Napoleon himself , `` belong rather to the biography of the regiments than to the history of the army . '' 
The historian has , in this case , the evident right to sum up the whole . 
He can not do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle , and it is not given to any one narrator , however conscientious he may be , to fix , absolutely , the form of that horrible cloud which is called a battle . 
This , which is true of all great armed encounters , is particularly applicable to Waterloo . 
Nevertheless , at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to a point . 
FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON Towards four o'clock the condition of the English army was serious . 
The Prince of Orange was in command of the centre , Hill of the right wing , Picton of the left wing . 
The Prince of Orange , desperate and intrepid , shouted to the Hollando-Belgians : `` Nassau ! 
Brunswick ! 
Never retreat ! '' 
Hill , having been weakened , had come up to the support of Wellington ; Picton was dead . 
At the very moment when the English had captured from the French the flag of the 105th of the line , the French had killed the English general , Picton , with a bullet through the head . 
The battle had , for Wellington , two bases of action , Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte ; Hougomont still held out , but was on fire ; La Haie-Sainte was taken . 
Of the German battalion which defended it , only forty-two men survived ; all the officers , except five , were either dead or captured . 
Three thousand combatants had been massacred in that barn . 
A sergeant of the English Guards , the foremost boxer in England , reputed invulnerable by his companions , had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy . 
Baring had been dislodged , Alten put to the sword . 
Many flags had been lost , one from Alten 's division , and one from the battalion of Lunenburg , carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts . 
The Scotch Grays no longer existed ; Ponsonby 's great dragoons had been hacked to pieces . 
That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro and beneath the cuirassiers of Travers ; out of twelve hundred horses , six hundred remained ; out of three lieutenant-colonels , two lay on the earth , -- Hamilton wounded , Mater slain . 
Ponsonby had fallen , riddled by seven lance-thrusts . 
Gordon was dead . 
Marsh was dead . 
Two divisions , the fifth and the sixth , had been annihilated . 
Hougomont injured , La Haie-Sainte taken , there now existed but one rallying-point , the centre . 
That point still held firm . 
Wellington reinforced it . 
He summoned thither Hill , who was at Merle-Braine ; he summoned Chasse , who was at Braine-l'Alleud . 
The centre of the English army , rather concave , very dense , and very compact , was strongly posted . 
It occupied the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , having behind it the village , and in front of it the slope , which was tolerably steep then . 
It rested on that stout stone dwelling which at that time belonged to the domain of Nivelles , and which marks the intersection of the roads -- a pile of the sixteenth century , and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it without injuring it . 
All about the plateau the English had cut the hedges here and there , made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees , thrust the throat of a cannon between two branches , embattled the shrubs . 
There artillery was ambushed in the brushwood . 
This punic labor , incontestably authorized by war , which permits traps , was so well done , that Haxo , who had been despatched by the Emperor at nine o'clock in the morning to reconnoitre the enemy 's batteries , had discovered nothing of it , and had returned and reported to Napoleon that there were no obstacles except the two barricades which barred the road to Nivelles and to Genappe . 
It was at the season when the grain is tall ; on the edge of the plateau a battalion of Kempt 's brigade , the 95th , armed with carabines , was concealed in the tall wheat . 
Thus assured and buttressed , the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was well posted . 
The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes , then adjoining the field of battle , and intersected by the ponds of Groenendael and Boitsfort . 
An army could not retreat thither without dissolving ; the regiments would have broken up immediately there . 
The artillery would have been lost among the morasses . 
The retreat , according to many a man versed in the art , -- though it is disputed by others , -- would have been a disorganized flight . 
To this centre , Wellington added one of Chasse 's brigades taken from the right wing , and one of Wincke 's brigades taken from the left wing , plus Clinton 's division . 
To his English , to the regiments of Halkett , to the brigades of Mitchell , to the guards of Maitland , he gave as reinforcements and aids , the infantry of Brunswick , Nassau 's contingent , Kielmansegg 's Hanoverians , and Ompteda 's Germans . 
This placed twenty-six battalions under his hand . 
The right wing , as Charras says , was thrown back on the centre . 
An enormous battery was masked by sacks of earth at the spot where there now stands what is called the `` Museum of Waterloo . '' 
Besides this , Wellington had , behind a rise in the ground , Somerset 's Dragoon Guards , fourteen hundred horse strong . 
It was the remaining half of the justly celebrated English cavalry . 
Ponsonby destroyed , Somerset remained . 
The battery , which , if completed , would have been almost a redoubt , was ranged behind a very low garden wall , backed up with a coating of bags of sand and a large slope of earth . 
This work was not finished ; there had been no time to make a palisade for it . 
Wellington , uneasy but impassive , was on horseback , and there remained the whole day in the same attitude , a little in advance of the old mill of Mont-Saint-Jean , which is still in existence , beneath an elm , which an Englishman , an enthusiastic vandal , purchased later on for two hundred francs , cut down , and carried off . 
Wellington was coldly heroic . 
The bullets rained about him . 
His aide-de-camp , Gordon , fell at his side . 
Lord Hill , pointing to a shell which had burst , said to him : `` My lord , what are your orders in case you are killed ? '' 
`` To do like me , '' replied Wellington . 
To Clinton he said laconically , `` To hold this spot to the last man . '' 
The day was evidently turning out ill . 
Wellington shouted to his old companions of Talavera , of Vittoria , of Salamanca : `` Boys , can retreat be thought of ? 
Think of old England ! '' 
Towards four o'clock , the English line drew back . 
Suddenly nothing was visible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and the sharpshooters ; the rest had disappeared : the regiments , dislodged by the shells and the French bullets , retreated into the bottom , now intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean ; a retrograde movement took place , the English front hid itself , Wellington drew back . 
`` The beginning of retreat ! '' 
cried Napoleon . 
NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR The Emperor , though ill and discommoded on horseback by a local trouble , had never been in a better humor than on that day . 
His impenetrability had been smiling ever since the morning . 
On the 18th of June , that profound soul masked by marble beamed blindly . 
The man who had been gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at Waterloo . 
The greatest favorites of destiny make mistakes . 
Our joys are composed of shadow . 
The supreme smile is God 's alone . 
Ridet Caesar , Pompeius flebit , said the legionaries of the Fulminatrix Legion . 
Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion , but it is certain that Caesar laughed . 
While exploring on horseback at one o'clock on the preceding night , in storm and rain , in company with Bertrand , the communes in the neighborhood of Rossomme , satisfied at the sight of the long line of the English camp-fires illuminating the whole horizon from Frischemont to Braine-l'Alleud , it had seemed to him that fate , to whom he had assigned a day on the field of Waterloo , was exact to the appointment ; he stopped his horse , and remained for some time motionless , gazing at the lightning and listening to the thunder ; and this fatalist was heard to cast into the darkness this mysterious saying , `` We are in accord . '' 
Napoleon was mistaken . 
They were no longer in accord . 
He took not a moment for sleep ; every instant of that night was marked by a joy for him . 
He traversed the line of the principal outposts , halting here and there to talk to the sentinels . 
At half-past two , near the wood of Hougomont , he heard the tread of a column on the march ; he thought at the moment that it was a retreat on the part of Wellington . 
He said : `` It is the rear-guard of the English getting under way for the purpose of decamping . 
I will take prisoners the six thousand English who have just arrived at Ostend . '' 
He conversed expansively ; he regained the animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March , when he pointed out to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant of the Gulf Juan , and cried , `` Well , Bertrand , here is a reinforcement already ! '' 
On the night of the 17th to the 18th of June he rallied Wellington . 
`` That little Englishman needs a lesson , '' said Napoleon . 
The rain redoubled in violence ; the thunder rolled while the Emperor was speaking . 
At half-past three o'clock in the morning , he lost one illusion ; officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him that the enemy was not making any movement . 
Nothing was stirring ; not a bivouac-fire had been extinguished ; the English army was asleep . 
The silence on earth was profound ; the only noise was in the heavens . 
At four o'clock , a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts ; this peasant had served as guide to a brigade of English cavalry , probably Vivian 's brigade , which was on its way to take up a position in the village of Ohain , at the extreme left . 
At five o'clock , two Belgian deserters reported to him that they had just quitted their regiment , and that the English army was ready for battle . 
`` So much the better ! '' 
exclaimed Napoleon . 
`` I prefer to overthrow them rather than to drive them back . '' 
In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms an angle with the Plancenoit road , had a kitchen table and a peasant 's chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme , seated himself , with a truss of straw for a carpet , and spread out on the table the chart of the battle-field , saying to Soult as he did so , `` A pretty checker-board . '' 
In consequence of the rains during the night , the transports of provisions , embedded in the soft roads , had not been able to arrive by morning ; the soldiers had had no sleep ; they were wet and fasting . 
This did not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming cheerfully to Ney , `` We have ninety chances out of a hundred . '' 
At eight o'clock the Emperor 's breakfast was brought to him . 
He invited many generals to it . 
During breakfast , it was said that Wellington had been to a ball two nights before , in Brussels , at the Duchess of Richmond 's ; and Soult , a rough man of war , with a face of an archbishop , said , `` The ball takes place to-day . '' 
The Emperor jested with Ney , who said , `` Wellington will not be so simple as to wait for Your Majesty . '' 
That was his way , however . 
`` He was fond of jesting , '' says Fleury de Chaboulon . 
`` A merry humor was at the foundation of his character , '' says Gourgaud . 
`` He abounded in pleasantries , which were more peculiar than witty , '' says Benjamin Constant . 
These gayeties of a giant are worthy of insistence . 
It was he who called his grenadiers `` his grumblers '' ; he pinched their ears ; he pulled their mustaches . 
`` The Emperor did nothing but play pranks on us , '' is the remark of one of them . 
During the mysterious trip from the island of Elba to France , on the 27th of February , on the open sea , the French brig of war , Le Zephyr , having encountered the brig L'Inconstant , on which Napoleon was concealed , and having asked the news of Napoleon from L'Inconstant , the Emperor , who still wore in his hat the white and amaranthine cockade sown with bees , which he had adopted at the isle of Elba , laughingly seized the speaking-trumpet , and answered for himself , `` The Emperor is well . '' 
A man who laughs like that is on familiar terms with events . 
Napoleon indulged in many fits of this laughter during the breakfast at Waterloo . 
After breakfast he meditated for a quarter of an hour ; then two generals seated themselves on the truss of straw , pen in hand and their paper on their knees , and the Emperor dictated to them the order of battle . 
At nine o'clock , at the instant when the French army , ranged in echelons and set in motion in five columns , had deployed -- the divisions in two lines , the artillery between the brigades , the music at their head ; as they beat the march , with rolls on the drums and the blasts of trumpets , mighty , vast , joyous , a sea of casques , of sabres , and of bayonets on the horizon , the Emperor was touched , and twice exclaimed , `` Magnificent ! 
Magnificent ! '' 
Between nine o'clock and half-past ten the whole army , incredible as it may appear , had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines , forming , to repeat the Emperor 's expression , `` the figure of six V 's . '' 
A few moments after the formation of the battle-array , in the midst of that profound silence , like that which heralds the beginning of a storm , which precedes engagements , the Emperor tapped Haxo on the shoulder , as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders , detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon , Reille , and Lobau , and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean , which was situated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads , and said to him , `` There are four and twenty handsome maids , General . '' 
Sure of the issue , he encouraged with a smile , as they passed before him , the company of sappers of the first corps , which he had appointed to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried . 
All this serenity had been traversed by but a single word of haughty pity ; perceiving on his left , at a spot where there now stands a large tomb , those admirable Scotch Grays , with their superb horses , massing themselves , he said , `` It is a pity . '' 
Then he mounted his horse , advanced beyond Rossomme , and selected for his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of the road from Genappe to Brussels , which was his second station during the battle . 
The third station , the one adopted at seven o'clock in the evening , between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte , is formidable ; it is a rather elevated knoll , which still exists , and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the plain . 
Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of the road , up to Napoleon himself . 
As at Brienne , he had over his head the shriek of the bullets and of the heavy artillery . 
Mouldy cannon-balls , old sword-blades , and shapeless projectiles , eaten up with rust , were picked up at the spot where his horse ' feet stood . 
Scabra rubigine . 
A few years ago , a shell of sixty pounds , still charged , and with its fuse broken off level with the bomb , was unearthed . 
It was at this last post that the Emperor said to his guide , Lacoste , a hostile and terrified peasant , who was attached to the saddle of a hussar , and who turned round at every discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon : `` Fool , it is shameful ! 
You 'll get yourself killed with a ball in the back . '' 
He who writes these lines has himself found , in the friable soil of this knoll , on turning over the sand , the remains of the neck of a bomb , disintegrated , by the oxidization of six and forty years , and old fragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between the fingers . 
Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains , where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place , are no longer what they were on June 18 , 1815 . 
By taking from this mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it , its real relief has been taken away , and history , disconcerted , no longer finds her bearings there . 
It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifying it . 
Wellington , when he beheld Waterloo once more , two years later , exclaimed , `` They have altered my field of battle ! '' 
Where the great pyramid of earth , surmounted by the lion , rises to-day , there was a hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road , but which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe . 
The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe to Brussels : one , the English tomb , is on the left ; the other , the German tomb , is on the right . 
There is no French tomb . 
The whole of that plain is a sepulchre for France . 
Thanks to the thousands upon thousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one hundred and fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference , the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope . 
On the day of battle , particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte , it was abrupt and difficult of approach . 
The slope there is so steep that the English cannon could not see the farm , situated in the bottom of the valley , which was the centre of the combat . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the rains had still farther increased this acclivity , the mud complicated the problem of the ascent , and the men not only slipped back , but stuck fast in the mire . 
Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trench whose presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine . 
What was this trench ? 
Let us explain . 
Braine-l'Alleud is a Belgian village ; Ohain is another . 
These villages , both of them concealed in curves of the landscape , are connected by a road about a league and a half in length , which traverses the plain along its undulating level , and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow , which makes a ravine of this road in some places . 
In 1815 , as at the present day , this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles ; only , it is now on a level with the plain ; it was then a hollow way . 
Its two slopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock . 
This road was , and still is , a trench throughout the greater portion of its course ; a hollow trench , sometimes a dozen feet in depth , and whose banks , being too steep , crumbled away here and there , particularly in winter , under driving rains . 
Accidents happened here . 
The road was so narrow at the Braine-l'Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart , as is proved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery , and which gives the name of the dead , Monsieur Bernard Debrye , Merchant of Brussels , and the date of the accident , February , 1637 . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- It was so deep on the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant , Mathieu Nicaise , was crushed there , in 1783 , by a slide from the slope , as is stated on another stone cross , the top of which has disappeared in the process of clearing the ground , but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the grassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- This is the inscription : -- D. O. M. CY A ETE ECRASE PAR MALHEUR SOUS UN CHARIOT , MONSIEUR BERNARD DE BRYE MARCHAND A BRUXELLE LE -LSB- Illegible -RSB- FEVRIER 1637 . 
On the day of battle , this hollow road whose existence was in no way indicated , bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean , a trench at the summit of the escarpment , a rut concealed in the soil , was invisible ; that is to say , terrible . 
THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE So , on the morning of Waterloo , Napoleon was content . 
He was right ; the plan of battle conceived by him was , as we have seen , really admirable . 
The battle once begun , its very various changes , -- the resistance of Hougomont ; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte ; the killing of Bauduin ; the disabling of Foy ; the unexpected wall against which Soye 's brigade was shattered ; Guilleminot 's fatal heedlessness when he had neither petard nor powder sacks ; the miring of the batteries ; the fifteen unescorted pieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge ; the small effect of the bombs falling in the English lines , and there embedding themselves in the rain-soaked soil , and only succeeding in producing volcanoes of mud , so that the canister was turned into a splash ; the uselessness of Pire 's demonstration on Braine-l'Alleud ; all that cavalry , fifteen squadrons , almost exterminated ; the right wing of the English badly alarmed , the left wing badly cut into ; Ney 's strange mistake in massing , instead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps ; men delivered over to grape-shot , arranged in ranks twenty-seven deep and with a frontage of two hundred ; the frightful holes made in these masses by the cannon-balls ; attacking columns disorganized ; the side-battery suddenly unmasked on their flank ; Bourgeois , Donzelot , and Durutte compromised ; Quiot repulsed ; Lieutenant Vieux , that Hercules graduated at the Polytechnic School , wounded at the moment when he was beating in with an axe the door of La Haie-Sainte under the downright fire of the English barricade which barred the angle of the road from Genappe to Brussels ; Marcognet 's division caught between the infantry and the cavalry , shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid the grain by Best and Pack , put to the sword by Ponsonby ; his battery of seven pieces spiked ; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding , in spite of the Comte d'Erlon , both Frischemont and Smohain ; the flag of the 105th taken , the flag of the 45th captured ; that black Prussian hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred light cavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit ; the alarming things that had been said by prisoners ; Grouchy 's delay ; fifteen hundred men killed in the orchard of Hougomont in less than an hour ; eighteen hundred men overthrown in a still shorter time about La Haie-Sainte , -- all these stormy incidents passing like the clouds of battle before Napoleon , had hardly troubled his gaze and had not overshadowed that face of imperial certainty . 
Napoleon was accustomed to gaze steadily at war ; he never added up the heart-rending details , cipher by cipher ; ciphers mattered little to him , provided that they furnished the total , victory ; he was not alarmed if the beginnings did go astray , since he thought himself the master and the possessor at the end ; he knew how to wait , supposing himself to be out of the question , and he treated destiny as his equal : he seemed to say to fate , Thou wilt not dare . 
Composed half of light and half of shadow , Napoleon thought himself protected in good and tolerated in evil . 
He had , or thought that he had , a connivance , one might almost say a complicity , of events in his favor , which was equivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity . 
Nevertheless , when one has Beresina , Leipzig , and Fontainebleau behind one , it seems as though one might distrust Waterloo . 
A mysterious frown becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens . 
At the moment when Wellington retreated , Napoleon shuddered . 
He suddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared , and the van of the English army disappear . 
It was rallying , but hiding itself . 
The Emperor half rose in his stirrups . 
The lightning of victory flashed from his eyes . 
Wellington , driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes and destroyed -- that was the definitive conquest of England by France ; it was Crecy , Poitiers , Malplaquet , and Ramillies avenged . 
The man of Marengo was wiping out Agincourt . 
So the Emperor , meditating on this terrible turn of fortune , swept his glass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle . 
His guard , standing behind him with grounded arms , watched him from below with a sort of religion . 
He pondered ; he examined the slopes , noted the declivities , scrutinized the clumps of trees , the square of rye , the path ; he seemed to be counting each bush . 
He gazed with some intentness at the English barricades of the two highways , -- two large abatis of trees , that on the road to Genappe above La Haie-Sainte , armed with two cannon , the only ones out of all the English artillery which commanded the extremity of the field of battle , and that on the road to Nivelles where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chasse 's brigade . 
Near this barricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas , painted white , which stands at the angle of the cross-road near Braine-l'Alleud ; he bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide made a negative sign with his head , which was probably perfidious . 
The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking . 
Wellington had drawn back . 
All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him . 
Napoleon turning round abruptly , despatched an express at full speed to Paris to announce that the battle was won . 
Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts . 
He had just found his clap of thunder . 
He gave orders to Milhaud 's cuirassiers to carry the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
THE UNEXPECTED There were three thousand five hundred of them . 
They formed a front a quarter of a league in extent . 
They were giant men , on colossal horses . 
There were six and twenty squadrons of them ; and they had behind them to support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's division , -- the one hundred and six picked gendarmes , the light cavalry of the Guard , eleven hundred and ninety-seven men , and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances . 
They wore casques without horse-tails , and cuirasses of beaten iron , with horse-pistols in their holsters , and long sabre-swords . 
That morning the whole army had admired them , when , at nine o'clock , with braying of trumpets and all the music playing `` Let us watch o'er the Safety of the Empire , '' they had come in a solid column , with one of their batteries on their flank , another in their centre , and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont , and taken up their position for battle in that powerful second line , so cleverly arranged by Napoleon , which , having on its extreme left Kellermann 's cuirassiers and on its extreme right Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had , so to speak , two wings of iron . 
Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor 's orders . 
Ney drew his sword and placed himself at their head . 
The enormous squadrons were set in motion . 
Then a formidable spectacle was seen . 
All their cavalry , with upraised swords , standards and trumpets flung to the breeze , formed in columns by divisions , descended , by a simultaneous movement and like one man , with the precision of a brazen battering-ram which is effecting a breach , the hill of La Belle Alliance , plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men had already fallen , disappeared there in the smoke , then emerging from that shadow , reappeared on the other side of the valley , still compact and in close ranks , mounting at a full trot , through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them , the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
They ascended , grave , threatening , imperturbable ; in the intervals between the musketry and the artillery , their colossal trampling was audible . 
Being two divisions , there were two columns of them ; Wathier 's division held the right , Delort 's division was on the left . 
It seemed as though two immense adders of steel were to be seen crawling towards the crest of the table-land . 
It traversed the battle like a prodigy . 
Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt of the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry ; Murat was lacking here , but Ney was again present . 
It seemed as though that mass had become a monster and had but one soul . 
Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of a polyp . 
They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke which was rent here and there . 
A confusion of helmets , of cries , of sabres , a stormy heaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons and the flourish of trumpets , a terrible and disciplined tumult ; over all , the cuirasses like the scales on the hydra . 
These narrations seemed to belong to another age . 
Something parallel to this vision appeared , no doubt , in the ancient Orphic epics , which told of the centaurs , the old hippanthropes , those Titans with human heads and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop , horrible , invulnerable , sublime -- gods and beasts . 
Odd numerical coincidence , -- twenty-six battalions rode to meet twenty-six battalions . 
Behind the crest of the plateau , in the shadow of the masked battery , the English infantry , formed into thirteen squares , two battalions to the square , in two lines , with seven in the first line , six in the second , the stocks of their guns to their shoulders , taking aim at that which was on the point of appearing , waited , calm , mute , motionless . 
They did not see the cuirassiers , and the cuirassiers did not see them . 
They listened to the rise of this flood of men . 
They heard the swelling noise of three thousand horse , the alternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot , the jingling of the cuirasses , the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage breathing . 
There ensued a most terrible silence ; then , all at once , a long file of uplifted arms , brandishing sabres , appeared above the crest , and casques , trumpets , and standards , and three thousand heads with gray mustaches , shouting , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
All this cavalry debouched on the plateau , and it was like the appearance of an earthquake . 
All at once , a tragic incident ; on the English left , on our right , the head of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor . 
On arriving at the culminating point of the crest , ungovernable , utterly given over to fury and their course of extermination of the squares and cannon , the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench , -- a trench between them and the English . 
It was the hollow road of Ohain . 
It was a terrible moment . 
The ravine was there , unexpected , yawning , directly under the horses ' feet , two fathoms deep between its double slopes ; the second file pushed the first into it , and the third pushed on the second ; the horses reared and fell backward , landed on their haunches , slid down , all four feet in the air , crushing and overwhelming the riders ; and there being no means of retreat , -- the whole column being no longer anything more than a projectile , -- the force which had been acquired to crush the English crushed the French ; the inexorable ravine could only yield when filled ; horses and riders rolled there pell-mell , grinding each other , forming but one mass of flesh in this gulf : when this trench was full of living men , the rest marched over them and passed on . 
Almost a third of Dubois 's brigade fell into that abyss . 
This began the loss of the battle . 
A local tradition , which evidently exaggerates matters , says that two thousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow road of Ohain . 
This figure probably comprises all the other corpses which were flung into this ravine the day after the combat . 
Let us note in passing that it was Dubois 's sorely tried brigade which , an hour previously , making a charge to one side , had captured the flag of the Lunenburg battalion . 
Napoleon , before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had scrutinized the ground , but had not been able to see that hollow road , which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of the plateau . 
Warned , nevertheless , and put on the alert by the little white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles highway , he had probably put a question as to the possibility of an obstacle , to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide had answered No . 
We might almost affirm that Napoleon 's catastrophe originated in that sign of a peasant 's head . 
Other fatalities were destined to arise . 
Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle ? 
We answer No . 
Why ? 
Because of Wellington ? 
Because of Blucher ? 
No . 
Because of God . 
Bonaparte victor at Waterloo ; that does not come within the law of the nineteenth century . 
Another series of facts was in preparation , in which there was no longer any room for Napoleon . 
The ill will of events had declared itself long before . 
It was time that this vast man should fall . 
The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the balance . 
This individual alone counted for more than a universal group . 
These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head ; the world mounting to the brain of one man , -- this would be mortal to civilization were it to last . 
The moment had arrived for the incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan . 
Probably the principles and the elements , on which the regular gravitations of the moral , as of the material , world depend , had complained . 
Smoking blood , over-filled cemeteries , mothers in tears , -- these are formidable pleaders . 
When the earth is suffering from too heavy a burden , there are mysterious groanings of the shades , to which the abyss lends an ear . 
Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been decided on . 
He embarrassed God . 
Waterloo is not a battle ; it is a change of front on the part of the Universe . 
THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine . 
Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank on the cuirassiers . 
The intrepid General Delort made the military salute to the English battery . 
The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered the squares at a gallop . 
The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a halt . 
The disaster of the hollow road had decimated , but not discouraged them . 
They belonged to that class of men who , when diminished in number , increase in courage . 
Wathier 's column alone had suffered in the disaster ; Delort 's column , which Ney had deflected to the left , as though he had a presentiment of an ambush , had arrived whole . 
The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares . 
At full speed , with bridles loose , swords in their teeth pistols in fist , -- such was the attack . 
There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until the soldier is changed into a statue , and when all this flesh turns into granite . 
The English battalions , desperately assaulted , did not stir . 
Then it was terrible . 
All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once . 
A frenzied whirl enveloped them . 
That cold infantry remained impassive . 
The first rank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets , the second ranks shot them down ; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged their guns , the front of the square parted , permitted the passage of an eruption of grape-shot , and closed again . 
The cuirassiers replied by crushing them . 
Their great horses reared , strode across the ranks , leaped over the bayonets and fell , gigantic , in the midst of these four living wells . 
The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers ; the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares . 
Files of men disappeared , ground to dust under the horses . 
The bayonets plunged into the bellies of these centaurs ; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably never been seen anywhere else . 
The squares , wasted by this mad cavalry , closed up their ranks without flinching . 
Inexhaustible in the matter of grape-shot , they created explosions in their assailants ' midst . 
The form of this combat was monstrous . 
These squares were no longer battalions , they were craters ; those cuirassiers were no longer cavalry , they were a tempest . 
Each square was a volcano attacked by a cloud ; lava contended with lightning . 
The square on the extreme right , the most exposed of all , being in the air , was almost annihilated at the very first shock . 
lt was formed of the 75th regiment of Highlanders . 
The bagpipe-player in the centre dropped his melancholy eyes , filled with the reflections of the forests and the lakes , in profound inattention , while men were being exterminated around him , and seated on a drum , with his pibroch under his arm , played the Highland airs . 
These Scotchmen died thinking of Ben Lothian , as did the Greeks recalling Argos . 
The sword of a cuirassier , which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it , put an end to the song by killing the singer . 
The cuirassiers , relatively few in number , and still further diminished by the catastrophe of the ravine , had almost the whole English army against them , but they multiplied themselves so that each man of them was equal to ten . 
Nevertheless , some Hanoverian battalions yielded . 
Wellington perceived it , and thought of his cavalry . 
Had Napoleon at that same moment thought of his infantry , he would have won the battle . 
This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake . 
All at once , the cuirassiers , who had been the assailants , found themselves assailed . 
The English cavalry was at their back . 
Before them two squares , behind them Somerset ; Somerset meant fourteen hundred dragoons of the guard . 
On the right , Somerset had Dornberg with the German light-horse , and on his left , Trip with the Belgian carabineers ; the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front , before and in the rear , by infantry and cavalry , had to face all sides . 
What mattered it to them ? 
They were a whirlwind . 
Their valor was something indescribable . 
In addition to this , they had behind them the battery , which was still thundering . 
It was necessary that it should be so , or they could never have been wounded in the back . 
One of their cuirasses , pierced on the shoulder by a ball from a biscayan , -LSB- 9 -RSB- is in the collection of the Waterloo Museum . 
-LSB- 9 -RSB- A heavy rifled gun . 
For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed . 
It was no longer a hand-to-hand conflict ; it was a shadow , a fury , a dizzy transport of souls and courage , a hurricane of lightning swords . 
In an instant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only eight hundred . 
Fuller , their lieutenant-colonel , fell dead . 
Ney rushed up with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's light-horse . 
The plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured , recaptured , captured again . 
The cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry ; or , to put it more exactly , the whole of that formidable rout collared each other without releasing the other . 
The squares still held firm . 
There were a dozen assaults . 
Ney had four horses killed under him . 
Half the cuirassiers remained on the plateau . 
This conflict lasted two hours . 
The English army was profoundly shaken . 
There is no doubt that , had they not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the hollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and decided the victory . 
This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton , who had seen Talavera and Badajoz . 
Wellington , three-quarters vanquished , admired heroically . 
He said in an undertone , `` Sublime ! '' 
The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen , took or spiked sixty pieces of ordnance , and captured from the English regiments six flags , which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the Guard bore to the Emperor , in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance . 
Wellington 's situation had grown worse . 
