Dieu-Jesus ! 
Did you fall from heaven ? 
There is no trouble about that : if ever you do fall , it will be from there . 
And what a state you are in ! 
You have no cravat ; you have no hat ; you have no coat ! 
Do you know , you would have frightened any one who did not know you ? 
No coat ! 
Lord God ! 
Are the saints going mad nowadays ? 
But how did you get in here ? '' 
His words tumbled over each other . 
The goodman talked with a rustic volubility , in which there was nothing alarming . 
All this was uttered with a mixture of stupefaction and naive kindliness . 
`` Who are you ? 
and what house is this ? '' 
demanded Jean Valjean . 
`` Ah ! 
pardieu , this is too much ! '' 
exclaimed the old man . 
`` I am the person for whom you got the place here , and this house is the one where you had me placed . 
What ! 
You do n't recognize me ? '' 
`` No , '' said Jean Valjean ; `` and how happens it that you know me ? '' 
`` You saved my life , '' said the man . 
He turned . 
A ray of moonlight outlined his profile , and Jean Valjean recognized old Fauchelevent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , `` so it is you ? 
Yes , I recollect you . '' 
`` That is very lucky , '' said the old man , in a reproachful tone . 
`` And what are you doing here ? '' 
resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` Why , I am covering my melons , of course ! '' 
In fact , at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him , old Fauchelevent held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in spreading over the melon bed . 
During the hour or thereabouts that he had been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them . 
It was this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar movements observed from the shed by Jean Valjean . 
He continued : -- `` I said to myself , ` The moon is bright : it is going to freeze . 
What if I were to put my melons into their greatcoats ? ' 
And , '' he added , looking at Jean Valjean with a broad smile , -- `` pardieu ! 
you ought to have done the same ! 
But how do you come here ? '' 
Jean Valjean , finding himself known to this man , at least only under the name of Madeleine , thenceforth advanced only with caution . 
He multiplied his questions . 
Strange to say , their roles seemed to be reversed . 
It was he , the intruder , who interrogated . 
`` And what is this bell which you wear on your knee ? '' 
`` This , '' replied Fauchelevent , `` is so that I may be avoided . '' 
`` What ! 
so that you may be avoided ? '' 
Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air . 
`` Ah , goodness ! 
there are only women in this house -- many young girls . 
It appears that I should be a dangerous person to meet . 
The bell gives them warning . 
When I come , they go . 
`` What house is this ? '' 
`` Come , you know well enough . '' 
`` But I do not . '' 
`` Not when you got me the place here as gardener ? '' 
`` Answer me as though I knew nothing . '' 
`` Well , then , this is the Petit-Picpus convent . '' 
Memories recurred to Jean Valjean . 
Chance , that is to say , Providence , had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine where old Fauchelevent , crippled by the fall from his cart , had been admitted on his recommendation two years previously . 
He repeated , as though talking to himself : -- `` The Petit-Picpus convent . '' 
`` Exactly , '' returned old Fauchelevent . 
`` But to come to the point , how the deuce did you manage to get in here , you , Father Madeleine ? 
No matter if you are a saint ; you are a man as well , and no man enters here . '' 
`` You certainly are here . '' 
`` There is no one but me . '' 
`` Still , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I must stay here . '' 
`` Ah , good God ! '' 
cried Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean drew near to the old man , and said to him in a grave voice : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , I saved your life . '' 
`` I was the first to recall it , '' returned Fauchelevent . 
`` Well , you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the olden days . '' 
Fauchelevent took in his aged , trembling , and wrinkled hands Jean Valjean 's two robust hands , and stood for several minutes as though incapable of speaking . 
At length he exclaimed : -- `` Oh ! 
that would be a blessing from the good God , if I could make you some little return for that ! 
Save your life ! 
Monsieur le Maire , dispose of the old man ! '' 
A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man . 
His countenance seemed to emit a ray of light . 
`` What do you wish me to do ? '' 
he resumed . 
`` That I will explain to you . 
You have a chamber ? '' 
`` I have an isolated hovel yonder , behind the ruins of the old convent , in a corner which no one ever looks into . 
There are three rooms in it . '' 
The hut was , in fact , so well hidden behind the ruins , and so cleverly arranged to prevent it being seen , that Jean Valjean had not perceived it . 
`` Good , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Now I am going to ask two things of you . '' 
`` What are they , Mr. Mayor ? '' 
`` In the first place , you are not to tell any one what you know about me . 
In the second , you are not to try to find out anything more . '' 
`` As you please . 
I know that you can do nothing that is not honest , that you have always been a man after the good God 's heart . 
And then , moreover , you it was who placed me here . 
That concerns you . 
I am at your service . '' 
`` That is settled then . 
Now , come with me . 
We will go and get the child . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` so there is a child ? '' 
He added not a word further , and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows his master . 
Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette , who had grown rosy again before the flame of a good fire , was lying asleep in the old gardener 's bed . 
Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more ; his hat , which he had flung over the wall , had been found and picked up . 
While Jean Valjean was putting on his coat , Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap , which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall . 
The two men were warming themselves with their elbows resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese , black bread , a bottle of wine , and two glasses , and the old man was saying to Jean Valjean , as he laid his hand on the latter 's knee : `` Ah ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
You did not recognize me immediately ; you save people 's lives , and then you forget them ! 
That is bad ! 
But they remember you ! 
You are an ingrate ! '' 
WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side , so to speak , had come about in the simplest possible manner . 
When Jean Valjean , on the evening of the very day when Javert had arrested him beside Fantine 's death-bed , had escaped from the town jail of M. sur M. , the police had supposed that he had betaken himself to Paris . 
Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost , and everything disappears in this belly of the world , as in the belly of the sea . 
No forest hides a man as does that crowd . 
Fugitives of every sort know this . 
They go to Paris as to an abyss ; there are gulfs which save . 
The police know it also , and it is in Paris that they seek what they have lost elsewhere . 
They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to Paris to throw light on their researches . 
Javert had , in fact , rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean . 
Javert 's zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M. Chabouillet , secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles . 
M. Chabouillet , who had , moreover , already been Javert 's patron , had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris . 
There Javert rendered himself useful in divers and , though the word may seem strange for such services , honorable manners . 
He no longer thought of Jean Valjean , -- the wolf of to-day causes these dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday , -- when , in December , 1823 , he read a newspaper , he who never read newspapers ; but Javert , a monarchical man , had a desire to know the particulars of the triumphal entry of the `` Prince Generalissimo '' into Bayonne . 
Just as he was finishing the article , which interested him ; a name , the name of Jean Valjean , attracted his attention at the bottom of a page . 
The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead , and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it . 
He confined himself to the remark , `` That 's a good entry . '' 
Then he threw aside the paper , and thought no more about it . 
Some time afterwards , it chanced that a police report was transmitted from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in Paris , concerning the abduction of a child , which had taken place , under peculiar circumstances , as it was said , in the commune of Montfermeil . 
A little girl of seven or eight years of age , the report said , who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper of that neighborhood , had been stolen by a stranger ; this child answered to the name of Cosette , and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine , who had died in the hospital , it was not known where or when . 
This report came under Javert 's eye and set him to thinking . 
The name of Fantine was well known to him . 
He remembered that Jean Valjean had made him , Javert , burst into laughter , by asking him for a respite of three days , for the purpose of going to fetch that creature 's child . 
He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach for Montfermeil . 
Some signs had made him suspect at the time that this was the second occasion of his entering that coach , and that he had already , on the previous day , made an excursion to the neighborhood of that village , for he had not been seen in the village itself . 
What had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil ? 
It could not even be surmised . 
Javert understood it now . 
Fantine 's daughter was there . 
Jean Valjean was going there in search of her . 
And now this child had been stolen by a stranger ! 
Who could that stranger be ? 
Could it be Jean Valjean ? 
But Jean Valjean was dead . 
Javert , without saying anything to anybody , took the coach from the Pewter Platter , Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette , and made a trip to Montfermeil . 
He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there ; he found a great deal of obscurity . 
For the first few days the Thenardiers had chattered in their rage . 
The disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village . 
He immediately obtained numerous versions of the story , which ended in the abduction of a child . 
Hence the police report . 
But their first vexation having passed off , Thenardier , with his wonderful instinct , had very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the prosecutor of the Crown , and that his complaints with regard to the abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon himself , and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand , the glittering eye of justice . 
The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle brought to them . 
And in the first place , how explain the fifteen hundred francs which he had received ? 
He turned squarely round , put a gag on his wife 's mouth , and feigned astonishment when the stolen child was mentioned to him . 
He understood nothing about it ; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature `` taken from him '' so hastily ; he should have liked to keep her two or three days longer , out of tenderness ; but her `` grandfather '' had come for her in the most natural way in the world . 
He added the `` grandfather , '' which produced a good effect . 
This was the story that Javert hit upon when he arrived at Montfermeil . 
The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish . 
Nevertheless , Javert dropped a few questions , like plummets , into Thenardier 's history . 
`` Who was that grandfather ? 
and what was his name ? '' 
Thenardier replied with simplicity : `` He is a wealthy farmer . 
I saw his passport . 
I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert . '' 
Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name . 
Thereupon Javert returned to Paris . 
`` Jean Valjean is certainly dead , '' said he , `` and I am a ninny . '' 
He had again begun to forget this history , when , in the course of March , 1824 , he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish of Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed `` the mendicant who gives alms . '' 
This person , the story ran , was a man of means , whose name no one knew exactly , and who lived alone with a little girl of eight years , who knew nothing about herself , save that she had come from Montfermeil . 
Montfermeil ! 
that name was always coming up , and it made Javert prick up his ears . 
An old beggar police spy , an ex-beadle , to whom this person had given alms , added a few more details . 
This gentleman of property was very shy , -- never coming out except in the evening , speaking to no one , except , occasionally to the poor , and never allowing any one to approach him . 
He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat , which was worth many millions , being all wadded with bank-bills . 
This piqued Javert 's curiosity in a decided manner . 
In order to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming him , he borrowed the beadle 's outfit for a day , and the place where the old spy was in the habit of crouching every evening , whining orisons through his nose , and playing the spy under cover of prayer . 
`` The suspected individual '' did indeed approach Javert thus disguised , and bestow alms on him . 
At that moment Javert raised his head , and the shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean . 
However , the darkness might have misled him ; Jean Valjean 's death was official ; Javert cherished very grave doubts ; and when in doubt , Javert , the man of scruples , never laid a finger on any one 's collar . 
He followed his man to the Gorbeau house , and got `` the old woman '' to talking , which was no difficult matter . 
The old woman confirmed the fact regarding the coat lined with millions , and narrated to him the episode of the thousand-franc bill . 
She had seen it ! 
She had handled it ! 
Javert hired a room ; that evening he installed himself in it . 
He came and listened at the mysterious lodger 's door , hoping to catch the sound of his voice , but Jean Valjean saw his candle through the key-hole , and foiled the spy by keeping silent . 
On the following day Jean Valjean decamped ; but the noise made by the fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman , who , hearing the rattling of coin , suspected that he might be intending to leave , and made haste to warn Javert . 
At night , when Jean Valjean came out , Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two men . 
Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture , but he had not mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize ; that was his secret , and he had kept it for three reasons : in the first place , because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert ; next , because , to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead , on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort , was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert , and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict ; and lastly , because Javert , being an artist , had a taste for the unforeseen . 
He hated those well-heralded successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off . 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the last . 
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree , then from corner to corner of the street , and had not lost sight of him for a single instant ; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert 's eye had been on him . 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean ? 
Because he was still in doubt . 
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at its ease ; the free press embarrassed it ; several arbitrary arrests denounced by the newspapers , had echoed even as far as the Chambers , and had rendered the Prefecture timid . 
Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter . 
The police agents were afraid of making a mistake ; the prefect laid the blame on them ; a mistake meant dismissal . 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph , reproduced by twenty newspapers , would have caused in Paris : `` Yesterday , an aged grandfather , with white hair , a respectable and well-to-do gentleman , who was walking with his grandchild , aged eight , was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict ! '' 
Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own ; injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the prefect . 
He was really in doubt . 
Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark . 
Sadness , uneasiness , anxiety , depression , this fresh misfortune of being forced to flee by night , to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette and himself , the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace of the child -- all this , without his being aware of it , had altered Jean Valjean 's walk , and impressed on his bearing such senility , that the police themselves , incarnate in the person of Javert , might , and did in fact , make a mistake . 
The impossibility of approaching too close , his costume of an emigre preceptor , the declaration of Thenardier which made a grandfather of him , and , finally , the belief in his death in prison , added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in Javert 's mind . 
For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his papers ; but if the man was not Jean Valjean , and if this man was not a good , honest old fellow living on his income , he was probably some merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web of Parisian misdeeds , some chief of a dangerous band , who gave alms to conceal his other talents , which was an old dodge . 
He had trusty fellows , accomplices ' retreats in case of emergencies , in which he would , no doubt , take refuge . 
All these turns which he was making through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man . 
To arrest him too hastily would be `` to kill the hen that laid the golden eggs . '' 
Where was the inconvenience in waiting ? 
Javert was very sure that he would not escape . 
Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind , putting to himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage . 
It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise , that , thanks to the brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop , he decidedly recognized Jean Valjean . 
There are in this world two beings who give a profound start , -- the mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey . 
Javert gave that profound start . 
As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean , the formidable convict , he perceived that there were only three of them , and he asked for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise . 
One puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel . 
This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his agents came near causing him to lose the trail . 
He speedily divined , however , that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between his pursuers and himself . 
He bent his head and reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the right scent . 
Javert , with his powerful rectitude of instinct , went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz . 
A word with the toll-keeper furnished him with the information which he required : `` Have you seen a man with a little girl ? '' 
`` I made him pay two sous , '' replied the toll-keeper . 
Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated spot on the other side of the water , leading Cosette by the hand . 
He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine ; he remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap , and of the sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
He made sure of his back burrows , as huntsmen say ; he hastily despatched one of his agents , by a roundabout way , to guard that issue . 
A patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him , he made a requisition on it , and caused it to accompany him . 
In such games soldiers are aces . 
Moreover , the principle is , that in order to get the best of a wild boar , one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs . 
These combinations having been effected , feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind alley Genrot on the right , his agent on the left , and himself , Javert , in the rear , he took a pinch of snuff . 
Then he began the game . 
He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment ; he allowed his man to go on ahead , knowing that he had him safe , but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as possible , happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing him free , gloating over him with his gaze , with that voluptuousness of the spider which allows the fly to flutter , and of the cat which lets the mouse run . 
Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality , -- the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers . 
What a delight this strangling is ! 
Javert was enjoying himself . 
The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted . 
He was sure of success ; all he had to do now was to close his hand . 
Accompanied as he was , the very idea of resistance was impossible , however vigorous , energetic , and desperate Jean Valjean might be . 
Javert advanced slowly , sounding , searching on his way all the nooks of the street like so many pockets of thieves . 
When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there . 
His exasperation can be imagined . 
He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus ; that agent , who had remained imperturbably at his post , had not seen the man pass . 
It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns ; that is to say , he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels , and then the oldest huntsmen know not what to say . 
Duvivier , Ligniville , and Desprez halt short . 
In a discomfiture of this sort , Artonge exclaims , `` It was not a stag , but a sorcerer . '' 
Javert would have liked to utter the same cry . 
His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage . 
It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia , that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India , that Caesar made mistakes in the war in Africa , that Cyrus was at fault in the war in Scythia , and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean Valjean . 
He was wrong , perhaps , in hesitating in his recognition of the exconvict . 
The first glance should have sufficed him . 
He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old building ; he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de Pontoise . 
He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin . 
Advice is certainly useful ; it is a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogs who deserve confidence ; but the hunter can not be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict . 
Javert , by taking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail , alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart , and so made him run . 
Above all , he was wrong in that after he had picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz , he played that formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a thread . 
He thought himself stronger than he was , and believed that he could play at the game of the mouse and the lion . 
At the same time , he reckoned himself as too weak , when he judged it necessary to obtain reinforcement . 
Fatal precaution , waste of precious time ! 
Javert committed all these blunders , and none the less was one of the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed . 
He was , in the full force of the term , what is called in venery a knowing dog . 
But what is there that is perfect ? 
Great strategists have their eclipses . 
The greatest follies are often composed , like the largest ropes , of a multitude of strands . 
Take the cable thread by thread , take all the petty determining motives separately , and you can break them one after the other , and you say , `` That is all there is of it ! '' 
Braid them , twist them together ; the result is enormous : it is Attila hesitating between Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west ; it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua ; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube . 
However that may be , even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean had escaped him , Javert did not lose his head . 
Sure that the convict who had broken his ban could not be far off , he established sentinels , he organized traps and ambuscades , and beat the quarter all that night . 
The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut . 
A precious sign which , however , led him astray , since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land . 
Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction . 
The fact is , that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot , he would probably have done so and have been lost . 
Javert explored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a needle . 
At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook , and returned to the Prefecture of Police , as much ashamed as a police spy who had been captured by a robber might have been . 
NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS Nothing , half a century ago , more resembled every other carriage gate than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus . 
This entrance , which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion , permitted a view of two things , neither of which have anything very funereal about them , -- a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines , and the face of a lounging porter . 
Above the wall , at the bottom of the court , tall trees were visible . 
When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard , when a glass of wine cheered up the porter , it was difficult to pass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling impression of it . 
Nevertheless , it was a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse . 
The threshold smiled ; the house prayed and wept . 
If one succeeded in passing the porter , which was not easy , -- which was even nearly impossible for every one , for there was an open sesame ! 
which it was necessary to know , -- if , the porter once passed , one entered a little vestibule on the right , on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it at a time , if one did not allow one 's self to be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow , with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase , if one ventured to ascend it , one crossed a first landing , then a second , and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable persistency . 
Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows . 
The corridor took a turn and became dark . 
If one doubled this cape , one arrived a few paces further on , in front of a door which was all the more mysterious because it was not fastened . 
If one opened it , one found one 's self in a little chamber about six feet square , tiled , well-scrubbed , clean , cold , and hung with nankin paper with green flowers , at fifteen sous the roll . 
A white , dull light fell from a large window , with tiny panes , on the left , which usurped the whole width of the room . 
One gazed about , but saw no one ; one listened , one heard neither a footstep nor a human murmur . 
The walls were bare , the chamber was not furnished ; there was not even a chair . 
One looked again , and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular hole , about a foot square , with a grating of interlacing iron bars , black , knotted , solid , which formed squares -- I had almost said meshes -- of less than an inch and a half in diagonal length . 
The little green flowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars , without being startled or thrown into confusion by their funereal contact . 
Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole , this grating would have prevented it . 
It did not allow the passage of the body , but it did allow the passage of the eyes ; that is to say , of the mind . 
This seems to have occurred to them , for it had been re-enforced by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear , and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a strainer . 
At the bottom of this plate , an aperture had been pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box . 
A bit of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening . 
If the tape was pulled , a bell rang , and one heard a voice very near at hand , which made one start . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
the voice demanded . 
It was a woman 's voice , a gentle voice , so gentle that it was mournful . 
Here , again , there was a magical word which it was necessary to know . 
If one did not know it , the voice ceased , the wall became silent once more , as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other side of it . 
If one knew the password , the voice resumed , `` Enter on the right . '' 
One then perceived on the right , facing the window , a glass door surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray . 
On raising the latch and crossing the threshold , one experienced precisely the same impression as when one enters at the theatre into a grated baignoire , before the grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted . 
One was , in fact , in a sort of theatre-box , narrow , furnished with two old chairs , and a much-frayed straw matting , sparely illuminated by the vague light from the glass door ; a regular box , with its front just of a height to lean upon , bearing a tablet of black wood . 
This box was grated , only the grating of it was not of gilded wood , as at the opera ; it was a monstrous lattice of iron bars , hideously interlaced and riveted to the wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists . 
The first minutes passed ; when one 's eyes began to grow used to this cellar-like half-twilight , one tried to pass the grating , but got no further than six inches beyond it . 
There he encountered a barrier of black shutters , re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood painted a gingerbread yellow . 
These shutters were divided into long , narrow slats , and they masked the entire length of the grating . 
They were always closed . 
At the expiration of a few moments one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters , and saying : -- `` I am here . 
What do you wish with me ? '' 
It was a beloved , sometimes an adored , voice . 
No one was visible . 
Hardly the sound of a breath was audible . 
It seemed as though it were a spirit which had been evoked , that was speaking to you across the walls of the tomb . 
If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions , the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you ; the evoked spirit became an apparition . 
Behind the grating , behind the shutter , one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight , a head , of which only the mouth and the chin were visible ; the rest was covered with a black veil . 
One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe , and a form that was barely defined , covered with a black shroud . 
That head spoke with you , but did not look at you and never smiled at you . 
The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that you saw her in the white , and she saw you in the black . 
This light was symbolical . 
Nevertheless , your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was made in that place shut off from all glances . 
A profound vagueness enveloped that form clad in mourning . 
Your eyes searched that vagueness , and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition . 
At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could see nothing . 
What you beheld was night , emptiness , shadows , a wintry mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb , a sort of terrible peace , a silence from which you could gather nothing , not even sighs , a gloom in which you could distinguish nothing , not even phantoms . 
What you beheld was the interior of a cloister . 
It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called the Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration . 
The box in which you stood was the parlor . 
The first voice which had addressed you was that of the portress who always sat motionless and silent , on the other side of the wall , near the square opening , screened by the iron grating and the plate with its thousand holes , as by a double visor . 
The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that the parlor , which had a window on the side of the world , had none on the side of the convent . 
Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacred place . 
Nevertheless , there was something beyond that shadow ; there was a light ; there was life in the midst of that death . 
Although this was the most strictly walled of all convents , we shall endeavor to make our way into it , and to take the reader in , and to say , without transgressing the proper bounds , things which story-tellers have never seen , and have , therefore , never described . 
THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA This convent , which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the Rue Petit-Picpus , was a community of Bernardines of the obedience of Martin Verga . 
These Bernardines were attached , in consequence , not to Clairvaux , like the Bernardine monks , but to Citeaux , like the Benedictine monks . 
In other words , they were the subjects , not of Saint Bernard , but of Saint Benoit . 
Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that Martin Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines , with Salamanca for the head of the order , and Alcala as the branch establishment . 
This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic countries of Europe . 
There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one order on another . 
To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoit , which is here in question : there are attached to this order , without counting the obedience of Martin Verga , four congregations , -- two in Italy , Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua ; two in France , Cluny and Saint-Maur ; and nine orders , -- Vallombrosa , Granmont , the Celestins , the Camaldules , the Carthusians , the Humilies , the Olivateurs , the Silvestrins , and lastly , Citeaux ; for Citeaux itself , a trunk for other orders , is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoit . 
Citeaux dates from Saint Robert , Abbe de Molesme , in the diocese of Langres , in 1098 . 
Now it was in 529 that the devil , having retired to the desert of Subiaco -- he was old -- had he turned hermit ? 
-- was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo , where he dwelt , by Saint-Benoit , then aged seventeen . 
After the rule of the Carmelites , who go barefoot , wear a bit of willow on their throats , and never sit down , the harshest rule is that of the Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
They are clothed in black , with a guimpe , which , in accordance with the express command of Saint-Benoit , mounts to the chin . 
A robe of serge with large sleeves , a large woollen veil , the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square on the breast , the band which descends over their brow to their eyes , -- this is their dress . 
All is black except the band , which is white . 
The novices wear the same habit , but all in white . 
The professed nuns also wear a rosary at their side . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual Adoration , like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , who , at the beginning of this century , had two houses in Paris , -- one at the Temple , the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve . 
However , the Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus , of whom we are speaking , were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve and at the Temple . 
There were numerous differences in their rule ; there were some in their costume . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore the black guimpe , and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve wore a white one , and had , besides , on their breasts , a Holy Sacrament about three inches long , in silver gilt or gilded copper . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy Sacrament . 
The Perpetual Adoration , which was common to the house of the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple , leaves those two orders perfectly distinct . 
Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga , just as there existed a similarity in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy , the life , and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin , between the two orders , which were , nevertheless , widely separated , and on occasion even hostile . 
The Oratory of Italy , established at Florence by Philip de Neri , and the Oratory of France , established by Pierre de Berulle . 
The Oratory of France claimed the precedence , since Philip de Neri was only a saint , while Berulle was a cardinal . 
Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round , abstain from meat , fast in Lent and on many other days which are peculiar to them , rise from their first sleep , from one to three o'clock in the morning , to read their breviary and chant matins , sleep in all seasons between serge sheets and on straw , make no use of the bath , never light a fire , scourge themselves every Friday , observe the rule of silence , speak to each other only during the recreation hours , which are very brief , and wear drugget chemises for six months in the year , from September 14th , which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross , until Easter . 
These six months are a modification : the rule says all the year , but this drugget chemise , intolerable in the heat of summer , produced fevers and nervous spasms . 
The use of it had to be restricted . 
Even with this palliation , when the nuns put on this chemise on the 14th of September , they suffer from fever for three or four days . 
Obedience , poverty , chastity , perseverance in their seclusion , -- these are their vows , which the rule greatly aggravates . 
The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers , who are called meres vocales because they have a voice in the chapter . 
A prioress can only be re-elected twice , which fixes the longest possible reign of a prioress at nine years . 
They never see the officiating priest , who is always hidden from them by a serge curtain nine feet in height . 
During the sermon , when the preacher is in the chapel , they drop their veils over their faces . 
They must always speak low , walk with their eyes on the ground and their heads bowed . 
One man only is allowed to enter the convent , -- the archbishop of the diocese . 
There is really one other , -- the gardener . 
But he is always an old man , and , in order that he may always be alone in the garden , and that the nuns may be warned to avoid him , a bell is attached to his knee . 
Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive . 
It is the canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation . 
As at the voice of Christ , ut voci Christi , at a gesture , at the first sign , ad nutum , ad primum signum , immediately , with cheerfulness , with perseverance , with a certain blind obedience , prompte , hilariter , perseveranter et caeca quadam obedientia , as the file in the hand of the workman , quasi limam in manibus fabri , without power to read or to write without express permission , legere vel scribere non addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia . 
Each one of them in turn makes what they call reparation . 
The reparation is the prayer for all the sins , for all the faults , for all the dissensions , for all the violations , for all the iniquities , for all the crimes committed on earth . 
For the space of twelve consecutive hours , from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock in the morning , or from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock in the afternoon , the sister who is making reparation remains on her knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament , with hands clasped , a rope around her neck . 
When her fatigue becomes unendurable , she prostrates herself flat on her face against the earth , with her arms outstretched in the form of a cross ; this is her only relief . 
In this attitude she prays for all the guilty in the universe . 
This is great to sublimity . 
As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle , it is called without distinction , to make reparation or to be at the post . 
The nuns even prefer , out of humility , this last expression , which contains an idea of torture and abasement . 
To make reparation is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed . 
The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to fall directly behind her . 
Besides this , there is always a sister kneeling before the Holy Sacrament . 
This station lasts an hour . 
They relieve each other like soldiers on guard . 
This is the Perpetual Adoration . 
The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped with peculiar solemnity , recalling , not the saints and martyrs , but moments in the life of Jesus Christ : as Mother Nativity , Mother Conception , Mother Presentation , Mother Passion . 
But the names of saints are not interdicted . 
When one sees them , one never sees anything but their mouths . 
All their teeth are yellow . 
No tooth-brush ever entered that convent . 
Brushing one 's teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is the loss of one 's soul . 
They never say my . 
They possess nothing of their own , and they must not attach themselves to anything . 
They call everything our ; thus : our veil , our chaplet ; if they were speaking of their chemise , they would say our chemise . 
Sometimes they grow attached to some petty object , -- to a book of hours , a relic , a medal that has been blessed . 
As soon as they become aware that they are growing attached to this object , they must give it up . 
They recall the words of Saint Therese , to whom a great lady said , as she was on the point of entering her order , `` Permit me , mother , to send for a Bible to which I am greatly attached . '' 
`` Ah , you are attached to something ! 
In that case , do not enter our order ! '' 
Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up , to have a place of her own , a chamber . 
They live with their cells open . 
When they meet , one says , `` Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
The other responds , `` Forever . '' 
The same ceremony when one taps at the other 's door . 
Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard to say hastily , `` Forever ! '' 
Like all practices , this becomes mechanical by force of habit ; and one sometimes says forever before the other has had time to say the rather long sentence , `` Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar . '' 
Among the Visitandines the one who enters says : `` Ave Maria , '' and the one whose cell is entered says , `` Gratia plena . '' 
It is their way of saying good day , which is in fact full of grace . 
At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the church bell of the convent . 
At this signal prioress , vocal mothers , professed nuns , lay-sisters , novices , postulants , interrupt what they are saying , what they are doing , or what they are thinking , and all say in unison if it is five o'clock , for instance , `` At five o'clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
If it is eight o'clock , `` At eight o'clock and at all hours ! '' 
and so on , according to the hour . 
This custom , the object of which is to break the thread of thought and to lead it back constantly to God , exists in many communities ; the formula alone varies . 
Thus at The Infant Jesus they say , `` At this hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart ! '' 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga , cloistered fifty years ago at Petit-Picpus , chant the offices to a solemn psalmody , a pure Gregorian chant , and always with full voice during the whole course of the office . 
Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause , and say in a low voice , `` Jesus-Marie-Joseph . '' 
For the office of the dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a depth . 
The effect produced is striking and tragic . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar for the burial of their community . 
The Government , as they say , does not permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they die . 
This is an affliction to them , and causes them consternation as an infraction of the rules . 
They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best , -- permission to be interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient Vaugirard cemetery , which was made of land which had formerly belonged to their community . 
On Fridays the nuns hear high mass , vespers , and all the offices , as on Sunday . 
They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals unknown to people of the world , of which the Church of France was so prodigal in the olden days , and of which it is still prodigal in Spain and Italy . 
Their stations in the chapel are interminable . 
As for the number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them : `` The prayers of the postulants are frightful , the prayers of the novices are still worse , and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse . '' 
Once a week the chapter assembles : the prioress presides ; the vocal mothers assist . 
Each sister kneels in turn on the stones , and confesses aloud , in the presence of all , the faults and sins which she has committed during the week . 
The vocal mothers consult after each confession and inflict the penance aloud . 
Besides this confession in a loud tone , for which all faults in the least serious are reserved , they have for their venial offences what they call the coulpe . 
To make one 's coulpe means to prostrate one 's self flat on one 's face during the office in front of the prioress until the latter , who is never called anything but our mother , notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of her stall that she can rise . 
The coulpe or peccavi , is made for a very small matter -- a broken glass , a torn veil , an involuntary delay of a few seconds at an office , a false note in church , etc. ; this suffices , and the coulpe is made . 
The coulpe is entirely spontaneous ; it is the culpable person herself -LRB- the word is etymologically in its place here -RRB- who judges herself and inflicts it on herself . 
On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone the offices before a large reading-desk with four places . 
One day one of the mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with Ecce , and instead of Ecce she uttered aloud the three notes do si sol ; for this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a coulpe which lasted during the whole service : what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter had laughed . 
When a nun is summoned to the parlor , even were it the prioress herself , she drops her veil , as will be remembered , so that only her mouth is visible . 
The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers . 
The others can see only their immediate family , and that very rarely . 
If , by chance , an outsider presents herself to see a nun , or one whom she has known and loved in the outer world , a regular series of negotiations is required . 
If it is a woman , the authorization may sometimes be granted ; the nun comes , and they talk to her through the shutters , which are opened only for a mother or sister . 
It is unnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men . 
Such is the rule of Saint-Benoit , aggravated by Martin Verga . 
These nuns are not gay , rosy , and fresh , as the daughters of other orders often are . 
They are pale and grave . 
Between 1825 and 1830 three of them went mad . 
AUSTERITIES One is a postulant for two years at least , often for four ; a novice for four . 
It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their order . 
In their cells , they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations , of which they must never speak . 
On the day when a novice makes her profession , she is dressed in her handsomest attire , she is crowned with white roses , her hair is brushed until it shines , and curled . 
Then she prostrates herself ; a great black veil is thrown over her , and the office for the dead is sung . 
Then the nuns separate into two files ; one file passes close to her , saying in plaintive accents , `` Our sister is dead '' ; and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy , `` Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ ! '' 
At the epoch when this story takes place , a boarding-school was attached to the convent -- a boarding-school for young girls of noble and mostly wealthy families , among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen , and an English girl bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot . 
These young girls , reared by these nuns between four walls , grew up with a horror of the world and of the age . 
One of them said to us one day , `` The sight of the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot . '' 
They were dressed in blue , with a white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their breast . 
On certain grand festival days , particularly Saint Martha 's day , they were permitted , as a high favor and a supreme happiness , to dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoit for a whole day . 
In the early days the nuns were in the habit of lending them their black garments . 
This seemed profane , and the prioress forbade it . 
Only the novices were permitted to lend . 
It is remarkable that these performances , tolerated and encouraged , no doubt , in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit , were a genuine happiness and a real recreation for the scholars . 
They simply amused themselves with it . 
It was new ; it gave them a change . 
Candid reasons of childhood , which do not , however , succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one 's hand and standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk . 
The pupils conformed , with the exception of the austerities , to all the practices of the convent . 
There was a certain young woman who entered the world , and who after many years of married life had not succeeded in breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door , `` forever ! '' 
Like the nuns , the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor . 
Their very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them . 
The following illustrates to what a degree severity on that point was carried . 
One day a young girl received a visit from her mother , who was accompanied by a little sister three years of age . 
The young girl wept , for she wished greatly to embrace her sister . 
Impossible . 
She begged that , at least , the child might be permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it . 
This was almost indignantly refused . 
GAYETIES None the less , these young girls filled this grave house with charming souvenirs . 
At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister . 
The recreation hour struck . 
A door swung on its hinges . 
The birds said , `` Good ; here come the children ! '' 
An irruption of youth inundated that garden intersected with a cross like a shroud . 
Radiant faces , white foreheads , innocent eyes , full of merry light , all sorts of auroras , were scattered about amid these shadows . 
After the psalmodies , the bells , the peals , and knells and offices , the sound of these little girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees . 
The hive of joy was opened , and each one brought her honey . 
They played , they called to each other , they formed into groups , they ran about ; pretty little white teeth chattered in the corners ; the veils superintended the laughs from a distance , shades kept watch of the sunbeams , but what mattered it ? 
Still they beamed and laughed . 
Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling brilliancy . 
They looked on , vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of the hives . 
It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house of mourning . 
The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns ; the gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence . 
Thanks to these children , there was , among so many austere hours , one hour of ingenuousness . 
The little ones skipped about ; the elder ones danced . 
In this cloister play was mingled with heaven . 
Nothing is so delightful and so august as all these fresh , expanding young souls . 
Homer would have come thither to laugh with Perrault ; and there was in that black garden , youth , health , noise , cries , giddiness , pleasure , happiness enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses , those of the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale , those of the throne as well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand . 
In that house more than anywhere else , perhaps , arise those children 's sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of thoughtfulness . 
It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of five years exclaimed one day : `` Mother ! 
one of the big girls has just told me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remain here . 
What happiness ! '' 
It was here , too , that this memorable dialogue took place : -- A Vocal Mother . 
Why are you weeping , my child ? 
The child -LRB- aged six -RRB- . 
I told Alix that I knew my French history . 
She says that I do not know it , but I do . 
Alix , the big girl -LRB- aged nine -RRB- . 
No ; she does not know it . 
The Mother . 
How is that , my child ? 
Alix . 
She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any question in the book , and she would answer it . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` She did not answer it . '' 
`` Let us see about it . 
What did you ask her ? '' 
`` I opened the book at random , as she proposed , and I put the first question that I came across . '' 
`` And what was the question ? '' 
`` It was , ` What happened after that ? ' '' 
It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder : -- `` How well bred ! 
it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just like a person ! '' 
It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once picked up a confession which had been written out in advance , in order that she might not forget it , by a sinner of seven years : -- `` Father , I accuse myself of having been avaricious . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having been an adulteress . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen . '' 
It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six years of age improvised the following tale , which was listened to by blue eyes aged four and five years : -- `` There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a great many flowers . 
They plucked the flowers and put them in their pockets . 
After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their playthings . 
There was a wolf in that country ; there was a great deal of forest ; and the wolf was in the forest ; and he ate the little cocks . '' 
And this other poem : -- `` There came a blow with a stick . 
`` It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat . 
`` It was not good for her ; it hurt her . 
`` Then a lady put Punchinello in prison . '' 
It was there that a little abandoned child , a foundling whom the convent was bringing up out of charity , uttered this sweet and heart-breaking saying . 
She heard the others talking of their mothers , and she murmured in her corner : -- `` As for me , my mother was not there when I was born ! '' 
There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through the corridors with her bunch of keys , and whose name was Sister Agatha . 
The big big girls -- those over ten years of age -- called her Agathocles . 
The refectory , a large apartment of an oblong square form , which received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden , was dark and damp , and , as the children say , full of beasts . 
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects . 
Each of its four corners had received , in the language of the pupils , a special and expressive name . 
There was Spider corner , Caterpillar corner , Wood-louse corner , and Cricket corner . 
Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed . 
It was not so cold there as elsewhere . 
From the refectory the names had passed to the boarding-school , and there served as in the old College Mazarin to distinguish four nations . 
Every pupil belonged to one of these four nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at meals . 
One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he was passing . 
He inquired of another pupil , a charming brunette with rosy cheeks , who stood near him : -- `` Who is that ? '' 
`` She is a spider , Monseigneur . '' 
`` Bah ! 
And that one yonder ? '' 
`` She is a cricket . '' 
`` And that one ? '' 
`` She is a caterpillar . '' 
`` Really ! 
and yourself ? '' 
`` I am a wood-louse , Monseigneur . '' 
Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities . 
At the beginning of this century Ecouen was one of those strict and graceful places where young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august . 
At Ecouen , in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament , a distinction was made between virgins and florists . 
There were also the `` dais '' and the `` censors , '' -- the first who held the cords of the dais , and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament . 
The flowers belonged by right to the florists . 
Four `` virgins '' walked in advance . 
On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory , `` Who is a virgin ? '' 
Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a `` little one '' of seven years , to a `` big girl '' of sixteen , who took the head of the procession , while she , the little one , remained at the rear , `` You are a virgin , but I am not . '' 
DISTRACTIONS Above the door of the refectory this prayer , which was called the white Paternoster , and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to paradise , was inscribed in large black letters : -- `` Little white Paternoster , which God made , which God said , which God placed in paradise . 
In the evening , when I went to bed , I found three angels sitting on my bed , one at the foot , two at the head , the good Virgin Mary in the middle , who told me to lie down without hesitation . 
The good God is my father , the good Virgin is my mother , the three apostles are my brothers , the three virgins are my sisters . 
The shirt in which God was born envelopes my body ; Saint Margaret 's cross is written on my breast . 
Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows , weeping for God , when she met M. Saint John . 
` Monsieur Saint John , whence come you ? ' 
` I come from Ave Salus . ' 
` You have not seen the good God ; where is he ? ' 
` He is on the tree of the Cross , his feet hanging , his hands nailed , a little cap of white thorns on his head . ' 
Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide , thrice in the morning , shall win paradise at the last . '' 
In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under a triple coating of daubing paint . 
At the present time it is finally disappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then , and who are old women now . 
A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this refectory , whose only door , as we think we have mentioned , opened on the garden . 
Two narrow tables , each flanked by two wooden benches , formed two long parallel lines from one end to the other of the refectory . 
The walls were white , the tables were black ; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety in convents . 
The meals were plain , and the food of the children themselves severe . 
A single dish of meat and vegetables combined , or salt fish -- such was their luxury . 
This meagre fare , which was reserved for the pupils alone , was , nevertheless , an exception . 
The children ate in silence , under the eye of the mother whose turn it was , who , if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against the rule , opened and shut a wooden book from time to time . 
This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints , read aloud from a little pulpit with a desk , which was situated at the foot of the crucifix . 
The reader was one of the big girls , in weekly turn . 
At regular distances , on the bare tables , there were large , varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives and forks , and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or spoiled fish ; this was punished . 
These bowls were called ronds d'eau . 
The child who broke the silence `` made a cross with her tongue . '' 
Where ? 
On the ground . 
She licked the pavement . 
The dust , that end of all joys , was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of chirping . 
There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as a unique copy , and which it is forbidden to read . 
It is the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate . 
Nemo regulas , seu constitutiones nostras , externis communicabit . 
The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book , and set to reading it with avidity , a reading which was often interrupted by the fear of being caught , which caused them to close the volume precipitately . 
From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate amount of pleasure . 
The most `` interesting thing '' they found were some unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys . 
They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby fruit-trees . 
In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of the punishments administered , when the wind had shaken the trees , they sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or an inhabited pear on the sly . 
I will now cede the privilege of speech to a letter which lies before me , a letter written five and twenty years ago by an old pupil , now Madame la Duchesse de -- one of the most elegant women in Paris . 
I quote literally : `` One hides one 's pear or one 's apple as best one may . 
When one goes up stairs to put the veil on the bed before supper , one stuffs them under one 's pillow and at night one eats them in bed , and when one can not do that , one eats them in the closet . '' 
That was one of their greatest luxuries . 
Once -- it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the convent -- one of the young girls , Mademoiselle Bouchard , who was connected with the Montmorency family , laid a wager that she would ask for a day 's leave of absence -- an enormity in so austere a community . 
The wager was accepted , but not one of those who bet believed that she would do it . 
When the moment came , as the archbishop was passing in front of the pupils , Mademoiselle Bouchard , to the indescribable terror of her companions , stepped out of the ranks , and said , `` Monseigneur , a day 's leave of absence . '' 
Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall , blooming , with the prettiest little rosy face in the world . 
M. de Quelen smiled and said , `` What , my dear child , a day 's leave of absence ! 
Three days if you like . 
I grant you three days . '' 
The prioress could do nothing ; the archbishop had spoken . 
Horror of the convent , but joy of the pupil . 
The effect may be imagined . 
This stern cloister was not so well walled off , however , but that the life of the passions of the outside world , drama , and even romance , did not make their way in . 
To prove this , we will confine ourselves to recording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact , which , however , bears no reference in itself to , and is not connected by any thread whatever with the story which we are relating . 
We mention the fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in the reader 's mind . 
About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was not a nun , who was treated with great respect , and who was addressed as Madame Albertine . 
Nothing was known about her , save that she was mad , and that in the world she passed for dead . 
Beneath this history it was said there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a great marriage . 
This woman , hardly thirty years of age , of dark complexion and tolerably pretty , had a vague look in her large black eyes . 
Could she see ? 
There was some doubt about this . 
She glided rather than walked , she never spoke ; it was not quite known whether she breathed . 
Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh . 
To touch her hand was like touching snow . 
She possessed a strange spectral grace . 
Wherever she entered , people felt cold . 
One day a sister , on seeing her pass , said to another sister , `` She passes for a dead woman . '' 
`` Perhaps she is one , '' replied the other . 
A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine . 
This arose from the eternal curiosity of the pupils . 
In the chapel there was a gallery called L'OEil de Boeuf . 
It was in this gallery , which had only a circular bay , an oeil de boeuf , that Madame Albertine listened to the offices . 
She always occupied it alone because this gallery , being on the level of the first story , the preacher or the officiating priest could be seen , which was interdicted to the nuns . 
One day the pulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank , M. Le Duc de Rohan , peer of France , officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de Leon , and who died afterward , in 1830 , as cardinal and Archbishop of Besancon . 
It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent . 
Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services . 
That day , as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan , she half rose , and said , in a loud voice , amid the silence of the chapel , `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
The whole community turned their heads in amazement , the preacher raised his eyes , but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility . 
A breath from the outer world , a flash of life , had passed for an instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished , and the mad woman had become a corpse again . 
Those two words , however , had set every one in the convent who had the privilege of speech to chattering . 
How many things were contained in that `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
what revelations ! 
M. de Rohan 's name really was Auguste . 
It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very highest society , since she knew M. de Rohan , and that her own rank there was of the highest , since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a lord , and that there existed between them some connection , of relationship , perhaps , but a very close one in any case , since she knew his `` pet name . '' 
Two very severe duchesses , Mesdames de Choiseul and de Serent , often visited the community , whither they penetrated , no doubt , in virtue of the privilege Magnates mulieres , and caused great consternation in the boarding-school . 
When these two old ladies passed by , all the poor young girls trembled and dropped their eyes . 
Moreover , M. de Rohan , quite unknown to himself , was an object of attention to the school-girls . 
At that epoch he had just been made , while waiting for the episcopate , vicar-general of the Archbishop of Paris . 
It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus . 
Not one of the young recluses could see him , because of the serge curtain , but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice , which they had come to know and to distinguish . 
He had been a mousquetaire , and then , he was said to be very coquettish , that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed in a roll around his head , and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent moire , and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the world . 
He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen years . 
Not a sound from without made its way into the convent . 
But there was one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither . 
This was an event , and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall it . 
It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood . 
This flute always played the same air , an air which is very far away nowadays , -- `` My Zetulbe , come reign o'er my soul , '' -- and it was heard two or three times a day . 
The young girls passed hours in listening to it , the vocal mothers were upset by it , brains were busy , punishments descended in showers . 
This lasted for several months . 
The girls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician . 
Each one dreamed that she was Zetulbe . 
The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the Rue Droit-Mur ; and they would have given anything , compromised everything , attempted anything for the sake of seeing , of catching a glance , if only for a second , of the `` young man '' who played that flute so deliciously , and who , no doubt , played on all these souls at the same time . 
There were some who made their escape by a back door , and ascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side , in order to attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps . 
Impossible ! 
One even went so far as to thrust her arm through the grating , and to wave her white handkerchief . 
Two were still bolder . 
They found means to climb on a roof , and risked their lives there , and succeeded at last in seeing `` the young man . '' 
He was an old emigre gentleman , blind and penniless , who was playing his flute in his attic , in order to pass the time . 
THE LITTLE CONVENT In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly distinct buildings , -- the Great Convent , inhabited by the nuns , the Boarding-school , where the scholars were lodged ; and lastly , what was called the Little Convent . 
It was a building with a garden , in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders , the relics of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution ; a reunion of all the black , gray , and white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties ; what might be called , if such a coupling of words is permissible , a sort of harlequin convent . 
When the Empire was established , all these poor old dispersed and exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines . 
The government paid them a small pension , the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received them cordially . 
It was a singular pell-mell . 
Each followed her own rule , Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed , as a great recreation , to pay them a visit ; the result is , that all those young memories have retained among other souvenirs that of Mother Sainte-Bazile , Mother Sainte-Scolastique , and Mother Jacob . 
One of these refugees found herself almost at home . 
She was a nun of Sainte-Aure , the only one of her order who had survived . 
The ancient convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied , at the beginning of the eighteenth century , this very house of the Petit-Picpus , which belonged later to the Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
This holy woman , too poor to wear the magnificent habit of her order , which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary , had piously put it on a little manikin , which she exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her death . 
In 1824 , only one nun of this order remained ; to-day , there remains only a doll . 
In addition to these worthy mothers , some old society women had obtained permission of the prioress , like Madame Albertine , to retire into the Little Convent . 
Among the number were Madame Beaufort d'Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne . 
Another was never known in the convent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew her nose . 
The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini -LRB- hubbub -RRB- . 
About 1820 or 1821 , Madame de Genlis , who was at that time editing a little periodical publication called l'Intrepide , asked to be allowed to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident . 
The Duc d'Orleans recommended her . 
Uproar in the hive ; the vocal-mothers were all in a flutter ; Madame de Genlis had made romances . 
But she declared that she was the first to detest them , and then , she had reached her fierce stage of devotion . 
With the aid of God , and of the Prince , she entered . 
She departed at the end of six or eight months , alleging as a reason , that there was no shade in the garden . 
The nuns were delighted . 
Although very old , she still played the harp , and did it very well . 
When she went away she left her mark in her cell . 
Madame de Genlis was superstitious and a Latinist . 
These two words furnish a tolerably good profile of her . 
A few years ago , there were still to be seen , pasted in the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her silverware and her jewels , these five lines in Latin , written with her own hand in red ink on yellow paper , and which , in her opinion , possessed the property of frightening away robbers : -- Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis : -LSB- 15 -RSB- Dismas et Gesmas , media est divina potestas ; Alta petit Dismas , infelix , infima , Gesmas ; Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas . 
Hos versus dicas , ne tu furto tua perdas . 
-LSB- 15 -RSB- On the boughs hang three bodies of unequal merits : Dismas and Gesmas , between is the divine power . 
Dismas seeks the heights , Gesmas , unhappy man , the lowest regions ; the highest power will preserve us and our effects . 
If you repeat this verse , you will not lose your things by theft . 
These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the two thieves of Calvary were named , as is commonly believed , Dismas and Gestas , or Dismas and Gesmas . 
This orthography might have confounded the pretensions put forward in the last century by the Vicomte de Gestas , of a descent from the wicked thief . 
However , the useful virtue attached to these verses forms an article of faith in the order of the Hospitallers . 
The church of the house , constructed in such a manner as to separate the Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable intrenchment , was , of course , common to the Boarding-school , the Great Convent , and the Little Convent . 
The public was even admitted by a sort of lazaretto entrance on the street . 
But all was so arranged , that none of the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face from the outside world . 
Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand , and folded in such a manner as to form , not , as in ordinary churches , a prolongation behind the altar , but a sort of hall , or obscure cellar , to the right of the officiating priest ; suppose this hall to be shut off by a curtain seven feet in height , of which we have already spoken ; in the shadow of that curtain , pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the choir on the left , the school-girls on the right , the lay-sisters and the novices at the bottom , and you will have some idea of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus assisting at divine service . 
That cavern , which was called the choir , communicated with the cloister by a lobby . 
The church was lighted from the garden . 
When the nuns were present at services where their rule enjoined silence , the public was warned of their presence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and falling . 
SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825 , the prioress of the Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur , whose name , in religion , was Mother Innocente . 
She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur , author of Lives of the Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoit . 
She had been re-elected . 
She was a woman about sixty years of age , short , thick , `` singing like a cracked pot , '' says the letter which we have already quoted ; an excellent woman , moreover , and the only merry one in the whole convent , and for that reason adored . 
She was learned , erudite , wise , competent , curiously proficient in history , crammed with Latin , stuffed with Greek , full of Hebrew , and more of a Benedictine monk than a Benedictine nun . 
The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun , Mother Cineres , who was almost blind . 
The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine ; the treasurer , Mother Sainte-Gertrude , the chief mistress of the novices ; Mother-Saint-Ange , the assistant mistress ; Mother Annonciation , the sacristan ; Mother Saint-Augustin , the nurse , the only one in the convent who was malicious ; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde -LRB- Mademoiselle Gauvain -RRB- , very young and with a beautiful voice ; Mother des Anges -LRB- Mademoiselle Drouet -RRB- , who had been in the convent of the Filles-Dieu , and in the convent du Tresor , between Gisors and Magny ; Mother Saint-Joseph -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cogolludo -RRB- , Mother Sainte-Adelaide -LRB- Mademoiselle d'Auverney -RRB- , Mother Misericorde -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cifuentes , who could not resist austerities -RRB- , Mother Compassion -LRB- Mademoiselle de la Miltiere , received at the age of sixty in defiance of the rule , and very wealthy -RRB- ; Mother Providence -LRB- Mademoiselle de Laudiniere -RRB- , Mother Presentation -LRB- Mademoiselle de Siguenza -RRB- , who was prioress in 1847 ; and finally , Mother Sainte-Celigne -LRB- sister of the sculptor Ceracchi -RRB- , who went mad ; Mother Sainte-Chantal -LRB- Mademoiselle de Suzon -RRB- , who went mad . 
There was also , among the prettiest of them , a charming girl of three and twenty , who was from the Isle de Bourbon , a descendant of the Chevalier Roze , whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze , and who was called Mother Assumption . 
Mother Sainte-Mechtilde , intrusted with the singing and the choir , was fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter . 
She usually took a complete scale of them , that is to say , seven , from ten to sixteen years of age , inclusive , of assorted voices and sizes , whom she made sing standing , drawn up in a line , side by side , according to age , from the smallest to the largest . 
This presented to the eye , something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls , a sort of living Pan-pipe made of angels . 
Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister Euphrasie , Sister Sainte-Marguerite , Sister Sainte-Marthe , who was in her dotage , and Sister Sainte-Michel , whose long nose made them laugh . 
All these women were gentle with the children . 
The nuns were severe only towards themselves . 
No fire was lighted except in the school , and the food was choice compared to that in the convent . 
Moreover , they lavished a thousand cares on their scholars . 
Only , when a child passed near a nun and addressed her , the nun never replied . 
This rule of silence had had this effect , that throughout the whole convent , speech had been withdrawn from human creatures , and bestowed on inanimate objects . 
Now it was the church-bell which spoke , now it was the gardener 's bell . 
A very sonorous bell , placed beside the portress , and which was audible throughout the house , indicated by its varied peals , which formed a sort of acoustic telegraph , all the actions of material life which were to be performed , and summoned to the parlor , in case of need , such or such an inhabitant of the house . 
Each person and each thing had its own peal . 
The prioress had one and one , the sub-prioress one and two . 
Six-five announced lessons , so that the pupils never said `` to go to lessons , '' but `` to go to six-five . '' 
Four-four was Madame de Genlis 's signal . 
It was very often heard . 
`` C'est le diable a quatre , -- it 's the very deuce -- said the uncharitable . 
Tennine strokes announced a great event . 
It was the opening of the door of seclusion , a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts which only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop . 
With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener , no man entered the convent , as we have already said . 
The schoolgirls saw two others : one , the chaplain , the Abbe Banes , old and ugly , whom they were permitted to contemplate in the choir , through a grating ; the other the drawing-master , M. Ansiaux , whom the letter , of which we have perused a few lines , calls M. Anciot , and describes as a frightful old hunchback . 
It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen . 
Such was this curious house . 
POST CORDA LAPIDES After having sketched its moral face , it will not prove unprofitable to point out , in a few words , its material configuration . 
The reader already has some idea of it . 
The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue Polonceau , the Rue Droit-Mur , the Rue Petit-Picpus , and the unused lane , called Rue Aumarais on old plans . 
These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat . 
The convent was composed of several buildings and a garden . 
The principal building , taken in its entirety , was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which , viewed from a bird 's - eye view , outlined , with considerable exactness , a gibbet laid flat on the ground . 
The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau ; the lesser arm was a lofty , gray , severe grated facade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus ; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its extremity . 
Towards the centre of this facade was a low , arched door , whitened with dust and ashes , where the spiders wove their webs , and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays , and on rare occasions , when the coffin of a nun left the convent . 
This was the public entrance of the church . 
The elbow of the gibbet was a square hall which was used as the servants ' hall , and which the nuns called the buttery . 
In the main arm were the cells of the mothers , the sisters , and the novices . 
In the lesser arm lay the kitchens , the refectory , backed up by the cloisters and the church . 
Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed lane Aumarais , was the school , which was not visible from without . 
The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden , which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau , which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside . 
The garden , which was slightly arched , had in its centre , on the summit of a hillock , a fine pointed and conical fir-tree , whence ran , as from the peaked boss of a shield , four grand alleys , and , ranged by twos in between the branchings of these , eight small ones , so that , if the enclosure had been circular , the geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel . 
As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of the garden , they were of unequal length . 
They were bordered with currant bushes . 
At the bottom , an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent , which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house of the Little Convent , which was at the angle of the Aumarais lane . 
In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little garden . 
To this whole , let the reader add a courtyard , all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings , prison walls , the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood , and he will be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago . 
This holy house had been built on the precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century , which was called the `` tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils . '' 
All these streets , moreover , were more ancient than Paris . 
These names , Droit-Mur and Aumarais , are very ancient ; the streets which bear them are very much more ancient still . 
Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane ; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers , for God opened flowers before man cut stones . 
A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in former times , and since we have ventured to open a window on that discreet retreat , the reader will permit us one other little digression , utterly foreign to this book , but characteristic and useful , since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures . 
In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey of Fontevrault . 
She had even been in society before the Revolution . 
She talked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil , Keeper of the Seals under Louis XVI . 
and of a Presidentess Duplat , with whom she had been very intimate . 
It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these names on every pretext . 
She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault , -- that it was like a city , and that there were streets in the monastery . 
She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils . 
Every year , she solemnly renewed her vows , and at the moment of taking the oath , she said to the priest , `` Monseigneur Saint-Francois gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Julien , Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius , Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius , etc. , etc. ; and thus I give it to you , father . '' 
And the school-girls would begin to laugh , not in their sleeves , but under their veils ; charming little stifled laughs which made the vocal mothers frown . 
On another occasion , the centenarian was telling stories . 
She said that in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as the mousquetaires . 
It was a century which spoke through her , but it was the eighteenth century . 
She told about the custom of the four wines , which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne . 
When a great personage , a marshal of France , a prince , a duke , and a peer , traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne , the city fathers came out to harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which they had poured four different sorts of wine . 
On the first goblet this inscription could be read , monkey wine ; on the second , lion wine ; on the third , sheep wine ; on the fourth , hog wine . 
These four legends express the four stages descended by the drunkard ; the first , intoxication , which enlivens ; the second , that which irritates ; the third , that which dulls ; and the fourth , that which brutalizes . 
In a cupboard , under lock and key , she kept a mysterious object of which she thought a great deal . 
The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid this . 
She would not show this object to anyone . 
She shut herself up , which her rule allowed her to do , and hid herself , every time that she desired to contemplate it . 
If she heard a footstep in the corridor , she closed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her aged hands . 
As soon as it was mentioned to her , she became silent , she who was so fond of talking . 
The most curious were baffled by her silence and the most tenacious by her obstinacy . 
Thus it furnished a subject of comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent . 
What could that treasure of the centenarian be , which was so precious and so secret ? 
Some holy book , no doubt ? 
Some unique chaplet ? 
Some authentic relic ? 
They lost themselves in conjectures . 
When the poor old woman died , they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting , perhaps , and opened it . 
They found the object beneath a triple linen cloth , like some consecrated paten . 
It was a Faenza platter representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary lads armed with enormous syringes . 
The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures . 
One of the charming little Loves is already fairly spitted . 
He is resisting , fluttering his tiny wings , and still making an effort to fly , but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air . 
Moral : Love conquered by the colic . 
This platter , which is very curious , and which had , possibly , the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea , was still in existence in September , 1845 ; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais . 
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because , said she , the parlor is too gloomy . 
ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION However , this almost sepulchral parlor , of which we have sought to convey an idea , is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in other convents . 
At the convent of the Rue du Temple , in particular , which belonged , in truth , to another order , the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains , and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor , whose windows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames , a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face , painted bouquets , and even the head of a Turk . 
It is in that garden of the Temple convent , that stood that famous chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France , and which bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm . 
As we have said , this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration , Benedictines quite different from those who depended on Citeaux . 
This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years . 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart , in two churches in Paris , at Saint-Sulpice and at Saint-Jean en Greve , a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town in an uproar . 
M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy , in which the Pope 's Nuncio officiated . 
But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted women , Madame Courtin , Marquise de Boucs , and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux . 
This outrage committed on `` the most holy sacrament of the altar , '' though but temporary , would not depart from these holy souls , and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a `` Perpetual Adoration '' in some female monastery . 
Both of them , one in 1652 , the other in 1653 , made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine de Bar , called of the Holy Sacrament , a Benedictine nun , for the purpose of founding , to this pious end , a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoit ; the first permission for this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz , Abbe of Saint-Germain , `` on condition that no woman could be received unless she contributed three hundred livres income , which amounts to six thousand livres , to the principal . '' 
After the Abbe of Saint-Germain , the king accorded letters-patent ; and all the rest , abbatial charter , and royal letters , was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament . 
Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at Paris . 
Their first convent was `` a new building '' in the Rue Cassette , out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux . 
This order , as it will be seen , was not to be confounded with the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux . 
It mounted back to the Abbe of Saint-Germain des Pres , in the same manner that the ladies of the Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits , and the sisters of charity to the general of the Lazarists . 
It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus , whose interior we have just shown . 
In 1657 , Pope Alexander VII . 
had authorized , by a special brief , the Bernardines of the Rue Petit-Picpus , to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine nuns of the Holy Sacrament . 
But the two orders remained distinct none the less . 
END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS At the beginning of the Restoration , the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in its decay ; this forms a part of the general death of the order , which , after the eighteenth century , has been disappearing like all the religious orders . 
Contemplation is , like prayer , one of humanity 's needs ; but , like everything which the Revolution touched , it will be transformed , and from being hostile to social progress , it will become favorable to it . 
The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated . 
In 1840 , the Little Convent had disappeared , the school had disappeared . 
There were no longer any old women , nor young girls ; the first were dead , the latter had taken their departure . 
Volaverunt . 
The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that it alarms , vocations recoil before it , the order receives no recruits . 
In 1845 , it still obtained lay-sisters here and there . 
But of professed nuns , none at all . 
Forty years ago , the nuns numbered nearly a hundred ; fifteen years ago there were not more than twenty-eight of them . 
How many are there to-day ? 
In 1847 , the prioress was young , a sign that the circle of choice was restricted . 
She was not forty years old . 
In proportion as the number diminishes , the fatigue increases , the service of each becomes more painful ; the moment could then be seen drawing near when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy rule of Saint-Benoit . 
The burden is implacable , and remains the same for the few as for the many . 
It weighs down , it crushes . 
Thus they die . 
At the period when the author of this book still lived in Paris , two died . 
One was twenty-five years old , the other twenty-three . 
This latter can say , like Julia Alpinula : `` Hic jaceo . 
Vixi annos viginti et tres . '' 
It is in consequence of this decay that the convent gave up the education of girls . 
We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house without entering it , and without introducing the minds which accompany us , and which are listening to our tale , to the profit of some , perchance , of the melancholy history of Jean Valjean . 
We have penetrated into this community , full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day . 
It is the closed garden , hortus conclusus . 
We have spoken of this singular place in detail , but with respect , in so far , at least , as detail and respect are compatible . 
We do not understand all , but we insult nothing . 
We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre , who wound up by anointing the executioner , and from the sneer of Voltaire , who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross . 
An illogical act on Voltaire 's part , we may remark , by the way ; for Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas ; and even for those who deny superhuman incarnations , what does the crucifix represent ? 
The assassinated sage . 
In this nineteenth century , the religious idea is undergoing a crisis . 
People are unlearning certain things , and they do well , provided that , while unlearning them they learn this : There is no vacuum in the human heart . 
Certain demolitions take place , and it is well that they do , but on condition that they are followed by reconstructions . 
In the meantime , let us study things which are no more . 
It is necessary to know them , if only for the purpose of avoiding them . 
The counterfeits of the past assume false names , and gladly call themselves the future . 
This spectre , this past , is given to falsifying its own passport . 
Let us inform ourselves of the trap . 
Let us be on our guard . 
The past has a visage , superstition , and a mask , hypocrisy . 
Let us denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask . 
As for convents , they present a complex problem , -- a question of civilization , which condemns them ; a question of liberty , which protects them . 
THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA This book is a drama , whose leading personage is the Infinite . 
Man is the second . 
Such being the case , and a convent having happened to be on our road , it has been our duty to enter it . 
Why ? 
Because the convent , which is common to the Orient as well as to the Occident , to antiquity as well as to modern times , to paganism , to Buddhism , to Mahometanism , as well as to Christianity , is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite . 
This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain ideas ; nevertheless , while absolutely maintaining our reserves , our restrictions , and even our indignations , we must say that every time we encounter man in the Infinite , either well or ill understood , we feel ourselves overpowered with respect . 
There is , in the synagogue , in the mosque , in the pagoda , in the wigwam , a hideous side which we execrate , and a sublime side , which we adore . 
What a contemplation for the mind , and what endless food for thought , is the reverberation of God upon the human wall ! 
THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT From the point of view of history , of reason , and of truth , monasticism is condemned . 
Monasteries , when they abound in a nation , are clogs in its circulation , cumbrous establishments , centres of idleness where centres of labor should exist . 
Monastic communities are to the great social community what the mistletoe is to the oak , what the wart is to the human body . 
Their prosperity and their fatness mean the impoverishment of the country . 
The monastic regime , good at the beginning of civilization , useful in the reduction of the brutal by the spiritual , is bad when peoples have reached their manhood . 
Moreover , when it becomes relaxed , and when it enters into its period of disorder , it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity , because it still continues to set the example . 
Claustration has had its day . 
Cloisters , useful in the early education of modern civilization , have embarrassed its growth , and are injurious to its development . 
So far as institution and formation with relation to man are concerned , monasteries , which were good in the tenth century , questionable in the fifteenth , are detestable in the nineteenth . 
The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton two wonderful nations , Italy and Spain ; the one the light , the other the splendor of Europe for centuries ; and , at the present day , these two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce , thanks to the healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone . 
The convent -- the ancient female convent in particular , such as it still presents itself on the threshold of this century , in Italy , in Austria , in Spain -- is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages . 
The cloister , that cloister , is the point of intersection of horrors . 
The Catholic cloister , properly speaking , is wholly filled with the black radiance of death . 
The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all . 
There rise , in obscurity , beneath vaults filled with gloom , beneath domes vague with shadow , massive altars of Babel , as high as cathedrals ; there immense white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark ; there are extended , all nude on the ebony , great Christs of ivory ; more than bleeding , -- bloody ; hideous and magnificent , with their elbows displaying the bones , their knee-pans showing their integuments , their wounds showing their flesh , crowned with silver thorns , nailed with nails of gold , with blood drops of rubies on their brows , and diamond tears in their eyes . 
The diamonds and rubies seem wet , and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep , their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges , their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles , their knees excoriated with prayer ; women who think themselves wives , spectres who think themselves seraphim . 
Do these women think ? 
No . 
Have they any will ? 
No . 
Do they love ? 
No . 
Do they live ? 
No . 
Their nerves have turned to bone ; their bones have turned to stone . 
Their veil is of woven night . 
Their breath under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration of death . 
The abbess , a spectre , sanctifies them and terrifies them . 
The immaculate one is there , and very fierce . 
Such are the ancient monasteries of Spain . 
Liars of terrible devotion , caverns of virgins , ferocious places . 
Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself . 
The Spanish convent was , above all others , the Catholic convent . 
There was a flavor of the Orient about it . 
The archbishop , the kislar-aga of heaven , locked up and kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved for God . 
The nun was the odalisque , the priest was the eunuch . 
The fervent were chosen in dreams and possessed Christ . 
At night , the beautiful , nude young man descended from the cross and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one . 
Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana , who had the crucified for her sultan , from all living distraction . 
A glance on the outer world was infidelity . 
The in pace replaced the leather sack . 
That which was cast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West . 
In both quarters , women wrung their hands ; the waves for the first , the grave for the last ; here the drowned , there the buried . 
Monstrous parallel . 
To-day the upholders of the past , unable to deny these things , have adopted the expedient of smiling at them . 
There has come into fashion a strange and easy manner of suppressing the revelations of history , of invalidating the commentaries of philosophy , of eliding all embarrassing facts and all gloomy questions . 
A matter for declamations , say the clever . 
Declamations , repeat the foolish . 
Jean-Jacques a declaimer ; Diderot a declaimer ; Voltaire on Calas , Labarre , and Sirven , declaimers . 
I know not who has recently discovered that Tacitus was a declaimer , that Nero was a victim , and that pity is decidedly due to `` that poor Holofernes . '' 
Facts , however , are awkward things to disconcert , and they are obstinate . 
The author of this book has seen , with his own eyes , eight leagues distant from Brussels , -- there are relics of the Middle Ages there which are attainable for everybody , -- at the Abbey of Villers , the hole of the oubliettes , in the middle of the field which was formerly the courtyard of the cloister , and on the banks of the Thil , four stone dungeons , half under ground , half under the water . 
They were in pace . 
Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door , a vault , and a grated opening which , on the outside , is two feet above the level of the river , and on the inside , six feet above the level of the ground . 
Four feet of river flow past along the outside wall . 
The ground is always soaked . 
The occupant of the in pace had this wet soil for his bed . 
In one of these dungeons , there is a fragment of an iron necklet riveted to the wall ; in another , there can be seen a square box made of four slabs of granite , too short for a person to lie down in , too low for him to stand upright in . 
A human being was put inside , with a coverlid of stone on top . 
This exists . 
It can be seen . 
It can be touched . 
These in pace , these dungeons , these iron hinges , these necklets , that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river 's current , that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb , with this difference , that the dead man here was a living being , that soil which is but mud , that vault hole , those oozing walls , -- what declaimers ! 
ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST Monasticism , such as it existed in Spain , and such as it still exists in Thibet , is a sort of phthisis for civilization . 
It stops life short . 
It simply depopulates . 
Claustration , castration . 
It has been the scourge of Europe . 
Add to this the violence so often done to the conscience , the forced vocations , feudalism bolstered up by the cloister , the right of the first-born pouring the excess of the family into monasticism , the ferocities of which we have just spoken , the in pace , the closed mouths , the walled-up brains , so many unfortunate minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows , the taking of the habit , the interment of living souls . 
Add individual tortures to national degradations , and , whoever you may be , you will shudder before the frock and the veil , -- those two winding-sheets of human devising . 
Nevertheless , at certain points and in certain places , in spite of philosophy , in spite of progress , the spirit of the cloister persists in the midst of the nineteenth century , and a singular ascetic recrudescence is , at this moment , astonishing the civilized world . 
The obstinacy of antiquated institutions in perpetuating themselves resembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume which should claim our hair , the pretensions of the spoiled fish which should persist in being eaten , the persecution of the child 's garment which should insist on clothing the man , the tenderness of corpses which should return to embrace the living . 
`` Ingrates ! '' 
says the garment , `` I protected you in inclement weather . 
Why will you have nothing to do with me ? '' 
`` I have just come from the deep sea , '' says the fish . 
`` I have been a rose , '' says the perfume . 
`` I have loved you , '' says the corpse . 
`` I have civilized you , '' says the convent . 
To this there is but one reply : `` In former days . '' 
To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things , and of the government of men by embalming , to restore dogmas in a bad condition , to regild shrines , to patch up cloisters , to rebless reliquaries , to refurnish superstitions , to revictual fanaticisms , to put new handles on holy water brushes and militarism , to reconstitute monasticism and militarism , to believe in the salvation of society by the multiplication of parasites , to force the past on the present , -- this seems strange . 
Still , there are theorists who hold such theories . 
These theorists , who are in other respects people of intelligence , have a very simple process ; they apply to the past a glazing which they call social order , divine right , morality , family , the respect of elders , antique authority , sacred tradition , legitimacy , religion ; and they go about shouting , `` Look ! 
take this , honest people . '' 
This logic was known to the ancients . 
The soothsayers practise it . 
They rubbed a black heifer over with chalk , and said , `` She is white , Bos cretatus . '' 
As for us , we respect the past here and there , and we spare it , above all , provided that it consents to be dead . 
If it insists on being alive , we attack it , and we try to kill it . 
Superstitions , bigotries , affected devotion , prejudices , those forms all forms as they are , are tenacious of life ; they have teeth and nails in their smoke , and they must be clasped close , body to body , and war must be made on them , and that without truce ; for it is one of the fatalities of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat with phantoms . 
It is difficult to seize darkness by the throat , and to hurl it to the earth . 
A convent in France , in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century , is a college of owls facing the light . 
A cloister , caught in the very act of asceticism , in the very heart of the city of '89 and of 1830 and of 1848 , Rome blossoming out in Paris , is an anachronism . 
In ordinary times , in order to dissolve an anachronism and to cause it to vanish , one has only to make it spell out the date . 
But we are not in ordinary times . 
Let us fight . 
Let us fight , but let us make a distinction . 
The peculiar property of truth is never to commit excesses . 
What need has it of exaggeration ? 
There is that which it is necessary to destroy , and there is that which it is simply necessary to elucidate and examine . 
What a force is kindly and serious examination ! 
Let us not apply a flame where only a light is required . 
So , given the nineteenth century , we are opposed , as a general proposition , and among all peoples , in Asia as well as in Europe , in India as well as in Turkey , to ascetic claustration . 
Whoever says cloister , says marsh . 
Their putrescence is evident , their stagnation is unhealthy , their fermentation infects people with fever , and etiolates them ; their multiplication becomes a plague of Egypt . 
We can not think without affright of those lands where fakirs , bonzes , santons , Greek monks , marabouts , talapoins , and dervishes multiply even like swarms of vermin . 
This said , the religious question remains . 
This question has certain mysterious , almost formidable sides ; may we be permitted to look at it fixedly . 
THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES Men unite themselves and dwell in communities . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right of association . 
They shut themselves up at home . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right which every man has to open or shut his door . 
They do not come forth . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right to go and come , which implies the right to remain at home . 
There , at home , what do they do ? 
They speak in low tones ; they drop their eyes ; they toil . 
