The wheel really had suffered serious damage . 
The shock administered by the mail-wagon had split two spokes and strained the hub , so that the nut no longer held firm . 
`` My friend , '' he said to the stableman , `` is there a wheelwright here ? '' 
`` Certainly , sir . '' 
`` Do me the service to go and fetch him . '' 
`` He is only a step from here . 
Hey ! 
Master Bourgaillard ! '' 
Master Bourgaillard , the wheelwright , was standing on his own threshold . 
He came , examined the wheel and made a grimace like a surgeon when the latter thinks a limb is broken . 
`` Can you repair this wheel immediately ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` When can I set out again ? '' 
`` To-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow ! '' 
`` There is a long day 's work on it . 
Are you in a hurry , sir ? '' 
`` In a very great hurry . 
I must set out again in an hour at the latest . '' 
`` Impossible , sir . '' 
`` I will pay whatever you ask . '' 
`` Impossible . '' 
`` Well , in two hours , then . '' 
`` Impossible to-day . 
Two new spokes and a hub must be made . 
Monsieur will not be able to start before to-morrow morning . '' 
`` The matter can not wait until to-morrow . 
What if you were to replace this wheel instead of repairing it ? '' 
`` How so ? '' 
`` You are a wheelwright ? '' 
`` Certainly , sir . '' 
`` Have you not a wheel that you can sell me ? 
Then I could start again at once . '' 
`` A spare wheel ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I have no wheel on hand that would fit your cabriolet . 
Two wheels make a pair . 
Two wheels can not be put together hap-hazard . '' 
`` In that case , sell me a pair of wheels . '' 
`` Not all wheels fit all axles , sir . '' 
`` Try , nevertheless . '' 
`` It is useless , sir . 
I have nothing to sell but cart-wheels . 
We are but a poor country here . '' 
`` Have you a cabriolet that you can let me have ? '' 
The wheelwright had seen at the first glance that the tilbury was a hired vehicle . 
He shrugged his shoulders . 
`` You treat the cabriolets that people let you so well ! 
If I had one , I would not let it to you ! '' 
`` Well , sell it to me , then . '' 
`` I have none . '' 
`` What ! 
not even a spring-cart ? 
I am not hard to please , as you see . '' 
`` We live in a poor country . 
There is , in truth , '' added the wheelwright , `` an old calash under the shed yonder , which belongs to a bourgeois of the town , who gave it to me to take care of , and who only uses it on the thirty-sixth of the month -- never , that is to say . 
I might let that to you , for what matters it to me ? 
But the bourgeois must not see it pass -- and then , it is a calash ; it would require two horses . '' 
`` I will take two post-horses . '' 
`` Where is Monsieur going ? '' 
`` To Arras . '' 
`` And Monsieur wishes to reach there to-day ? '' 
`` Yes , of course . '' 
`` By taking two post-horses ? '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Does it make any difference whether Monsieur arrives at four o'clock to-morrow morning ? '' 
`` Certainly not . '' 
`` There is one thing to be said about that , you see , by taking post-horses -- Monsieur has his passport ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , by taking post-horses , Monsieur can not reach Arras before to-morrow . 
We are on a cross-road . 
The relays are badly served , the horses are in the fields . 
The season for ploughing is just beginning ; heavy teams are required , and horses are seized upon everywhere , from the post as well as elsewhere . 
Monsieur will have to wait three or four hours at the least at every relay . 
And , then , they drive at a walk . 
There are many hills to ascend . '' 
`` Come then , I will go on horseback . 
Unharness the cabriolet . 
Some one can surely sell me a saddle in the neighborhood . '' 
`` Without doubt . 
But will this horse bear the saddle ? '' 
`` That is true ; you remind me of that ; he will not bear it . '' 
`` Then -- '' `` But I can surely hire a horse in the village ? '' 
`` A horse to travel to Arras at one stretch ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That would require such a horse as does not exist in these parts . 
You would have to buy it to begin with , because no one knows you . 
But you will not find one for sale nor to let , for five hundred francs , or for a thousand . '' 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
`` The best thing is to let me repair the wheel like an honest man , and set out on your journey to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow will be too late . '' 
`` The deuce ! '' 
`` Is there not a mail-wagon which runs to Arras ? 
When will it pass ? '' 
`` To-night . 
Both the posts pass at night ; the one going as well as the one coming . '' 
`` What ! 
It will take you a day to mend this wheel ? '' 
`` A day , and a good long one . '' 
`` If you set two men to work ? '' 
`` If I set ten men to work . '' 
`` What if the spokes were to be tied together with ropes ? '' 
`` That could be done with the spokes , not with the hub ; and the felly is in a bad state , too . '' 
`` Is there any one in this village who lets out teams ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Is there another wheelwright ? '' 
The stableman and the wheelwright replied in concert , with a toss of the head `` No . '' 
He felt an immense joy . 
It was evident that Providence was intervening . 
That it was it who had broken the wheel of the tilbury and who was stopping him on the road . 
He had not yielded to this sort of first summons ; he had just made every possible effort to continue the journey ; he had loyally and scrupulously exhausted all means ; he had been deterred neither by the season , nor fatigue , nor by the expense ; he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
If he went no further , that was no fault of his . 
It did not concern him further . 
It was no longer his fault . 
It was not the act of his own conscience , but the act of Providence . 
He breathed again . 
He breathed freely and to the full extent of his lungs for the first time since Javert 's visit . 
It seemed to him that the hand of iron which had held his heart in its grasp for the last twenty hours had just released him . 
It seemed to him that God was for him now , and was manifesting Himself . 
He said himself that he had done all he could , and that now he had nothing to do but retrace his steps quietly . 
If his conversation with the wheelwright had taken place in a chamber of the inn , it would have had no witnesses , no one would have heard him , things would have rested there , and it is probable that we should not have had to relate any of the occurrences which the reader is about to peruse ; but this conversation had taken place in the street . 
Any colloquy in the street inevitably attracts a crowd . 
There are always people who ask nothing better than to become spectators . 
While he was questioning the wheelwright , some people who were passing back and forth halted around them . 
After listening for a few minutes , a young lad , to whom no one had paid any heed , detached himself from the group and ran off . 
At the moment when the traveller , after the inward deliberation which we have just described , resolved to retrace his steps , this child returned . 
He was accompanied by an old woman . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the woman , `` my boy tells me that you wish to hire a cabriolet . '' 
These simple words uttered by an old woman led by a child made the perspiration trickle down his limbs . 
He thought that he beheld the hand which had relaxed its grasp reappear in the darkness behind him , ready to seize him once more . 
He answered : -- `` Yes , my good woman ; I am in search of a cabriolet which I can hire . '' 
And he hastened to add : -- `` But there is none in the place . '' 
`` Certainly there is , '' said the old woman . 
`` Where ? '' 
interpolated the wheelwright . 
`` At my house , '' replied the old woman . 
He shuddered . 
The fatal hand had grasped him again . 
The old woman really had in her shed a sort of basket spring-cart . 
The wheelwright and the stable-man , in despair at the prospect of the traveller escaping their clutches , interfered . 
`` It was a frightful old trap ; it rests flat on the axle ; it is an actual fact that the seats were suspended inside it by leather thongs ; the rain came into it ; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture ; it would not go much further than the tilbury ; a regular ramshackle old stage-wagon ; the gentleman would make a great mistake if he trusted himself to it , '' etc. , etc. . 
All this was true ; but this trap , this ramshackle old vehicle , this thing , whatever it was , ran on its two wheels and could go to Arras . 
He paid what was asked , left the tilbury with the wheelwright to be repaired , intending to reclaim it on his return , had the white horse put to the cart , climbed into it , and resumed the road which he had been travelling since morning . 
At the moment when the cart moved off , he admitted that he had felt , a moment previously , a certain joy in the thought that he should not go whither he was now proceeding . 
He examined this joy with a sort of wrath , and found it absurd . 
Why should he feel joy at turning back ? 
After all , he was taking this trip of his own free will . 
No one was forcing him to it . 
And assuredly nothing would happen except what he should choose . 
As he left Hesdin , he heard a voice shouting to him : `` Stop ! 
Stop ! '' 
He halted the cart with a vigorous movement which contained a feverish and convulsive element resembling hope . 
It was the old woman 's little boy . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the latter , `` it was I who got the cart for you . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` You have not given me anything . '' 
He who gave to all so readily thought this demand exorbitant and almost odious . 
`` Ah ! 
it 's you , you scamp ? '' 
said he ; `` you shall have nothing . '' 
He whipped up his horse and set off at full speed . 
He had lost a great deal of time at Hesdin . 
He wanted to make it good . 
The little horse was courageous , and pulled for two ; but it was the month of February , there had been rain ; the roads were bad . 
And then , it was no longer the tilbury . 
The cart was very heavy , and in addition , there were many ascents . 
He took nearly four hours to go from Hesdin to Saint-Pol ; four hours for five leagues . 
At Saint-Pol he had the horse unharnessed at the first inn he came to and led to the stable ; as he had promised Scaufflaire , he stood beside the manger while the horse was eating ; he thought of sad and confusing things . 
The inn-keeper 's wife came to the stable . 
`` Does not Monsieur wish to breakfast ? '' 
`` Come , that is true ; I even have a good appetite . '' 
He followed the woman , who had a rosy , cheerful face ; she led him to the public room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth . 
`` Make haste ! '' 
said he ; `` I must start again ; I am in a hurry . '' 
A big Flemish servant-maid placed his knife and fork in all haste ; he looked at the girl with a sensation of comfort . 
`` That is what ailed me , '' he thought ; `` I had not breakfasted . '' 
His breakfast was served ; he seized the bread , took a mouthful , and then slowly replaced it on the table , and did not touch it again . 
A carter was eating at another table ; he said to this man : -- `` Why is their bread so bitter here ? '' 
The carter was a German and did not understand him . 
He returned to the stable and remained near the horse . 
An hour later he had quitted Saint-Pol and was directing his course towards Tinques , which is only five leagues from Arras . 
What did he do during this journey ? 
Of what was he thinking ? 
As in the morning , he watched the trees , the thatched roofs , the tilled fields pass by , and the way in which the landscape , broken at every turn of the road , vanished ; this is a sort of contemplation which sometimes suffices to the soul , and almost relieves it from thought . 
What is more melancholy and more profound than to see a thousand objects for the first and the last time ? 
To travel is to be born and to die at every instant ; perhaps , in the vaguest region of his mind , be did make comparisons between the shifting horizon and our human existence : all the things of life are perpetually fleeing before us ; the dark and bright intervals are intermingled ; after a dazzling moment , an eclipse ; we look , we hasten , we stretch out our hands to grasp what is passing ; each event is a turn in the road , and , all at once , we are old ; we feel a shock ; all is black ; we distinguish an obscure door ; the gloomy horse of life , which has been drawing us halts , and we see a veiled and unknown person unharnessing amid the shadows . 
Twilight was falling when the children who were coming out of school beheld this traveller enter Tinques ; it is true that the days were still short ; he did not halt at Tinques ; as he emerged from the village , a laborer , who was mending the road with stones , raised his head and said to him : -- `` That horse is very much fatigued . '' 
The poor beast was , in fact , going at a walk . 
`` Are you going to Arras ? '' 
added the road-mender . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` If you go on at that rate you will not arrive very early . '' 
He stopped his horse , and asked the laborer : -- `` How far is it from here to Arras ? '' 
`` Nearly seven good leagues . '' 
`` How is that ? 
the posting guide only says five leagues and a quarter . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned the road-mender , `` so you do n't know that the road is under repair ? 
You will find it barred a quarter of an hour further on ; there is no way to proceed further . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` You will take the road on the left , leading to Carency ; you will cross the river ; when you reach Camblin , you will turn to the right ; that is the road to Mont-Saint-Eloy which leads to Arras . '' 
`` But it is night , and I shall lose my way . '' 
`` You do not belong in these parts ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` And , besides , it is all cross-roads ; stop ! 
sir , '' resumed the road-mender ; `` shall I give you a piece of advice ? 
your horse is tired ; return to Tinques ; there is a good inn there ; sleep there ; you can reach Arras to-morrow . '' 
`` I must be there this evening . '' 
`` That is different ; but go to the inn all the same , and get an extra horse ; the stable-boy will guide you through the cross-roads . '' 
He followed the road-mender 's advice , retraced his steps , and , half an hour later , he passed the same spot again , but this time at full speed , with a good horse to aid ; a stable-boy , who called himself a postilion , was seated on the shaft of the cariole . 
Still , he felt that he had lost time . 
Night had fully come . 
They turned into the cross-road ; the way became frightfully bad ; the cart lurched from one rut to the other ; he said to the postilion : -- `` Keep at a trot , and you shall have a double fee . '' 
In one of the jolts , the whiffle-tree broke . 
`` There 's the whiffle-tree broken , sir , '' said the postilion ; `` I do n't know how to harness my horse now ; this road is very bad at night ; if you wish to return and sleep at Tinques , we could be in Arras early to-morrow morning . '' 
He replied , `` Have you a bit of rope and a knife ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it . 
This caused another loss of twenty minutes ; but they set out again at a gallop . 
The plain was gloomy ; low-hanging , black , crisp fogs crept over the hills and wrenched themselves away like smoke : there were whitish gleams in the clouds ; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea produced a sound in all quarters of the horizon , as of some one moving furniture ; everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror . 
How many things shiver beneath these vast breaths of the night ! 
He was stiff with cold ; he had eaten nothing since the night before ; he vaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in the neighborhood of D -- , eight years previously , and it seemed but yesterday . 
The hour struck from a distant tower ; he asked the boy : -- `` What time is it ? '' 
`` Seven o'clock , sir ; we shall reach Arras at eight ; we have but three leagues still to go . '' 
At that moment , he for the first time indulged in this reflection , thinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner : that all this trouble which he was taking was , perhaps , useless ; that he did not know so much as the hour of the trial ; that he should , at least , have informed himself of that ; that he was foolish to go thus straight ahead without knowing whether he would be of any service or not ; then he sketched out some calculations in his mind : that , ordinarily , the sittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine o'clock in the morning ; that it could not be a long affair ; that the theft of the apples would be very brief ; that there would then remain only a question of identity , four or five depositions , and very little for the lawyers to say ; that he should arrive after all was over . 
The postilion whipped up the horses ; they had crossed the river and left Mont-Saint-Eloy behind them . 
The night grew more profound . 
SISTER SIMPLICE PUT TO THE PROOF But at that moment Fantine was joyous . 
She had passed a very bad night ; her cough was frightful ; her fever had doubled in intensity ; she had had dreams : in the morning , when the doctor paid his visit , she was delirious ; he assumed an alarmed look , and ordered that he should be informed as soon as M. Madeleine arrived . 
All the morning she was melancholy , said but little , and laid plaits in her sheets , murmuring the while , in a low voice , calculations which seemed to be calculations of distances . 
Her eyes were hollow and staring . 
They seemed almost extinguished at intervals , then lighted up again and shone like stars . 
It seems as though , at the approach of a certain dark hour , the light of heaven fills those who are quitting the light of earth . 
Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt , she replied invariably , `` Well . 
I should like to see M. Madeleine . '' 
Some months before this , at the moment when Fantine had just lost her last modesty , her last shame , and her last joy , she was the shadow of herself ; now she was the spectre of herself . 
Physical suffering had completed the work of moral suffering . 
This creature of five and twenty had a wrinkled brow , flabby cheeks , pinched nostrils , teeth from which the gums had receded , a leaden complexion , a bony neck , prominent shoulder-blades , frail limbs , a clayey skin , and her golden hair was growing out sprinkled with gray . 
Alas ! 
how illness improvises old-age ! 
At mid-day the physician returned , gave some directions , inquired whether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary , and shook his head . 
M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o'clock . 
As exactness is kindness , he was exact . 
About half-past two , Fantine began to be restless . 
In the course of twenty minutes , she asked the nun more than ten times , `` What time is it , sister ? '' 
Three o'clock struck . 
At the third stroke , Fantine sat up in bed ; she who could , in general , hardly turn over , joined her yellow , fleshless hands in a sort of convulsive clasp , and the nun heard her utter one of those profound sighs which seem to throw off dejection . 
Then Fantine turned and looked at the door . 
No one entered ; the door did not open . 
She remained thus for a quarter of an hour , her eyes riveted on the door , motionless and apparently holding her breath . 
The sister dared not speak to her . 
The clock struck a quarter past three . 
Fantine fell back on her pillow . 
She said nothing , but began to plait the sheets once more . 
Half an hour passed , then an hour , no one came ; every time the clock struck , Fantine started up and looked towards the door , then fell back again . 
Her thought was clearly perceptible , but she uttered no name , she made no complaint , she blamed no one . 
But she coughed in a melancholy way . 
One would have said that something dark was descending upon her . 
She was livid and her lips were blue . 
She smiled now and then . 
Five o'clock struck . 
Then the sister heard her say , very low and gently , `` He is wrong not to come to-day , since I am going away to-morrow . '' 
Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine 's delay . 
In the meantime , Fantine was staring at the tester of her bed . 
She seemed to be endeavoring to recall something . 
All at once she began to sing in a voice as feeble as a breath . 
The nun listened . 
This is what Fantine was singing : -- `` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . 
`` Yestere'en the Virgin Mary came near my stove , in a broidered mantle clad , and said to me , ` Here , hide ` neath my veil the child whom you one day begged from me . 
Haste to the city , buy linen , buy a needle , buy thread . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
`` Dear Holy Virgin , beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons decked . 
God may give me his loveliest star ; I prefer the child thou hast granted me . 
` Madame , what shall I do with this linen fine ? ' 
-- ` Make of it clothes for thy new-born babe . ' 
`` Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , and corn-flowers are blue . '' 
` Wash this linen . ' 
-- ` Where ? ' 
-- ` In the stream . 
Make of it , soiling not , spoiling not , a petticoat fair with its bodice fine , which I will embroider and fill with flowers . ' 
-- ` Madame , the child is no longer here ; what is to be done ? ' 
-- ` Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to bury me . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through , Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . '' 
This song was an old cradle romance with which she had , in former days , lulled her little Cosette to sleep , and which had never recurred to her mind in all the five years during which she had been parted from her child . 
She sang it in so sad a voice , and to so sweet an air , that it was enough to make any one , even a nun , weep . 
The sister , accustomed as she was to austerities , felt a tear spring to her eyes . 
The clock struck six . 
Fantine did not seem to hear it . 
She no longer seemed to pay attention to anything about her . 
Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of the factory , whether the mayor had returned , and if he would not come to the infirmary soon . 
The girl returned in a few minutes . 
Fantine was still motionless and seemed absorbed in her own thoughts . 
The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone , that the mayor had set out that morning before six o'clock , in a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , cold as the weather was ; that he had gone alone , without even a driver ; that no one knew what road he had taken ; that people said he had been seen to turn into the road to Arras ; that others asserted that they had met him on the road to Paris . 
That when he went away he had been very gentle , as usual , and that he had merely told the portress not to expect him that night . 
While the two women were whispering together , with their backs turned to Fantine 's bed , the sister interrogating , the servant conjecturing , Fantine , with the feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies , which unite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation of death , had raised herself to her knees in bed , with her shrivelled hands resting on the bolster , and her head thrust through the opening of the curtains , and was listening . 
All at once she cried : -- `` You are speaking of M. Madeleine ! 
Why are you talking so low ? 
What is he doing ? 
Why does he not come ? '' 
Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought they heard the voice of a man ; they wheeled round in affright . 
`` Answer me ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
The servant stammered : -- `` The portress told me that he could not come to-day . '' 
`` Be calm , my child , '' said the sister ; `` lie down again . '' 
Fantine , without changing her attitude , continued in a loud voice , and with an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending : -- `` He can not come ? 
Why not ? 
You know the reason . 
You are whispering it to each other there . 
I want to know it . '' 
The servant-maid hastened to say in the nun 's ear , `` Say that he is busy with the city council . '' 
Sister Simplice blushed faintly , for it was a lie that the maid had proposed to her . 
On the other hand , it seemed to her that the mere communication of the truth to the invalid would , without doubt , deal her a terrible blow , and that this was a serious matter in Fantine 's present state . 
Her flush did not last long ; the sister raised her calm , sad eyes to Fantine , and said , `` Monsieur le Maire has gone away . '' 
Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed : her eyes sparkled ; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face . 
`` Gone ! '' 
she cried ; `` he has gone to get Cosette . '' 
Then she raised her arms to heaven , and her white face became ineffable ; her lips moved ; she was praying in a low voice . 
When her prayer was finished , `` Sister , '' she said , `` I am willing to lie down again ; I will do anything you wish ; I was naughty just now ; I beg your pardon for having spoken so loud ; it is very wrong to talk loudly ; I know that well , my good sister , but , you see , I am very happy : the good God is good ; M. Madeleine is good ; just think ! 
he has gone to Montfermeil to get my little Cosette . '' 
She lay down again , with the nun 's assistance , helped the nun to arrange her pillow , and kissed the little silver cross which she wore on her neck , and which Sister Simplice had given her . 
`` My child , '' said the sister , `` try to rest now , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine took the sister 's hand in her moist hands , and the latter was pained to feel that perspiration . 
`` He set out this morning for Paris ; in fact , he need not even go through Paris ; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence . 
Do you remember how he said to me yesterday , when I spoke to him of Cosette , Soon , soon ? 
He wants to give me a surprise , you know ! 
he made me sign a letter so that she could be taken from the Thenardiers ; they can not say anything , can they ? 
they will give back Cosette , for they have been paid ; the authorities will not allow them to keep the child since they have received their pay . 
Do not make signs to me that I must not talk , sister ! 
I am extremely happy ; I am doing well ; I am not ill at all any more ; I am going to see Cosette again ; I am even quite hungry ; it is nearly five years since I saw her last ; you can not imagine how much attached one gets to children , and then , she will be so pretty ; you will see ! 
If you only knew what pretty little rosy fingers she had ! 
In the first place , she will have very beautiful hands ; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old ; like this ! 
she must be a big girl now ; she is seven years old ; she is quite a young lady ; I call her Cosette , but her name is really Euphrasie . 
Stop ! 
this morning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece , and I had a sort of idea come across me , like that , that I should see Cosette again soon . 
Mon Dieu ! 
how wrong it is not to see one 's children for years ! 
One ought to reflect that life is not eternal . 
Oh , how good M. le Maire is to go ! 
it is very cold ! 
it is true ; he had on his cloak , at least ? 
he will be here to-morrow , will he not ? 
to-morrow will be a festival day ; to-morrow morning , sister , you must remind me to put on my little cap that has lace on it . 
What a place that Montfermeil is ! 
I took that journey on foot once ; it was very long for me , but the diligences go very quickly ! 
he will be here to-morrow with Cosette : how far is it from here to Montfermeil ? '' 
The sister , who had no idea of distances , replied , `` Oh , I think that be will be here to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow ! 
to-morrow ! '' 
said Fantine , `` I shall see Cosette to-morrow ! 
you see , good sister of the good God , that I am no longer ill ; I am mad ; I could dance if any one wished it . '' 
A person who had seen her a quarter of an hour previously would not have understood the change ; she was all rosy now ; she spoke in a lively and natural voice ; her whole face was one smile ; now and then she talked , she laughed softly ; the joy of a mother is almost infantile . 
`` Well , '' resumed the nun , `` now that you are happy , mind me , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice : `` Yes , lie down again ; be good , for you are going to have your child ; Sister Simplice is right ; every one here is right . '' 
And then , without stirring , without even moving her head , she began to stare all about her with wide-open eyes and a joyous air , and she said nothing more . 
The sister drew the curtains together again , hoping that she would fall into a doze . 
Between seven and eight o'clock the doctor came ; not hearing any sound , he thought Fantine was asleep , entered softly , and approached the bed on tiptoe ; he opened the curtains a little , and , by the light of the taper , he saw Fantine 's big eyes gazing at him . 
She said to him , `` She will be allowed to sleep beside me in a little bed , will she not , sir ? '' 
The doctor thought that she was delirious . 
She added : -- `` See ! 
there is just room . '' 
The doctor took Sister Simplice aside , and she explained matters to him ; that M. Madeleine was absent for a day or two , and that in their doubt they had not thought it well to undeceive the invalid , who believed that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil ; that it was possible , after all , that her guess was correct : the doctor approved . 
He returned to Fantine 's bed , and she went on : -- `` You see , when she wakes up in the morning , I shall be able to say good morning to her , poor kitten , and when I can not sleep at night , I can hear her asleep ; her little gentle breathing will do me good . '' 
`` Give me your hand , '' said the doctor . 
She stretched out her arm , and exclaimed with a laugh : -- `` Ah , hold ! 
in truth , you did not know it ; I am cured ; Cosette will arrive to-morrow . '' 
The doctor was surprised ; she was better ; the pressure on her chest had decreased ; her pulse had regained its strength ; a sort of life had suddenly supervened and reanimated this poor , worn-out creature . 
`` Doctor , '' she went on , `` did the sister tell you that M. le Maire has gone to get that mite of a child ? '' 
The doctor recommended silence , and that all painful emotions should be avoided ; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona , and , in case the fever should increase again during the night , a calming potion . 
As he took his departure , he said to the sister : -- `` She is doing better ; if good luck willed that the mayor should actually arrive to-morrow with the child , who knows ? 
there are crises so astounding ; great joy has been known to arrest maladies ; I know well that this is an organic disease , and in an advanced state , but all those things are such mysteries : we may be able to save her . '' 
THE TRAVELLER ON HIS ARRIVAL TAKES PRECAUTIONS FOR DEPARTURE It was nearly eight o'clock in the evening when the cart , which we left on the road , entered the porte-cochere of the Hotel de la Poste in Arras ; the man whom we have been following up to this moment alighted from it , responded with an abstracted air to the attentions of the people of the inn , sent back the extra horse , and with his own hands led the little white horse to the stable ; then he opened the door of a billiard-room which was situated on the ground floor , sat down there , and leaned his elbows on a table ; he had taken fourteen hours for the journey which he had counted on making in six ; he did himself the justice to acknowledge that it was not his fault , but at bottom , he was not sorry . 
The landlady of the hotel entered . 
`` Does Monsieur wish a bed ? 
Does Monsieur require supper ? '' 
He made a sign of the head in the negative . 
`` The stableman says that Monsieur 's horse is extremely fatigued . '' 
Here he broke his silence . 
`` Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrow morning ? '' 
`` Oh , Monsieur ! 
he must rest for two days at least . '' 
He inquired : -- `` Is not the posting-station located here ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
The hostess conducted him to the office ; he showed his passport , and inquired whether there was any way of returning that same night to M. sur M. by the mail-wagon ; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to be vacant ; he engaged it and paid for it . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the clerk , `` do not fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o'clock in the morning . '' 
This done , he left the hotel and began to wander about the town . 
He was not acquainted with Arras ; the streets were dark , and he walked on at random ; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of the passers-by . 
He crossed the little river Crinchon , and found himself in a labyrinth of narrow alleys where he lost his way . 
A citizen was passing along with a lantern . 
After some hesitation , he decided to apply to this man , not without having first glanced behind and in front of him , as though he feared lest some one should hear the question which he was about to put . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` where is the court-house , if you please . '' 
`` You do not belong in town , sir ? '' 
replied the bourgeois , who was an oldish man ; `` well , follow me . 
I happen to be going in the direction of the court-house , that is to say , in the direction of the hotel of the prefecture ; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at this moment , and the courts are holding their sittings provisionally in the prefecture . '' 
`` Is it there that the Assizes are held ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Certainly , sir ; you see , the prefecture of to-day was the bishop 's palace before the Revolution . 
M. de Conzie , who was bishop in ' 82 , built a grand hall there . 
It is in this grand hall that the court is held . '' 
On the way , the bourgeois said to him : -- `` If Monsieur desires to witness a case , it is rather late . 
The sittings generally close at six o'clock . '' 
When they arrived on the grand square , however , the man pointed out to him four long windows all lighted up , in the front of a vast and gloomy building . 
`` Upon my word , sir , you are in luck ; you have arrived in season . 
Do you see those four windows ? 
That is the Court of Assizes . 
There is light there , so they are not through . 
The matter must have been greatly protracted , and they are holding an evening session . 
Do you take an interest in this affair ? 
Is it a criminal case ? 
Are you a witness ? '' 
He replied : -- `` I have not come on any business ; I only wish to speak to one of the lawyers . '' 
`` That is different , '' said the bourgeois . 
`` Stop , sir ; here is the door where the sentry stands . 
You have only to ascend the grand staircase . '' 
He conformed to the bourgeois 's directions , and a few minutes later he was in a hall containing many people , and where groups , intermingled with lawyers in their gowns , were whispering together here and there . 
It is always a heart-breaking thing to see these congregations of men robed in black , murmuring together in low voices , on the threshold of the halls of justice . 
It is rare that charity and pity are the outcome of these words . 
Condemnations pronounced in advance are more likely to be the result . 
All these groups seem to the passing and thoughtful observer so many sombre hives where buzzing spirits construct in concert all sorts of dark edifices . 
This spacious hall , illuminated by a single lamp , was the old hall of the episcopal palace , and served as the large hall of the palace of justice . 
A double-leaved door , which was closed at that moment , separated it from the large apartment where the court was sitting . 
The obscurity was such that he did not fear to accost the first lawyer whom he met . 
`` What stage have they reached , sir ? '' 
he asked . 
`` It is finished , '' said the lawyer . 
`` Finished ! '' 
This word was repeated in such accents that the lawyer turned round . 
`` Excuse me sir ; perhaps you are a relative ? '' 
`` No ; I know no one here . 
Has judgment been pronounced ? '' 
`` Of course . 
Nothing else was possible . '' 
`` To penal servitude ? '' 
`` For life . '' 
He continued , in a voice so weak that it was barely audible : -- `` Then his identity was established ? '' 
`` What identity ? '' 
replied the lawyer . 
`` There was no identity to be established . 
The matter was very simple . 
The woman had murdered her child ; the infanticide was proved ; the jury threw out the question of premeditation , and she was condemned for life . '' 
`` So it was a woman ? '' 
said he . 
`` Why , certainly . 
The Limosin woman . 
Of what are you speaking ? '' 
`` Nothing . 
But since it is all over , how comes it that the hall is still lighted ? '' 
`` For another case , which was begun about two hours ago . 
`` What other case ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
this one is a clear case also . 
It is about a sort of blackguard ; a man arrested for a second offence ; a convict who has been guilty of theft . 
I do n't know his name exactly . 
There 's a bandit 's phiz for you ! 
I 'd send him to the galleys on the strength of his face alone . '' 
`` Is there any way of getting into the court-room , sir ? '' 
said he . 
`` I really think that there is not . 
There is a great crowd . 
However , the hearing has been suspended . 
Some people have gone out , and when the hearing is resumed , you might make an effort . '' 
`` Where is the entrance ? '' 
`` Through yonder large door . '' 
The lawyer left him . 
In the course of a few moments he had experienced , almost simultaneously , almost intermingled with each other , all possible emotions . 
The words of this indifferent spectator had , in turn , pierced his heart like needles of ice and like blades of fire . 
When he saw that nothing was settled , he breathed freely once more ; but he could not have told whether what he felt was pain or pleasure . 
He drew near to many groups and listened to what they were saying . 
The docket of the session was very heavy ; the president had appointed for the same day two short and simple cases . 
They had begun with the infanticide , and now they had reached the convict , the old offender , the `` return horse . '' 
This man had stolen apples , but that did not appear to be entirely proved ; what had been proved was , that he had already been in the galleys at Toulon . 
It was that which lent a bad aspect to his case . 
However , the man 's examination and the depositions of the witnesses had been completed , but the lawyer 's plea , and the speech of the public prosecutor were still to come ; it could not be finished before midnight . 
The man would probably be condemned ; the attorney-general was very clever , and never missed his culprits ; he was a brilliant fellow who wrote verses . 
An usher stood at the door communicating with the hall of the Assizes . 
He inquired of this usher : -- `` Will the door be opened soon , sir ? '' 
`` It will not be opened at all , '' replied the usher . 
`` What ! 
It will not be opened when the hearing is resumed ? 
Is not the hearing suspended ? '' 
`` The hearing has just been begun again , '' replied the usher , `` but the door will not be opened again . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because the hall is full . '' 
`` What ! 
There is not room for one more ? '' 
`` Not another one . 
The door is closed . 
No one can enter now . '' 
The usher added after a pause : `` There are , to tell the truth , two or three extra places behind Monsieur le President , but Monsieur le President only admits public functionaries to them . '' 
So saying , the usher turned his back . 
He retired with bowed head , traversed the antechamber , and slowly descended the stairs , as though hesitating at every step . 
It is probable that he was holding counsel with himself . 
The violent conflict which had been going on within him since the preceding evening was not yet ended ; and every moment he encountered some new phase of it . 
On reaching the landing-place , he leaned his back against the balusters and folded his arms . 
All at once he opened his coat , drew out his pocket-book , took from it a pencil , tore out a leaf , and upon that leaf he wrote rapidly , by the light of the street lantern , this line : M. Madeleine , Mayor of M. sur M. ; then he ascended the stairs once more with great strides , made his way through the crowd , walked straight up to the usher , handed him the paper , and said in an authoritative manner : -- `` Take this to Monsieur le President . '' 
The usher took the paper , cast a glance upon it , and obeyed . 
AN ENTRANCE BY FAVOR Although he did not suspect the fact , the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed a sort of celebrity . 
For the space of seven years his reputation for virtue had filled the whole of Bas Boulonnais ; it had eventually passed the confines of a small district and had been spread abroad through two or three neighboring departments . 
Besides the service which he had rendered to the chief town by resuscitating the black jet industry , there was not one out of the hundred and forty communes of the arrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him for some benefit . 
He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply the industries of other arrondissements . 
It was thus that he had , when occasion offered , supported with his credit and his funds the linen factory at Boulogne , the flax-spinning industry at Frevent , and the hydraulic manufacture of cloth at Boubers-sur-Canche . 
Everywhere the name of M. Madeleine was pronounced with veneration . 
Arras and Douai envied the happy little town of M. sur M. its mayor . 
The Councillor of the Royal Court of Douai , who was presiding over this session of the Assizes at Arras , was acquainted , in common with the rest of the world , with this name which was so profoundly and universally honored . 
When the usher , discreetly opening the door which connected the council-chamber with the court-room , bent over the back of the President 's arm-chair and handed him the paper on which was inscribed the line which we have just perused , adding : `` The gentleman desires to be present at the trial , '' the President , with a quick and deferential movement , seized a pen and wrote a few words at the bottom of the paper and returned it to the usher , saying , `` Admit him . '' 
The unhappy man whose history we are relating had remained near the door of the hall , in the same place and the same attitude in which the usher had left him . 
In the midst of his revery he heard some one saying to him , `` Will Monsieur do me the honor to follow me ? '' 
It was the same usher who had turned his back upon him but a moment previously , and who was now bowing to the earth before him . 
At the same time , the usher handed him the paper . 
He unfolded it , and as he chanced to be near the light , he could read it . 
`` The President of the Court of Assizes presents his respects to M. Madeleine . '' 
He crushed the paper in his hand as though those words contained for him a strange and bitter aftertaste . 
He followed the usher . 
A few minutes later he found himself alone in a sort of wainscoted cabinet of severe aspect , lighted by two wax candles , placed upon a table with a green cloth . 
The last words of the usher who had just quitted him still rang in his ears : `` Monsieur , you are now in the council-chamber ; you have only to turn the copper handle of yonder door , and you will find yourself in the court-room , behind the President 's chair . '' 
These words were mingled in his thoughts with a vague memory of narrow corridors and dark staircases which he had recently traversed . 
The usher had left him alone . 
The supreme moment had arrived . 
He sought to collect his faculties , but could not . 
It is chiefly at the moment when there is the greatest need for attaching them to the painful realities of life , that the threads of thought snap within the brain . 
He was in the very place where the judges deliberated and condemned . 
With stupid tranquillity he surveyed this peaceful and terrible apartment , where so many lives had been broken , which was soon to ring with his name , and which his fate was at that moment traversing . 
He stared at the wall , then he looked at himself , wondering that it should be that chamber and that it should be he . 
He had eaten nothing for four and twenty hours ; he was worn out by the jolts of the cart , but he was not conscious of it . 
It seemed to him that he felt nothing . 
He approached a black frame which was suspended on the wall , and which contained , under glass , an ancient autograph letter of Jean Nicolas Pache , mayor of Paris and minister , and dated , through an error , no doubt , the 9th of June , of the year II. , and in which Pache forwarded to the commune the list of ministers and deputies held in arrest by them . 
Any spectator who had chanced to see him at that moment , and who had watched him , would have imagined , doubtless , that this letter struck him as very curious , for he did not take his eyes from it , and he read it two or three times . 
He read it without paying any attention to it , and unconsciously . 
He was thinking of Fantine and Cosette . 
As he dreamed , he turned round , and his eyes fell upon the brass knob of the door which separated him from the Court of Assizes . 
He had almost forgotten that door . 
His glance , calm at first , paused there , remained fixed on that brass handle , then grew terrified , and little by little became impregnated with fear . 
Beads of perspiration burst forth among his hair and trickled down upon his temples . 
At a certain moment he made that indescribable gesture of a sort of authority mingled with rebellion , which is intended to convey , and which does so well convey , `` Pardieu ! 
who compels me to this ? '' 
Then he wheeled briskly round , caught sight of the door through which he had entered in front of him , went to it , opened it , and passed out . 
He was no longer in that chamber ; he was outside in a corridor , a long , narrow corridor , broken by steps and gratings , making all sorts of angles , lighted here and there by lanterns similar to the night taper of invalids , the corridor through which he had approached . 
He breathed , he listened ; not a sound in front , not a sound behind him , and he fled as though pursued . 
When he had turned many angles in this corridor , he still listened . 
The same silence reigned , and there was the same darkness around him . 
He was out of breath ; he staggered ; he leaned against the wall . 
The stone was cold ; the perspiration lay ice-cold on his brow ; he straightened himself up with a shiver . 
Then , there alone in the darkness , trembling with cold and with something else , too , perchance , he meditated . 
He had meditated all night long ; he had meditated all the day : he heard within him but one voice , which said , `` Alas ! '' 
A quarter of an hour passed thus . 
At length he bowed his head , sighed with agony , dropped his arms , and retraced his steps . 
He walked slowly , and as though crushed . 
It seemed as though some one had overtaken him in his flight and was leading him back . 
He re-entered the council-chamber . 
The first thing he caught sight of was the knob of the door . 
This knob , which was round and of polished brass , shone like a terrible star for him . 
He gazed at it as a lamb might gaze into the eye of a tiger . 
He could not take his eyes from it . 
From time to time he advanced a step and approached the door . 
Had he listened , he would have heard the sound of the adjoining hall like a sort of confused murmur ; but he did not listen , and he did not hear . 
Suddenly , without himself knowing how it happened , he found himself near the door ; he grasped the knob convulsively ; the door opened . 
He was in the court-room . 
A PLACE WHERE CONVICTIONS ARE IN PROCESS OF FORMATION He advanced a pace , closed the door mechanically behind him , and remained standing , contemplating what he saw . 
It was a vast and badly lighted apartment , now full of uproar , now full of silence , where all the apparatus of a criminal case , with its petty and mournful gravity in the midst of the throng , was in process of development . 
At the one end of the hall , the one where he was , were judges , with abstracted air , in threadbare robes , who were gnawing their nails or closing their eyelids ; at the other end , a ragged crowd ; lawyers in all sorts of attitudes ; soldiers with hard but honest faces ; ancient , spotted woodwork , a dirty ceiling , tables covered with serge that was yellow rather than green ; doors blackened by handmarks ; tap-room lamps which emitted more smoke than light , suspended from nails in the wainscot ; on the tables candles in brass candlesticks ; darkness , ugliness , sadness ; and from all this there was disengaged an austere and august impression , for one there felt that grand human thing which is called the law , and that grand divine thing which is called justice . 
No one in all that throng paid any attention to him ; all glances were directed towards a single point , a wooden bench placed against a small door , in the stretch of wall on the President 's left ; on this bench , illuminated by several candles , sat a man between two gendarmes . 
This man was the man . 
He did not seek him ; he saw him ; his eyes went thither naturally , as though they had known beforehand where that figure was . 
He thought he was looking at himself , grown old ; not absolutely the same in face , of course , but exactly similar in attitude and aspect , with his bristling hair , with that wild and uneasy eye , with that blouse , just as it was on the day when he entered D -- , full of hatred , concealing his soul in that hideous mass of frightful thoughts which he had spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison . 
He said to himself with a shudder , `` Good God ! 
shall I become like that again ? '' 
This creature seemed to be at least sixty ; there was something indescribably coarse , stupid , and frightened about him . 
At the sound made by the opening door , people had drawn aside to make way for him ; the President had turned his head , and , understanding that the personage who had just entered was the mayor of M. sur M. , he had bowed to him ; the attorney-general , who had seen M. Madeleine at M. sur M. , whither the duties of his office had called him more than once , recognized him and saluted him also : he had hardly perceived it ; he was the victim of a sort of hallucination ; he was watching . 
Judges , clerks , gendarmes , a throng of cruelly curious heads , all these he had already beheld once , in days gone by , twenty-seven years before ; he had encountered those fatal things once more ; there they were ; they moved ; they existed ; it was no longer an effort of his memory , a mirage of his thought ; they were real gendarmes and real judges , a real crowd , and real men of flesh and blood : it was all over ; he beheld the monstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him , with all that there is formidable in reality . 
All this was yawning before him . 
He was horrified by it ; he shut his eyes , and exclaimed in the deepest recesses of his soul , `` Never ! '' 
And by a tragic play of destiny which made all his ideas tremble , and rendered him nearly mad , it was another self of his that was there ! 
all called that man who was being tried Jean Valjean . 
Under his very eyes , unheard-of vision , he had a sort of representation of the most horrible moment of his life , enacted by his spectre . 
Everything was there ; the apparatus was the same , the hour of the night , the faces of the judges , of soldiers , and of spectators ; all were the same , only above the President 's head there hung a crucifix , something which the courts had lacked at the time of his condemnation : God had been absent when he had been judged . 
There was a chair behind him ; he dropped into it , terrified at the thought that he might be seen ; when he was seated , he took advantage of a pile of cardboard boxes , which stood on the judge 's desk , to conceal his face from the whole room ; he could now see without being seen ; he had fully regained consciousness of the reality of things ; gradually he recovered ; he attained that phase of composure where it is possible to listen . 
M. Bamatabois was one of the jurors . 
He looked for Javert , but did not see him ; the seat of the witnesses was hidden from him by the clerk 's table , and then , as we have just said , the hall was sparely lighted . 
At the moment of this entrance , the defendant 's lawyer had just finished his plea . 
The attention of all was excited to the highest pitch ; the affair had lasted for three hours : for three hours that crowd had been watching a strange man , a miserable specimen of humanity , either profoundly stupid or profoundly subtle , gradually bending beneath the weight of a terrible likeness . 
This man , as the reader already knows , was a vagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden with ripe apples , broken in the orchard of a neighbor , called the Pierron orchard . 
Who was this man ? 
an examination had been made ; witnesses had been heard , and they were unanimous ; light had abounded throughout the entire debate ; the accusation said : `` We have in our grasp not only a marauder , a stealer of fruit ; we have here , in our hands , a bandit , an old offender who has broken his ban , an ex-convict , a miscreant of the most dangerous description , a malefactor named Jean Valjean , whom justice has long been in search of , and who , eight years ago , on emerging from the galleys at Toulon , committed a highway robbery , accompanied by violence , on the person of a child , a Savoyard named Little Gervais ; a crime provided for by article 383 of the Penal Code , the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter , when his identity shall have been judicially established . 
He has just committed a fresh theft ; it is a case of a second offence ; condemn him for the fresh deed ; later on he will be judged for the old crime . '' 
In the face of this accusation , in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses , the accused appeared to be astonished more than anything else ; he made signs and gestures which were meant to convey No , or else he stared at the ceiling : he spoke with difficulty , replied with embarrassment , but his whole person , from head to foot , was a denial ; he was an idiot in the presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him , and like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fast upon him ; nevertheless , it was a question of the most menacing future for him ; the likeness increased every moment , and the entire crowd surveyed , with more anxiety than he did himself , that sentence freighted with calamity , which descended ever closer over his head ; there was even a glimpse of a possibility afforded ; besides the galleys , a possible death penalty , in case his identity were established , and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter in condemnation . 
Who was this man ? 
what was the nature of his apathy ? 
was it imbecility or craft ? 
Did he understand too well , or did he not understand at all ? 
these were questions which divided the crowd , and seemed to divide the jury ; there was something both terrible and puzzling in this case : the drama was not only melancholy ; it was also obscure . 
The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well , in that provincial tongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar , and which was formerly employed by all advocates , at Paris as well as at Romorantin or at Montbrison , and which to-day , having become classic , is no longer spoken except by the official orators of magistracy , to whom it is suited on account of its grave sonorousness and its majestic stride ; a tongue in which a husband is called a consort , and a woman a spouse ; Paris , the centre of art and civilization ; the king , the monarch ; Monseigneur the Bishop , a sainted pontiff ; the district-attorney , the eloquent interpreter of public prosecution ; the arguments , the accents which we have just listened to ; the age of Louis XIV. , the grand age ; a theatre , the temple of Melpomene ; the reigning family , the august blood of our kings ; a concert , a musical solemnity ; the General Commandant of the province , the illustrious warrior , who , etc. ; the pupils in the seminary , these tender levities ; errors imputed to newspapers , the imposture which distills its venom through the columns of those organs ; etc. . 
The lawyer had , accordingly , begun with an explanation as to the theft of the apples , -- an awkward matter couched in fine style ; but Benigne Bossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in the midst of a funeral oration , and he extricated himself from the situation in stately fashion . 
The lawyer established the fact that the theft of the apples had not been circumstantially proved . 
His client , whom he , in his character of counsel , persisted in calling Champmathieu , had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that branch by any one . 
He had been taken with that branch -LRB- which the lawyer preferred to call a bough -RRB- in his possession ; but he said that he had found it broken off and lying on the ground , and had picked it up . 
Where was there any proof to the contrary ? 
No doubt that branch had been broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall , then thrown away by the alarmed marauder ; there was no doubt that there had been a thief in the case . 
But what proof was there that that thief had been Champmathieu ? 
One thing only . 
His character as an ex-convict . 
The lawyer did not deny that that character appeared to be , unhappily , well attested ; the accused had resided at Faverolles ; the accused had exercised the calling of a tree-pruner there ; the name of Champmathieu might well have had its origin in Jean Mathieu ; all that was true , -- in short , four witnesses recognize Champmathieu , positively and without hesitation , as that convict , Jean Valjean ; to these signs , to this testimony , the counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of his client , the denial of an interested party ; but supposing that he was the convict Jean Valjean , did that prove that he was the thief of the apples ? 
that was a presumption at the most , not a proof . 
The prisoner , it was true , and his counsel , `` in good faith , '' was obliged to admit it , had adopted `` a bad system of defence . '' 
He obstinately denied everything , the theft and his character of convict . 
An admission upon this last point would certainly have been better , and would have won for him the indulgence of his judges ; the counsel had advised him to do this ; but the accused had obstinately refused , thinking , no doubt , that he would save everything by admitting nothing . 
It was an error ; but ought not the paucity of this intelligence to be taken into consideration ? 
This man was visibly stupid . 
Long-continued wretchedness in the galleys , long misery outside the galleys , had brutalized him , etc. . 
He defended himself badly ; was that a reason for condemning him ? 
As for the affair with Little Gervais , the counsel need not discuss it ; it did not enter into the case . 
The lawyer wound up by beseeching the jury and the court , if the identity of Jean Valjean appeared to them to be evident , to apply to him the police penalties which are provided for a criminal who has broken his ban , and not the frightful chastisement which descends upon the convict guilty of a second offence . 
The district-attorney answered the counsel for the defence . 
He was violent and florid , as district-attorneys usually are . 
He congratulated the counsel for the defence on his `` loyalty , '' and skilfully took advantage of this loyalty . 
He reached the accused through all the concessions made by his lawyer . 
The advocate had seemed to admit that the prisoner was Jean Valjean . 
He took note of this . 
So this man was Jean Valjean . 
This point had been conceded to the accusation and could no longer be disputed . 
Here , by means of a clever autonomasia which went back to the sources and causes of crime , the district-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romantic school , then dawning under the name of the Satanic school , which had been bestowed upon it by the critics of the Quotidienne and the Oriflamme ; he attributed , not without some probability , to the influence of this perverse literature the crime of Champmathieu , or rather , to speak more correctly , of Jean Valjean . 
Having exhausted these considerations , he passed on to Jean Valjean himself . 
Who was this Jean Valjean ? 
Description of Jean Valjean : a monster spewed forth , etc. . 
The model for this sort of description is contained in the tale of Theramene , which is not useful to tragedy , but which every day renders great services to judicial eloquence . 
The audience and the jury `` shuddered . '' 
The description finished , the district-attorney resumed with an oratorical turn calculated to raise the enthusiasm of the journal of the prefecture to the highest pitch on the following day : And it is such a man , etc. , etc. , etc. , vagabond , beggar , without means of existence , etc. , etc. , inured by his past life to culpable deeds , and but little reformed by his sojourn in the galleys , as was proved by the crime committed against Little Gervais , etc. , etc. ; it is such a man , caught upon the highway in the very act of theft , a few paces from a wall that had been scaled , still holding in his hand the object stolen , who denies the crime , the theft , the climbing the wall ; denies everything ; denies even his own identity ! 
In addition to a hundred other proofs , to which we will not recur , four witnesses recognize him -- Javert , the upright inspector of police ; Javert , and three of his former companions in infamy , the convicts Brevet , Chenildieu , and Cochepaille . 
What does he offer in opposition to this overwhelming unanimity ? 
His denial . 
What obduracy ! 
You will do justice , gentlemen of the jury , etc. , etc. . 
While the district-attorney was speaking , the accused listened to him open-mouthed , with a sort of amazement in which some admiration was assuredly blended . 
He was evidently surprised that a man could talk like that . 
From time to time , at those `` energetic '' moments of the prosecutor 's speech , when eloquence which can not contain itself overflows in a flood of withering epithets and envelops the accused like a storm , he moved his head slowly from right to left and from left to right in the sort of mute and melancholy protest with which he had contented himself since the beginning of the argument . 
Two or three times the spectators who were nearest to him heard him say in a low voice , `` That is what comes of not having asked M. Baloup . '' 
The district-attorney directed the attention of the jury to this stupid attitude , evidently deliberate , which denoted not imbecility , but craft , skill , a habit of deceiving justice , and which set forth in all its nakedness the `` profound perversity '' of this man . 
He ended by making his reserves on the affair of Little Gervais and demanding a severe sentence . 
At that time , as the reader will remember , it was penal servitude for life . 
The counsel for the defence rose , began by complimenting Monsieur l'Avocat-General on his `` admirable speech , '' then replied as best he could ; but he weakened ; the ground was evidently slipping away from under his feet . 
THE SYSTEM OF DENIALS The moment for closing the debate had arrived . 
The President had the accused stand up , and addressed to him the customary question , `` Have you anything to add to your defence ? '' 
The man did not appear to understand , as he stood there , twisting in his hands a terrible cap which he had . 
The President repeated the question . 
This time the man heard it . 
He seemed to understand . 
He made a motion like a man who is just waking up , cast his eyes about him , stared at the audience , the gendarmes , his counsel , the jury , the court , laid his monstrous fist on the rim of woodwork in front of his bench , took another look , and all at once , fixing his glance upon the district-attorney , he began to speak . 
It was like an eruption . 
It seemed , from the manner in which the words escaped from his mouth , -- incoherent , impetuous , pell-mell , tumbling over each other , -- as though they were all pressing forward to issue forth at once . 
He said : -- `` This is what I have to say . 
That I have been a wheelwright in Paris , and that it was with Monsieur Baloup . 
It is a hard trade . 
In the wheelwright 's trade one works always in the open air , in courtyards , under sheds when the masters are good , never in closed workshops , because space is required , you see . 
In winter one gets so cold that one beats one 's arms together to warm one 's self ; but the masters do n't like it ; they say it wastes time . 
Handling iron when there is ice between the paving-stones is hard work . 
That wears a man out quickly One is old while he is still quite young in that trade . 
At forty a man is done for . 
I was fifty-three . 
I was in a bad state . 
And then , workmen are so mean ! 
When a man is no longer young , they call him nothing but an old bird , old beast ! 
I was not earning more than thirty sous a day . 
They paid me as little as possible . 
The masters took advantage of my age -- and then I had my daughter , who was a laundress at the river . 
She earned a little also . 
It sufficed for us two . 
She had trouble , also ; all day long up to her waist in a tub , in rain , in snow . 
When the wind cuts your face , when it freezes , it is all the same ; you must still wash . 
There are people who have not much linen , and wait until late ; if you do not wash , you lose your custom . 
The planks are badly joined , and water drops on you from everywhere ; you have your petticoats all damp above and below . 
That penetrates . 
She has also worked at the laundry of the Enfants-Rouges , where the water comes through faucets . 
You are not in the tub there ; you wash at the faucet in front of you , and rinse in a basin behind you . 
As it is enclosed , you are not so cold ; but there is that hot steam , which is terrible , and which ruins your eyes . 
She came home at seven o'clock in the evening , and went to bed at once , she was so tired . 
Her husband beat her . 
She is dead . 
We have not been very happy . 
She was a good girl , who did not go to the ball , and who was very peaceable . 
I remember one Shrove-Tuesday when she went to bed at eight o'clock . 
There , I am telling the truth ; you have only to ask . 
Ah , yes ! 
how stupid I am ! 
Paris is a gulf . 
Who knows Father Champmathieu there ? 
But M. Baloup does , I tell you . 
Go see at M. Baloup 's ; and after all , I do n't know what is wanted of me . '' 
The man ceased speaking , and remained standing . 
He had said these things in a loud , rapid , hoarse voice , with a sort of irritated and savage ingenuousness . 
Once he paused to salute some one in the crowd . 
The sort of affirmations which he seemed to fling out before him at random came like hiccoughs , and to each he added the gesture of a wood-cutter who is splitting wood . 
When he had finished , the audience burst into a laugh . 
He stared at the public , and , perceiving that they were laughing , and not understanding why , he began to laugh himself . 
It was inauspicious . 
The President , an attentive and benevolent man , raised his voice . 
He reminded `` the gentlemen of the jury '' that `` the sieur Baloup , formerly a master-wheelwright , with whom the accused stated that he had served , had been summoned in vain . 
He had become bankrupt , and was not to be found . '' 
Then turning to the accused , he enjoined him to listen to what he was about to say , and added : `` You are in a position where reflection is necessary . 
The gravest presumptions rest upon you , and may induce vital results . 
Prisoner , in your own interests , I summon you for the last time to explain yourself clearly on two points . 
In the first place , did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierron orchard , break the branch , and steal the apples ; that is to say , commit the crime of breaking in and theft ? 
In the second place , are you the discharged convict , Jean Valjean -- yes or no ? '' 
The prisoner shook his head with a capable air , like a man who has thoroughly understood , and who knows what answer he is going to make . 
He opened his mouth , turned towards the President , and said : -- `` In the first place -- '' Then he stared at his cap , stared at the ceiling , and held his peace . 
`` Prisoner , '' said the district-attorney , in a severe voice ; `` pay attention . 
You are not answering anything that has been asked of you . 
Your embarrassment condemns you . 
It is evident that your name is not Champmathieu ; that you are the convict , Jean Valjean , concealed first under the name of Jean Mathieu , which was the name of his mother ; that you went to Auvergne ; that you were born at Faverolles , where you were a pruner of trees . 
It is evident that you have been guilty of entering , and of the theft of ripe apples from the Pierron orchard . 
The gentlemen of the jury will form their own opinion . '' 
The prisoner had finally resumed his seat ; he arose abruptly when the district-attorney had finished , and exclaimed : -- `` You are very wicked ; that you are ! 
This what I wanted to say ; I could not find words for it at first . 
I have stolen nothing . 
I am a man who does not have something to eat every day . 
I was coming from Ailly ; I was walking through the country after a shower , which had made the whole country yellow : even the ponds were overflowed , and nothing sprang from the sand any more but the little blades of grass at the wayside . 
I found a broken branch with apples on the ground ; I picked up the branch without knowing that it would get me into trouble . 
I have been in prison , and they have been dragging me about for the last three months ; more than that I can not say ; people talk against me , they tell me , ` Answer ! ' 
The gendarme , who is a good fellow , nudges my elbow , and says to me in a low voice , ` Come , answer ! ' 
I do n't know how to explain ; I have no education ; I am a poor man ; that is where they wrong me , because they do not see this . 
I have not stolen ; I picked up from the ground things that were lying there . 
You say , Jean Valjean , Jean Mathieu ! 
I do n't know those persons ; they are villagers . 
I worked for M. Baloup , Boulevard de l'Hopital ; my name is Champmathieu . 
You are very clever to tell me where I was born ; I do n't know myself : it 's not everybody who has a house in which to come into the world ; that would be too convenient . 
I think that my father and mother were people who strolled along the highways ; I know nothing different . 
When I was a child , they called me young fellow ; now they call me old fellow ; those are my baptismal names ; take that as you like . 
I have been in Auvergne ; I have been at Faverolles . 
Pardi . 
Well ! 
ca n't a man have been in Auvergne , or at Faverolles , without having been in the galleys ? 
I tell you that I have not stolen , and that I am Father Champmathieu ; I have been with M. Baloup ; I have had a settled residence . 
You worry me with your nonsense , there ! 
Why is everybody pursuing me so furiously ? '' 
The district-attorney had remained standing ; he addressed the President : -- `` Monsieur le President , in view of the confused but exceedingly clever denials of the prisoner , who would like to pass himself off as an idiot , but who will not succeed in so doing , -- we shall attend to that , -- we demand that it shall please you and that it shall please the court to summon once more into this place the convicts Brevet , Cochepaille , and Chenildieu , and Police-Inspector Javert , and question them for the last time as to the identity of the prisoner with the convict Jean Valjean . '' 
`` I would remind the district-attorney , '' said the President , `` that Police-Inspector Javert , recalled by his duties to the capital of a neighboring arrondissement , left the court-room and the town as soon as he had made his deposition ; we have accorded him permission , with the consent of the district-attorney and of the counsel for the prisoner . '' 
`` That is true , Mr. President , '' responded the district-attorney . 
`` In the absence of sieur Javert , I think it my duty to remind the gentlemen of the jury of what he said here a few hours ago . 
Javert is an estimable man , who does honor by his rigorous and strict probity to inferior but important functions . 
These are the terms of his deposition : ` I do not even stand in need of circumstantial proofs and moral presumptions to give the lie to the prisoner 's denial . 
I recognize him perfectly . 
The name of this man is not Champmathieu ; he is an ex-convict named Jean Valjean , and is very vicious and much to be feared . 
It is only with extreme regret that he was released at the expiration of his term . 
He underwent nineteen years of penal servitude for theft . 
He made five or six attempts to escape . 
Besides the theft from Little Gervais , and from the Pierron orchard , I suspect him of a theft committed in the house of His Grace the late Bishop of D -- I often saw him at the time when I was adjutant of the galley-guard at the prison in Toulon . 
I repeat that I recognize him perfectly . ' '' 
This extremely precise statement appeared to produce a vivid impression on the public and on the jury . 
The district-attorney concluded by insisting , that in default of Javert , the three witnesses Brevet , Chenildieu , and Cochepaille should be heard once more and solemnly interrogated . 
The President transmitted the order to an usher , and , a moment later , the door of the witnesses ' room opened . 
The usher , accompanied by a gendarme ready to lend him armed assistance , introduced the convict Brevet . 
The audience was in suspense ; and all breasts heaved as though they had contained but one soul . 
The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the central prisons . 
Brevet was a person sixty years of age , who had a sort of business man 's face , and the air of a rascal . 
The two sometimes go together . 
In prison , whither fresh misdeeds had led him , he had become something in the nature of a turnkey . 
He was a man of whom his superiors said , `` He tries to make himself of use . '' 
The chaplains bore good testimony as to his religious habits . 
It must not be forgotten that this passed under the Restoration . 
`` Brevet , '' said the President , `` you have undergone an ignominious sentence , and you can not take an oath . '' 
Brevet dropped his eyes . 
`` Nevertheless , '' continued the President , `` even in the man whom the law has degraded , there may remain , when the divine mercy permits it , a sentiment of honor and of equity . 
It is to this sentiment that I appeal at this decisive hour . 
If it still exists in you , -- and I hope it does , -- reflect before replying to me : consider on the one hand , this man , whom a word from you may ruin ; on the other hand , justice , which a word from you may enlighten . 
The instant is solemn ; there is still time to retract if you think you have been mistaken . 
Rise , prisoner . 
Brevet , take a good look at the accused , recall your souvenirs , and tell us on your soul and conscience , if you persist in recognizing this man as your former companion in the galleys , Jean Valjean ? '' 
Brevet looked at the prisoner , then turned towards the court . 
`` Yes , Mr. President , I was the first to recognize him , and I stick to it ; that man is Jean Valjean , who entered at Toulon in 1796 , and left in 1815 . 
I left a year later . 
He has the air of a brute now ; but it must be because age has brutalized him ; he was sly at the galleys : I recognize him positively . '' 
`` Take your seat , '' said the President . 
`` Prisoner , remain standing . '' 
Chenildieu was brought in , a prisoner for life , as was indicated by his red cassock and his green cap . 
He was serving out his sentence at the galleys of Toulon , whence he had been brought for this case . 
He was a small man of about fifty , brisk , wrinkled , frail , yellow , brazen-faced , feverish , who had a sort of sickly feebleness about all his limbs and his whole person , and an immense force in his glance . 
His companions in the galleys had nicknamed him I-deny-God -LRB- Je-nie Dieu , Chenildieu -RRB- . 
The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had used to Brevet . 
At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy which deprived him of the right to take an oath , Chenildieu raised his head and looked the crowd in the face . 
The President invited him to reflection , and asked him as he had asked Brevet , if he persisted in recognition of the prisoner . 
Chenildieu burst out laughing . 
`` Pardieu , as if I did n't recognize him ! 
We were attached to the same chain for five years . 
So you are sulking , old fellow ? '' 
`` Go take your seat , '' said the President . 
The usher brought in Cochepaille . 
He was another convict for life , who had come from the galleys , and was dressed in red , like Chenildieu , was a peasant from Lourdes , and a half-bear of the Pyrenees . 
He had guarded the flocks among the mountains , and from a shepherd he had slipped into a brigand . 
Cochepaille was no less savage and seemed even more stupid than the prisoner . 
He was one of those wretched men whom nature has sketched out for wild beasts , and on whom society puts the finishing touches as convicts in the galleys . 
The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words , and asked him , as he had asked the other two , if he persisted , without hesitation or trouble , in recognizing the man who was standing before him . 
`` He is Jean Valjean , '' said Cochepaille . 
`` He was even called Jean-the-Screw , because he was so strong . '' 
Each of these affirmations from these three men , evidently sincere and in good faith , had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury for the prisoner , -- a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that a fresh declaration was added to the proceeding . 
The prisoner had listened to them , with that astounded face which was , according to the accusation , his principal means of defence ; at the first , the gendarmes , his neighbors , had heard him mutter between his teeth : `` Ah , well , he 's a nice one ! '' 
after the second , he said , a little louder , with an air that was almost that of satisfaction , `` Good ! '' 
at the third , he cried , `` Famous ! '' 
The President addressed him : -- `` Have you heard , prisoner ? 
What have you to say ? '' 
He replied : -- `` I say , ` Famous ! ' '' 
An uproar broke out among the audience , and was communicated to the jury ; it was evident that the man was lost . 
`` Ushers , '' said the President , `` enforce silence ! 
I am going to sum up the arguments . '' 
At that moment there was a movement just beside the President ; a voice was heard crying : -- `` Brevet ! 
Chenildieu ! 
Cochepaille ! 
look here ! '' 
All who heard that voice were chilled , so lamentable and terrible was it ; all eyes were turned to the point whence it had proceeded . 
A man , placed among the privileged spectators who were seated behind the court , had just risen , had pushed open the half-door which separated the tribunal from the audience , and was standing in the middle of the hall ; the President , the district-attorney , M. Bamatabois , twenty persons , recognized him , and exclaimed in concert : -- `` M. Madeleine ! '' 
CHAMPMATHIEU MORE AND MORE ASTONISHED It was he , in fact . 
The clerk 's lamp illumined his countenance . 
He held his hat in his hand ; there was no disorder in his clothing ; his coat was carefully buttoned ; he was very pale , and he trembled slightly ; his hair , which had still been gray on his arrival in Arras , was now entirely white : it had turned white during the hour he had sat there . 
All heads were raised : the sensation was indescribable ; there was a momentary hesitation in the audience , the voice had been so heart-rending ; the man who stood there appeared so calm that they did not understand at first . 
They asked themselves whether he had indeed uttered that cry ; they could not believe that that tranquil man had been the one to give that terrible outcry . 
This indecision only lasted a few seconds . 
Even before the President and the district-attorney could utter a word , before the ushers and the gendarmes could make a gesture , the man whom all still called , at that moment , M. Madeleine , had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille , Brevet , and Chenildieu . 
`` Do you not recognize me ? '' 
said he . 
All three remained speechless , and indicated by a sign of the head that they did not know him . 
Cochepaille , who was intimidated , made a military salute . 
M. Madeleine turned towards the jury and the court , and said in a gentle voice : -- `` Gentlemen of the jury , order the prisoner to be released ! 
Mr. President , have me arrested . 
He is not the man whom you are in search of ; it is I : I am Jean Valjean . '' 
Not a mouth breathed ; the first commotion of astonishment had been followed by a silence like that of the grave ; those within the hall experienced that sort of religious terror which seizes the masses when something grand has been done . 
In the meantime , the face of the President was stamped with sympathy and sadness ; he had exchanged a rapid sign with the district-attorney and a few low-toned words with the assistant judges ; he addressed the public , and asked in accents which all understood : -- `` Is there a physician present ? '' 
The district-attorney took the word : -- `` Gentlemen of the jury , the very strange and unexpected incident which disturbs the audience inspires us , like yourselves , only with a sentiment which it is unnecessary for us to express . 
You all know , by reputation at least , the honorable M. Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. ; if there is a physician in the audience , we join the President in requesting him to attend to M. Madeleine , and to conduct him to his home . '' 
M.Madeleine did not allow the district-attorney to finish ; he interrupted him in accents full of suavity and authority . 
These are the words which he uttered ; here they are literally , as they were written down , immediately after the trial by one of the witnesses to this scene , and as they now ring in the ears of those who heard them nearly forty years ago : -- `` I thank you , Mr. District-Attorney , but I am not mad ; you shall see ; you were on the point of committing a great error ; release this man ! 
I am fulfilling a duty ; I am that miserable criminal . 
I am the only one here who sees the matter clearly , and I am telling you the truth . 
God , who is on high , looks down on what I am doing at this moment , and that suffices . 
You can take me , for here I am : but I have done my best ; I concealed myself under another name ; I have become rich ; I have become a mayor ; I have tried to re-enter the ranks of the honest . 
It seems that that is not to be done . 
In short , there are many things which I can not tell . 
I will not narrate the story of my life to you ; you will hear it one of these days . 
I robbed Monseigneur the Bishop , it is true ; it is true that I robbed Little Gervais ; they were right in telling you that Jean Valjean was a very vicious wretch . 
Perhaps it was not altogether his fault . 
Listen , honorable judges ! 
a man who has been so greatly humbled as I have has neither any remonstrances to make to Providence , nor any advice to give to society ; but , you see , the infamy from which I have tried to escape is an injurious thing ; the galleys make the convict what he is ; reflect upon that , if you please . 
Before going to the galleys , I was a poor peasant , with very little intelligence , a sort of idiot ; the galleys wrought a change in me . 
I was stupid ; I became vicious : I was a block of wood ; I became a firebrand . 
Later on , indulgence and kindness saved me , as severity had ruined me . 
But , pardon me , you can not understand what I am saying . 
You will find at my house , among the ashes in the fireplace , the forty-sou piece which I stole , seven years ago , from little Gervais . 
I have nothing farther to add ; take me . 
Good God ! 
the district-attorney shakes his head ; you say , 'M . 
Madeleine has gone mad ! ' 
you do not believe me ! 
that is distressing . 
Do not , at least , condemn this man ! 
What ! 
these men do not recognize me ! 
I wish Javert were here ; he would recognize me . '' 
Nothing can reproduce the sombre and kindly melancholy of tone which accompanied these words . 
He turned to the three convicts , and said : -- `` Well , I recognize you ; do you remember , Brevet ? '' 
He paused , hesitated for an instant , and said : -- `` Do you remember the knitted suspenders with a checked pattern which you wore in the galleys ? '' 
Brevet gave a start of surprise , and surveyed him from head to foot with a frightened air . 
He continued : -- `` Chenildieu , you who conferred on yourself the name of ` Jenie-Dieu , ' your whole right shoulder bears a deep burn , because you one day laid your shoulder against the chafing-dish full of coals , in order to efface the three letters T. F. P. , which are still visible , nevertheless ; answer , is this true ? '' 
`` It is true , '' said Chenildieu . 
He addressed himself to Cochepaille : -- `` Cochepaille , you have , near the bend in your left arm , a date stamped in blue letters with burnt powder ; the date is that of the landing of the Emperor at Cannes , March 1 , 1815 ; pull up your sleeve ! '' 
Cochepaille pushed up his sleeve ; all eyes were focused on him and on his bare arm . 
A gendarme held a light close to it ; there was the date . 
The unhappy man turned to the spectators and the judges with a smile which still rends the hearts of all who saw it whenever they think of it . 
It was a smile of triumph ; it was also a smile of despair . 
`` You see plainly , '' he said , `` that I am Jean Valjean . '' 
In that chamber there were no longer either judges , accusers , nor gendarmes ; there was nothing but staring eyes and sympathizing hearts . 
No one recalled any longer the part that each might be called upon to play ; the district-attorney forgot he was there for the purpose of prosecuting , the President that he was there to preside , the counsel for the defence that he was there to defend . 
It was a striking circumstance that no question was put , that no authority intervened . 
The peculiarity of sublime spectacles is , that they capture all souls and turn witnesses into spectators . 
No one , probably , could have explained what he felt ; no one , probably , said to himself that he was witnessing the splendid outburst of a grand light : all felt themselves inwardly dazzled . 
It was evident that they had Jean Valjean before their eyes . 
That was clear . 
The appearance of this man had sufficed to suffuse with light that matter which had been so obscure but a moment previously , without any further explanation : the whole crowd , as by a sort of electric revelation , understood instantly and at a single glance the simple and magnificent history of a man who was delivering himself up so that another man might not be condemned in his stead . 
The details , the hesitations , little possible oppositions , were swallowed up in that vast and luminous fact . 
It was an impression which vanished speedily , but which was irresistible at the moment . 
`` I do not wish to disturb the court further , '' resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` I shall withdraw , since you do not arrest me . 
I have many things to do . 
The district-attorney knows who I am ; he knows whither I am going ; he can have me arrested when he likes . '' 
He directed his steps towards the door . 
Not a voice was raised , not an arm extended to hinder him . 
All stood aside . 
At that moment there was about him that divine something which causes multitudes to stand aside and make way for a man . 
He traversed the crowd slowly . 
It was never known who opened the door , but it is certain that he found the door open when he reached it . 
On arriving there he turned round and said : -- `` I am at your command , Mr. District-Attorney . '' 
Then he addressed the audience : -- `` All of you , all who are present -- consider me worthy of pity , do you not ? 
Good God ! 
When I think of what I was on the point of doing , I consider that I am to be envied . 
Nevertheless , I should have preferred not to have had this occur . '' 
He withdrew , and the door closed behind him as it had opened , for those who do certain sovereign things are always sure of being served by some one in the crowd . 
Less than an hour after this , the verdict of the jury freed the said Champmathieu from all accusations ; and Champmathieu , being at once released , went off in a state of stupefaction , thinking that all men were fools , and comprehending nothing of this vision . 
IN WHAT MIRROR M. MADELEINE CONTEMPLATES HIS HAIR The day had begun to dawn . 
Fantine had passed a sleepless and feverish night , filled with happy visions ; at daybreak she fell asleep . 
Sister Simplice , who had been watching with her , availed herself of this slumber to go and prepare a new potion of chinchona . 
The worthy sister had been in the laboratory of the infirmary but a few moments , bending over her drugs and phials , and scrutinizing things very closely , on account of the dimness which the half-light of dawn spreads over all objects . 
Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a faint shriek . 
M. Madeleine stood before her ; he had just entered silently . 
`` Is it you , Mr. Mayor ? '' 
she exclaimed . 
He replied in a low voice : -- `` How is that poor woman ? '' 
`` Not so bad just now ; but we have been very uneasy . '' 
She explained to him what had passed : that Fantine had been very ill the day before , and that she was better now , because she thought that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil to get her child . 
The sister dared not question the mayor ; but she perceived plainly from his air that he had not come from there . 
`` All that is good , '' said he ; `` you were right not to undeceive her . '' 
`` Yes , '' responded the sister ; `` but now , Mr. Mayor , she will see you and will not see her child . 
What shall we say to her ? '' 
He reflected for a moment . 
`` God will inspire us , '' said he . 
`` But we can not tell a lie , '' murmured the sister , half aloud . 
It was broad daylight in the room . 
The light fell full on M. Madeleine 's face . 
The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it . 
`` Good God , sir ! '' 
she exclaimed ; `` what has happened to you ? 
Your hair is perfectly white ! '' 
`` White ! '' 
said he . 
Sister Simplice had no mirror . 
She rummaged in a drawer , and pulled out the little glass which the doctor of the infirmary used to see whether a patient was dead and whether he no longer breathed . 
M. Madeleine took the mirror , looked at his hair , and said : -- `` Well ! '' 
He uttered the word indifferently , and as though his mind were on something else . 
The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught a glimpse in all this . 
He inquired : -- `` Can I see her ? '' 
`` Is not Monsieur le Maire going to have her child brought back to her ? '' 
said the sister , hardly venturing to put the question . 
`` Of course ; but it will take two or three days at least . '' 
`` If she were not to see Monsieur le Maire until that time , '' went on the sister , timidly , `` she would not know that Monsieur le Maire had returned , and it would be easy to inspire her with patience ; and when the child arrived , she would naturally think Monsieur le Maire had just come with the child . 
We should not have to enact a lie . '' 
M. Madeleine seemed to reflect for a few moments ; then he said with his calm gravity : -- `` No , sister , I must see her . 
I may , perhaps , be in haste . '' 
The nun did not appear to notice this word `` perhaps , '' which communicated an obscure and singular sense to the words of the mayor 's speech . 
She replied , lowering her eyes and her voice respectfully : -- `` In that case , she is asleep ; but Monsieur le Maire may enter . '' 
He made some remarks about a door which shut badly , and the noise of which might awaken the sick woman ; then he entered Fantine 's chamber , approached the bed and drew aside the curtains . 
She was asleep . 
Her breath issued from her breast with that tragic sound which is peculiar to those maladies , and which breaks the hearts of mothers when they are watching through the night beside their sleeping child who is condemned to death . 
But this painful respiration hardly troubled a sort of ineffable serenity which overspread her countenance , and which transfigured her in her sleep . 
Her pallor had become whiteness ; her cheeks were crimson ; her long golden lashes , the only beauty of her youth and her virginity which remained to her , palpitated , though they remained closed and drooping . 
Her whole person was trembling with an indescribable unfolding of wings , all ready to open wide and bear her away , which could be felt as they rustled , though they could not be seen . 
To see her thus , one would never have dreamed that she was an invalid whose life was almost despaired of . 
She resembled rather something on the point of soaring away than something on the point of dying . 
The branch trembles when a hand approaches it to pluck a flower , and seems to both withdraw and to offer itself at one and the same time . 
The human body has something of this tremor when the instant arrives in which the mysterious fingers of Death are about to pluck the soul . 
M. Madeleine remained for some time motionless beside that bed , gazing in turn upon the sick woman and the crucifix , as he had done two months before , on the day when he had come for the first time to see her in that asylum . 
They were both still there in the same attitude -- she sleeping , he praying ; only now , after the lapse of two months , her hair was gray and his was white . 
The sister had not entered with him . 
He stood beside the bed , with his finger on his lips , as though there were some one in the chamber whom he must enjoin to silence . 
She opened her eyes , saw him , and said quietly , with a smile : -- `` And Cosette ? '' 
FANTINE HAPPY She made no movement of either surprise or of joy ; she was joy itself . 
That simple question , `` And Cosette ? '' 
was put with so profound a faith , with so much certainty , with such a complete absence of disquiet and of doubt , that he found not a word of reply . 
She continued : -- `` I knew that you were there . 
I was asleep , but I saw you . 
I have seen you for a long , long time . 
I have been following you with my eyes all night long . 
You were in a glory , and you had around you all sorts of celestial forms . '' 
He raised his glance to the crucifix . 
`` But , '' she resumed , `` tell me where Cosette is . 
Why did not you place her on my bed against the moment of my waking ? '' 
He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able to recall . 
Fortunately , the doctor had been warned , and he now made his appearance . 
He came to the aid of M. Madeleine . 
`` Calm yourself , my child , '' said the doctor ; `` your child is here . '' 
Fantine 's eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light . 
She clasped her hands with an expression which contained all that is possible to prayer in the way of violence and tenderness . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` bring her to me ! '' 
Touching illusion of a mother ! 
Cosette was , for her , still the little child who is carried . 
`` Not yet , '' said the doctor , `` not just now . 
You still have some fever . 
The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm . 
You must be cured first . '' 
She interrupted him impetuously : -- `` But I am cured ! 
Oh , I tell you that I am cured ! 
What an ass that doctor is ! 
The idea ! 
I want to see my child ! '' 
`` You see , '' said the doctor , `` how excited you become . 
So long as you are in this state I shall oppose your having your child . 
It is not enough to see her ; it is necessary that you should live for her . 
When you are reasonable , I will bring her to you myself . '' 
The poor mother bowed her head . 
`` I beg your pardon , doctor , I really beg your pardon . 
Formerly I should never have spoken as I have just done ; so many misfortunes have happened to me , that I sometimes do not know what I am saying . 
I understand you ; you fear the emotion . 
I will wait as long as you like , but I swear to you that it would not have harmed me to see my daughter . 
I have been seeing her ; I have not taken my eyes from her since yesterday evening . 
Do you know ? 
If she were brought to me now , I should talk to her very gently . 
That is all . 
Is it not quite natural that I should desire to see my daughter , who has been brought to me expressly from Montfermeil ? 
I am not angry . 
I know well that I am about to be happy . 
All night long I have seen white things , and persons who smiled at me . 
When Monsieur le Docteur pleases , he shall bring me Cosette . 
I have no longer any fever ; I am well . 
I am perfectly conscious that there is nothing the matter with me any more ; but I am going to behave as though I were ill , and not stir , to please these ladies here . 
When it is seen that I am very calm , they will say , ` She must have her child . ' '' 
M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed . 
