She inquired of Toussaint : -- `` Has my father returned yet ? '' 
`` Not yet , Mademoiselle . '' 
-LSB- We have already noted once for all the fact that Toussaint stuttered . 
May we be permitted to dispense with it for the future . 
The musical notation of an infirmity is repugnant to us . -RSB- 
Jean Valjean , a thoughtful man , and given to nocturnal strolls , often returned quite late at night . 
`` Toussaint , '' went on Cosette , `` are you careful to thoroughly barricade the shutters opening on the garden , at least with bars , in the evening , and to put the little iron things in the little rings that close them ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
be easy on that score , Miss. '' Toussaint did not fail in her duty , and Cosette was well aware of the fact , but she could not refrain from adding : -- `` It is so solitary here . '' 
`` So far as that is concerned , '' said Toussaint , `` it is true . 
We might be assassinated before we had time to say ouf ! 
And Monsieur does not sleep in the house , to boot . 
But fear nothing , Miss , I fasten the shutters up like prisons . 
Lone women ! 
That is enough to make one shudder , I believe you ! 
Just imagine , what if you were to see men enter your chamber at night and say : ` Hold your tongue ! ' 
and begin to cut your throat . 
It 's not the dying so much ; you die , for one must die , and that 's all right ; it 's the abomination of feeling those people touch you . 
And then , their knives ; they ca n't be able to cut well with them ! 
Ah , good gracious ! '' 
`` Be quiet , '' said Cosette . 
`` Fasten everything thoroughly . '' 
Cosette , terrified by the melodrama improvised by Toussaint , and possibly , also , by the recollection of the apparitions of the past week , which recurred to her memory , dared not even say to her : `` Go and look at the stone which has been placed on the bench ! '' 
for fear of opening the garden gate and allowing `` the men '' to enter . 
She saw that all the doors and windows were carefully fastened , made Toussaint go all over the house from garret to cellar , locked herself up in her own chamber , bolted her door , looked under her couch , went to bed and slept badly . 
All night long she saw that big stone , as large as a mountain and full of caverns . 
At sunrise , -- the property of the rising sun is to make us laugh at all our terrors of the past night , and our laughter is in direct proportion to our terror which they have caused , -- at sunrise Cosette , when she woke , viewed her fright as a nightmare , and said to herself : `` What have I been thinking of ? 
It is like the footsteps that I thought I heard a week or two ago in the garden at night ! 
It is like the shadow of the chimney-pot ! 
Am I becoming a coward ? '' 
The sun , which was glowing through the crevices in her shutters , and turning the damask curtains crimson , reassured her to such an extent that everything vanished from her thoughts , even the stone . 
`` There was no more a stone on the bench than there was a man in a round hat in the garden ; I dreamed about the stone , as I did all the rest . '' 
She dressed herself , descended to the garden , ran to the bench , and broke out in a cold perspiration . 
The stone was there . 
But this lasted only for a moment . 
That which is terror by night is curiosity by day . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she , `` come , let us see what it is . '' 
She lifted the stone , which was tolerably large . 
Beneath it was something which resembled a letter . 
It was a white envelope . 
Cosette seized it . 
There was no address on one side , no seal on the other . 
Yet the envelope , though unsealed , was not empty . 
Papers could be seen inside . 
Cosette examined it . 
It was no longer alarm , it was no longer curiosity ; it was a beginning of anxiety . 
Cosette drew from the envelope its contents , a little notebook of paper , each page of which was numbered and bore a few lines in a very fine and rather pretty handwriting , as Cosette thought . 
Cosette looked for a name ; there was none . 
To whom was this addressed ? 
To her , probably , since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench . 
From whom did it come ? 
An irresistible fascination took possession of her ; she tried to turn away her eyes from the leaflets which were trembling in her hand , she gazed at the sky , the street , the acacias all bathed in light , the pigeons fluttering over a neighboring roof , and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript , and she said to herself that she must know what it contained . 
This is what she read . 
A HEART BENEATH A STONE The reduction of the universe to a single being , the expansion of a single being even to God , that is love . 
Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars . 
How sad is the soul , when it is sad through love ! 
What a void in the absence of the being who , by herself alone fills the world ! 
Oh ! 
how true it is that the beloved being becomes God . 
One could comprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father of all evidently made creation for the soul , and the soul for love . 
The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilac curtain is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of dreams . 
God is behind everything , but everything hides God . 
Things are black , creatures are opaque . 
To love a being is to render that being transparent . 
Certain thoughts are prayers . 
There are moments when , whatever the attitude of the body may be , the soul is on its knees . 
Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices , which possess , however , a reality of their own . 
They are prevented from seeing each other , they can not write to each other ; they discover a multitude of mysterious means to correspond . 
They send each other the song of the birds , the perfume of the flowers , the smiles of children , the light of the sun , the sighings of the breeze , the rays of stars , all creation . 
And why not ? 
All the works of God are made to serve love . 
Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages . 
Oh Spring ! 
Thou art a letter that I write to her . 
The future belongs to hearts even more than it does to minds . 
Love , that is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity . 
In the infinite , the inexhaustible is requisite . 
Love participates of the soul itself . 
It is of the same nature . 
Like it , it is the divine spark ; like it , it is incorruptible , indivisible , imperishable . 
It is a point of fire that exists within us , which is immortal and infinite , which nothing can confine , and which nothing can extinguish . 
We feel it burning even to the very marrow of our bones , and we see it beaming in the very depths of heaven . 
Oh Love ! 
Adorations ! 
voluptuousness of two minds which understand each other , of two hearts which exchange with each other , of two glances which penetrate each other ! 
You will come to me , will you not , bliss ! 
strolls by twos in the solitudes ! 
Blessed and radiant days ! 
I have sometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves from the lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destinies of men . 
God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love , except to give them endless duration . 
After a life of love , an eternity of love is , in fact , an augmentation ; but to increase in intensity even the ineffable felicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world , is impossible , even to God . 
God is the plenitude of heaven ; love is the plenitude of man . 
You look at a star for two reasons , because it is luminous , and because it is impenetrable . 
You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a greater mystery , woman . 
All of us , whoever we may be , have our respirable beings . 
We lack air and we stifle . 
Then we die . 
To die for lack of love is horrible . 
Suffocation of the soul . 
When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic unity , the secret of life has been discovered so far as they are concerned ; they are no longer anything more than the two boundaries of the same destiny ; they are no longer anything but the two wings of the same spirit . 
Love , soar . 
On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as she walks , you are lost , you love . 
But one thing remains for you to do : to think of her so intently that she is constrained to think of you . 
What love commences can be finished by God alone . 
True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a handkerchief found , and eternity is required for its devotion and its hopes . 
It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely little . 
If you are a stone , be adamant ; if you are a plant , be the sensitive plant ; if you are a man , be love . 
Nothing suffices for love . 
We have happiness , we desire paradise ; we possess paradise , we desire heaven . 
Oh ye who love each other , all this is contained in love . 
Understand how to find it there . 
Love has contemplation as well as heaven , and more than heaven , it has voluptuousness . 
`` Does she still come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
`` No , sir . '' 
`` This is the church where she attends mass , is it not ? '' 
`` She no longer comes here . '' 
`` Does she still live in this house ? '' 
`` She has moved away . '' 
`` Where has she gone to dwell ? '' 
`` She did not say . '' 
What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one 's soul ! 
Love has its childishness , other passions have their pettinesses . 
Shame on the passions which belittle man ! 
Honor to the one which makes a child of him ! 
There is one strange thing , do you know it ? 
I dwell in the night . 
There is a being who carried off my sky when she went away . 
Oh ! 
would that we were lying side by side in the same grave , hand in hand , and from time to time , in the darkness , gently caressing a finger , -- that would suffice for my eternity ! 
Ye who suffer because ye love , love yet more . 
To die of love , is to live in it . 
Love . 
A sombre and starry transfiguration is mingled with this torture . 
There is ecstasy in agony . 
Oh joy of the birds ! 
It is because they have nests that they sing . 
Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise . 
Deep hearts , sage minds , take life as God has made it ; it is a long trial , an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny . 
This destiny , the true one , begins for a man with the first step inside the tomb . 
Then something appears to him , and he begins to distinguish the definitive . 
The definitive , meditate upon that word . 
The living perceive the infinite ; the definitive permits itself to be seen only by the dead . 
In the meanwhile , love and suffer , hope and contemplate . 
Woe , alas ! 
to him who shall have loved only bodies , forms , appearances ! 
Death will deprive him of all . 
Try to love souls , you will find them again . 
I encountered in the street , a very poor young man who was in love . 
His hat was old , his coat was worn , his elbows were in holes ; water trickled through his shoes , and the stars through his soul . 
What a grand thing it is to be loved ! 
What a far grander thing it is to love ! 
The heart becomes heroic , by dint of passion . 
It is no longer composed of anything but what is pure ; it no longer rests on anything that is not elevated and great . 
An unworthy thought can no more germinate in it , than a nettle on a glacier . 
The serene and lofty soul , inaccessible to vulgar passions and emotions , dominating the clouds and the shades of this world , its follies , its lies , its hatreds , its vanities , its miseries , inhabits the blue of heaven , and no longer feels anything but profound and subterranean shocks of destiny , as the crests of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake . 
If there did not exist some one who loved , the sun would become extinct . 
COSETTE AFTER THE LETTER As Cosette read , she gradually fell into thought . 
At the very moment when she raised her eyes from the last line of the note-book , the handsome officer passed triumphantly in front of the gate , -- it was his hour ; Cosette thought him hideous . 
She resumed her contemplation of the book . 
It was written in the most charming of chirography , thought Cosette ; in the same hand , but with divers inks , sometimes very black , again whitish , as when ink has been added to the inkstand , and consequently on different days . 
It was , then , a mind which had unfolded itself there , sigh by sigh , irregularly , without order , without choice , without object , hap-hazard . 
Cosette had never read anything like it . 
This manuscript , in which she already perceived more light than obscurity , produced upon her the effect of a half-open sanctuary . 
Each one of these mysterious lines shone before her eyes and inundated her heart with a strange radiance . 
The education which she had received had always talked to her of the soul , and never of love , very much as one might talk of the firebrand and not of the flame . 
This manuscript of fifteen pages suddenly and sweetly revealed to her all of love , sorrow , destiny , life , eternity , the beginning , the end . 
It was as if a hand had opened and suddenly flung upon her a handful of rays of light . 
In these few lines she felt a passionate , ardent , generous , honest nature , a sacred will , an immense sorrow , and an immense despair , a suffering heart , an ecstasy fully expanded . 
What was this manuscript ? 
A letter . 
A letter without name , without address , without date , without signature , pressing and disinterested , an enigma composed of truths , a message of love made to be brought by an angel and read by a virgin , an appointment made beyond the bounds of earth , the love-letter of a phantom to a shade . 
It was an absent one , tranquil and dejected , who seemed ready to take refuge in death and who sent to the absent love , his lady , the secret of fate , the key of life , love . 
This had been written with one foot in the grave and one finger in heaven . 
These lines , which had fallen one by one on the paper , were what might be called drops of soul . 
Now , from whom could these pages come ? 
Who could have penned them ? 
Cosette did not hesitate a moment . 
One man only . 
He ! 
Day had dawned once more in her spirit ; all had reappeared . 
She felt an unheard-of joy , and a profound anguish . 
It was he ! 
he who had written ! 
he was there ! 
it was he whose arm had been thrust through that railing ! 
While she was forgetful of him , he had found her again ! 
But had she forgotten him ? 
No , never ! 
She was foolish to have thought so for a single moment . 
She had always loved him , always adored him . 
The fire had been smothered , and had smouldered for a time , but she saw all plainly now ; it had but made headway , and now it had burst forth afresh , and had inflamed her whole being . 
This note-book was like a spark which had fallen from that other soul into hers . 
She felt the conflagration starting up once more . 
She imbued herself thoroughly with every word of the manuscript : `` Oh yes ! '' 
said she , `` how perfectly I recognize all that ! 
That is what I had already read in his eyes . '' 
As she was finishing it for the third time , Lieutenant Theodule passed the gate once more , and rattled his spurs upon the pavement . 
Cosette was forced to raise her eyes . 
She thought him insipid , silly , stupid , useless , foppish , displeasing , impertinent , and extremely ugly . 
The officer thought it his duty to smile at her . 
She turned away as in shame and indignation . 
She would gladly have thrown something at his head . 
She fled , re-entered the house , and shut herself up in her chamber to peruse the manuscript once more , to learn it by heart , and to dream . 
When she had thoroughly mastered it she kissed it and put it in her bosom . 
All was over , Cosette had fallen back into deep , seraphic love . 
The abyss of Eden had yawned once more . 
All day long , Cosette remained in a sort of bewilderment . 
She scarcely thought , her ideas were in the state of a tangled skein in her brain , she could not manage to conjecture anything , she hoped through a tremor , what ? 
vague things . 
She dared make herself no promises , and she did not wish to refuse herself anything . 
Flashes of pallor passed over her countenance , and shivers ran through her frame . 
It seemed to her , at intervals , that she was entering the land of chimaeras ; she said to herself : `` Is this reality ? '' 
Then she felt of the dear paper within her bosom under her gown , she pressed it to her heart , she felt its angles against her flesh ; and if Jean Valjean had seen her at the moment , he would have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown joy , which overflowed from beneath her eyelids . 
-- `` Oh yes ! '' 
she thought , `` it is certainly he ! 
This comes from him , and is for me ! '' 
And she told herself that an intervention of the angels , a celestial chance , had given him back to her . 
Oh transfiguration of love ! 
Oh dreams ! 
That celestial chance , that intervention of the angels , was a pellet of bread tossed by one thief to another thief , from the Charlemagne Courtyard to the Lion 's Ditch , over the roofs of La Force . 
OLD PEOPLE ARE MADE TO GO OUT OPPORTUNELY When evening came , Jean Valjean went out ; Cosette dressed herself . 
She arranged her hair in the most becoming manner , and she put on a dress whose bodice had received one snip of the scissors too much , and which , through this slope , permitted a view of the beginning of her throat , and was , as young girls say , `` a trifle indecent . '' 
It was not in the least indecent , but it was prettier than usual . 
She made her toilet thus without knowing why she did so . 
Did she mean to go out ? 
No . 
Was she expecting a visitor ? 
No . 
At dusk , she went down to the garden . 
Toussaint was busy in her kitchen , which opened on the back yard . 
She began to stroll about under the trees , thrusting aside the branches from time to time with her hand , because there were some which hung very low . 
In this manner she reached the bench . 
The stone was still there . 
She sat down , and gently laid her white hand on this stone as though she wished to caress and thank it . 
All at once , she experienced that indefinable impression which one undergoes when there is some one standing behind one , even when she does not see the person . 
She turned her head and rose to her feet . 
It was he . 
His head was bare . 
He appeared to have grown thin and pale . 
His black clothes were hardly discernible . 
The twilight threw a wan light on his fine brow , and covered his eyes in shadows . 
Beneath a veil of incomparable sweetness , he had something about him that suggested death and night . 
His face was illuminated by the light of the dying day , and by the thought of a soul that is taking flight . 
He seemed to be not yet a ghost , and he was no longer a man . 
He had flung away his hat in the thicket , a few paces distant . 
Cosette , though ready to swoon , uttered no cry . 
She retreated slowly , for she felt herself attracted . 
He did not stir . 
By virtue of something ineffable and melancholy which enveloped him , she felt the look in his eyes which she could not see . 
Cosette , in her retreat , encountered a tree and leaned against it . 
Had it not been for this tree , she would have fallen . 
Then she heard his voice , that voice which she had really never heard , barely rising above the rustle of the leaves , and murmuring : -- `` Pardon me , here I am . 
My heart is full . 
I could not live on as I was living , and I have come . 
Have you read what I placed there on the bench ? 
Do you recognize me at all ? 
Have no fear of me . 
It is a long time , you remember the day , since you looked at me at the Luxembourg , near the Gladiator . 
And the day when you passed before me ? 
It was on the 16th of June and the 2d of July . 
It is nearly a year ago . 
I have not seen you for a long time . 
I inquired of the woman who let the chairs , and she told me that she no longer saw you . 
You lived in the Rue de l'Ouest , on the third floor , in the front apartments of a new house , -- you see that I know ! 
I followed you . 
What else was there for me to do ? 
And then you disappeared . 
I thought I saw you pass once , while I was reading the newspapers under the arcade of the Odeon . 
I ran after you . 
But no . 
It was a person who had a bonnet like yours . 
At night I came hither . 
Do not be afraid , no one sees me . 
I come to gaze upon your windows near at hand . 
I walk very softly , so that you may not hear , for you might be alarmed . 
The other evening I was behind you , you turned round , I fled . 
Once , I heard you singing . 
I was happy . 
Did it affect you because I heard you singing through the shutters ? 
That could not hurt you . 
No , it is not so ? 
You see , you are my angel ! 
Let me come sometimes ; I think that I am going to die . 
If you only knew ! 
I adore you . 
Forgive me , I speak to you , but I do not know what I am saying ; I may have displeased you ; have I displeased you ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
my mother ! '' 
said she . 
And she sank down as though on the point of death . 
He grasped her , she fell , he took her in his arms , he pressed her close , without knowing what he was doing . 
He supported her , though he was tottering himself . 
It was as though his brain were full of smoke ; lightnings darted between his lips ; his ideas vanished ; it seemed to him that he was accomplishing some religious act , and that he was committing a profanation . 
Moreover , he had not the least passion for this lovely woman whose force he felt against his breast . 
He was beside himself with love . 
She took his hand and laid it on her heart . 
He felt the paper there , he stammered : -- `` You love me , then ? '' 
She replied in a voice so low that it was no longer anything more than a barely audible breath : -- `` Hush ! 
Thou knowest it ! '' 
And she hid her blushing face on the breast of the superb and intoxicated young man . 
He fell upon the bench , and she beside him . 
They had no words more . 
The stars were beginning to gleam . 
How did it come to pass that their lips met ? 
How comes it to pass that the birds sing , that snow melts , that the rose unfolds , that May expands , that the dawn grows white behind the black trees on the shivering crest of the hills ? 
A kiss , and that was all . 
Both started , and gazed into the darkness with sparkling eyes . 
They felt neither the cool night , nor the cold stone , nor the damp earth , nor the wet grass ; they looked at each other , and their hearts were full of thoughts . 
They had clasped hands unconsciously . 
She did not ask him , she did not even wonder , how he had entered there , and how he had made his way into the garden . 
It seemed so simple to her that he should be there ! 
From time to time , Marius ' knee touched Cosette 's knee , and both shivered . 
At intervals , Cosette stammered a word . 
Her soul fluttered on her lips like a drop of dew on a flower . 
Little by little they began to talk to each other . 
Effusion followed silence , which is fulness . 
The night was serene and splendid overhead . 
These two beings , pure as spirits , told each other everything , their dreams , their intoxications , their ecstasies , their chimaeras , their weaknesses , how they had adored each other from afar , how they had longed for each other , their despair when they had ceased to see each other . 
They confided to each other in an ideal intimacy , which nothing could augment , their most secret and most mysterious thoughts . 
They related to each other , with candid faith in their illusions , all that love , youth , and the remains of childhood which still lingered about them , suggested to their minds . 
Their two hearts poured themselves out into each other in such wise , that at the expiration of a quarter of an hour , it was the young man who had the young girl 's soul , and the young girl who had the young man 's soul . 
Each became permeated with the other , they were enchanted with each other , they dazzled each other . 
When they had finished , when they had told each other everything , she laid her head on his shoulder and asked him : -- `` What is your name ? '' 
`` My name is Marius , '' said he . 
`` And yours ? '' 
`` My name is Cosette . '' 
THE MALICIOUS PLAYFULNESS OF THE WIND Since 1823 , when the tavern of Montfermeil was on the way to shipwreck and was being gradually engulfed , not in the abyss of a bankruptcy , but in the cesspool of petty debts , the Thenardier pair had had two other children ; both males . 
That made five ; two girls and three boys . 
Madame Thenardier had got rid of the last two , while they were still young and very small , with remarkable luck . 
Got rid of is the word . 
There was but a mere fragment of nature in that woman . 
A phenomenon , by the way , of which there is more than one example extant . 
Like the Marechale de La Mothe-Houdancourt , the Thenardier was a mother to her daughters only . 
There her maternity ended . 
Her hatred of the human race began with her own sons . 
In the direction of her sons her evil disposition was uncompromising , and her heart had a lugubrious wall in that quarter . 
As the reader has seen , she detested the eldest ; she cursed the other two . 
Why ? 
Because . 
The most terrible of motives , the most unanswerable of retorts -- Because . 
`` I have no need of a litter of squalling brats , '' said this mother . 
Let us explain how the Thenardiers had succeeded in getting rid of their last two children ; and even in drawing profit from the operation . 
The woman Magnon , who was mentioned a few pages further back , was the same one who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the two children which she had had . 
She lived on the Quai des Celestins , at the corner of this ancient street of the Petit-Musc which afforded her the opportunity of changing her evil repute into good odor . 
The reader will remember the great epidemic of croup which ravaged the river districts of the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago , and of which science took advantage to make experiments on a grand scale as to the efficacy of inhalations of alum , so beneficially replaced at the present day by the external tincture of iodine . 
During this epidemic , the Magnon lost both her boys , who were still very young , one in the morning , the other in the evening of the same day . 
This was a blow . 
These children were precious to their mother ; they represented eighty francs a month . 
These eighty francs were punctually paid in the name of M. Gillenormand , by collector of his rents , M. Barge , a retired tip-staff , in the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile . 
The children dead , the income was at an end . 
The Magnon sought an expedient . 
In that dark free-masonry of evil of which she formed a part , everything is known , all secrets are kept , and all lend mutual aid . 
Magnon needed two children ; the Thenardiers had two . 
The same sex , the same age . 
A good arrangement for the one , a good investment for the other . 
The little Thenardiers became little Magnons . 
Magnon quitted the Quai des Celestins and went to live in the Rue Clocheperce . 
In Paris , the identity which binds an individual to himself is broken between one street and another . 
The registry office being in no way warned , raised no objections , and the substitution was effected in the most simple manner in the world . 
Only , the Thenardier exacted for this loan of her children , ten francs a month , which Magnon promised to pay , and which she actually did pay . 
It is unnecessary to add that M. Gillenormand continued to perform his compact . 
He came to see the children every six months . 
He did not perceive the change . 
`` Monsieur , '' Magnon said to him , `` how much they resemble you ! '' 
Thenardier , to whom avatars were easy , seized this occasion to become Jondrette . 
His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time to discover that they had two little brothers . 
When a certain degree of misery is reached , one is overpowered with a sort of spectral indifference , and one regards human beings as though they were spectres . 
Your nearest relations are often no more for you than vague shadowy forms , barely outlined against a nebulous background of life and easily confounded again with the invisible . 
On the evening of the day when she had handed over her two little ones to Magnon , with express intention of renouncing them forever , the Thenardier had felt , or had appeared to feel , a scruple . 
She said to her husband : `` But this is abandoning our children ! '' 
Thenardier , masterful and phlegmatic , cauterized the scruple with this saying : `` Jean Jacques Rousseau did even better ! '' 
From scruples , the mother proceeded to uneasiness : `` But what if the police were to annoy us ? 
Tell me , Monsieur Thenardier , is what we have done permissible ? '' 
Thenardier replied : `` Everything is permissible . 
No one will see anything but true blue in it . 
Besides , no one has any interest in looking closely after children who have not a sou . '' 
Magnon was a sort of fashionable woman in the sphere of crime . 
She was careful about her toilet . 
She shared her lodgings , which were furnished in an affected and wretched style , with a clever gallicized English thief . 
This English woman , who had become a naturalized Parisienne , recommended by very wealthy relations , intimately connected with the medals in the Library and Mademoiselle Mar 's diamonds , became celebrated later on in judicial accounts . 
She was called Mamselle Miss. . 
The two little creatures who had fallen to Magnon had no reason to complain of their lot . 
Recommended by the eighty francs , they were well cared for , as is everything from which profit is derived ; they were neither badly clothed , nor badly fed ; they were treated almost like `` little gentlemen , '' -- better by their false mother than by their real one . 
Magnon played the lady , and talked no thieves ' slang in their presence . 
Thus passed several years . 
Thenardier augured well from the fact . 
One day , he chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipend of ten francs : `` The father must give them some education . '' 
All at once , these two poor children , who had up to that time been protected tolerably well , even by their evil fate , were abruptly hurled into life and forced to begin it for themselves . 
A wholesale arrest of malefactors , like that in the Jondrette garret , necessarily complicated by investigations and subsequent incarcerations , is a veritable disaster for that hideous and occult counter-society which pursues its existence beneath public society ; an adventure of this description entails all sorts of catastrophes in that sombre world . 
The Thenardier catastrophe involved the catastrophe of Magnon . 
One day , a short time after Magnon had handed to Eponine the note relating to the Rue Plumet , a sudden raid was made by the police in the Rue Clocheperce ; Magnon was seized , as was also Mamselle Miss ; and all the inhabitants of the house , which was of a suspicious character , were gathered into the net . 
While this was going on , the two little boys were playing in the back yard , and saw nothing of the raid . 
When they tried to enter the house again , they found the door fastened and the house empty . 
A cobbler opposite called them to him , and delivered to them a paper which `` their mother '' had left for them . 
On this paper there was an address : M. Barge , collector of rents , Rue du Roi-de-Sicile , No. 8 . 
The proprietor of the stall said to them : `` You can not live here any longer . 
Go there . 
It is near by . 
The first street on the left . 
Ask your way from this paper . '' 
The children set out , the elder leading the younger , and holding in his hand the paper which was to guide them . 
It was cold , and his benumbed little fingers could not close very firmly , and they did not keep a very good hold on the paper . 
At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce , a gust of wind tore it from him , and as night was falling , the child was not able to find it again . 
They began to wander aimlessly through the streets . 
IN WHICH LITTLE GAVROCHE EXTRACTS PROFIT FROM NAPOLEON THE GREAT Spring in Paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes which do not precisely chill but freeze one ; these north winds which sadden the most beautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs of cold air which enter a warm room through the cracks of a badly fitting door or window . 
It seems as though the gloomy door of winter had remained ajar , and as though the wind were pouring through it . 
In the spring of 1832 , the epoch when the first great epidemic of this century broke out in Europe , these north gales were more harsh and piercing than ever . 
It was a door even more glacial than that of winter which was ajar . 
It was the door of the sepulchre . 
In these winds one felt the breath of the cholera . 
From a meteorological point of view , these cold winds possessed this peculiarity , that they did not preclude a strong electric tension . 
Frequent storms , accompanied by thunder and lightning , burst forth at this epoch . 
One evening , when these gales were blowing rudely , to such a degree that January seemed to have returned and that the bourgeois had resumed their cloaks , Little Gavroche , who was always shivering gayly under his rags , was standing as though in ecstasy before a wig-maker 's shop in the vicinity of the Orme-Saint-Gervais . 
He was adorned with a woman 's woollen shawl , picked up no one knows where , and which he had converted into a neck comforter . 
Little Gavroche appeared to be engaged in intent admiration of a wax bride , in a low-necked dress , and crowned with orange-flowers , who was revolving in the window , and displaying her smile to passers-by , between two argand lamps ; but in reality , he was taking an observation of the shop , in order to discover whether he could not `` prig '' from the shop-front a cake of soap , which he would then proceed to sell for a sou to a `` hair-dresser '' in the suburbs . 
He had often managed to breakfast off of such a roll . 
He called his species of work , for which he possessed special aptitude , `` shaving barbers . '' 
While contemplating the bride , and eyeing the cake of soap , he muttered between his teeth : `` Tuesday . 
It was not Tuesday . 
Was it Tuesday ? 
Perhaps it was Tuesday . 
Yes , it was Tuesday . '' 
No one has ever discovered to what this monologue referred . 
Yes , perchance , this monologue had some connection with the last occasion on which he had dined , three days before , for it was now Friday . 
The barber in his shop , which was warmed by a good stove , was shaving a customer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy , that freezing and impudent street urchin both of whose hands were in his pockets , but whose mind was evidently unsheathed . 
While Gavroche was scrutinizing the shop-window and the cakes of windsor soap , two children of unequal stature , very neatly dressed , and still smaller than himself , one apparently about seven years of age , the other five , timidly turned the handle and entered the shop , with a request for something or other , alms possibly , in a plaintive murmur which resembled a groan rather than a prayer . 
They both spoke at once , and their words were unintelligible because sobs broke the voice of the younger , and the teeth of the elder were chattering with cold . 
The barber wheeled round with a furious look , and without abandoning his razor , thrust back the elder with his left hand and the younger with his knee , and slammed his door , saying : `` The idea of coming in and freezing everybody for nothing ! '' 
The two children resumed their march in tears . 
In the meantime , a cloud had risen ; it had begun to rain . 
Little Gavroche ran after them and accosted them : -- `` What 's the matter with you , brats ? '' 
`` We do n't know where we are to sleep , '' replied the elder . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` A great matter , truly . 
The idea of bawling about that . 
They must be greenies ! '' 
And adopting , in addition to his superiority , which was rather bantering , an accent of tender authority and gentle patronage : -- `` Come along with me , young ` uns ! '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the elder . 
And the two children followed him as they would have followed an archbishop . 
They had stopped crying . 
Gavroche led them up the Rue Saint-Antoine in the direction of the Bastille . 
As Gavroche walked along , he cast an indignant backward glance at the barber 's shop . 
`` That fellow has no heart , the whiting , '' -LSB- 35 -RSB- he muttered . 
`` He 's an Englishman . '' 
-LSB- 35 -RSB- Merlan : a sobriquet given to hairdressers because they are white with powder . 
A woman who caught sight of these three marching in a file , with Gavroche at their head , burst into noisy laughter . 
This laugh was wanting in respect towards the group . 
`` Good day , Mamselle Omnibus , '' said Gavroche to her . 
An instant later , the wig-maker occurred to his mind once more , and he added : -- `` I am making a mistake in the beast ; he 's not a whiting , he 's a serpent . 
Barber , I 'll go and fetch a locksmith , and I 'll have a bell hung to your tail . '' 
This wig-maker had rendered him aggressive . 
As he strode over a gutter , he apostrophized a bearded portress who was worthy to meet Faust on the Brocken , and who had a broom in her hand . 
`` Madam , '' said he , `` so you are going out with your horse ? '' 
And thereupon , he spattered the polished boots of a pedestrian . 
`` You scamp ! '' 
shouted the furious pedestrian . 
Gavroche elevated his nose above his shawl . 
`` Is Monsieur complaining ? '' 
`` Of you ! '' 
ejaculated the man . 
`` The office is closed , '' said Gavroche , `` I do not receive any more complaints . '' 
In the meanwhile , as he went on up the street , he perceived a beggar-girl , thirteen or fourteen years old , and clad in so short a gown that her knees were visible , lying thoroughly chilled under a porte-cochere . 
The little girl was getting to be too old for such a thing . 
Growth does play these tricks . 
The petticoat becomes short at the moment when nudity becomes indecent . 
`` Poor girl ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` She has n't even trousers . 
Hold on , take this . '' 
And unwinding all the comfortable woollen which he had around his neck , he flung it on the thin and purple shoulders of the beggar-girl , where the scarf became a shawl once more . 
The child stared at him in astonishment , and received the shawl in silence . 
When a certain stage of distress has been reached in his misery , the poor man no longer groans over evil , no longer returns thanks for good . 
That done : `` Brrr ! '' 
said Gavroche , who was shivering more than Saint Martin , for the latter retained one-half of his cloak . 
At this brrr ! 
the downpour of rain , redoubled in its spite , became furious . 
The wicked skies punish good deeds . 
`` Ah , come now ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche , `` what 's the meaning of this ? 
It 's re-raining ! 
Good Heavens , if it goes on like this , I shall stop my subscription . '' 
And he set out on the march once more . 
`` It 's all right , '' he resumed , casting a glance at the beggar-girl , as she coiled up under the shawl , `` she 's got a famous peel . '' 
And looking up at the clouds he exclaimed : -- `` Caught ! '' 
The two children followed close on his heels . 
As they were passing one of these heavy grated lattices , which indicate a baker 's shop , for bread is put behind bars like gold , Gavroche turned round : -- `` Ah , by the way , brats , have we dined ? '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the elder , `` we have had nothing to eat since this morning . '' 
`` So you have neither father nor mother ? '' 
resumed Gavroche majestically . 
`` Excuse us , sir , we have a papa and a mamma , but we do n't know where they are . '' 
`` Sometimes that 's better than knowing where they are , '' said Gavroche , who was a thinker . 
`` We have been wandering about these two hours , '' continued the elder , `` we have hunted for things at the corners of the streets , but we have found nothing . '' 
`` I know , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` it 's the dogs who eat everything . '' 
He went on , after a pause : -- `` Ah ! 
we have lost our authors . 
We do n't know what we have done with them . 
This should not be , gamins . 
It 's stupid to let old people stray off like that . 
Come now ! 
we must have a snooze all the same . '' 
However , he asked them no questions . 
What was more simple than that they should have no dwelling place ! 
The elder of the two children , who had almost entirely recovered the prompt heedlessness of childhood , uttered this exclamation : -- `` It 's queer , all the same . 
Mamma told us that she would take us to get a blessed spray on Palm Sunday . '' 
`` Bosh , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Mamma , '' resumed the elder , `` is a lady who lives with Mamselle Miss. '' `` Tanflute ! '' 
retorted Gavroche . 
Meanwhile he had halted , and for the last two minutes he had been feeling and fumbling in all sorts of nooks which his rags contained . 
At last he tossed his head with an air intended to be merely satisfied , but which was triumphant , in reality . 
`` Let us be calm , young ` uns . 
Here 's supper for three . '' 
And from one of his pockets he drew forth a sou . 
Without allowing the two urchins time for amazement , he pushed both of them before him into the baker 's shop , and flung his sou on the counter , crying : -- `` Boy ! 
five centimes ' worth of bread . '' 
The baker , who was the proprietor in person , took up a loaf and a knife . 
`` In three pieces , my boy ! '' 
went on Gavroche . 
And he added with dignity : -- `` There are three of us . '' 
And seeing that the baker , after scrutinizing the three customers , had taken down a black loaf , he thrust his finger far up his nose with an inhalation as imperious as though he had had a pinch of the great Frederick 's snuff on the tip of his thumb , and hurled this indignant apostrophe full in the baker 's face : -- `` Keksekca ? '' 
Those of our readers who might be tempted to espy in this interpellation of Gavroche 's to the baker a Russian or a Polish word , or one of those savage cries which the Yoways and the Botocudos hurl at each other from bank to bank of a river , athwart the solitudes , are warned that it is a word which they -LSB- our readers -RSB- utter every day , and which takes the place of the phrase : `` Qu'est - ce que c'est que cela ? '' 
The baker understood perfectly , and replied : -- `` Well ! 
It 's bread , and very good bread of the second quality . '' 
`` You mean larton brutal -LSB- black bread -RSB- ! '' 
retorted Gavroche , calmly and coldly disdainful . 
`` White bread , boy ! 
white bread -LSB- larton savonne -RSB- ! 
I 'm standing treat . '' 
The baker could not repress a smile , and as he cut the white bread he surveyed them in a compassionate way which shocked Gavroche . 
`` Come , now , baker 's boy ! '' 
said he , `` what are you taking our measure like that for ? '' 
All three of them placed end to end would have hardly made a measure . 
When the bread was cut , the baker threw the sou into his drawer , and Gavroche said to the two children : -- `` Grub away . '' 
The little boys stared at him in surprise . 
Gavroche began to laugh . 
`` Ah ! 
hullo , that 's so ! 
they do n't understand yet , they 're too small . '' 
And he repeated : -- `` Eat away . '' 
At the same time , he held out a piece of bread to each of them . 
And thinking that the elder , who seemed to him the more worthy of his conversation , deserved some special encouragement and ought to be relieved from all hesitation to satisfy his appetite , he added , as be handed him the largest share : -- `` Ram that into your muzzle . '' 
One piece was smaller than the others ; he kept this for himself . 
The poor children , including Gavroche , were famished . 
As they tore their bread apart in big mouthfuls , they blocked up the shop of the baker , who , now that they had paid their money , looked angrily at them . 
`` Let 's go into the street again , '' said Gavroche . 
They set off once more in the direction of the Bastille . 
From time to time , as they passed the lighted shop-windows , the smallest halted to look at the time on a leaden watch which was suspended from his neck by a cord . 
`` Well , he is a very green ` un , '' said Gavroche . 
Then , becoming thoughtful , he muttered between his teeth : -- `` All the same , if I had charge of the babes I 'd lock 'em up better than that . '' 
Just as they were finishing their morsel of bread , and had reached the angle of that gloomy Rue des Ballets , at the other end of which the low and threatening wicket of La Force was visible : -- `` Hullo , is that you , Gavroche ? '' 
said some one . 
`` Hullo , is that you , Montparnasse ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
A man had just accosted the street urchin , and the man was no other than Montparnasse in disguise , with blue spectacles , but recognizable to Gavroche . 
`` The bow-wows ! '' 
went on Gavroche , `` you 've got a hide the color of a linseed plaster , and blue specs like a doctor . 
You 're putting on style , ` pon my word ! '' 
`` Hush ! '' 
ejaculated Montparnasse , `` not so loud . '' 
And he drew Gavroche hastily out of range of the lighted shops . 
The two little ones followed mechanically , holding each other by the hand . 
When they were ensconced under the arch of a portecochere , sheltered from the rain and from all eyes : -- `` Do you know where I 'm going ? '' 
demanded Montparnasse . 
`` To the Abbey of Ascend-with-Regret , '' -LSB- 36 -RSB- replied Gavroche . 
-LSB- 36 -RSB- The scaffold . 
`` Joker ! '' 
And Montparnasse went on : -- `` I 'm going to find Babet . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche , `` so her name is Babet . '' 
Montparnasse lowered his voice : -- `` Not she , he . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Babet . '' 
`` Yes , Babet . '' 
`` I thought he was buckled . '' 
`` He has undone the buckle , '' replied Montparnasse . 
And he rapidly related to the gamin how , on the morning of that very day , Babet , having been transferred to La Conciergerie , had made his escape , by turning to the left instead of to the right in `` the police office . '' 
Gavroche expressed his admiration for this skill . 
`` What a dentist ! '' 
he cried . 
Montparnasse added a few details as to Babet 's flight , and ended with : -- `` Oh ! 
That 's not all . '' 
Gavroche , as he listened , had seized a cane that Montparnasse held in his hand , and mechanically pulled at the upper part , and the blade of a dagger made its appearance . 
`` Ah ! '' 
he exclaimed , pushing the dagger back in haste , `` you have brought along your gendarme disguised as a bourgeois . '' 
Montparnasse winked . 
`` The deuce ! '' 
resumed Gavroche , `` so you 're going to have a bout with the bobbies ? '' 
`` You ca n't tell , '' replied Montparnasse with an indifferent air . 
`` It 's always a good thing to have a pin about one . '' 
Gavroche persisted : -- `` What are you up to to-night ? '' 
Again Montparnasse took a grave tone , and said , mouthing every syllable : `` Things . '' 
And abruptly changing the conversation : -- `` By the way ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Something happened t ` other day . 
Fancy . 
I meet a bourgeois . 
He makes me a present of a sermon and his purse . 
I put it in my pocket . 
A minute later , I feel in my pocket . 
There 's nothing there . '' 
`` Except the sermon , '' said Gavroche . 
`` But you , '' went on Montparnasse , `` where are you bound for now ? '' 
Gavroche pointed to his two proteges , and said : -- `` I 'm going to put these infants to bed . '' 
`` Whereabouts is the bed ? '' 
`` At my house . '' 
`` Where 's your house ? '' 
`` At my house . '' 
`` So you have a lodging ? '' 
`` Yes , I have . '' 
`` And where is your lodging ? '' 
`` In the elephant , '' said Gavroche . 
Montparnasse , though not naturally inclined to astonishment , could not restrain an exclamation . 
`` In the elephant ! '' 
`` Well , yes , in the elephant ! '' 
retorted Gavroche . 
`` Kekcaa ? '' 
This is another word of the language which no one writes , and which every one speaks . 
Kekcaa signifies : Quest que c'est que cela a ? 
-LSB- What 's the matter with that ? -RSB- 
The urchin 's profound remark recalled Montparnasse to calmness and good sense . 
He appeared to return to better sentiments with regard to Gavroche 's lodging . 
`` Of course , '' said he , `` yes , the elephant . 
Is it comfortable there ? '' 
`` Very , '' said Gavroche . 
`` It 's really bully there . 
There ai n't any draughts , as there are under the bridges . '' 
`` How do you get in ? '' 
`` Oh , I get in . '' 
`` So there is a hole ? '' 
demanded Montparnasse . 
`` Parbleu ! 
I should say so . 
But you must n't tell . 
It 's between the fore legs . 
The bobbies have n't seen it . '' 
`` And you climb up ? 
Yes , I understand . '' 
`` A turn of the hand , cric , crac , and it 's all over , no one there . '' 
After a pause , Gavroche added : -- `` I shall have a ladder for these children . '' 
Montparnasse burst out laughing : -- `` Where the devil did you pick up those young ` uns ? '' 
Gavroche replied with great simplicity : -- `` They are some brats that a wig-maker made me a present of . '' 
Meanwhile , Montparnasse had fallen to thinking : -- `` You recognized me very readily , '' he muttered . 
He took from his pocket two small objects which were nothing more than two quills wrapped in cotton , and thrust one up each of his nostrils . 
This gave him a different nose . 
`` That changes you , '' remarked Gavroche , `` you are less homely so , you ought to keep them on all the time . '' 
Montparnasse was a handsome fellow , but Gavroche was a tease . 
`` Seriously , '' demanded Montparnasse , `` how do you like me so ? '' 
The sound of his voice was different also . 
In a twinkling , Montparnasse had become unrecognizable . 
`` Oh ! 
Do play Porrichinelle for us ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche . 
The two children , who had not been listening up to this point , being occupied themselves in thrusting their fingers up their noses , drew near at this name , and stared at Montparnasse with dawning joy and admiration . 
Unfortunately , Montparnasse was troubled . 
He laid his hand on Gavroche 's shoulder , and said to him , emphasizing his words : `` Listen to what I tell you , boy ! 
if I were on the square with my dog , my knife , and my wife , and if you were to squander ten sous on me , I would n't refuse to work , but this is n't Shrove Tuesday . '' 
This odd phrase produced a singular effect on the gamin . 
He wheeled round hastily , darted his little sparkling eyes about him with profound attention , and perceived a police sergeant standing with his back to them a few paces off . 
Gavroche allowed an : `` Ah ! 
good ! '' 
to escape him , but immediately suppressed it , and shaking Montparnasse 's hand : -- `` Well , good evening , '' said he , `` I 'm going off to my elephant with my brats . 
Supposing that you should need me some night , you can come and hunt me up there . 
I lodge on the entresol . 
There is no porter . 
You will inquire for Monsieur Gavroche . '' 
`` Very good , '' said Montparnasse . 
And they parted , Montparnasse betaking himself in the direction of the Greve , and Gavroche towards the Bastille . 
The little one of five , dragged along by his brother who was dragged by Gavroche , turned his head back several times to watch `` Porrichinelle '' as he went . 
The ambiguous phrase by means of which Montparnasse had warned Gavroche of the presence of the policeman , contained no other talisman than the assonance dig repeated five or six times in different forms . 
This syllable , dig , uttered alone or artistically mingled with the words of a phrase , means : `` Take care , we can no longer talk freely . '' 
There was besides , in Montparnasse 's sentence , a literary beauty which was lost upon Gavroche , that is mon dogue , ma dague et ma digue , a slang expression of the Temple , which signifies my dog , my knife , and my wife , greatly in vogue among clowns and the red-tails in the great century when Moliere wrote and Callot drew . 
Twenty years ago , there was still to be seen in the southwest corner of the Place de la Bastille , near the basin of the canal , excavated in the ancient ditch of the fortress-prison , a singular monument , which has already been effaced from the memories of Parisians , and which deserved to leave some trace , for it was the idea of a `` member of the Institute , the General-in-chief of the army of Egypt . '' 
We say monument , although it was only a rough model . 
But this model itself , a marvellous sketch , the grandiose skeleton of an idea of Napoleon 's , which successive gusts of wind have carried away and thrown , on each occasion , still further from us , had become historical and had acquired a certain definiteness which contrasted with its provisional aspect . 
It was an elephant forty feet high , constructed of timber and masonry , bearing on its back a tower which resembled a house , formerly painted green by some dauber , and now painted black by heaven , the wind , and time . 
In this deserted and unprotected corner of the place , the broad brow of the colossus , his trunk , his tusks , his tower , his enormous crupper , his four feet , like columns produced , at night , under the starry heavens , a surprising and terrible form . 
It was a sort of symbol of popular force . 
It was sombre , mysterious , and immense . 
It was some mighty , visible phantom , one knew not what , standing erect beside the invisible spectre of the Bastille . 
Few strangers visited this edifice , no passer-by looked at it . 
It was falling into ruins ; every season the plaster which detached itself from its sides formed hideous wounds upon it . 
`` The aediles , '' as the expression ran in elegant dialect , had forgotten it ever since 1814 . 
There it stood in its corner , melancholy , sick , crumbling , surrounded by a rotten palisade , soiled continually by drunken coachmen ; cracks meandered athwart its belly , a lath projected from its tail , tall grass flourished between its legs ; and , as the level of the place had been rising all around it for a space of thirty years , by that slow and continuous movement which insensibly elevates the soil of large towns , it stood in a hollow , and it looked as though the ground were giving way beneath it . 
It was unclean , despised , repulsive , and superb , ugly in the eyes of the bourgeois , melancholy in the eyes of the thinker . 
There was something about it of the dirt which is on the point of being swept out , and something of the majesty which is on the point of being decapitated . 
As we have said , at night , its aspect changed . 
Night is the real element of everything that is dark . 
As soon as twilight descended , the old elephant became transfigured ; he assumed a tranquil and redoubtable appearance in the formidable serenity of the shadows . 
Being of the past , he belonged to night ; and obscurity was in keeping with his grandeur . 
This rough , squat , heavy , hard , austere , almost misshapen , but assuredly majestic monument , stamped with a sort of magnificent and savage gravity , has disappeared , and left to reign in peace , a sort of gigantic stove , ornamented with its pipe , which has replaced the sombre fortress with its nine towers , very much as the bourgeoisie replaces the feudal classes . 
It is quite natural that a stove should be the symbol of an epoch in which a pot contains power . 
This epoch will pass away , people have already begun to understand that , if there can be force in a boiler , there can be no force except in the brain ; in other words , that which leads and drags on the world , is not locomotives , but ideas . 
Harness locomotives to ideas , -- that is well done ; but do not mistake the horse for the rider . 
At all events , to return to the Place de la Bastille , the architect of this elephant succeeded in making a grand thing out of plaster ; the architect of the stove has succeeded in making a pretty thing out of bronze . 
This stove-pipe , which has been baptized by a sonorous name , and called the column of July , this monument of a revolution that miscarried , was still enveloped in 1832 , in an immense shirt of woodwork , which we regret , for our part , and by a vast plank enclosure , which completed the task of isolating the elephant . 
It was towards this corner of the place , dimly lighted by the reflection of a distant street lamp , that the gamin guided his two `` brats . '' 
The reader must permit us to interrupt ourselves here and to remind him that we are dealing with simple reality , and that twenty years ago , the tribunals were called upon to judge , under the charge of vagabondage , and mutilation of a public monument , a child who had been caught asleep in this very elephant of the Bastille . 
This fact noted , we proceed . 
On arriving in the vicinity of the colossus , Gavroche comprehended the effect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitely small , and said : -- `` Do n't be scared , infants . '' 
Then he entered through a gap in the fence into the elephant 's enclosure and helped the young ones to clamber through the breach . 
The two children , somewhat frightened , followed Gavroche without uttering a word , and confided themselves to this little Providence in rags which had given them bread and had promised them a shelter . 
There , extended along the fence , lay a ladder which by day served the laborers in the neighboring timber-yard . 
Gavroche raised it with remarkable vigor , and placed it against one of the elephant 's forelegs . 
Near the point where the ladder ended , a sort of black hole in the belly of the colossus could be distinguished . 
Gavroche pointed out the ladder and the hole to his guests , and said to them : -- `` Climb up and go in . '' 
The two little boys exchanged terrified glances . 
`` You 're afraid , brats ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche . 
And he added : -- `` You shall see ! '' 
He clasped the rough leg of the elephant , and in a twinkling , without deigning to make use of the ladder , he had reached the aperture . 
He entered it as an adder slips through a crevice , and disappeared within , and an instant later , the two children saw his head , which looked pale , appear vaguely , on the edge of the shadowy hole , like a wan and whitish spectre . 
`` Well ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` climb up , young ` uns ! 
You 'll see how snug it is here ! 
Come up , you ! '' 
he said to the elder , `` I 'll lend you a hand . '' 
The little fellows nudged each other , the gamin frightened and inspired them with confidence at one and the same time , and then , it was raining very hard . 
The elder one undertook the risk . 
The younger , on seeing his brother climbing up , and himself left alone between the paws of this huge beast , felt greatly inclined to cry , but he did not dare . 
The elder lad climbed , with uncertain steps , up the rungs of the ladder ; Gavroche , in the meanwhile , encouraging him with exclamations like a fencing-master to his pupils , or a muleteer to his mules . 
`` Do n't be afraid ! 
-- That 's it ! 
-- Come on ! 
-- Put your feet there ! 
-- Give us your hand here ! 
-- Boldly ! '' 
And when the child was within reach , he seized him suddenly and vigorously by the arm , and pulled him towards him . 
`` Nabbed ! '' 
said he . 
The brat had passed through the crack . 
`` Now , '' said Gavroche , `` wait for me . 
Be so good as to take a seat , Monsieur . '' 
And making his way out of the hole as he had entered it , he slipped down the elephant 's leg with the agility of a monkey , landed on his feet in the grass , grasped the child of five round the body , and planted him fairly in the middle of the ladder , then he began to climb up behind him , shouting to the elder : -- `` I 'm going to boost him , do you tug . '' 
And in another instant , the small lad was pushed , dragged , pulled , thrust , stuffed into the hole , before he had time to recover himself , and Gavroche , entering behind him , and repulsing the ladder with a kick which sent it flat on the grass , began to clap his hands and to cry : -- `` Here we are ! 
Long live General Lafayette ! '' 
This explosion over , he added : -- `` Now , young ` uns , you are in my house . '' 
Gavroche was at home , in fact . 
Oh , unforeseen utility of the useless ! 
Charity of great things ! 
Goodness of giants ! 
This huge monument , which had embodied an idea of the Emperor 's , had become the box of a street urchin . 
The brat had been accepted and sheltered by the colossus . 
The bourgeois decked out in their Sunday finery who passed the elephant of the Bastille , were fond of saying as they scanned it disdainfully with their prominent eyes : `` What 's the good of that ? '' 
It served to save from the cold , the frost , the hail , and rain , to shelter from the winds of winter , to preserve from slumber in the mud which produces fever , and from slumber in the snow which produces death , a little being who had no father , no mother , no bread , no clothes , no refuge . 
It served to receive the innocent whom society repulsed . 
It served to diminish public crime . 
It was a lair open to one against whom all doors were shut . 
It seemed as though the miserable old mastodon , invaded by vermin and oblivion , covered with warts , with mould , and ulcers , tottering , worm-eaten , abandoned , condemned , a sort of mendicant colossus , asking alms in vain with a benevolent look in the midst of the cross-roads , had taken pity on that other mendicant , the poor pygmy , who roamed without shoes to his feet , without a roof over his head , blowing on his fingers , clad in rags , fed on rejected scraps . 
That was what the elephant of the Bastille was good for . 
This idea of Napoleon , disdained by men , had been taken back by God . 
That which had been merely illustrious , had become august . 
In order to realize his thought , the Emperor should have had porphyry , brass , iron , gold , marble ; the old collection of planks , beams and plaster sufficed for God . 
The Emperor had had the dream of a genius ; in that Titanic elephant , armed , prodigious , with trunk uplifted , bearing its tower and scattering on all sides its merry and vivifying waters , he wished to incarnate the people . 
God had done a grander thing with it , he had lodged a child there . 
The hole through which Gavroche had entered was a breach which was hardly visible from the outside , being concealed , as we have stated , beneath the elephant 's belly , and so narrow that it was only cats and homeless children who could pass through it . 
`` Let 's begin , '' said Gavroche , `` by telling the porter that we are not at home . '' 
And plunging into the darkness with the assurance of a person who is well acquainted with his apartments , he took a plank and stopped up the aperture . 
Again Gavroche plunged into the obscurity . 
The children heard the crackling of the match thrust into the phosphoric bottle . 
The chemical match was not yet in existence ; at that epoch the Fumade steel represented progress . 
A sudden light made them blink ; Gavroche had just managed to ignite one of those bits of cord dipped in resin which are called cellar rats . 
The cellar rat , which emitted more smoke than light , rendered the interior of the elephant confusedly visible . 
Gavroche 's two guests glanced about them , and the sensation which they experienced was something like that which one would feel if shut up in the great tun of Heidelberg , or , better still , like what Jonah must have felt in the biblical belly of the whale . 
An entire and gigantic skeleton appeared enveloping them . 
Above , a long brown beam , whence started at regular distances , massive , arching ribs , represented the vertebral column with its sides , stalactites of plaster depended from them like entrails , and vast spiders ' webs stretching from side to side , formed dirty diaphragms . 
Here and there , in the corners , were visible large blackish spots which had the appearance of being alive , and which changed places rapidly with an abrupt and frightened movement . 
Fragments which had fallen from the elephant 's back into his belly had filled up the cavity , so that it was possible to walk upon it as on a floor . 
The smaller child nestled up against his brother , and whispered to him : -- `` It 's black . '' 
This remark drew an exclamation from Gavroche . 
The petrified air of the two brats rendered some shock necessary . 
`` What 's that you are gabbling about there ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Are you scoffing at me ? 
Are you turning up your noses ? 
Do you want the tuileries ? 
Are you brutes ? 
Come , say ! 
I warn you that I do n't belong to the regiment of simpletons . 
Ah , come now , are you brats from the Pope 's establishment ? '' 
A little roughness is good in cases of fear . 
It is reassuring . 
The two children drew close to Gavroche . 
Gavroche , paternally touched by this confidence , passed from grave to gentle , and addressing the smaller : -- `` Stupid , '' said he , accenting the insulting word , with a caressing intonation , `` it 's outside that it is black . 
Outside it 's raining , here it does not rain ; outside it 's cold , here there 's not an atom of wind ; outside there are heaps of people , here there 's no one ; outside there ai n't even the moon , here there 's my candle , confound it ! '' 
The two children began to look upon the apartment with less terror ; but Gavroche allowed them no more time for contemplation . 
`` Quick , '' said he . 
And he pushed them towards what we are very glad to be able to call the end of the room . 
There stood his bed . 
Gavroche 's bed was complete ; that is to say , it had a mattress , a blanket , and an alcove with curtains . 
The mattress was a straw mat , the blanket a rather large strip of gray woollen stuff , very warm and almost new . 
This is what the alcove consisted of : -- Three rather long poles , thrust into and consolidated , with the rubbish which formed the floor , that is to say , the belly of the elephant , two in front and one behind , and united by a rope at their summits , so as to form a pyramidal bundle . 
This cluster supported a trellis-work of brass wire which was simply placed upon it , but artistically applied , and held by fastenings of iron wire , so that it enveloped all three holes . 
A row of very heavy stones kept this network down to the floor so that nothing could pass under it . 
This grating was nothing else than a piece of the brass screens with which aviaries are covered in menageries . 
Gavroche 's bed stood as in a cage , behind this net . 
The whole resembled an Esquimaux tent . 
This trellis-work took the place of curtains . 
Gavroche moved aside the stones which fastened the net down in front , and the two folds of the net which lapped over each other fell apart . 
`` Down on all fours , brats ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
He made his guests enter the cage with great precaution , then he crawled in after them , pulled the stones together , and closed the opening hermetically again . 
All three had stretched out on the mat . 
Gavroche still had the cellar rat in his hand . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` go to sleep ! 
I 'm going to suppress the candelabra . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' the elder of the brothers asked Gavroche , pointing to the netting , `` what 's that for ? '' 
`` That , '' answered Gavroche gravely , `` is for the rats . 
Go to sleep ! '' 
Nevertheless , he felt obliged to add a few words of instruction for the benefit of these young creatures , and he continued : -- `` It 's a thing from the Jardin des Plantes . 
It 's used for fierce animals . 
There 's a whole shopful of them there . 
All you 've got to do is to climb over a wall , crawl through a window , and pass through a door . 
You can get as much as you want . '' 
As he spoke , he wrapped the younger one up bodily in a fold of the blanket , and the little one murmured : -- `` Oh ! 
how good that is ! 
It 's warm ! '' 
Gavroche cast a pleased eye on the blanket . 
`` That 's from the Jardin des Plantes , too , '' said he . 
`` I took that from the monkeys . '' 
And , pointing out to the eldest the mat on which he was lying , a very thick and admirably made mat , he added : -- `` That belonged to the giraffe . '' 
After a pause he went on : -- `` The beasts had all these things . 
I took them away from them . 
It did n't trouble them . 
I told them : ` It 's for the elephant . ' '' 
He paused , and then resumed : -- `` You crawl over the walls and you do n't care a straw for the government . 
So there now ! '' 
The two children gazed with timid and stupefied respect on this intrepid and ingenious being , a vagabond like themselves , isolated like themselves , frail like themselves , who had something admirable and all-powerful about him , who seemed supernatural to them , and whose physiognomy was composed of all the grimaces of an old mountebank , mingled with the most ingenuous and charming smiles . 
`` Monsieur , '' ventured the elder timidly , `` you are not afraid of the police , then ? '' 
Gavroche contented himself with replying : -- `` Brat ! 
Nobody says ` police , ' they say ` bobbies . ' '' 
The smaller had his eyes wide open , but he said nothing . 
As he was on the edge of the mat , the elder being in the middle , Gavroche tucked the blanket round him as a mother might have done , and heightened the mat under his head with old rags , in such a way as to form a pillow for the child . 
Then he turned to the elder : -- `` Hey ! 
We 're jolly comfortable here , ai n't we ? '' 
`` Ah , yes ! '' 
replied the elder , gazing at Gavroche with the expression of a saved angel . 
The two poor little children who had been soaked through , began to grow warm once more . 
`` Ah , by the way , '' continued Gavroche , `` what were you bawling about ? '' 
And pointing out the little one to his brother : -- `` A mite like that , I 've nothing to say about , but the idea of a big fellow like you crying ! 
It 's idiotic ; you looked like a calf . '' 
`` Gracious , replied the child , `` we have no lodging . '' 
`` Bother ! '' 
retorted Gavroche , `` you do n't say ` lodgings , ' you say ` crib . ' '' 
`` And then , we were afraid of being alone like that at night . '' 
`` You do n't say ` night , ' you say ` darkmans . ' '' 
`` Thank you , sir , '' said the child . 
`` Listen , '' went on Gavroche , `` you must never bawl again over anything . 
I 'll take care of you . 
You shall see what fun we 'll have . 
In summer , we 'll go to the Glaciere with Navet , one of my pals , we 'll bathe in the Gare , we 'll run stark naked in front of the rafts on the bridge at Austerlitz , -- that makes the laundresses raging . 
They scream , they get mad , and if you only knew how ridiculous they are ! 
We 'll go and see the man-skeleton . 
And then I 'll take you to the play . 
I 'll take you to see Frederick Lemaitre . 
I have tickets , I know some of the actors , I even played in a piece once . 
There were a lot of us fellers , and we ran under a cloth , and that made the sea . 
I 'll get you an engagement at my theatre . 
We 'll go to see the savages . 
They ai n't real , those savages ai n't . 
They wear pink tights that go all in wrinkles , and you can see where their elbows have been darned with white . 
Then , we 'll go to the Opera . 
We 'll get in with the hired applauders . 
The Opera claque is well managed . 
I would n't associate with the claque on the boulevard . 
At the Opera , just fancy ! 
some of them pay twenty sous , but they 're ninnies . 
They 're called dishclouts . 
And then we 'll go to see the guillotine work . 
I 'll show you the executioner . 
He lives in the Rue des Marais . 
Monsieur Sanson . 
He has a letter-box at his door . 
Ah ! 
we 'll have famous fun ! '' 
At that moment a drop of wax fell on Gavroche 's finger , and recalled him to the realities of life . 
`` The deuce ! '' 
said he , `` there 's the wick giving out . 
Attention ! 
I ca n't spend more than a sou a month on my lighting . 
When a body goes to bed , he must sleep . 
We have n't the time to read M. Paul de Kock 's romances . 
And besides , the light might pass through the cracks of the porte-cochere , and all the bobbies need to do is to see it . '' 
`` And then , '' remarked the elder timidly , -- he alone dared talk to Gavroche , and reply to him , `` a spark might fall in the straw , and we must look out and not burn the house down . '' 
`` People do n't say ` burn the house down , ' '' remarked Gavroche , `` they say ` blaze the crib . ' '' 
The storm increased in violence , and the heavy downpour beat upon the back of the colossus amid claps of thunder . 
`` You 're taken in , rain ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` It amuses me to hear the decanter run down the legs of the house . 
Winter is a stupid ; it wastes its merchandise , it loses its labor , it ca n't wet us , and that makes it kick up a row , old water-carrier that it is . '' 
This allusion to the thunder , all the consequences of which Gavroche , in his character of a philosopher of the nineteenth century , accepted , was followed by a broad flash of lightning , so dazzling that a hint of it entered the belly of the elephant through the crack . 
Almost at the same instant , the thunder rumbled with great fury . 
The two little creatures uttered a shriek , and started up so eagerly that the network came near being displaced , but Gavroche turned his bold face to them , and took advantage of the clap of thunder to burst into a laugh . 
`` Calm down , children . 
Do n't topple over the edifice . 
That 's fine , first-class thunder ; all right . 
That 's no slouch of a streak of lightning . 
Bravo for the good God ! 
Deuce take it ! 
It 's almost as good as it is at the Ambigu . '' 
That said , he restored order in the netting , pushed the two children gently down on the bed , pressed their knees , in order to stretch them out at full length , and exclaimed : -- `` Since the good God is lighting his candle , I can blow out mine . 
Now , babes , now , my young humans , you must shut your peepers . 
It 's very bad not to sleep . 
It 'll make you swallow the strainer , or , as they say , in fashionable society , stink in the gullet . 
Wrap yourself up well in the hide ! 
I 'm going to put out the light . 
Are you ready ? '' 
`` Yes , '' murmured the elder , `` I 'm all right . 
I seem to have feathers under my head . '' 
`` People do n't say ` head , ' '' cried Gavroche , `` they say ` nut ' . '' 
The two children nestled close to each other , Gavroche finished arranging them on the mat , drew the blanket up to their very ears , then repeated , for the third time , his injunction in the hieratical tongue : -- `` Shut your peepers ! '' 
And he snuffed out his tiny light . 
Hardly had the light been extinguished , when a peculiar trembling began to affect the netting under which the three children lay . 
It consisted of a multitude of dull scratches which produced a metallic sound , as if claws and teeth were gnawing at the copper wire . 
This was accompanied by all sorts of little piercing cries . 
The little five-year-old boy , on hearing this hubbub overhead , and chilled with terror , jogged his brother 's elbow ; but the elder brother had already shut his peepers , as Gavroche had ordered . 
Then the little one , who could no longer control his terror , questioned Gavroche , but in a very low tone , and with bated breath : -- `` Sir ? '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
said Gavroche , who had just closed his eyes . 
`` What is that ? '' 
`` It 's the rats , '' replied Gavroche . 
And he laid his head down on the mat again . 
The rats , in fact , who swarmed by thousands in the carcass of the elephant , and who were the living black spots which we have already mentioned , had been held in awe by the flame of the candle , so long as it had been lighted ; but as soon as the cavern , which was the same as their city , had returned to darkness , scenting what the good story-teller Perrault calls `` fresh meat , '' they had hurled themselves in throngs on Gavroche 's tent , had climbed to the top of it , and had begun to bite the meshes as though seeking to pierce this new-fangled trap . 
Still the little one could not sleep . 
`` Sir ? '' 
he began again . 
`` Hey ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` What are rats ? '' 
`` They are mice . '' 
This explanation reassured the child a little . 
He had seen white mice in the course of his life , and he was not afraid of them . 
Nevertheless , he lifted up his voice once more . 
`` Sir ? '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
said Gavroche again . 
`` Why do n't you have a cat ? '' 
`` I did have one , '' replied Gavroche , `` I brought one here , but they ate her . '' 
This second explanation undid the work of the first , and the little fellow began to tremble again . 
The dialogue between him and Gavroche began again for the fourth time : -- `` Monsieur ? '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
`` Who was it that was eaten ? '' 
`` The cat . '' 
`` And who ate the cat ? '' 
`` The rats . '' 
`` The mice ? '' 
`` Yes , the rats . '' 
The child , in consternation , dismayed at the thought of mice which ate cats , pursued : -- `` Sir , would those mice eat us ? '' 
`` Would n't they just ! '' 
ejaculated Gavroche . 
The child 's terror had reached its climax . 
But Gavroche added : -- `` Do n't be afraid . 
They ca n't get in . 
And besides , I 'm here ! 
Here , catch hold of my hand . 
Hold your tongue and shut your peepers ! '' 
At the same time Gavroche grasped the little fellow 's hand across his brother . 
The child pressed the hand close to him , and felt reassured . 
Courage and strength have these mysterious ways of communicating themselves . 
Silence reigned round them once more , the sound of their voices had frightened off the rats ; at the expiration of a few minutes , they came raging back , but in vain , the three little fellows were fast asleep and heard nothing more . 
The hours of the night fled away . 
Darkness covered the vast Place de la Bastille . 
A wintry gale , which mingled with the rain , blew in gusts , the patrol searched all the doorways , alleys , enclosures , and obscure nooks , and in their search for nocturnal vagabonds they passed in silence before the elephant ; the monster , erect , motionless , staring open-eyed into the shadows , had the appearance of dreaming happily over his good deed ; and sheltered from heaven and from men the three poor sleeping children . 
In order to understand what is about to follow , the reader must remember , that , at that epoch , the Bastille guard-house was situated at the other end of the square , and that what took place in the vicinity of the elephant could neither be seen nor heard by the sentinel . 
Towards the end of that hour which immediately precedes the dawn , a man turned from the Rue Saint-Antoine at a run , made the circuit of the enclosure of the column of July , and glided between the palings until he was underneath the belly of the elephant . 
If any light had illuminated that man , it might have been divined from the thorough manner in which he was soaked that he had passed the night in the rain . 
Arrived beneath the elephant , he uttered a peculiar cry , which did not belong to any human tongue , and which a paroquet alone could have imitated . 
Twice he repeated this cry , of whose orthography the following barely conveys an idea : -- `` Kirikikiou ! '' 
At the second cry , a clear , young , merry voice responded from the belly of the elephant : -- `` Yes ! '' 
Almost immediately , the plank which closed the hole was drawn aside , and gave passage to a child who descended the elephant 's leg , and fell briskly near the man . 
It was Gavroche . 
The man was Montparnasse . 
As for his cry of Kirikikiou , -- that was , doubtless , what the child had meant , when he said : -- `` You will ask for Monsieur Gavroche . '' 
On hearing it , he had waked with a start , had crawled out of his `` alcove , '' pushing apart the netting a little , and carefully drawing it together again , then he had opened the trap , and descended . 
The man and the child recognized each other silently amid the gloom : Montparnasse confined himself to the remark : -- `` We need you . 
Come , lend us a hand . '' 
The lad asked for no further enlightenment . 
`` I 'm with you , '' said he . 
And both took their way towards the Rue Saint-Antoine , whence Montparnasse had emerged , winding rapidly through the long file of market-gardeners ' carts which descend towards the markets at that hour . 
The market-gardeners , crouching , half-asleep , in their wagons , amid the salads and vegetables , enveloped to their very eyes in their mufflers on account of the beating rain , did not even glance at these strange pedestrians . 
THE VICISSITUDES OF FLIGHT This is what had taken place that same night at the La Force : -- An escape had been planned between Babet , Brujon , Guelemer , and Thenardier , although Thenardier was in close confinement . 
Babet had arranged the matter for his own benefit , on the same day , as the reader has seen from Montparnasse 's account to Gavroche . 
Montparnasse was to help them from outside . 
Brujon , after having passed a month in the punishment cell , had had time , in the first place , to weave a rope , in the second , to mature a plan . 
In former times , those severe places where the discipline of the prison delivers the convict into his own hands , were composed of four stone walls , a stone ceiling , a flagged pavement , a camp bed , a grated window , and a door lined with iron , and were called dungeons ; but the dungeon was judged to be too terrible ; nowadays they are composed of an iron door , a grated window , a camp bed , a flagged pavement , four stone walls , and a stone ceiling , and are called chambers of punishment . 
A little light penetrates towards mid-day . 
The inconvenient point about these chambers which , as the reader sees , are not dungeons , is that they allow the persons who should be at work to think . 
So Brujon meditated , and he emerged from the chamber of punishment with a rope . 
As he had the name of being very dangerous in the Charlemagne courtyard , he was placed in the New Building . 
The first thing he found in the New Building was Guelemer , the second was a nail ; Guelemer , that is to say , crime ; a nail , that is to say , liberty . 
Brujon , of whom it is high time that the reader should have a complete idea , was , with an appearance of delicate health and a profoundly premeditated languor , a polished , intelligent sprig , and a thief , who had a caressing glance , and an atrocious smile . 
His glance resulted from his will , and his smile from his nature . 
His first studies in his art had been directed to roofs . 
He had made great progress in the industry of the men who tear off lead , who plunder the roofs and despoil the gutters by the process called double pickings . 
The circumstance which put the finishing touch on the moment peculiarly favorable for an attempt at escape , was that the roofers were re-laying and re-jointing , at that very moment , a portion of the slates on the prison . 
The Saint-Bernard courtyard was no longer absolutely isolated from the Charlemagne and the Saint-Louis courts . 
Up above there were scaffoldings and ladders ; in other words , bridges and stairs in the direction of liberty . 
The New Building , which was the most cracked and decrepit thing to be seen anywhere in the world , was the weak point in the prison . 
The walls were eaten by saltpetre to such an extent that the authorities had been obliged to line the vaults of the dormitories with a sheathing of wood , because stones were in the habit of becoming detached and falling on the prisoners in their beds . 
In spite of this antiquity , the authorities committed the error of confining in the New Building the most troublesome prisoners , of placing there `` the hard cases , '' as they say in prison parlance . 
