`` I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which my brother mentioned . 
Then he interrupted himself and addressed me : -- '' ` Have we not some relatives in those parts , my dear sister ? ' 
`` I replied , -- '' ` We did have some ; among others , M. de Lucenet , who was captain of the gates at Pontarlier under the old regime . ' '' 
` Yes , ' resumed my brother ; ` but in ' 93 , one had no longer any relatives , one had only one 's arms . 
I worked . 
They have , in the country of Pontarlier , whither you are going , Monsieur Valjean , a truly patriarchal and truly charming industry , my sister . 
It is their cheese-dairies , which they call fruitieres . ' 
`` Then my brother , while urging the man to eat , explained to him , with great minuteness , what these fruitieres of Pontarlier were ; that they were divided into two classes : the big barns which belong to the rich , and where there are forty or fifty cows which produce from seven to eight thousand cheeses each summer , and the associated fruitieres , which belong to the poor ; these are the peasants of mid-mountain , who hold their cows in common , and share the proceeds . 
` They engage the services of a cheese-maker , whom they call the grurin ; the grurin receives the milk of the associates three times a day , and marks the quantity on a double tally . 
It is towards the end of April that the work of the cheese-dairies begins ; it is towards the middle of June that the cheese-makers drive their cows to the mountains . ' 
`` The man recovered his animation as he ate . 
My brother made him drink that good Mauves wine , which he does not drink himself , because he says that wine is expensive . 
My brother imparted all these details with that easy gayety of his with which you are acquainted , interspersing his words with graceful attentions to me . 
He recurred frequently to that comfortable trade of grurin , as though he wished the man to understand , without advising him directly and harshly , that this would afford him a refuge . 
One thing struck me . 
This man was what I have told you . 
Well , neither during supper , nor during the entire evening , did my brother utter a single word , with the exception of a few words about Jesus when he entered , which could remind the man of what he was , nor of what my brother was . 
To all appearances , it was an occasion for preaching him a little sermon , and of impressing the Bishop on the convict , so that a mark of the passage might remain behind . 
This might have appeared to any one else who had this , unfortunate man in his hands to afford a chance to nourish his soul as well as his body , and to bestow upon him some reproach , seasoned with moralizing and advice , or a little commiseration , with an exhortation to conduct himself better in the future . 
My brother did not even ask him from what country he came , nor what was his history . 
For in his history there is a fault , and my brother seemed to avoid everything which could remind him of it . 
To such a point did he carry it , that at one time , when my brother was speaking of the mountaineers of Pontarlier , who exercise a gentle labor near heaven , and who , he added , are happy because they are innocent , he stopped short , fearing lest in this remark there might have escaped him something which might wound the man . 
By dint of reflection , I think I have comprehended what was passing in my brother 's heart . 
He was thinking , no doubt , that this man , whose name is Jean Valjean , had his misfortune only too vividly present in his mind ; that the best thing was to divert him from it , and to make him believe , if only momentarily , that he was a person like any other , by treating him just in his ordinary way . 
Is not this indeed , to understand charity well ? 
Is there not , dear Madame , something truly evangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon , from moralizing , from allusions ? 
and is not the truest pity , when a man has a sore point , not to touch it at all ? 
It has seemed to me that this might have been my brother 's private thought . 
In any case , what I can say is that , if he entertained all these ideas , he gave no sign of them ; from beginning to end , even to me he was the same as he is every evening , and he supped with this Jean Valjean with the same air and in the same manner in which he would have supped with M. Gedeon le Provost , or with the curate of the parish . 
`` Towards the end , when he had reached the figs , there came a knock at the door . 
It was Mother Gerbaud , with her little one in her arms . 
My brother kissed the child on the brow , and borrowed fifteen sous which I had about me to give to Mother Gerbaud . 
The man was not paying much heed to anything then . 
He was no longer talking , and he seemed very much fatigued . 
After poor old Gerbaud had taken her departure , my brother said grace ; then he turned to the man and said to him , ` You must be in great need of your bed . ' 
Madame Magloire cleared the table very promptly . 
I understood that we must retire , in order to allow this traveller to go to sleep , and we both went up stairs . 
Nevertheless , I sent Madame Magloire down a moment later , to carry to the man 's bed a goat skin from the Black Forest , which was in my room . 
The nights are frigid , and that keeps one warm . 
It is a pity that this skin is old ; all the hair is falling out . 
My brother bought it while he was in Germany , at Tottlingen , near the sources of the Danube , as well as the little ivory-handled knife which I use at table . 
`` Madame Magloire returned immediately . 
We said our prayers in the drawing-room , where we hang up the linen , and then we each retired to our own chambers , without saying a word to each other . '' 
TRANQUILLITY After bidding his sister good night , Monseigneur Bienvenu took one of the two silver candlesticks from the table , handed the other to his guest , and said to him , -- `` Monsieur , I will conduct you to your room . '' 
The man followed him . 
As might have been observed from what has been said above , the house was so arranged that in order to pass into the oratory where the alcove was situated , or to get out of it , it was necessary to traverse the Bishop 's bedroom . 
At the moment when he was crossing this apartment , Madame Magloire was putting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed . 
This was her last care every evening before she went to bed . 
The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove . 
A fresh white bed had been prepared there . 
The man set the candle down on a small table . 
`` Well , '' said the Bishop , `` may you pass a good night . 
To-morrow morning , before you set out , you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows . '' 
`` Thanks , Monsieur l'Abbe , '' said the man . 
Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace , when all of a sudden , and without transition , he made a strange movement , which would have frozen the two sainted women with horror , had they witnessed it . 
Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him at that moment . 
Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a menace ? 
Was he simply obeying a sort of instinctive impulse which was obscure even to himself ? 
He turned abruptly to the old man , folded his arms , and bending upon his host a savage gaze , he exclaimed in a hoarse voice : -- `` Ah ! 
really ! 
You lodge me in your house , close to yourself like this ? '' 
He broke off , and added with a laugh in which there lurked something monstrous : -- `` Have you really reflected well ? 
How do you know that I have not been an assassin ? '' 
The Bishop replied : -- `` That is the concern of the good God . '' 
Then gravely , and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking to himself , he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed his benediction on the man , who did not bow , and without turning his head or looking behind him , he returned to his bedroom . 
When the alcove was in use , a large serge curtain drawn from wall to wall concealed the altar . 
The Bishop knelt before this curtain as he passed and said a brief prayer . 
A moment later he was in his garden , walking , meditating , conteplating , his heart and soul wholly absorbed in those grand and mysterious things which God shows at night to the eyes which remain open . 
As for the man , he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit by the nice white sheets . 
Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils after the manner of convicts , he dropped , all dressed as he was , upon the bed , where he immediately fell into a profound sleep . 
Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his apartment . 
A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house . 
JEAN VALJEAN Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke . 
Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie . 
He had not learned to read in his childhood . 
When he reached man 's estate , be became a tree-pruner at Faverolles . 
His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu ; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean , probably a sobriquet , and a contraction of viola Jean , `` here 's Jean . '' 
Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition which constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures . 
On the whole , however , there was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant about Jean Valjean in appearance , at least . 
He had lost his father and mother at a very early age . 
His mother had died of a milk fever , which had not been properly attended to . 
His father , a tree-pruner , like himself , had been killed by a fall from a tree . 
All that remained to Jean Valjean was a sister older than himself , -- a widow with seven children , boys and girls . 
This sister had brought up Jean Valjean , and so long as she had a husband she lodged and fed her young brother . 
The husband died . 
The eldest of the seven children was eight years old . 
The youngest , one . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year . 
He took the father 's place , and , in his turn , supported the sister who had brought him up . 
This was done simply as a duty and even a little churlishly on the part of Jean Valjean . 
Thus his youth had been spent in rude and ill-paid toil . 
He had never known a `` kind woman friend '' in his native parts . 
He had not had the time to fall in love . 
He returned at night weary , and ate his broth without uttering a word . 
His sister , mother Jeanne , often took the best part of his repast from his bowl while he was eating , -- a bit of meat , a slice of bacon , the heart of the cabbage , -- to give to one of her children . 
As he went on eating , with his head bent over the table and almost into his soup , his long hair falling about his bowl and concealing his eyes , he had the air of perceiving nothing and allowing it . 
There was at Faverolles , not far from the Valjean thatched cottage , on the other side of the lane , a farmer 's wife named Marie-Claude ; the Valjean children , habitually famished , sometimes went to borrow from Marie-Claude a pint of milk , in their mother 's name , which they drank behind a hedge or in some alley corner , snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the little girls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks . 
If their mother had known of this marauding , she would have punished the delinquents severely . 
Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for the pint of milk behind their mother 's back , and the children were not punished . 
In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day ; then he hired out as a hay-maker , as laborer , as neat-herd on a farm , as a drudge . 
He did whatever he could . 
His sister worked also but what could she do with seven little children ? 
It was a sad group enveloped in misery , which was being gradually annihilated . 
A very hard winter came . 
Jean had no work . 
The family had no bread . 
No bread literally . 
Seven children ! 
One Sunday evening , Maubert Isabeau , the baker on the Church Square at Faverolles , was preparing to go to bed , when he heard a violent blow on the grated front of his shop . 
He arrived in time to see an arm passed through a hole made by a blow from a fist , through the grating and the glass . 
The arm seized a loaf of bread and carried it off . 
Isabeau ran out in haste ; the robber fled at the full speed of his legs . 
Isabeau ran after him and stopped him . 
The thief had flung away the loaf , but his arm was still bleeding . 
It was Jean Valjean . 
This took place in 1795 . 
Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals of the time for theft and breaking and entering an inhabited house at night . 
He had a gun which he used better than any one else in the world , he was a bit of a poacher , and this injured his case . 
There exists a legitimate prejudice against poachers . 
The poacher , like the smuggler , smacks too strongly of the brigand . 
Nevertheless , we will remark cursorily , there is still an abyss between these races of men and the hideous assassin of the towns . 
The poacher lives in the forest , the smuggler lives in the mountains or on the sea . 
The cities make ferocious men because they make corrupt men . 
The mountain , the sea , the forest , make savage men ; they develop the fierce side , but often without destroying the humane side . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty . 
The terms of the Code were explicit . 
There occur formidable hours in our civilization ; there are moments when the penal laws decree a shipwreck . 
What an ominous minute is that in which society draws back and consummates the irreparable abandonment of a sentient being ! 
Jean Valjean was condemned to five years in the galleys . 
On the 22d of April , 1796 , the victory of Montenotte , won by the general-in-chief of the army of Italy , whom the message of the Directory to the Five Hundred , of the 2d of Floreal , year IV. , calls Buona-Parte , was announced in Paris ; on that same day a great gang of galley-slaves was put in chains at Bicetre . 
Jean Valjean formed a part of that gang . 
An old turnkey of the prison , who is now nearly eighty years old , still recalls perfectly that unfortunate wretch who was chained to the end of the fourth line , in the north angle of the courtyard . 
He was seated on the ground like the others . 
He did not seem to comprehend his position , except that it was horrible . 
It is probable that he , also , was disentangling from amid the vague ideas of a poor man , ignorant of everything , something excessive . 
While the bolt of his iron collar was being riveted behind his head with heavy blows from the hammer , he wept , his tears stifled him , they impeded his speech ; he only managed to say from time to time , `` I was a tree-pruner at Faverolles . '' 
Then still sobbing , he raised his right hand and lowered it gradually seven times , as though he were touching in succession seven heads of unequal heights , and from this gesture it was divined that the thing which he had done , whatever it was , he had done for the sake of clothing and nourishing seven little children . 
He set out for Toulon . 
He arrived there , after a journey of twenty-seven days , on a cart , with a chain on his neck . 
At Toulon he was clothed in the red cassock . 
All that had constituted his life , even to his name , was effaced ; he was no longer even Jean Valjean ; he was number 24,601 . 
What became of his sister ? 
What became of the seven children ? 
Who troubled himself about that ? 
What becomes of the handful of leaves from the young tree which is sawed off at the root ? 
It is always the same story . 
These poor living beings , these creatures of God , henceforth without support , without guide , without refuge , wandered away at random , -- who even knows ? 
-- each in his own direction perhaps , and little by little buried themselves in that cold mist which engulfs solitary destinies ; gloomy shades , into which disappear in succession so many unlucky heads , in the sombre march of the human race . 
They quitted the country . 
The clock-tower of what had been their village forgot them ; the boundary line of what had been their field forgot them ; after a few years ' residence in the galleys , Jean Valjean himself forgot them . 
In that heart , where there had been a wound , there was a scar . 
That is all . 
Only once , during all the time which he spent at Toulon , did he hear his sister mentioned . 
This happened , I think , towards the end of the fourth year of his captivity . 
I know not through what channels the news reached him . 
Some one who had known them in their own country had seen his sister . 
She was in Paris . 
She lived in a poor street Rear Saint-Sulpice , in the Rue du Gindre . 
She had with her only one child , a little boy , the youngest . 
Where were the other six ? 
Perhaps she did not know herself . 
Every morning she went to a printing office , No. 3 Rue du Sabot , where she was a folder and stitcher . 
She was obliged to be there at six o'clock in the morning -- long before daylight in winter . 
In the same building with the printing office there was a school , and to this school she took her little boy , who was seven years old . 
But as she entered the printing office at six , and the school only opened at seven , the child had to wait in the courtyard , for the school to open , for an hour -- one hour of a winter night in the open air ! 
They would not allow the child to come into the printing office , because he was in the way , they said . 
When the workmen passed in the morning , they beheld this poor little being seated on the pavement , overcome with drowsiness , and often fast asleep in the shadow , crouched down and doubled up over his basket . 
When it rained , an old woman , the portress , took pity on him ; she took him into her den , where there was a pallet , a spinning-wheel , and two wooden chairs , and the little one slumbered in a corner , pressing himself close to the cat that he might suffer less from cold . 
At seven o'clock the school opened , and he entered . 
That is what was told to Jean Valjean . 
They talked to him about it for one day ; it was a moment , a flash , as though a window had suddenly been opened upon the destiny of those things whom he had loved ; then all closed again . 
He heard nothing more forever . 
Nothing from them ever reached him again ; he never beheld them ; he never met them again ; and in the continuation of this mournful history they will not be met with any more . 
Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean 's turn to escape arrived . 
His comrades assisted him , as is the custom in that sad place . 
He escaped . 
He wandered for two days in the fields at liberty , if being at liberty is to be hunted , to turn the head every instant , to quake at the slightest noise , to be afraid of everything , -- of a smoking roof , of a passing man , of a barking dog , of a galloping horse , of a striking clock , of the day because one can see , of the night because one can not see , of the highway , of the path , of a bush , of sleep . 
On the evening of the second day he was captured . 
He had neither eaten nor slept for thirty-six hours . 
The maritime tribunal condemned him , for this crime , to a prolongation of his term for three years , which made eight years . 
In the sixth year his turn to escape occurred again ; he availed himself of it , but could not accomplish his flight fully . 
He was missing at roll-call . 
The cannon were fired , and at night the patrol found him hidden under the keel of a vessel in process of construction ; he resisted the galley guards who seized him . 
Escape and rebellion . 
This case , provided for by a special code , was punished by an addition of five years , two of them in the double chain . 
Thirteen years . 
In the tenth year his turn came round again ; he again profited by it ; he succeeded no better . 
Three years for this fresh attempt . 
Sixteen years . 
Finally , I think it was during his thirteenth year , he made a last attempt , and only succeeded in getting retaken at the end of four hours of absence . 
Three years for those four hours . 
Nineteen years . 
In October , 1815 , he was released ; he had entered there in 1796 , for having broken a pane of glass and taken a loaf of bread . 
Room for a brief parenthesis . 
This is the second time , during his studies on the penal question and damnation by law , that the author of this book has come across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point of departure for the disaster of a destiny . 
Claude Gaux had stolen a loaf ; Jean Valjean had stolen a loaf . 
English statistics prove the fact that four thefts out of five in London have hunger for their immediate cause . 
Jean Valjean had entered the galleys sobbing and shuddering ; he emerged impassive . 
He had entered in despair ; he emerged gloomy . 
What had taken place in that soul ? 
THE INTERIOR OF DESPAIR Let us try to say it . 
It is necessary that society should look at these things , because it is itself which creates them . 
He was , as we have said , an ignorant man , but he was not a fool . 
The light of nature was ignited in him . 
Unhappiness , which also possesses a clearness of vision of its own , augmented the small amount of daylight which existed in this mind . 
Beneath the cudgel , beneath the chain , in the cell , in hardship , beneath the burning sun of the galleys , upon the plank bed of the convict , he withdrew into his own consciousness and meditated . 
He constituted himself the tribunal . 
He began by putting himself on trial . 
He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustly punished . 
He admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy act ; that that loaf of bread would probably not have been refused to him had he asked for it ; that , in any case , it would have been better to wait until he could get it through compassion or through work ; that it is not an unanswerable argument to say , `` Can one wait when one is hungry ? '' 
That , in the first place , it is very rare for any one to die of hunger , literally ; and next , that , fortunately or unfortunately , man is so constituted that he can suffer long and much , both morally and physically , without dying ; that it is therefore necessary to have patience ; that that would even have been better for those poor little children ; that it had been an act of madness for him , a miserable , unfortunate wretch , to take society at large violently by the collar , and to imagine that one can escape from misery through theft ; that that is in any case a poor door through which to escape from misery through which infamy enters ; in short , that he was in the wrong . 
Then he asked himself -- Whether he had been the only one in fault in his fatal history . 
Whether it was not a serious thing , that he , a laborer , out of work , that he , an industrious man , should have lacked bread . 
And whether , the fault once committed and confessed , the chastisement had not been ferocious and disproportioned . 
Whether there had not been more abuse on the part of the law , in respect to the penalty , than there had been on the part of the culprit in respect to his fault . 
Whether there had not been an excess of weights in one balance of the scale , in the one which contains expiation . 
Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not equivalent to the annihilation of the crime , and did not result in reversing the situation , of replacing the fault of the delinquent by the fault of the repression , of converting the guilty man into the victim , and the debtor into the creditor , and of ranging the law definitely on the side of the man who had violated it . 
Whether this penalty , complicated by successive aggravations for attempts at escape , had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage perpetrated by the stronger upon the feebler , a crime of society against the individual , a crime which was being committed afresh every day , a crime which had lasted nineteen years . 
He asked himself whether human society could have the right to force its members to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack of foresight , and in the other case for its pitiless foresight ; and to seize a poor man forever between a defect and an excess , a default of work and an excess of punishment . 
Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those of its members who were the least well endowed in the division of goods made by chance , and consequently the most deserving of consideration . 
These questions put and answered , he judged society and condemned it . 
He condemned it to his hatred . 
He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering , and he said to himself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to call it to account . 
He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium between the harm which he had caused and the harm which was being done to him ; he finally arrived at the conclusion that his punishment was not , in truth , unjust , but that it most assuredly was iniquitous . 
Anger may be both foolish and absurd ; one can be irritated wrongfully ; one is exasperated only when there is some show of right on one 's side at bottom . 
Jean Valjean felt himself exasperated . 
And besides , human society had done him nothing but harm ; he had never seen anything of it save that angry face which it calls Justice , and which it shows to those whom it strikes . 
Men had only touched him to bruise him . 
Every contact with them had been a blow . 
Never , since his infancy , since the days of his mother , of his sister , had he ever encountered a friendly word and a kindly glance . 
From suffering to suffering , he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a war ; and that in this war he was the conquered . 
He had no other weapon than his hate . 
He resolved to whet it in the galleys and to bear it away with him when he departed . 
There was at Toulon a school for the convicts , kept by the Ignorantin friars , where the most necessary branches were taught to those of the unfortunate men who had a mind for them . 
He was of the number who had a mind . 
He went to school at the age of forty , and learned to read , to write , to cipher . 
He felt that to fortify his intelligence was to fortify his hate . 
In certain cases , education and enlightenment can serve to eke out evil . 
This is a sad thing to say ; after having judged society , which had caused his unhappiness , he judged Providence , which had made society , and he condemned it also . 
Thus during nineteen years of torture and slavery , this soul mounted and at the same time fell . 
Light entered it on one side , and darkness on the other . 
Jean Valjean had not , as we have seen , an evil nature . 
He was still good when he arrived at the galleys . 
He there condemned society , and felt that he was becoming wicked ; he there condemned Providence , and was conscious that he was becoming impious . 
It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point . 
Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom ? 
Can the man created good by God be rendered wicked by man ? 
Can the soul be completely made over by fate , and become evil , fate being evil ? 
Can the heart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities and infirmities under the oppression of a disproportionate unhappiness , as the vertebral column beneath too low a vault ? 
Is there not in every human soul , was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in particular , a first spark , a divine element , incorruptible in this world , immortal in the other , which good can develop , fan , ignite , and make to glow with splendor , and which evil can never wholly extinguish ? 
Grave and obscure questions , to the last of which every physiologist would probably have responded no , and that without hesitation , had he beheld at Toulon , during the hours of repose , which were for Jean Valjean hours of revery , this gloomy galley-slave , seated with folded arms upon the bar of some capstan , with the end of his chain thrust into his pocket to prevent its dragging , serious , silent , and thoughtful , a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath , condemned by civilization , and regarding heaven with severity . 
Certainly , -- and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact , -- the observing physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery ; he would , perchance , have pitied this sick man , of the law 's making ; but he would not have even essayed any treatment ; he would have turned aside his gaze from the caverns of which he would have caught a glimpse within this soul , and , like Dante at the portals of hell , he would have effaced from this existence the word which the finger of God has , nevertheless , inscribed upon the brow of every man , -- hope . 
Was this state of his soul , which we have attempted to analyze , as perfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those who read us ? 
Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive , after their formation , and had he seen distinctly during the process of their formation , all the elements of which his moral misery was composed ? 
Had this rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception of the succession of ideas through which he had , by degrees , mounted and descended to the lugubrious aspects which had , for so many years , formed the inner horizon of his spirit ? 
Was he conscious of all that passed within him , and of all that was working there ? 
That is something which we do not presume to state ; it is something which we do not even believe . 
There was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean , even after his misfortune , to prevent much vagueness from still lingering there . 
At times he did not rightly know himself what he felt . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadows ; he suffered in the shadows ; he hated in the shadows ; one might have said that he hated in advance of himself . 
He dwelt habitually in this shadow , feeling his way like a blind man and a dreamer . 
Only , at intervals , there suddenly came to him , from without and from within , an access of wrath , a surcharge of suffering , a livid and rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul , and caused to appear abruptly all around him , in front , behind , amid the gleams of a frightful light , the hideous precipices and the sombre perspective of his destiny . 
The flash passed , the night closed in again ; and where was he ? 
He no longer knew . 
The peculiarity of pains of this nature , in which that which is pitiless -- that is to say , that which is brutalizing -- predominates , is to transform a man , little by little , by a sort of stupid transfiguration , into a wild beast ; sometimes into a ferocious beast . 
Jean Valjean 's successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alone suffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul . 
Jean Valjean would have renewed these attempts , utterly useless and foolish as they were , as often as the opportunity had presented itself , without reflecting for an instant on the result , nor on the experiences which he had already gone through . 
He escaped impetuously , like the wolf who finds his cage open . 
Instinct said to him , `` Flee ! '' 
Reason would have said , `` Remain ! '' 
But in the presence of so violent a temptation , reason vanished ; nothing remained but instinct . 
The beast alone acted . 
When he was recaptured , the fresh severities inflicted on him only served to render him still more wild . 
One detail , which we must not omit , is that he possessed a physical strength which was not approached by a single one of the denizens of the galleys . 
At work , at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan , Jean Valjean was worth four men . 
He sometimes lifted and sustained enormous weights on his back ; and when the occasion demanded it , he replaced that implement which is called a jack-screw , and was formerly called orgueil -LSB- pride -RSB- , whence , we may remark in passing , is derived the name of the Rue Montorgueil , near the Halles -LSB- Fishmarket -RSB- in Paris . 
His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw . 
Once , when they were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon , one of those admirable caryatids of Puget , which support the balcony , became loosened , and was on the point of falling . 
Jean Valjean , who was present , supported the caryatid with his shoulder , and gave the workmen time to arrive . 
His suppleness even exceeded his strength . 
Certain convicts who were forever dreaming of escape , ended by making a veritable science of force and skill combined . 
It is the science of muscles . 
An entire system of mysterious statics is daily practised by prisoners , men who are forever envious of the flies and birds . 
To climb a vertical surface , and to find points of support where hardly a projection was visible , was play to Jean Valjean . 
An angle of the wall being given , with the tension of his back and legs , with his elbows and his heels fitted into the unevenness of the stone , he raised himself as if by magic to the third story . 
He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of the galley prison . 
He spoke but little . 
He laughed not at all . 
An excessive emotion was required to wring from him , once or twice a year , that lugubrious laugh of the convict , which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon . 
To all appearance , he seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of something terrible . 
He was absorbed , in fact . 
Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed intelligence , he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was resting on him . 
In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled , each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance , he perceived with terror , mingled with rage , a sort of frightful accumulation of things , collecting and mounting above him , beyond the range of his vision , -- laws , prejudices , men , and deeds , -- whose outlines escaped him , whose mass terrified him , and which was nothing else than that prodigious pyramid which we call civilization . 
He distinguished , here and there in that swarming and formless mass , now near him , now afar off and on inaccessible table-lands , some group , some detail , vividly illuminated ; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel ; there the gendarme and his sword ; yonder the mitred archbishop ; away at the top , like a sort of sun , the Emperor , crowned and dazzling . 
It seemed to him that these distant splendors , far from dissipating his night , rendered it more funereal and more black . 
All this -- laws , prejudices , deeds , men , things -- went and came above him , over his head , in accordance with the complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization , walking over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness in its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference . 
Souls which have fallen to the bottom of all possible misfortune , unhappy men lost in the lowest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks , the reproved of the law , feel the whole weight of this human society , so formidable for him who is without , so frightful for him who is beneath , resting upon their heads . 
In this situation Jean Valjean meditated ; and what could be the nature of his meditation ? 
If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts , it would , doubtless , think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought . 
All these things , realities full of spectres , phantasmagories full of realities , had eventually created for him a sort of interior state which is almost indescribable . 
At times , amid his convict toil , he paused . 
He fell to thinking . 
His reason , at one and the same time riper and more troubled than of yore , rose in revolt . 
Everything which had happened to him seemed to him absurd ; everything that surrounded him seemed to him impossible . 
He said to himself , `` It is a dream . '' 
He gazed at the galley-sergeant standing a few paces from him ; the galley-sergeant seemed a phantom to him . 
All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel . 
Visible nature hardly existed for him . 
It would almost be true to say that there existed for Jean Valjean neither sun , nor fine summer days , nor radiant sky , nor fresh April dawns . 
I know not what vent-hole daylight habitually illumined his soul . 
To sum up , in conclusion , that which can be summed up and translated into positive results in all that we have just pointed out , we will confine ourselves to the statement that , in the course of nineteen years , Jean Valjean , the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles , the formidable convict of Toulon , had become capable , thanks to the manner in which the galleys had moulded him , of two sorts of evil action : firstly , of evil action which was rapid , unpremeditated , dashing , entirely instinctive , in the nature of reprisals for the evil which he had undergone ; secondly , of evil action which was serious , grave , consciously argued out and premeditated , with the false ideas which such a misfortune can furnish . 
His deliberate deeds passed through three successive phases , which natures of a certain stamp can alone traverse , -- reasoning , will , perseverance . 
He had for moving causes his habitual wrath , bitterness of soul , a profound sense of indignities suffered , the reaction even against the good , the innocent , and the just , if there are any such . 
The point of departure , like the point of arrival , for all his thoughts , was hatred of human law ; that hatred which , if it be not arrested in its development by some providential incident , becomes , within a given time , the hatred of society , then the hatred of the human race , then the hatred of creation , and which manifests itself by a vague , incessant , and brutal desire to do harm to some living being , no matter whom . 
It will be perceived that it was not without reason that Jean Valjean 's passport described him as a very dangerous man . 
From year to year this soul had dried away slowly , but with fatal sureness . 
When the heart is dry , the eye is dry . 
On his departure from the galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear . 
BILLOWS AND SHADOWS A man overboard ! 
What matters it ? 
The vessel does not halt . 
The wind blows . 
That sombre ship has a path which it is forced to pursue . 
It passes on . 
The man disappears , then reappears ; he plunges , he rises again to the surface ; he calls , he stretches out his arms ; he is not heard . 
The vessel , trembling under the hurricane , is wholly absorbed in its own workings ; the passengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man ; his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves . 
He gives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths . 
What a spectre is that retreating sail ! 
He gazes and gazes at it frantically . 
It retreats , it grows dim , it diminishes in size . 
He was there but just now , he was one of the crew , he went and came along the deck with the rest , he had his part of breath and of sunlight , he was a living man . 
Now , what has taken place ? 
He has slipped , he has fallen ; all is at an end . 
He is in the tremendous sea . 
Under foot he has nothing but what flees and crumbles . 
The billows , torn and lashed by the wind , encompass him hideously ; the tossings of the abyss bear him away ; all the tongues of water dash over his head ; a populace of waves spits upon him ; confused openings half devour him ; every time that he sinks , he catches glimpses of precipices filled with night ; frightful and unknown vegetations seize him , knot about his feet , draw him to them ; he is conscious that he is becoming an abyss , that he forms part of the foam ; the waves toss him from one to another ; he drinks in the bitterness ; the cowardly ocean attacks him furiously , to drown him ; the enormity plays with his agony . 
It seems as though all that water were hate . 
Nevertheless , he struggles . 
He tries to defend himself ; he tries to sustain himself ; he makes an effort ; he swims . 
He , his petty strength all exhausted instantly , combats the inexhaustible . 
Where , then , is the ship ? 
Yonder . 
Barely visible in the pale shadows of the horizon . 
The wind blows in gusts ; all the foam overwhelms him . 
He raises his eyes and beholds only the lividness of the clouds . 
He witnesses , amid his death-pangs , the immense madness of the sea . 
He is tortured by this madness ; he hears noises strange to man , which seem to come from beyond the limits of the earth , and from one knows not what frightful region beyond . 
There are birds in the clouds , just as there are angels above human distresses ; but what can they do for him ? 
They sing and fly and float , and he , he rattles in the death agony . 
He feels himself buried in those two infinities , the ocean and the sky , at one and the same time : the one is a tomb ; the other is a shroud . 
Night descends ; he has been swimming for hours ; his strength is exhausted ; that ship , that distant thing in which there were men , has vanished ; he is alone in the formidable twilight gulf ; he sinks , he stiffens himself , he twists himself ; he feels under him the monstrous billows of the invisible ; he shouts . 
There are no more men . 
Where is God ? 
He shouts . 
Help ! 
Help ! 
He still shouts on . 
Nothing on the horizon ; nothing in heaven . 
He implores the expanse , the waves , the seaweed , the reef ; they are deaf . 
He beseeches the tempest ; the imperturbable tempest obeys only the infinite . 
Around him darkness , fog , solitude , the stormy and nonsentient tumult , the undefined curling of those wild waters . 
In him horror and fatigue . 
Beneath him the depths . 
Not a point of support . 
He thinks of the gloomy adventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow . 
The bottomless cold paralyzes him . 
His hands contract convulsively ; they close , and grasp nothingness . 
Winds , clouds , whirlwinds , gusts , useless stars ! 
What is to be done ? 
The desperate man gives up ; he is weary , he chooses the alternative of death ; he resists not ; he lets himself go ; he abandons his grip ; and then he tosses forevermore in the lugubrious dreary depths of engulfment . 
Oh , implacable march of human societies ! 
Oh , losses of men and of souls on the way ! 
Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip ! 
Disastrous absence of help ! 
Oh , moral death ! 
The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws fling their condemned . 
The sea is the immensity of wretchedness . 
The soul , going down stream in this gulf , may become a corpse . 
Who shall resuscitate it ? 
NEW TROUBLES When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys , when Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words , Thou art free ! 
the moment seemed improbable and unprecedented ; a ray of vivid light , a ray of the true light of the living , suddenly penetrated within him . 
But it was not long before this ray paled . 
Jean Valjean had been dazzled by the idea of liberty . 
He had believed in a new life . 
He very speedily perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is provided . 
And this was encompassed with much bitterness . 
He had calculated that his earnings , during his sojourn in the galleys , ought to amount to a hundred and seventy-one francs . 
It is but just to add that he had forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays and festival days during nineteen years , which entailed a diminution of about eighty francs . 
At all events , his hoard had been reduced by various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which had been counted out to him on his departure . 
He had understood nothing of this , and had thought himself wronged . 
Let us say the word -- robbed . 
On the day following his liberation , he saw , at Grasse , in front of an orange-flower distillery , some men engaged in unloading bales . 
He offered his services . 
Business was pressing ; they were accepted . 
He set to work . 
He was intelligent , robust , adroit ; he did his best ; the master seemed pleased . 
While he was at work , a gendarme passed , observed him , and demanded his papers . 
It was necessary to show him the yellow passport . 
That done , Jean Valjean resumed his labor . 
A little while before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the amount which they earned each day at this occupation ; he had been told thirty sous . 
When evening arrived , as he was forced to set out again on the following day , he presented himself to the owner of the distillery and requested to be paid . 
The owner did not utter a word , but handed him fifteen sous . 
He objected . 
He was told , `` That is enough for thee . '' 
He persisted . 
The master looked him straight between the eyes , and said to him `` Beware of the prison . '' 
There , again , he considered that he had been robbed . 
Society , the State , by diminishing his hoard , had robbed him wholesale . 
Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail . 
Liberation is not deliverance . 
One gets free from the galleys , but not from the sentence . 
That is what happened to him at Grasse . 
We have seen in what manner he was received at D -- THE MAN AROUSED As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning , Jean Valjean awoke . 
What woke him was that his bed was too good . 
It was nearly twenty years since he had slept in a bed , and , although he had not undressed , the sensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers . 
He had slept more than four hours . 
His fatigue had passed away . 
He was accustomed not to devote many hours to repose . 
He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him ; then he closed them again , with the intention of going to sleep once more . 
When many varied sensations have agitated the day , when various matters preoccupy the mind , one falls asleep once , but not a second time . 
Sleep comes more easily than it returns . 
This is what happened to Jean Valjean . 
He could not get to sleep again , and he fell to thinking . 
He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one 's mind are troubled . 
There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain . 
His memories of the olden time and of the immediate present floated there pell-mell and mingled confusedly , losing their proper forms , becoming disproportionately large , then suddenly disappearing , as in a muddy and perturbed pool . 
Many thoughts occurred to him ; but there was one which kept constantly presenting itself afresh , and which drove away all others . 
We will mention this thought at once : he had observed the six sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire had placed on the table . 
Those six sets of silver haunted him . 
-- They were there . 
-- A few paces distant . 
-- Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one in which he then was , the old servant-woman had been in the act of placing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed . 
-- He had taken careful note of this cupboard . 
-- On the right , as you entered from the dining-room . 
-- They were solid . 
-- And old silver . 
-- From the ladle one could get at least two hundred francs . 
-- Double what he had earned in nineteen years . 
-- It is true that he would have earned more if `` the administration had not robbed him . '' 
His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was certainly mingled some struggle . 
Three o'clock struck . 
He opened his eyes again , drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture , stretched out his arm and felt of his knapsack , which he had thrown down on a corner of the alcove ; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed , and placed his feet on the floor , and thus found himself , almost without knowing it , seated on his bed . 
He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude , which would have been suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him thus in the dark , the only person awake in that house where all were sleeping . 
All of a sudden he stooped down , removed his shoes and placed them softly on the mat beside the bed ; then he resumed his thoughtful attitude , and became motionless once more . 
Throughout this hideous meditation , the thoughts which we have above indicated moved incessantly through his brain ; entered , withdrew , re-entered , and in a manner oppressed him ; and then he thought , also , without knowing why , and with the mechanical persistence of revery , of a convict named Brevet , whom he had known in the galleys , and whose trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton . 
The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind . 
He remained in this situation , and would have so remained indefinitely , even until daybreak , had not the clock struck one -- the half or quarter hour . 
It seemed to him that that stroke said to him , `` Come on ! '' 
He rose to his feet , hesitated still another moment , and listened ; all was quiet in the house ; then he walked straight ahead , with short steps , to the window , of which he caught a glimpse . 
The night was not very dark ; there was a full moon , across which coursed large clouds driven by the wind . 
This created , outdoors , alternate shadow and gleams of light , eclipses , then bright openings of the clouds ; and indoors a sort of twilight . 
This twilight , sufficient to enable a person to see his way , intermittent on account of the clouds , resembled the sort of livid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar , before which the passersby come and go . 
On arriving at the window , Jean Valjean examined it . 
It had no grating ; it opened in the garden and was fastened , according to the fashion of the country , only by a small pin . 
He opened it ; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated the room abruptly , he closed it again immediately . 
He scrutinized the garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks . 
The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall , easy to climb . 
Far away , at the extremity , he perceived tops of trees , spaced at regular intervals , which indicated that the wall separated the garden from an avenue or lane planted with trees . 
Having taken this survey , he executed a movement like that of a man who has made up his mind , strode to his alcove , grasped his knapsack , opened it , fumbled in it , pulled out of it something which he placed on the bed , put his shoes into one of his pockets , shut the whole thing up again , threw the knapsack on his shoulders , put on his cap , drew the visor down over his eyes , felt for his cudgel , went and placed it in the angle of the window ; then returned to the bed , and resolutely seized the object which he had deposited there . 
It resembled a short bar of iron , pointed like a pike at one end . 
It would have been difficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bit of iron could have been designed . 
Perhaps it was a lever ; possibly it was a club . 
In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing more than a miner 's candlestick . 
Convicts were , at that period , sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which environ Toulon , and it was not rare for them to have miners ' tools at their command . 
These miners ' candlesticks are of massive iron , terminated at the lower extremity by a point , by means of which they are stuck into the rock . 
He took the candlestick in his right hand ; holding his breath and trying to deaden the sound of his tread , he directed his steps to the door of the adjoining room , occupied by the Bishop , as we already know . 
On arriving at this door , he found it ajar . 
The Bishop had not closed it . 
WHAT HE DOES Jean Valjean listened . 
Not a sound . 
He gave the door a push . 
He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger , lightly , with the furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering . 
The door yielded to this pressure , and made an imperceptible and silent movement , which enlarged the opening a little . 
He waited a moment ; then gave the door a second and a bolder push . 
It continued to yield in silence . 
The opening was now large enough to allow him to pass . 
But near the door there stood a little table , which formed an embarrassing angle with it , and barred the entrance . 
Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty . 
It was necessary , at any cost , to enlarge the aperture still further . 
He decided on his course of action , and gave the door a third push , more energetic than the two preceding . 
This time a badly oiled hinge suddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry . 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
The noise of the hinge rang in his ears with something of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Day of Judgment . 
In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined that that hinge had just become animated , and had suddenly assumed a terrible life , and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one , and warn and to wake those who were asleep . 
He halted , shuddering , bewildered , and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels . 
He heard the arteries in his temples beating like two forge hammers , and it seemed to him that his breath issued from his breast with the roar of the wind issuing from a cavern . 
It seemed impossible to him that the horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed the entire household , like the shock of an earthquake ; the door , pushed by him , had taken the alarm , and had shouted ; the old man would rise at once ; the two old women would shriek out ; people would come to their assistance ; in less than a quarter of an hour the town would be in an uproar , and the gendarmerie on hand . 
For a moment he thought himself lost . 
He remained where he was , petrified like the statue of salt , not daring to make a movement . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
The door had fallen wide open . 
He ventured to peep into the next room . 
Nothing had stirred there . 
He lent an ear . 
Nothing was moving in the house . 
The noise made by the rusty hinge had not awakened any one . 
This first danger was past ; but there still reigned a frightful tumult within him . 
Nevertheless , he did not retreat . 
Even when he had thought himself lost , he had not drawn back . 
His only thought now was to finish as soon as possible . 
He took a step and entered the room . 
This room was in a state of perfect calm . 
Here and there vague and confused forms were distinguishable , which in the daylight were papers scattered on a table , open folios , volumes piled upon a stool , an arm-chair heaped with clothing , a prie-Dieu , and which at that hour were only shadowy corners and whitish spots . 
Jean Valjean advanced with precaution , taking care not to knock against the furniture . 
He could hear , at the extremity of the room , the even and tranquil breathing of the sleeping Bishop . 
He suddenly came to a halt . 
He was near the bed . 
He had arrived there sooner than he had thought for . 
Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our actions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness , as though she desired to make us reflect . 
For the last half-hour a large cloud had covered the heavens . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front of the bed , this cloud parted , as though on purpose , and a ray of light , traversing the long window , suddenly illuminated the Bishop 's pale face . 
He was sleeping peacefully . 
He lay in his bed almost completely dressed , on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps , in a garment of brown wool , which covered his arms to the wrists . 
His head was thrown back on the pillow , in the careless attitude of repose ; his hand , adorned with the pastoral ring , and whence had fallen so many good deeds and so many holy actions , was hanging over the edge of the bed . 
His whole face was illumined with a vague expression of satisfaction , of hope , and of felicity . 
It was more than a smile , and almost a radiance . 
He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection of a light which was invisible . 
The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a mysterious heaven . 
A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop . 
It was , at the same time , a luminous transparency , for that heaven was within him . 
That heaven was his conscience . 
At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself , so to speak , upon that inward radiance , the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory . 
It remained , however , gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light . 
That moon in the sky , that slumbering nature , that garden without a quiver , that house which was so calm , the hour , the moment , the silence , added some solemn and unspeakable quality to the venerable repose of this man , and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that white hair , those closed eyes , that face in which all was hope and all was confidence , that head of an old man , and that slumber of an infant . 
There was something almost divine in this man , who was thus august , without being himself aware of it . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadow , and stood motionless , with his iron candlestick in his hand , frightened by this luminous old man . 
Never had he beheld anything like this . 
This confidence terrified him . 
The moral world has no grander spectacle than this : a troubled and uneasy conscience , which has arrived on the brink of an evil action , contemplating the slumber of the just . 
That slumber in that isolation , and with a neighbor like himself , had about it something sublime , of which he was vaguely but imperiously conscious . 
No one could have told what was passing within him , not even himself . 
In order to attempt to form an idea of it , it is necessary to think of the most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle . 
Even on his visage it would have been impossible to distinguish anything with certainty . 
It was a sort of haggard astonishment . 
He gazed at it , and that was all . 
But what was his thought ? 
It would have been impossible to divine it . 
What was evident was , that he was touched and astounded . 
But what was the nature of this emotion ? 
His eye never quitted the old man . 
The only thing which was clearly to be inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange indecision . 
One would have said that he was hesitating between the two abysses , -- the one in which one loses one 's self and that in which one saves one 's self . 
He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kiss that hand . 
At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards his brow , and he took off his cap ; then his arm fell back with the same deliberation , and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more , his cap in his left hand , his club in his right hand , his hair bristling all over his savage head . 
The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifying gaze . 
The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over the chimney-piece , which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them , with a benediction for one and pardon for the other . 
Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow ; then stepped rapidly past the bed , without glancing at the Bishop , straight to the cupboard , which he saw near the head ; he raised his iron candlestick as though to force the lock ; the key was there ; he opened it ; the first thing which presented itself to him was the basket of silverware ; he seized it , traversed the chamber with long strides , without taking any precautions and without troubling himself about the noise , gained the door , re-entered the oratory , opened the window , seized his cudgel , bestrode the window-sill of the ground-floor , put the silver into his knapsack , threw away the basket , crossed the garden , leaped over the wall like a tiger , and fled . 
THE BISHOP WORKS The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling in his garden . 
Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation . 
`` Monseigneur , Monseigneur ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` does your Grace know where the basket of silver is ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` Jesus the Lord be blessed ! '' 
she resumed ; `` I did not know what had become of it . '' 
The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed . 
He presented it to Madame Magloire . 
`` Here it is . '' 
`` Well ! '' 
said she . 
`` Nothing in it ! 
And the silver ? '' 
`` Ah , '' returned the Bishop , `` so it is the silver which troubles you ? 
I do n't know where it is . '' 
`` Great , good God ! 
It is stolen ! 
That man who was here last night has stolen it . '' 
In a twinkling , with all the vivacity of an alert old woman , Madame Magloire had rushed to the oratory , entered the alcove , and returned to the Bishop . 
The Bishop had just bent down , and was sighing as he examined a plant of cochlearia des Guillons , which the basket had broken as it fell across the bed . 
He rose up at Madame Magloire 's cry . 
`` Monseigneur , the man is gone ! 
The silver has been stolen ! '' 
As she uttered this exclamation , her eyes fell upon a corner of the garden , where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible . 
The coping of the wall had been torn away . 
`` Stay ! 
yonder is the way he went . 
He jumped over into Cochefilet Lane . 
Ah , the abomination ! 
He has stolen our silver ! '' 
The Bishop remained silent for a moment ; then he raised his grave eyes , and said gently to Madame Magloire : -- `` And , in the first place , was that silver ours ? '' 
Madame Magloire was speechless . 
Another silence ensued ; then the Bishop went on : -- `` Madame Magloire , I have for a long time detained that silver wrongfully . 
It belonged to the poor . 
Who was that man ? 
A poor man , evidently . '' 
`` Alas ! 
Jesus ! '' 
returned Madame Magloire . 
`` It is not for my sake , nor for Mademoiselle 's . 
It makes no difference to us . 
But it is for the sake of Monseigneur . 
What is Monseigneur to eat with now ? '' 
The Bishop gazed at her with an air of amazement . 
`` Ah , come ! 
Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons ? '' 
Madame Magloire shrugged her shoulders . 
`` Pewter has an odor . '' 
`` Iron forks and spoons , then . '' 
Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace . 
`` Iron has a taste . '' 
`` Very well , '' said the Bishop ; `` wooden ones then . '' 
A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean Valjean had sat on the previous evening . 
As he ate his breakfast , Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister , who said nothing , and to Madame Magloire , who was grumbling under her breath , that one really does not need either fork or spoon , even of wood , in order to dip a bit of bread in a cup of milk . 
`` A pretty idea , truly , '' said Madame Magloire to herself , as she went and came , `` to take in a man like that ! 
and to lodge him close to one 's self ! 
And how fortunate that he did nothing but steal ! 
Ah , mon Dieu ! 
it makes one shudder to think of it ! '' 
As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table , there came a knock at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
The door opened . 
A singular and violent group made its appearance on the threshold . 
Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar . 
The three men were gendarmes ; the other was Jean Valjean . 
A brigadier of gendarmes , who seemed to be in command of the group , was standing near the door . 
He entered and advanced to the Bishop , making a military salute . 
`` Monseigneur -- '' said he . 
At this word , Jean Valjean , who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed , raised his head with an air of stupefaction . 
`` Monseigneur ! '' 
he murmured . 
`` So he is not the cure ? '' 
`` Silence ! '' 
said the gendarme . 
`` He is Monseigneur the Bishop . '' 
In the meantime , Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as his great age permitted . 
`` Ah ! 
here you are ! '' 
he exclaimed , looking at Jean Valjean . 
`` I am glad to see you . 
Well , but how is this ? 
I gave you the candlesticks too , which are of silver like the rest , and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs . 
Why did you not carry them away with your forks and spoons ? '' 
Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide , and stared at the venerable Bishop with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of . 
`` Monseigneur , '' said the brigadier of gendarmes , `` so what this man said is true , then ? 
We came across him . 
He was walking like a man who is running away . 
We stopped him to look into the matter . 
He had this silver -- '' `` And he told you , '' interposed the Bishop with a smile , `` that it had been given to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he had passed the night ? 
I see how the matter stands . 
And you have brought him back here ? 
It is a mistake . '' 
`` In that case , '' replied the brigadier , `` we can let him go ? '' 
`` Certainly , '' replied the Bishop . 
The gendarmes released Jean Valjean , who recoiled . 
`` Is it true that I am to be released ? '' 
he said , in an almost inarticulate voice , and as though he were talking in his sleep . 
`` Yes , thou art released ; dost thou not understand ? '' 
said one of the gendarmes . 
`` My friend , '' resumed the Bishop , `` before you go , here are your candlesticks . 
Take them . '' 
He stepped to the chimney-piece , took the two silver candlesticks , and brought them to Jean Valjean . 
The two women looked on without uttering a word , without a gesture , without a look which could disconcert the Bishop . 
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb . 
He took the two candlesticks mechanically , and with a bewildered air . 
`` Now , '' said the Bishop , `` go in peace . 
By the way , when you return , my friend , it is not necessary to pass through the garden . 
You can always enter and depart through the street door . 
It is never fastened with anything but a latch , either by day or by night . '' 
Then , turning to the gendarmes : -- `` You may retire , gentlemen . '' 
The gendarmes retired . 
Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting . 
The Bishop drew near to him , and said in a low voice : -- `` Do not forget , never forget , that you have promised to use this money in becoming an honest man . '' 
Jean Valjean , who had no recollection of ever having promised anything , remained speechless . 
The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered them . 
He resumed with solemnity : -- `` Jean Valjean , my brother , you no longer belong to evil , but to good . 
It is your soul that I buy from you ; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the spirit of perdition , and I give it to God . '' 
LITTLE GERVAIS Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it . 
He set out at a very hasty pace through the fields , taking whatever roads and paths presented themselves to him , without perceiving that he was incessantly retracing his steps . 
He wandered thus the whole morning , without having eaten anything and without feeling hungry . 
He was the prey of a throng of novel sensations . 
He was conscious of a sort of rage ; he did not know against whom it was directed . 
He could not have told whether he was touched or humiliated . 
There came over him at moments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life . 
This state of mind fatigued him . 
He perceived with dismay that the sort of frightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred upon him was giving way within him . 
He asked himself what would replace this . 
At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison with the gendarmes , and that things should not have happened in this way ; it would have agitated him less . 
Although the season was tolerably far advanced , there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here and there , whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled to him memories of his childhood . 
These memories were almost intolerable to him , it was so long since they had recurred to him . 
Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long . 
As the sun declined to its setting , casting long shadows athwart the soil from every pebble , Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a large ruddy plain , which was absolutely deserted . 
There was nothing on the horizon except the Alps . 
Not even the spire of a distant village . 
Jean Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D -- A path which intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush . 
In the middle of this meditation , which would have contributed not a little to render his rags terrifying to any one who might have encountered him , a joyous sound became audible . 
He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard , about ten years of age , coming up the path and singing , his hurdy-gurdy on his hip , and his marmot-box on his back , One of those gay and gentle children , who go from land to land affording a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers . 
Without stopping his song , the lad halted in his march from time to time , and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his hand -- his whole fortune , probably . 
Among this money there was one forty-sou piece . 
The child halted beside the bush , without perceiving Jean Valjean , and tossed up his handful of sous , which , up to that time , he had caught with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand . 
This time the forty-sou piece escaped him , and went rolling towards the brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean set his foot upon it . 
In the meantime , the child had looked after his coin and had caught sight of him . 
He showed no astonishment , but walked straight up to the man . 
The spot was absolutely solitary . 
As far as the eye could see there was not a person on the plain or on the path . 
The only sound was the tiny , feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage , which was traversing the heavens at an immense height . 
The child was standing with his back to the sun , which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' said the little Savoyard , with that childish confidence which is composed of ignorance and innocence , `` my money . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Little Gervais , sir . '' 
`` Go away , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' resumed the child , `` give me back my money . '' 
Jean Valjean dropped his head , and made no reply . 
The child began again , `` My money , sir . '' 
Jean Valjean 's eyes remained fixed on the earth . 
`` My piece of money ! '' 
cried the child , `` my white piece ! 
my silver ! '' 
It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him . 
The child grasped him by the collar of his blouse and shook him . 
At the same time he made an effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his treasure . 
`` I want my piece of money ! 
my piece of forty sous ! '' 
The child wept . 
Jean Valjean raised his head . 
He still remained seated . 
His eyes were troubled . 
He gazed at the child , in a sort of amazement , then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a terrible voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
`` I , sir , '' replied the child . 
`` Little Gervais ! 
I ! 
Give me back my forty sous , if you please ! 
Take your foot away , sir , if you please ! '' 
Then irritated , though he was so small , and becoming almost menacing : -- `` Come now , will you take your foot away ? 
Take your foot away , or we 'll see ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
It 's still you ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , and rising abruptly to his feet , his foot still resting on the silver piece , he added : -- `` Will you take yourself off ! '' 
The frightened child looked at him , then began to tremble from head to foot , and after a few moments of stupor he set out , running at the top of his speed , without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry . 
Nevertheless , lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain distance , and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing , in the midst of his own revery . 
At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared . 
The sun had set . 
The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean . 
He had eaten nothing all day ; it is probable that he was feverish . 
He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the child 's flight . 
The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular intervals . 
His gaze , fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him , seemed to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient fragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass . 
All at once he shivered ; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening . 
He settled his cap more firmly on his brow , sought mechanically to cross and button his blouse , advanced a step and stopped to pick up his cudgel . 
At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece , which his foot had half ground into the earth , and which was shining among the pebbles . 
It was as though he had received a galvanic shock . 
`` What is this ? '' 
he muttered between his teeth . 
He recoiled three paces , then halted , without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which his foot had trodden but an instant before , as though the thing which lay glittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him . 
At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the silver coin , seized it , and straightened himself up again and began to gaze afar off over the plain , at the same time casting his eyes towards all points of the horizon , as he stood there erect and shivering , like a terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge . 
He saw nothing . 
Night was falling , the plain was cold and vague , great banks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight . 
He said , `` Ah ! '' 
and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child had disappeared . 
After about thirty paces he paused , looked about him and saw nothing . 
Then he shouted with all his might : -- `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
He paused and waited . 
There was no reply . 
The landscape was gloomy and deserted . 
He was encompassed by space . 
There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was lost , and a silence which engulfed his voice . 
An icy north wind was blowing , and imparted to things around him a sort of lugubrious life . 
The bushes shook their thin little arms with incredible fury . 
One would have said that they were threatening and pursuing some one . 
He set out on his march again , then he began to run ; and from time to time he halted and shouted into that solitude , with a voice which was the most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to hear , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
Assuredly , if the child had heard him , he would have been alarmed and would have taken good care not to show himself . 
But the child was no doubt already far away . 
He encountered a priest on horseback . 
He stepped up to him and said : -- `` Monsieur le Cure , have you seen a child pass ? '' 
`` No , '' said the priest . 
`` One named Little Gervais ? '' 
`` I have seen no one . '' 
He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the priest . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , this is for your poor people . 
Monsieur le Cure , he was a little lad , about ten years old , with a marmot , I think , and a hurdy-gurdy . 
One of those Savoyards , you know ? '' 
`` I have not seen him . '' 
`` Little Gervais ? 
There are no villages here ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
`` If he is like what you say , my friend , he is a little stranger . 
Such persons pass through these parts . 
We know nothing of them . '' 
Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence , and gave them to the priest . 
`` For your poor , '' he said . 
Then he added , wildly : -- `` Monsieur l'Abbe , have me arrested . 
I am a thief . '' 
The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste , much alarmed . 
Jean Valjean set out on a run , in the direction which he had first taken . 
In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance , gazing , calling , shouting , but he met no one . 
Two or three times he ran across the plain towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being reclining or crouching down ; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood or rocks nearly on a level with the earth . 
At length , at a spot where three paths intersected each other , he stopped . 
The moon had risen . 
He sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
His shout died away in the mist , without even awakening an echo . 
He murmured yet once more , `` Little Gervais ! '' 
but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice . 
It was his last effort ; his legs gave way abruptly under him , as though an invisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil conscience ; he fell exhausted , on a large stone , his fists clenched in his hair and his face on his knees , and he cried , `` I am a wretch ! '' 
Then his heart burst , and he began to cry . 
It was the first time that he had wept in nineteen years . 
When Jean Valjean left the Bishop 's house , he was , as we have seen , quite thrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto . 
He could not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him . 
He hardened himself against the angelic action and the gentle words of the old man . 
`` You have promised me to become an honest man . 
I buy your soul . 
I take it away from the spirit of perversity ; I give it to the good God . '' 
This recurred to his mind unceasingly . 
To this celestial kindness he opposed pride , which is the fortress of evil within us . 
He was indistinctly conscious that the pardon of this priest was the greatest assault and the most formidable attack which had moved him yet ; that his obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency ; that if he yielded , he should be obliged to renounce that hatred with which the actions of other men had filled his soul through so many years , and which pleased him ; that this time it was necessary to conquer or to be conquered ; and that a struggle , a colossal and final struggle , had been begun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man . 
In the presence of these lights , he proceeded like a man who is intoxicated . 
As he walked thus with haggard eyes , did he have a distinct perception of what might result to him from his adventure at D -- ? 
Did he understand all those mysterious murmurs which warn or importune the spirit at certain moments of life ? 
Did a voice whisper in his ear that he had just passed the solemn hour of his destiny ; that there no longer remained a middle course for him ; that if he were not henceforth the best of men , he would be the worst ; that it behooved him now , so to speak , to mount higher than the Bishop , or fall lower than the convict ; that if he wished to become good be must become an angel ; that if he wished to remain evil , he must become a monster ? 
Here , again , some questions must be put , which we have already put to ourselves elsewhere : did he catch some shadow of all this in his thought , in a confused way ? 
Misfortune certainly , as we have said , does form the education of the intelligence ; nevertheless , it is doubtful whether Jean Valjean was in a condition to disentangle all that we have here indicated . 
If these ideas occurred to him , he but caught glimpses of , rather than saw them , and they only succeeded in throwing him into an unutterable and almost painful state of emotion . 
On emerging from that black and deformed thing which is called the galleys , the Bishop had hurt his soul , as too vivid a light would have hurt his eyes on emerging from the dark . 
The future life , the possible life which offered itself to him henceforth , all pure and radiant , filled him with tremors and anxiety . 
He no longer knew where he really was . 
Like an owl , who should suddenly see the sun rise , the convict had been dazzled and blinded , as it were , by virtue . 
That which was certain , that which he did not doubt , was that he was no longer the same man , that everything about him was changed , that it was no longer in his power to make it as though the Bishop had not spoken to him and had not touched him . 
In this state of mind he had encountered little Gervais , and had robbed him of his forty sous . 
Why ? 
He certainly could not have explained it ; was this the last effect and the supreme effort , as it were , of the evil thoughts which he had brought away from the galleys , -- a remnant of impulse , a result of what is called in statics , acquired force ? 
It was that , and it was also , perhaps , even less than that . 
Let us say it simply , it was not he who stole ; it was not the man ; it was the beast , who , by habit and instinct , had simply placed his foot upon that money , while the intelligence was struggling amid so many novel and hitherto unheard-of thoughts besetting it . 
When intelligence re-awakened and beheld that action of the brute , Jean Valjean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror . 
It was because , -- strange phenomenon , and one which was possible only in the situation in which he found himself , -- in stealing the money from that child , he had done a thing of which he was no longer capable . 
However that may be , this last evil action had a decisive effect on him ; it abruptly traversed that chaos which he bore in his mind , and dispersed it , placed on one side the thick obscurity , and on the other the light , and acted on his soul , in the state in which it then was , as certain chemical reagents act upon a troubled mixture by precipitating one element and clarifying the other . 
First of all , even before examining himself and reflecting , all bewildered , like one who seeks to save himself , he tried to find the child in order to return his money to him ; then , when he recognized the fact that this was impossible , he halted in despair . 
At the moment when he exclaimed `` I am a wretch ! '' 
he had just perceived what he was , and he was already separated from himself to such a degree , that he seemed to himself to be no longer anything more than a phantom , and as if he had , there before him , in flesh and blood , the hideous galley-convict , Jean Valjean , cudgel in hand , his blouse on his hips , his knapsack filled with stolen objects on his back , with his resolute and gloomy visage , with his thoughts filled with abominable projects . 
Excess of unhappiness had , as we have remarked , made him in some sort a visionary . 
This , then , was in the nature of a vision . 
He actually saw that Jean Valjean , that sinister face , before him . 
He had almost reached the point of asking himself who that man was , and he was horrified by him . 
His brain was going through one of those violent and yet perfectly calm moments in which revery is so profound that it absorbs reality . 
One no longer beholds the object which one has before one , and one sees , as though apart from one 's self , the figures which one has in one 's own mind . 
Thus he contemplated himself , so to speak , face to face , and at the same time , athwart this hallucination , he perceived in a mysterious depth a sort of light which he at first took for a torch . 
On scrutinizing this light which appeared to his conscience with more attention , he recognized the fact that it possessed a human form and that this torch was the Bishop . 
His conscience weighed in turn these two men thus placed before it , -- the Bishop and Jean Valjean . 
Nothing less than the first was required to soften the second . 
By one of those singular effects , which are peculiar to this sort of ecstasies , in proportion as his revery continued , as the Bishop grew great and resplendent in his eyes , so did Jean Valjean grow less and vanish . 
After a certain time he was no longer anything more than a shade . 
All at once he disappeared . 
The Bishop alone remained ; he filled the whole soul of this wretched man with a magnificent radiance . 
Jean Valjean wept for a long time . 
He wept burning tears , he sobbed with more weakness than a woman , with more fright than a child . 
As he wept , daylight penetrated more and more clearly into his soul ; an extraordinary light ; a light at once ravishing and terrible . 
His past life , his first fault , his long expiation , his external brutishness , his internal hardness , his dismissal to liberty , rejoicing in manifold plans of vengeance , what had happened to him at the Bishop 's , the last thing that he had done , that theft of forty sous from a child , a crime all the more cowardly , and all the more monstrous since it had come after the Bishop 's pardon , -- all this recurred to his mind and appeared clearly to him , but with a clearness which he had never hitherto witnessed . 
He examined his life , and it seemed horrible to him ; his soul , and it seemed frightful to him . 
In the meantime a gentle light rested over this life and this soul . 
It seemed to him that he beheld Satan by the light of Paradise . 
How many hours did he weep thus ? 
What did he do after he had wept ? 
Whither did he go ! 
No one ever knew . 
The only thing which seems to be authenticated is that that same night the carrier who served Grenoble at that epoch , and who arrived at D -- about three o'clock in the morning , saw , as he traversed the street in which the Bishop 's residence was situated , a man in the attitude of prayer , kneeling on the pavement in the shadow , in front of the door of Monseigneur Welcome . 
THE YEAR 1817 1817 is the year which Louis XVIII. , with a certain royal assurance which was not wanting in pride , entitled the twenty-second of his reign . 
It is the year in which M. Bruguiere de Sorsum was celebrated . 
All the hairdressers ' shops , hoping for powder and the return of the royal bird , were besmeared with azure and decked with fleurs-de-lys . 
It was the candid time at which Count Lynch sat every Sunday as church-warden in the church-warden 's pew of Saint-Germain-des-Pres , in his costume of a peer of France , with his red ribbon and his long nose and the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed a brilliant action . 
The brilliant action performed by M. Lynch was this : being mayor of Bordeaux , on the 12th of March , 1814 , he had surrendered the city a little too promptly to M. the Duke d'Angouleme . 
Hence his peerage . 
In 1817 fashion swallowed up little boys of from four to six years of age in vast caps of morocco leather with ear-tabs resembling Esquimaux mitres . 
The French army was dressed in white , after the mode of the Austrian ; the regiments were called legions ; instead of numbers they bore the names of departments ; Napoleon was at St. Helena ; and since England refused him green cloth , he was having his old coats turned . 
In 1817 Pelligrini sang ; Mademoiselle Bigottini danced ; Potier reigned ; Odry did not yet exist . 
Madame Saqui had succeeded to Forioso . 
There were still Prussians in France . 
M. Delalot was a personage . 
Legitimacy had just asserted itself by cutting off the hand , then the head , of Pleignier , of Carbonneau , and of Tolleron . 
The Prince de Talleyrand , grand chamberlain , and the Abbe Louis , appointed minister of finance , laughed as they looked at each other , with the laugh of the two augurs ; both of them had celebrated , on the 14th of July , 1790 , the mass of federation in the Champ de Mars ; Talleyrand had said it as bishop , Louis had served it in the capacity of deacon . 
In 1817 , in the side-alleys of this same Champ de Mars , two great cylinders of wood might have been seen lying in the rain , rotting amid the grass , painted blue , with traces of eagles and bees , from which the gilding was falling . 
These were the columns which two years before had upheld the Emperor 's platform in the Champ de Mai . 
They were blackened here and there with the scorches of the bivouac of Austrians encamped near Gros-Caillou . 
Two or three of these columns had disappeared in these bivouac fires , and had warmed the large hands of the Imperial troops . 
The Field of May had this remarkable point : that it had been held in the month of June and in the Field of March -LRB- Mars -RRB- . 
In this year , 1817 , two things were popular : the Voltaire-Touquet and the snuff-box a la Charter . 
The most recent Parisian sensation was the crime of Dautun , who had thrown his brother 's head into the fountain of the Flower-Market . 
They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department , on account of the lack of news from that fatal frigate , The Medusa , which was destined to cover Chaumareix with infamy and Gericault with glory . 
Colonel Selves was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha . 
The palace of Thermes , in the Rue de La Harpe , served as a shop for a cooper . 
On the platform of the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny , the little shed of boards , which had served as an observatory to Messier , the naval astronomer under Louis XVI. , was still to be seen . 
The Duchesse de Duras read to three or four friends her unpublished Ourika , in her boudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin . 
The N 's were scratched off the Louvre . 
The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated , and was entitled the bridge of the King 's Garden -LSB- du Jardin du Roi -RSB- , a double enigma , which disguised the bridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes at one stroke . 
Louis XVIII. , much preoccupied while annotating Horace with the corner of his finger-nail , heroes who have become emperors , and makers of wooden shoes who have become dauphins , had two anxieties , -- Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau . 
The French Academy had given for its prize subject , The Happiness procured through Study . 
M. Bellart was officially eloquent . 
In his shadow could be seen germinating that future advocate-general of Broe , dedicated to the sarcasms of Paul-Louis Courier . 
There was a false Chateaubriand , named Marchangy , in the interim , until there should be a false Marchangy , named d'Arlincourt . 
Claire d'Albe and Malek-Adel were masterpieces ; Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of the epoch . 
The Institute had the academician , Napoleon Bonaparte , stricken from its list of members . 
A royal ordinance erected Angouleme into a naval school ; for the Duc d'Angouleme , being lord high admiral , it was evident that the city of Angouleme had all the qualities of a seaport ; otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound . 
In the Council of Ministers the question was agitated whether vignettes representing slack-rope performances , which adorned Franconi 's advertising posters , and which attracted throngs of street urchins , should be tolerated . 
M. Paer , the author of Agnese , a good sort of fellow , with a square face and a wart on his cheek , directed the little private concerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye in the Rue Ville l'Eveque . 
All the young girls were singing the Hermit of Saint-Avelle , with words by Edmond Geraud . 
The Yellow Dwarf was transferred into Mirror . 
The Cafe Lemblin stood up for the Emperor , against the Cafe Valois , which upheld the Bourbons . 
The Duc de Berri , already surveyed from the shadow by Louvel , had just been married to a princess of Sicily . 
Madame de Stael had died a year previously . 
The body-guard hissed Mademoiselle Mars . 
The grand newspapers were all very small . 
Their form was restricted , but their liberty was great . 
The Constitutionnel was constitutional . 
La Minerve called Chateaubriand Chateaubriant . 
That t made the good middle-class people laugh heartily at the expense of the great writer . 
In journals which sold themselves , prostituted journalists , insulted the exiles of 1815 . 
David had no longer any talent , Arnault had no longer any wit , Carnot was no longer honest , Soult had won no battles ; it is true that Napoleon had no longer any genius . 
No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent to an exile by post very rarely reached him , as the police made it their religious duty to intercept them . 
This is no new fact ; Descartes complained of it in his exile . 
Now David , having , in a Belgian publication , shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had been written to him , it struck the royalist journals as amusing ; and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion . 
What separated two men more than an abyss was to say , the regicides , or to say the voters ; to say the enemies , or to say the allies ; to say Napoleon , or to say Buonaparte . 
All sensible people were agreed that the era of revolution had been closed forever by King Louis XVIII. , surnamed `` The Immortal Author of the Charter . '' 
On the platform of the Pont-Neuf , the word Redivivus was carved on the pedestal that awaited the statue of Henry IV . 
M. Piet , in the Rue Therese , No. 4 , was making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the monarchy . 
The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures , `` We must write to Bacot . '' 
MM . 
Canuel , O'Mahoney , and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch , to some extent with Monsieur 's approval , of what was to become later on `` The Conspiracy of the Bord de l'Eau '' -- of the waterside . 
L'Epingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter . 
Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff . 
M. Decazes , who was liberal to a degree , reigned . 
Chateaubriand stood every morning at his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique , clad in footed trousers , and slippers , with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair , with his eyes fixed on a mirror , a complete set of dentist 's instruments spread out before him , cleaning his teeth , which were charming , while he dictated The Monarchy according to the Charter to M. Pilorge , his secretary . 
Criticism , assuming an authoritative tone , preferred Lafon to Talma . 
M. de Feletez signed himself A. ; M. Hoffmann signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote Therese Aubert . 
Divorce was abolished . 
Lyceums called themselves colleges . 
The collegians , decorated on the collar with a golden fleur-de-lys , fought each other apropos of the King of Rome . 
The counter-police of the chateau had denounced to her Royal Highness Madame , the portrait , everywhere exhibited , of M. the Duc d'Orleans , who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of hussars than M. the Duc de Berri , in his uniform of colonel-general of dragoons -- a serious inconvenience . 
The city of Paris was having the dome of the Invalides regilded at its own expense . 
Serious men asked themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such an occasion ; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M. Clausel de Coussergues ; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied . 
The comedian Picard , who belonged to the Academy , which the comedian Moliere had not been able to do , had The Two Philiberts played at the Odeon , upon whose pediment the removal of the letters still allowed THEATRE OF THE EMPRESS to be plainly read . 
People took part for or against Cugnet de Montarlot . 
Fabvier was factious ; Bavoux was revolutionary . 
The Liberal , Pelicier , published an edition of Voltaire , with the following title : Works of Voltaire , of the French Academy . 
`` That will attract purchasers , '' said the ingenious editor . 
The general opinion was that M. Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century ; envy was beginning to gnaw at him -- a sign of glory ; and this verse was composed on him : -- `` Even when Loyson steals , one feels that he has paws . '' 
As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign , M. de Pins , Archbishop of Amasie , administered the diocese of Lyons . 
The quarrel over the valley of Dappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from Captain , afterwards General Dufour . 
Saint-Simon , ignored , was erecting his sublime dream . 
There was a celebrated Fourier at the Academy of Science , whom posterity has forgotten ; and in some garret an obscure Fourier , whom the future will recall . 
Lord Byron was beginning to make his mark ; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France in these terms : a certain Lord Baron . 
David d'Angers was trying to work in marble . 
The Abbe Caron was speaking , in terms of praise , to a private gathering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines , of an unknown priest , named Felicite-Robert , who , at a latter date , became Lamennais . 
A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the Tuileries , from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV. ; it was a piece of mechanism which was not good for much ; a sort of plaything , the idle dream of a dream-ridden inventor ; an utopia -- a steamboat . 
The Parisians stared indifferently at this useless thing . 
M. de Vaublanc , the reformer of the Institute by a coup d'etat , the distinguished author of numerous academicians , ordinances , and batches of members , after having created them , could not succeed in becoming one himself . 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the pavilion de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau for prefect of police , on account of his piety . 
Dupuytren and Recamier entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine , and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of the divinity of Jesus Christ . 
Cuvier , with one eye on Genesis and the other on nature , tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with texts and by making mastodons flatter Moses . 
M. Francois de Neufchateau , the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory of Parmentier , made a thousand efforts to have pomme de terre -LSB- potato -RSB- pronounced parmentiere , and succeeded therein not at all . 
The Abbe Gregoire , ex-bishop , ex-conventionary , ex-senator , had passed , in the royalist polemics , to the state of `` Infamous Gregoire . '' 
The locution of which we have made use -- passed to the state of -- has been condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard . 
Under the third arch of the Pont de Jena , the new stone with which , the two years previously , the mining aperture made by Blucher to blow up the bridge had been stopped up , was still recognizable on account of its whiteness . 
Justice summoned to its bar a man who , on seeing the Comte d'Artois enter Notre Dame , had said aloud : `` Sapristi ! 
I regret the time when I saw Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage , arm in arm . '' 
A seditious utterance . 
Six months in prison . 
Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned ; men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secret of their recompense , and strutted immodestly in the light of day , in the cynicism of riches and dignities ; deserters from Ligny and Quatre-Bras , in the brazenness of their well-paid turpitude , exhibited their devotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner . 
This is what floats up confusedly , pell-mell , for the year 1817 , and is now forgotten . 
History neglects nearly all these particulars , and can not do otherwise ; the infinity would overwhelm it . 
Nevertheless , these details , which are wrongly called trivial , -- there are no trivial facts in humanity , nor little leaves in vegetation , -- are useful . 
It is of the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries is composed . 
In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged `` a fine farce . '' 
A DOUBLE QUARTETTE These Parisians came , one from Toulouse , another from Limoges , the third from Cahors , and the fourth from Montauban ; but they were students ; and when one says student , one says Parisian : to study in Paris is to be born in Paris . 
These young men were insignificant ; every one has seen such faces ; four specimens of humanity taken at random ; neither good nor bad , neither wise nor ignorant , neither geniuses nor fools ; handsome , with that charming April which is called twenty years . 
They were four Oscars ; for , at that epoch , Arthurs did not yet exist . 
Burn for him the perfumes of Araby ! 
exclaimed romance . 
Oscar advances . 
Oscar , I shall behold him ! 
People had just emerged from Ossian ; elegance was Scandinavian and Caledonian ; the pure English style was only to prevail later , and the first of the Arthurs , Wellington , had but just won the battle of Waterloo . 
These Oscars bore the names , one of Felix Tholomyes , of Toulouse ; the second , Listolier , of Cahors ; the next , Fameuil , of Limoges ; the last , Blachevelle , of Montauban . 
Naturally , each of them had his mistress . 
Blachevelle loved Favourite , so named because she had been in England ; Listolier adored Dahlia , who had taken for her nickname the name of a flower ; Fameuil idolized Zephine , an abridgment of Josephine ; Tholomyes had Fantine , called the Blonde , because of her beautiful , sunny hair . 
Favourite , Dahlia , Zephine , and Fantine were four ravishing young women , perfumed and radiant , still a little like working-women , and not yet entirely divorced from their needles ; somewhat disturbed by intrigues , but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity of toil , and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives the first fall in woman . 
One of the four was called the young , because she was the youngest of them , and one was called the old ; the old one was twenty-three . 
Not to conceal anything , the three first were more experienced , more heedless , and more emancipated into the tumult of life than Fantine the Blonde , who was still in her first illusions . 
Dahlia , Zephine , and especially Favourite , could not have said as much . 
There had already been more than one episode in their romance , though hardly begun ; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second , and Gustave in the third . 
Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors ; one scolds and the other flatters , and the beautiful daughters of the people have both of them whispering in their ear , each on its own side . 
These badly guarded souls listen . 
Hence the falls which they accomplish , and the stones which are thrown at them . 
They are overwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible . 
Alas ! 
what if the Jungfrau were hungry ? 
Favourite having been in England , was admired by Dahlia and Zephine . 
She had had an establishment of her own very early in life . 
Her father was an old unmarried professor of mathematics , a brutal man and a braggart , who went out to give lessons in spite of his age . 
This professor , when he was a young man , had one day seen a chambermaid 's gown catch on a fender ; he had fallen in love in consequence of this accident . 
The result had been Favourite . 
She met her father from time to time , and he bowed to her . 
One morning an old woman with the air of a devotee , had entered her apartments , and had said to her , `` You do not know me , Mamemoiselle ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I am your mother . '' 
Then the old woman opened the sideboard , and ate and drank , had a mattress which she owned brought in , and installed herself . 
This cross and pious old mother never spoke to Favourite , remained hours without uttering a word , breakfasted , dined , and supped for four , and went down to the porter 's quarters for company , where she spoke ill of her daughter . 
It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia to Listolier , to others perhaps , to idleness . 
How could she make such nails work ? 
She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her hands . 
As for Zephine , she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and caressing little way of saying `` Yes , sir . '' 
