There is a market for human flesh ; and it is not with your shadowy hands , shuddering around them , that you will prevent them from entering it ! 
Think of the street , think of the pavement covered with passers-by , think of the shops past which women go and come with necks all bare , and through the mire . 
These women , too , were pure once . 
Think of your sisters , those of you who have them . 
Misery , prostitution , the police , Saint-Lazare -- that is what those beautiful , delicate girls , those fragile marvels of modesty , gentleness and loveliness , fresher than lilacs in the month of May , will come to . 
Ah ! 
you have got yourselves killed ! 
You are no longer on hand ! 
That is well ; you have wished to release the people from Royalty , and you deliver over your daughters to the police . 
Friends , have a care , have mercy . 
Women , unhappy women , we are not in the habit of bestowing much thought on them . 
We trust to the women not having received a man 's education , we prevent their reading , we prevent their thinking , we prevent their occupying themselves with politics ; will you prevent them from going to the dead-house this evening , and recognizing your bodies ? 
Let us see , those who have families must be tractable , and shake hands with us and take themselves off , and leave us here alone to attend to this affair . 
I know well that courage is required to leave , that it is hard ; but the harder it is , the more meritorious . 
You say : ` I have a gun , I am at the barricade ; so much the worse , I shall remain there . ' 
So much the worse is easily said . 
My friends , there is a morrow ; you will not be here to-morrow , but your families will ; and what sufferings ! 
See , here is a pretty , healthy child , with cheeks like an apple , who babbles , prattles , chatters , who laughs , who smells sweet beneath your kiss , -- and do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned ? 
I have seen one , a very small creature , no taller than that . 
His father was dead . 
Poor people had taken him in out of charity , but they had bread only for themselves . 
The child was always hungry . 
It was winter . 
He did not cry . 
You could see him approach the stove , in which there was never any fire , and whose pipe , you know , was of mastic and yellow clay . 
His breathing was hoarse , his face livid , his limbs flaccid , his belly prominent . 
He said nothing . 
If you spoke to him , he did not answer . 
He is dead . 
He was taken to the Necker Hospital , where I saw him . 
I was house-surgeon in that hospital . 
Now , if there are any fathers among you , fathers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child 's tiny hand in their robust hand , let each one of those fathers imagine that this child is his own . 
That poor brat , I remember , and I seem to see him now , when he lay nude on the dissecting table , how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves beneath the grass in a cemetery . 
A sort of mud was found in his stomach . 
There were ashes in his teeth . 
Come , let us examine ourselves conscientiously and take counsel with our heart . 
Statistics show that the mortality among abandoned children is fifty-five per cent . 
I repeat , it is a question of women , it concerns mothers , it concerns young girls , it concerns little children . 
Who is talking to you of yourselves ? 
We know well what you are ; we know well that you are all brave , parbleu ! 
we know well that you all have in your souls the joy and the glory of giving your life for the great cause ; we know well that you feel yourselves elected to die usefully and magnificently , and that each one of you clings to his share in the triumph . 
Very well . 
But you are not alone in this world . 
There are other beings of whom you must think . 
You must not be egoists . '' 
All dropped their heads with a gloomy air . 
Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments . 
Combeferre , who spoke thus , was not an orphan . 
He recalled the mothers of other men , and forgot his own . 
He was about to get himself killed . 
He was `` an egoist . '' 
Marius , fasting , fevered , having emerged in succession from all hope , and having been stranded in grief , the most sombre of shipwrecks , and saturated with violent emotions and conscious that the end was near , had plunged deeper and deeper into that visionary stupor which always precedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted . 
A physiologist might have studied in him the growing symptoms of that febrile absorption known to , and classified by , science , and which is to suffering what voluptuousness is to pleasure . 
Despair , also , has its ecstasy . 
Marius had reached this point . 
He looked on at everything as from without ; as we have said , things which passed before him seemed far away ; he made out the whole , but did not perceive the details . 
He beheld men going and coming as through a flame . 
He heard voices speaking as at the bottom of an abyss . 
But this moved him . 
There was in this scene a point which pierced and roused even him . 
He had but one idea now , to die ; and he did not wish to be turned aside from it , but he reflected , in his gloomy somnambulism , that while destroying himself , he was not prohibited from saving some one else . 
He raised his voice . 
`` Enjolras and Combeferre are right , '' said he ; `` no unnecessary sacrifice . 
I join them , and you must make haste . 
Combeferre has said convincing things to you . 
There are some among you who have families , mothers , sisters , wives , children . 
Let such leave the ranks . '' 
No one stirred . 
`` Married men and the supporters of families , step out of the ranks ! '' 
repeated Marius . 
His authority was great . 
Enjolras was certainly the head of the barricade , but Marius was its savior . 
`` I order it , '' cried Enjolras . 
`` I entreat you , '' said Marius . 
Then , touched by Combeferre 's words , shaken by Enjolras ' order , touched by Marius ' entreaty , these heroic men began to denounce each other . 
-- `` It is true , '' said one young man to a full grown man , `` you are the father of a family . 
Go . '' 
-- `` It is your duty rather , '' retorted the man , `` you have two sisters whom you maintain . '' 
-- And an unprecedented controversy broke forth . 
Each struggled to determine which should not allow himself to be placed at the door of the tomb . 
`` Make haste , '' said Courfeyrac , `` in another quarter of an hour it will be too late . '' 
`` Citizens , '' pursued Enjolras , `` this is the Republic , and universal suffrage reigns . 
Do you yourselves designate those who are to go . '' 
They obeyed . 
After the expiration of a few minutes , five were unanimously selected and stepped out of the ranks . 
`` There are five of them ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
There were only four uniforms . 
`` Well , '' began the five , `` one must stay behind . '' 
And then a struggle arose as to who should remain , and who should find reasons for the others not remaining . 
The generous quarrel began afresh . 
`` You have a wife who loves you . '' 
-- `` You have your aged mother . '' 
-- '' You have neither father nor mother , and what is to become of your three little brothers ? '' 
-- `` You are the father of five children . '' 
-- `` You have a right to live , you are only seventeen , it is too early for you to die . '' 
These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points for heroism . 
The improbable was simple there . 
These men did not astonish each other . 
`` Be quick , '' repeated Courfeyrac . 
Men shouted to Marius from the groups : `` Do you designate who is to remain . '' 
`` Yes , '' said the five , `` choose . 
We will obey you . '' 
Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion . 
Still , at this idea , that of choosing a man for death , his blood rushed back to his heart . 
He would have turned pale , had it been possible for him to become any paler . 
He advanced towards the five , who smiled upon him , and each , with his eyes full of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths of history hovering over Thermopylae , cried to him : `` Me ! 
me ! 
me ! '' 
And Marius stupidly counted them ; there were still five of them ! 
Then his glance dropped to the four uniforms . 
At that moment , a fifth uniform fell , as if from heaven , upon the other four . 
The fifth man was saved . 
Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade . 
He had arrived by way of Mondetour lane , whither by dint of inquiries made , or by instinct , or chance . 
Thanks to his dress of a National Guardsman , he had made his way without difficulty . 
The sentinel stationed by the insurgents in the Rue Mondetour had no occasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman , and he had allowed the latter to entangle himself in the street , saying to himself : `` Probably it is a reinforcement , in any case it is a prisoner . '' 
The moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoning his duty and his post of observation . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt , no one had noticed him , all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms . 
Jean Valjean also had seen and heard , and he had silently removed his coat and flung it on the pile with the rest . 
The emotion aroused was indescribable . 
`` Who is this man ? '' 
demanded Bossuet . 
`` He is a man who saves others , '' replied Combeferre . 
Marius added in a grave voice : `` I know him . '' 
This guarantee satisfied every one . 
Enjolras turned to Jean Valjean . 
`` Welcome , citizen . '' 
And he added : `` You know that we are about to die . '' 
Jean Valjean , without replying , helped the insurgent whom he was saving to don his uniform . 
THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A BARRICADE The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place , had as result and culminating point Enjolras ' supreme melancholy . 
Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution ; he was incomplete , however , so far as the absolute can be so ; he had too much of Saint-Just about him , and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots ; still , his mind , in the society of the Friends of the A B C , had ended by undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre 's ideas ; for some time past , he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form of dogma , and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence of progress , and he had come to accept , as a definitive and magnificent evolution , the transformation of the great French Republic , into the immense human republic . 
As far as the immediate means were concerned , a violent situation being given , he wished to be violent ; on that point , he never varied ; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is summed up in the words : `` Eighty-three . '' 
Enjolras was standing erect on the staircase of paving-stones , one elbow resting on the stock of his gun . 
He was engaged in thought ; he quivered , as at the passage of prophetic breaths ; places where death is have these effects of tripods . 
A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes , which were filled with an inward look . 
All at once he threw back his head , his blond locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of stars , they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo , and Enjolras cried : `` Citizens , do you picture the future to yourselves ? 
The streets of cities inundated with light , green branches on the thresholds , nations sisters , men just , old men blessing children , the past loving the present , thinkers entirely at liberty , believers on terms of full equality , for religion heaven , God the direct priest , human conscience become an altar , no more hatreds , the fraternity of the workshop and the school , for sole penalty and recompense fame , work for all , right for all , peace over all , no more bloodshed , no more wars , happy mothers ! 
To conquer matter is the first step ; to realize the ideal is the second . 
Reflect on what progress has already accomplished . 
Formerly , the first human races beheld with terror the hydra pass before their eyes , breathing on the waters , the dragon which vomited flame , the griffin who was the monster of the air , and who flew with the wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger ; fearful beasts which were above man . 
Man , nevertheless , spread his snares , consecrated by intelligence , and finally conquered these monsters . 
We have vanquished the hydra , and it is called the locomotive ; we are on the point of vanquishing the griffin , we already grasp it , and it is called the balloon . 
On the day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished , and when man shall have definitely harnessed to his will the triple Chimaera of antiquity , the hydra , the dragon and the griffin , he will be the master of water , fire , and of air , and he will be for the rest of animated creation that which the ancient gods formerly were to him . 
Courage , and onward ! 
Citizens , whither are we going ? 
To science made government , to the force of things become the sole public force , to the natural law , having in itself its sanction and its penalty and promulgating itself by evidence , to a dawn of truth corresponding to a dawn of day . 
We are advancing to the union of peoples ; we are advancing to the unity of man . 
No more fictions ; no more parasites . 
The real governed by the true , that is the goal . 
Civilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe , and , later on , at the centre of continents , in a grand parliament of the intelligence . 
Something similar has already been seen . 
The amphictyons had two sittings a year , one at Delphos the seat of the gods , the other at Thermopylae , the place of heroes . 
Europe will have her amphictyons ; the globe will have its amphictyons . 
France bears this sublime future in her breast . 
This is the gestation of the nineteenth century . 
That which Greece sketched out is worthy of being finished by France . 
Listen to me , you , Feuilly , valiant artisan , man of the people . 
I revere you . 
Yes , you clearly behold the future , yes , you are right . 
You had neither father nor mother , Feuilly ; you adopted humanity for your mother and right for your father . 
You are about to die , that is to say to triumph , here . 
Citizens , whatever happens to-day , through our defeat as well as through our victory , it is a revolution that we are about to create . 
As conflagrations light up a whole city , so revolutions illuminate the whole human race . 
And what is the revolution that we shall cause ? 
I have just told you , the Revolution of the True . 
From a political point of view , there is but a single principle ; the sovereignty of man over himself . 
This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty . 
Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined , the state begins . 
But in that association there is no abdication . 
Each sovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself , for the purpose of forming the common right . 
This quantity is the same for all of us . 
This identity of concession which each makes to all , is called Equality . 
Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on the right of each . 
This protection of all over each is called Fraternity . 
The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is called society . 
This intersection being a junction , this point is a knot . 
Hence what is called the social bond . 
Some say social contract ; which is the same thing , the word contract being etymologically formed with the idea of a bond . 
Let us come to an understanding about equality ; for , if liberty is the summit , equality is the base . 
Equality , citizens , is not wholly a surface vegetation , a society of great blades of grass and tiny oaks ; a proximity of jealousies which render each other null and void ; legally speaking , it is all aptitudes possessed of the same opportunity ; politically , it is all votes possessed of the same weight ; religiously , it is all consciences possessed of the same right . 
Equality has an organ : gratuitous and obligatory instruction . 
The right to the alphabet , that is where the beginning must be made . 
The primary school imposed on all , the secondary school offered to all , that is the law . 
From an identical school , an identical society will spring . 
Yes , instruction ! 
light ! 
light ! 
everything comes from light , and to it everything returns . 
Citizens , the nineteenth century is great , but the twentieth century will be happy . 
Then , there will be nothing more like the history of old , we shall no longer , as to-day , have to fear a conquest , an invasion , a usurpation , a rivalry of nations , arms in hand , an interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings , on a birth in hereditary tyrannies , a partition of peoples by a congress , a dismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty , a combat of two religions meeting face to face , like two bucks in the dark , on the bridge of the infinite ; we shall no longer have to fear famine , farming out , prostitution arising from distress , misery from the failure of work and the scaffold and the sword , and battles and the ruffianism of chance in the forest of events . 
One might almost say : There will be no more events . 
We shall be happy . 
The human race will accomplish its law , as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law ; harmony will be re-established between the soul and the star ; the soul will gravitate around the truth , as the planet around the light . 
Friends , the present hour in which I am addressing you , is a gloomy hour ; but these are terrible purchases of the future . 
A revolution is a toll . 
Oh ! 
the human race will be delivered , raised up , consoled ! 
We affirm it on this barrier . 
Whence should proceed that cry of love , if not from the heights of sacrifice ? 
Oh my brothers , this is the point of junction , of those who think and of those who suffer ; this barricade is not made of paving-stones , nor of joists , nor of bits of iron ; it is made of two heaps , a heap of ideas , and a heap of woes . 
Here misery meets the ideal . 
The day embraces the night , and says to it : ` I am about to die , and thou shalt be born again with me . ' 
From the embrace of all desolations faith leaps forth . 
Sufferings bring hither their agony and ideas their immortality . 
This agony and this immortality are about to join and constitute our death . 
Brothers , he who dies here dies in the radiance of the future , and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the dawn . '' 
Enjolras paused rather than became silent ; his lips continued to move silently , as though he were talking to himself , which caused them all to gaze attentively at him , in the endeavor to hear more . 
There was no applause ; but they whispered together for a long time . 
Speech being a breath , the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves . 
MARIUS HAGGARD , JAVERT LACONIC Let us narrate what was passing in Marius ' thoughts . 
Let the reader recall the state of his soul . 
We have just recalled it , everything was a vision to him now . 
His judgment was disturbed . 
Marius , let us insist on this point , was under the shadow of the great , dark wings which are spread over those in the death agony . 
He felt that he had entered the tomb , it seemed to him that he was already on the other side of the wall , and he no longer beheld the faces of the living except with the eyes of one dead . 
How did M. Fauchelevent come there ? 
Why was he there ? 
What had he come there to do ? 
Marius did not address all these questions to himself . 
Besides , since our despair has this peculiarity , that it envelops others as well as ourselves , it seemed logical to him that all the world should come thither to die . 
Only , he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart . 
However , M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him , did not look at him , and had not even the air of hearing him , when Marius raised his voice to say : `` I know him . '' 
As far as Marius was concerned , this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was comforting , and , if such a word can be used for such impressions , we should say that it pleased him . 
He had always felt the absolute impossibility of addressing that enigmatical man , who was , in his eyes , both equivocal and imposing . 
Moreover , it had been a long time since he had seen him ; and this still further augmented the impossibility for Marius ' timid and reserved nature . 
The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondetour lane ; they bore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard . 
One of them wept as he took his leave . 
Before setting out , they embraced those who remained . 
When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure , Enjolras thought of the man who had been condemned to death . 
He entered the tap-room . 
Javert , still bound to the post , was engaged in meditation . 
`` Do you want anything ? '' 
Enjolras asked him . 
`` Javert replied : `` When are you going to kill me ? '' 
`` Wait . 
We need all our cartridges just at present . '' 
`` Then give me a drink , '' said Javert . 
Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water , and , as Javert was pinioned , he helped him to drink . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
inquired Enjolras . 
`` I am uncomfortable against this post , '' replied Javert . 
`` You are not tender to have left me to pass the night here . 
Bind me as you please , but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man . '' 
And with a motion of the head , he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf . 
There was , as the reader will remember , a long , broad table at the end of the room , on which they had been running bullets and making cartridges . 
All the cartridges having been made , and all the powder used , this table was free . 
At Enjolras ' command , four insurgents unbound Javert from the post . 
While they were loosing him , a fifth held a bayonet against his breast . 
Leaving his arms tied behind his back , they placed about his feet a slender but stout whip-cord , as is done to men on the point of mounting the scaffold , which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in length , and made him walk to the table at the end of the room , where they laid him down , closely bound about the middle of the body . 
By way of further security , and by means of a rope fastened to his neck , they added to the system of ligatures which rendered every attempt at escape impossible , that sort of bond which is called in prisons a martingale , which , starting at the neck , forks on the stomach , and meets the hands , after passing between the legs . 
While they were binding Javert , a man standing on the threshold was surveying him with singular attention . 
The shadow cast by this man made Javert turn his head . 
He raised his eyes , and recognized Jean Valjean . 
He did not even start , but dropped his lids proudly and confined himself to the remark : `` It is perfectly simple . '' 
THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED The daylight was increasing rapidly . 
Not a window was opened , not a door stood ajar ; it was the dawn but not the awaking . 
The end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , opposite the barricade , had been evacuated by the troops , as we have stated it seemed to be free , and presented itself to passers-by with a sinister tranquillity . 
The Rue Saint-Denis was as dumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at Thebes . 
Not a living being in the cross-roads , which gleamed white in the light of the sun . 
Nothing is so mournful as this light in deserted streets . 
Nothing was to be seen , but there was something to be heard . 
A mysterious movement was going on at a certain distance . 
It was evident that the critical moment was approaching . 
As on the previous evening , the sentinels had come in ; but this time all had come . 
The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack . 
Since the departure of the five , they had increased its height still further . 
On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the Halles , Enjolras , for fear of a surprise in the rear , came to a serious decision . 
He had the small gut of the Mondetour lane , which had been left open up to that time , barricaded . 
For this purpose , they tore up the pavement for the length of several houses more . 
In this manner , the barricade , walled on three streets , in front on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la Petite Truanderie , to the right on the Rue Mondetour , was really almost impregnable ; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there . 
It had three fronts , but no exit . 
-- `` A fortress but a rat hole too , '' said Courfeyrac with a laugh . 
Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones `` torn up in excess , '' said Bossuet , piled up near the door of the wine-shop . 
The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must needs come , that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle . 
An allowance of brandy was doled out to each . 
Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault . 
Each man selects his place as though at the theatre . 
They jostle , and elbow and crowd each other . 
There are some who make stalls of paving-stones . 
Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way , it is removed ; here is a redan which may afford protection , they take shelter behind it . 
Left-handed men are precious ; they take the places that are inconvenient to the rest . 
Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture . 
They wish to be at ease to kill , and to die comfortably . 
In the sad war of June , 1848 , an insurgent who was a formidable marksman , and who was firing from the top of a terrace upon a roof , had a reclining-chair brought there for his use ; a charge of grape-shot found him out there . 
As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for action , all disorderly movements cease ; there is no more pulling from one another ; there are no more coteries ; no more asides , there is no more holding aloof ; everything in their spirits converges in , and changes into , a waiting for the assailants . 
A barricade before the arrival of danger is chaos ; in danger , it is discipline itself . 
Peril produces order . 
As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle , and had placed himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for himself , all the rest held their peace . 
A series of faint , sharp noises resounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones . 
It was the men cocking their guns . 
Moreover , their attitudes were prouder , more confident than ever ; the excess of sacrifice strengthens ; they no longer cherished any hope , but they had despair , despair , -- the last weapon , which sometimes gives victory ; Virgil has said so . 
Supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions . 
To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a shipwreck ; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety . 
As on the preceding evening , the attention of all was directed , we might almost say leaned upon , the end of the street , now lighted up and visible . 
They had not long to wait . 
A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu quarter , but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack . 
A clashing of chains , the uneasy jolting of a mass , the click of brass skipping along the pavement , a sort of solemn uproar , announced that some sinister construction of iron was approaching . 
There arose a tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets , pierced and built for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas , and which are not made for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war . 
The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the street became ferocious . 
A cannon made its appearance . 
Artillery-men were pushing the piece ; it was in firing trim ; the fore-carriage had been detached ; two upheld the gun-carriage , four were at the wheels ; others followed with the caisson . 
They could see the smoke of the burning lint-stock . 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The whole barricade fired , the report was terrible ; an avalanche of smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men ; after a few seconds , the cloud dispersed , and the cannon and men re-appeared ; the gun-crew had just finished rolling it slowly , correctly , without haste , into position facing the barricade . 
Not one of them had been struck . 
Then the captain of the piece , bearing down upon the breech in order to raise the muzzle , began to point the cannon with the gravity of an astronomer levelling a telescope . 
`` Bravo for the cannoneers ! '' 
cried Bossuet . 
And the whole barricade clapped their hands . 
A moment later , squarely planted in the very middle of the street , astride of the gutter , the piece was ready for action . 
A formidable pair of jaws yawned on the barricade . 
`` Come , merrily now ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` That 's the brutal part of it . 
After the fillip on the nose , the blow from the fist . 
The army is reaching out its big paw to us . 
The barricade is going to be severely shaken up . 
The fusillade tries , the cannon takes . '' 
`` It is a piece of eight , new model , brass , '' added Combeferre . 
`` Those pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin to one hundred of brass is exceeded . 
The excess of tin renders them too tender . 
Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers when looked at from the vent hole . 
In order to obviate this danger , and to render it possible to force the charge , it may become necessary to return to the process of the fourteenth century , hooping , and to encircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steel bands , from the breech to the trunnions . 
In the meantime , they remedy this defect as best they may ; they manage to discover where the holes are located in the vent of a cannon , by means of a searcher . 
But there is a better method , with Gribeauval 's movable star . '' 
`` In the sixteenth century , '' remarked Bossuet , `` they used to rifle cannon . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` that augments the projectile force , but diminishes the accuracy of the firing . 
In firing at short range , the trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired , the parabola is exaggerated , the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects , which is , nevertheless , a necessity of battle , the importance of which increases with the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge . 
This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge ; small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic necessities , such , for instance , as the preservation of the gun-carriage . 
In short , that despot , the cannon , can not do all that it desires ; force is a great weakness . 
A cannon-ball only travels six hundred leagues an hour ; light travels seventy thousand leagues a second . 
Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon . '' 
`` Reload your guns , '' said Enjolras . 
How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the cannon-balls ? 
Would they effect a breach ? 
That was the question . 
While the insurgents were reloading their guns , the artillery-men were loading the cannon . 
The anxiety in the redoubt was profound . 
The shot sped the report burst forth . 
`` Present ! '' 
shouted a joyous voice . 
And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed against it . 
He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne , and he had nimbly climbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the cannon-ball . 
The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish . 
At the most there was an omnibus wheel broken , and the old Anceau cart was demolished . 
On seeing this , the barricade burst into a laugh . 
`` Go on ! '' 
shouted Bossuet to the artillerists . 
THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY Thet flocked round Gavroche . 
But he had no time to tell anything . 
Marius drew him aside with a shudder . 
`` What are you doing here ? '' 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said the child , `` what are you doing here yourself ? '' 
And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery . 
His eyes grew larger with the proud light within them . 
It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued : `` Who told you to come back ? 
Did you deliver my letter at the address ? '' 
Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that letter . 
In his haste to return to the barricade , he had got rid of it rather than delivered it . 
He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had not been able to make out . 
It is true that the man was bareheaded , but that was not sufficient . 
In short , he had been administering to himself little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius ' reproaches . 
In order to extricate himself from the predicament , he took the simplest course ; he lied abominably . 
`` Citizen , I delivered the letter to the porter . 
The lady was asleep . 
She will have the letter when she wakes up . 
Marius had had two objects in sending that letter : to bid farewell to Cosette and to save Gavroche . 
He was obliged to content himself with the half of his desire . 
The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the barricade , was a coincidence which occurred to him . 
He pointed out M. Fauchelevent to Gavroche . 
`` Do you know that man ? '' 
`` No , '' said Gavroche . 
Gavroche had , in fact , as we have just mentioned , seen Jean Valjean only at night . 
The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in Marius ' mind were dissipated . 
Did he know M. Fauchelevent 's opinions ? 
Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican . 
Hence his very natural presence in this combat . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche was shouting , at the other end of the barricade : `` My gun ! '' 
Courfeyrac had it returned to him . 
Gavroche warned `` his comrades '' as he called them , that the barricade was blocked . 
He had had great difficulty in reaching it . 
A battalion of the line whose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie was on the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne ; on the opposite side , the municipal guard occupied the Rue des Precheurs . 
The bulk of the army was facing them in front . 
This information given , Gavroche added : `` I authorize you to hit 'em a tremendous whack . '' 
Meanwhile , Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his embrasure . 
The assailants , dissatisfied , no doubt , with their shot , had not repeated it . 
A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of the street behind the piece of ordnance . 
The soldiers were tearing up the pavement and constructing with the stones a small , low wall , a sort of side-work not more than eighteen inches high , and facing the barricade . 
In the angle at the left of this epaulement , there was visible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massed in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Enjolras , on the watch , thought he distinguished the peculiar sound which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the caissons , and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevation and incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left . 
Then the cannoneers began to load the piece . 
The chief seized the lint-stock himself and lowered it to the vent . 
`` Down with your heads , hug the wall ! '' 
shouted Enjolras , `` and all on your knees along the barricade ! '' 
The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop , and who had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche 's arrival , rushed pell-mell towards the barricade ; but before Enjolras ' order could be executed , the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a round of grape-shot . 
This is what it was , in fact . 
The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt , and had there rebounded from the wall ; and this terrible rebound had produced two dead and three wounded . 
If this were continued , the barricade was no longer tenable . 
The grape-shot made its way in . 
A murmur of consternation arose . 
`` Let us prevent the second discharge , '' said Enjolras . 
And , lowering his rifle , he took aim at the captain of the gun , who , at that moment , was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying and definitely fixing its pointing . 
The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery , very young , blond , with a very gentle face , and the intelligent air peculiar to that predestined and redoubtable weapon which , by dint of perfecting itself in horror , must end in killing war . 
Combeferre , who was standing beside Enjolras , scrutinized this young man . 
`` What a pity ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` What hideous things these butcheries are ! 
Come , when there are no more kings , there will be no more war . 
Enjolras , you are taking aim at that sergeant , you are not looking at him . 
Fancy , he is a charming young man ; he is intrepid ; it is evident that he is thoughtful ; those young artillery-men are very well educated ; he has a father , a mother , a family ; he is probably in love ; he is not more than five and twenty at the most ; he might be your brother . '' 
`` He is , '' said Enjolras . 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` he is mine too . 
Well , let us not kill him . '' 
`` Let me alone . 
It must be done . '' 
And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras ' marble cheek . 
At the same moment , he pressed the trigger of his rifle . 
The flame leaped forth . 
The artillery-man turned round twice , his arms extended in front of him , his head uplifted , as though for breath , then he fell with his side on the gun , and lay there motionless . 
They could see his back , from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood . 
The ball had traversed his breast from side to side . 
He was dead . 
He had to be carried away and replaced by another . 
Several minutes were thus gained , in fact . 
EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THAT INFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796 Opinions were exchanged in the barricade . 
The firing from the gun was about to begin again . 
Against that grape-shot , they could not hold out a quarter of an hour longer . 
It was absolutely necessary to deaden the blows . 
Enjolras issued this command : `` We must place a mattress there . '' 
`` We have none , '' said Combeferre , `` the wounded are lying on them . '' 
Jean Valjean , who was seated apart on a stone post , at the corner of the tavern , with his gun between his knees , had , up to that moment , taken no part in anything that was going on . 
He did not appear to hear the combatants saying around him : `` Here is a gun that is doing nothing . '' 
At the order issued by Enjolras , he rose . 
It will be remembered that , on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , an old woman , foreseeing the bullets , had placed her mattress in front of her window . 
This window , an attic window , was on the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade . 
The mattress , placed cross-wise , supported at the bottom on two poles for drying linen , was upheld at the top by two ropes , which , at that distance , looked like two threads , and which were attached to two nails planted in the window frames . 
These ropes were distinctly visible , like hairs , against the sky . 
`` Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Enjolras , who had just re-loaded his , handed it to him . 
Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired . 
One of the mattress ropes was cut . 
The mattress now hung by one thread only . 
Jean Valjean fired the second charge . 
The second rope lashed the panes of the attic window . 
The mattress slipped between the two poles and fell into the street . 
The barricade applauded . 
All voices cried : `` Here is a mattress ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Combeferre , `` but who will go and fetch it ? '' 
The mattress had , in fact , fallen outside the barricade , between besiegers and besieged . 
Now , the death of the sergeant of artillery having exasperated the troop , the soldiers had , for several minutes , been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stones which they had erected , and , in order to supply the forced silence of the piece , which was quiet while its service was in course of reorganization , they had opened fire on the barricade . 
The insurgents did not reply to this musketry , in order to spare their ammunition The fusillade broke against the barricade ; but the street , which it filled , was terrible . 
Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut , entered the street , traversed the storm of bullets , walked up to the mattress , hoisted it upon his back , and returned to the barricade . 
He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands . 
He fixed it there against the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see it . 
That done , they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot . 
It was not long in coming . 
The cannon vomited forth its package of buck-shot with a roar . 
But there was no rebound . 
The effect which they had foreseen had been attained . 
The barricade was saved . 
`` Citizen , '' said Enjolras to Jean Valjean , `` the Republic thanks you . '' 
Bossuet admired and laughed . 
He exclaimed : `` It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power . 
Triumph of that which yields over that which strikes with lightning . 
But never mind , glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon ! '' 
DAWN At that moment , Cosette awoke . 
Her chamber was narrow , neat , unobtrusive , with a long sash-window , facing the East on the back court-yard of the house . 
Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris . 
She had not been there on the preceding evening , and she had already retired to her chamber when Toussaint had said : `` It appears that there is a row . '' 
Cosette had slept only a few hours , but soundly . 
She had had sweet dreams , which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very white . 
Some one , who was Marius , had appeared to her in the light . 
She awoke with the sun in her eyes , which , at first , produced on her the effect of being a continuation of her dream . 
Her first thought on emerging from this dream was a smiling one . 
Cosette felt herself thoroughly reassured . 
Like Jean Valjean , she had , a few hours previously , passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely will not hear of unhappiness . 
She began to cherish hope , with all her might , without knowing why . 
Then she felt a pang at her heart . 
It was three days since she had seen Marius . 
But she said to herself that he must have received her letter , that he knew where she was , and that he was so clever that he would find means of reaching her . 
-- And that certainly to-day , and perhaps that very morning . 
-- It was broad daylight , but the rays of light were very horizontal ; she thought that it was very early , but that she must rise , nevertheless , in order to receive Marius . 
She felt that she could not live without Marius , and that , consequently , that was sufficient and that Marius would come . 
No objection was valid . 
All this was certain . 
It was monstrous enough already to have suffered for three days . 
Marius absent three days , this was horrible on the part of the good God . 
Now , this cruel teasing from on high had been gone through with . 
Marius was about to arrive , and he would bring good news . 
Youth is made thus ; it quickly dries its eyes ; it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it . 
Youth is the smile of the future in the presence of an unknown quantity , which is itself . 
It is natural to it to be happy . 
It seems as though its respiration were made of hope . 
Moreover , Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the subject of this absence which was to last only one day , and what explanation of it he had given her . 
Every one has noticed with what nimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away and hides , and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable . 
There are thoughts which play us the same trick ; they nestle away in a corner of our brain ; that is the end of them ; they are lost ; it is impossible to lay the memory on them . 
Cosette was somewhat vexed at the useless little effort made by her memory . 
She told herself , that it was very naughty and very wicked of her , to have forgotten the words uttered by Marius . 
She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul and body , her prayers and her toilet . 
One may , in a case of exigency , introduce the reader into a nuptial chamber , not into a virginal chamber . 
Verse would hardly venture it , prose must not . 
It is the interior of a flower that is not yet unfolded , it is whiteness in the dark , it is the private cell of a closed lily , which must not be gazed upon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it . 
Woman in the bud is sacred . 
That innocent bud which opens , that adorable half-nudity which is afraid of itself , that white foot which takes refuge in a slipper , that throat which veils itself before a mirror as though a mirror were an eye , that chemise which makes haste to rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture or a passing vehicle , those cords tied , those clasps fastened , those laces drawn , those tremors , those shivers of cold and modesty , that exquisite affright in every movement , that almost winged uneasiness where there is no cause for alarm , the successive phases of dressing , as charming as the clouds of dawn , -- it is not fitting that all this should be narrated , and it is too much to have even called attention to it . 
The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising of a young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star . 
The possibility of hurting should inspire an augmentation of respect . 
The down on the peach , the bloom on the plum , the radiated crystal of the snow , the wing of the butterfly powdered with feathers , are coarse compared to that chastity which does not even know that it is chaste . 
The young girl is only the flash of a dream , and is not yet a statue . 
Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal . 
The indiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra . 
Here , contemplation is profanation . 
We shall , therefore , show nothing of that sweet little flutter of Cosette 's rising . 
An oriental tale relates how the rose was made white by God , but that Adam looked upon her when she was unfolding , and she was ashamed and turned crimson . 
We are of the number who fall speechless in the presence of young girls and flowers , since we think them worthy of veneration . 
Cosette dressed herself very hastily , combed and dressed her hair , which was a very simple matter in those days , when women did not swell out their curls and bands with cushions and puffs , and did not put crinoline in their locks . 
Then she opened the window and cast her eyes around her in every direction , hoping to descry some bit of the street , an angle of the house , an edge of pavement , so that she might be able to watch for Marius there . 
But no view of the outside was to be had . 
The back court was surrounded by tolerably high walls , and the outlook was only on several gardens . 
Cosette pronounced these gardens hideous : for the first time in her life , she found flowers ugly . 
The smallest scrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better . 
She decided to gaze at the sky , as though she thought that Marius might come from that quarter . 
All at once , she burst into tears . 
Not that this was fickleness of soul ; but hopes cut in twain by dejection -- that was her case . 
She had a confused consciousness of something horrible . 
Thoughts were rife in the air , in fact . 
She told herself that she was not sure of anything , that to withdraw herself from sight was to be lost ; and the idea that Marius could return to her from heaven appeared to her no longer charming but mournful . 
Then , as is the nature of these clouds , calm returned to her , and hope and a sort of unconscious smile , which yet indicated trust in God . 
Every one in the house was still asleep . 
A country-like silence reigned . 
Not a shutter had been opened . 
The porter 's lodge was closed . 
Toussaint had not risen , and Cosette , naturally , thought that her father was asleep . 
She must have suffered much , and she must have still been suffering greatly , for she said to herself , that her father had been unkind ; but she counted on Marius . 
The eclipse of such a light was decidedly impossible . 
Now and then , she heard sharp shocks in the distance , and she said : `` It is odd that people should be opening and shutting their carriage gates so early . '' 
They were the reports of the cannon battering the barricade . 
A few feet below Cosette 's window , in the ancient and perfectly black cornice of the wall , there was a martin 's nest ; the curve of this nest formed a little projection beyond the cornice , so that from above it was possible to look into this little paradise . 
The mother was there , spreading her wings like a fan over her brood ; the father fluttered about , flew away , then came back , bearing in his beak food and kisses . 
The dawning day gilded this happy thing , the great law , `` Multiply , '' lay there smiling and august , and that sweet mystery unfolded in the glory of the morning . 
Cosette , with her hair in the sunlight , her soul absorbed in chimeras , illuminated by love within and by the dawn without , bent over mechanically , and almost without daring to avow to herself that she was thinking at the same time of Marius , began to gaze at these birds , at this family , at that male and female , that mother and her little ones , with the profound trouble which a nest produces on a virgin . 
THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE The assailants ' fire continued . 
Musketry and grape-shot alternated , but without committing great ravages , to tell the truth . 
The top alone of the Corinthe facade suffered ; the window on the first floor , and the attic window in the roof , riddled with buck-shot and biscaiens , were slowly losing their shape . 
The combatants who had been posted there had been obliged to withdraw . 
However , this is according to the tactics of barricades ; to fire for a long while , in order to exhaust the insurgents ' ammunition , if they commit the mistake of replying . 
When it is perceived , from the slackening of their fire , that they have no more powder and ball , the assault is made . 
Enjolras had not fallen into this trap ; the barricade did not reply . 
At every discharge by platoons , Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his tongue , a sign of supreme disdain . 
`` Good for you , '' said he , `` rip up the cloth . 
We want some lint . '' 
Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect which it produced , and said to the cannon : `` You are growing diffuse , my good fellow . '' 
One gets puzzled in battle , as at a ball . 
It is probable that this silence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers uneasy , and to make them fear some unexpected incident , and that they felt the necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap of paving-stones , and of knowing what was going on behind that impassable wall which received blows without retorting . 
The insurgents suddenly perceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof . 
A fireman had placed his back against a tall chimney , and seemed to be acting as sentinel . 
His glance fell directly down into the barricade . 
`` There 's an embarrassing watcher , '' said Enjolras . 
Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras ' rifle , but he had his own gun . 
Without saying a word , he took aim at the fireman , and , a second later , the helmet , smashed by a bullet , rattled noisily into the street . 
The terrified soldier made haste to disappear . 
A second observer took his place . 
This one was an officer . 
Jean Valjean , who had re-loaded his gun , took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer 's casque to join the soldier 's . 
The officer did not persist , and retired speedily . 
This time the warning was understood . 
No one made his appearance thereafter on that roof ; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned . 
`` Why did you not kill the man ? '' 
Bossuet asked Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean made no reply . 
DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER Bossuet muttered in Combeferre 's ear : `` He did not answer my question . '' 
`` He is a man who does good by gun-shots , '' said Combeferre . 
Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch know that the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant against insurrections . 
It was particularly zealous and intrepid in the days of June , 1832 . 
A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la Cunette , whose `` establishment '' had been closed by the riots , became leonine at the sight of his deserted dance-hall , and got himself killed to preserve the order represented by a tea-garden . 
In that bourgeois and heroic time , in the presence of ideas which had their knights , interests had their paladins . 
The prosiness of the originators detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement . 
The diminution of a pile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise . 
They shed their blood lyrically for the counting-house ; and they defended the shop , that immense diminutive of the fatherland , with Lacedaemonian enthusiasm . 
At bottom , we will observe , there was nothing in all this that was not extremely serious . 
It was social elements entering into strife , while awaiting the day when they should enter into equilibrium . 
Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism -LSB- the barbarous name of the correct party -RSB- . 
People were for order in combination with lack of discipline . 
The drum suddenly beat capricious calls , at the command of such or such a Colonel of the National Guard ; such and such a captain went into action through inspiration ; such and such National Guardsmen fought , `` for an idea , '' and on their own account . 
At critical moments , on `` days '' they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts . 
There existed in the army of order , veritable guerilleros , some of the sword , like Fannicot , others of the pen , like Henri Fonfrede . 
Civilization , unfortunately , represented at this epoch rather by an aggregation of interests than by a group of principles , was or thought itself , in peril ; it set up the cry of alarm ; each , constituting himself a centre , defended it , succored it , and protected it with his own head ; and the first comer took it upon himself to save society . 
Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination . 
A platoon of the National Guard would constitute itself on its own authority a private council of war , and judge and execute a captured insurgent in five minutes . 
It was an improvisation of this sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire . 
Fierce Lynch law , with which no one party had any right to reproach the rest , for it has been applied by the Republic in America , as well as by the monarchy in Europe . 
This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes . 
On one day of rioting , a young poet , named Paul Aime Garnier , was pursued in the Place Royale , with a bayonet at his loins , and only escaped by taking refuge under the porte-cochere of No. 6 . 
They shouted : -- `` There 's another of those Saint-Simonians ! '' 
and they wanted to kill him . 
Now , he had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon . 
A National Guard had read the words Saint-Simon on the book , and had shouted : `` Death ! '' 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , a company of the National Guards from the suburbs , commanded by the Captain Fannicot , above mentioned , had itself decimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own good pleasure . 
This fact , singular though it may seem , was proved at the judicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of 1832 . 
Captain Fannicot , a bold and impatient bourgeois , a sort of condottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized , a fanatical and intractable governmentalist , could not resist the temptation to fire prematurely , and the ambition of capturing the barricade alone and unaided , that is to say , with his company . 
Exasperated by the successive apparition of the red flag and the old coat which he took for the black flag , he loudly blamed the generals and chiefs of the corps , who were holding council and did not think that the moment for the decisive assault had arrived , and who were allowing `` the insurrection to fry in its own fat , '' to use the celebrated expression of one of them . 
For his part , he thought the barricade ripe , and as that which is ripe ought to fall , he made the attempt . 
He commanded men as resolute as himself , `` raging fellows , '' as a witness said . 
His company , the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet , was the first of the battalion posted at the angle of the street . 
At the moment when they were least expecting it , the captain launched his men against the barricade . 
This movement , executed with more good will than strategy , cost the Fannicot company dear . 
Before it had traversed two thirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from the barricade . 
Four , the most audacious , who were running on in front , were mown down point-blank at the very foot of the redoubt , and this courageous throng of National Guards , very brave men but lacking in military tenacity , were forced to fall back , after some hesitation , leaving fifteen corpses on the pavement . 
This momentary hesitation gave the insurgents time to re-load their weapons , and a second and very destructive discharge struck the company before it could regain the corner of the street , its shelter . 
A moment more , and it was caught between two fires , and it received the volley from the battery piece which , not having received the order , had not discontinued its firing . 
The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from this grape-shot . 
He was killed by the cannon , that is to say , by order . 
This attack , which was more furious than serious , irritated Enjolras . 
-- `` The fools ! '' 
said he . 
`` They are getting their own men killed and they are using up our ammunition for nothing . '' 
Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was . 
Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons . 
Insurrection , which is speedily exhausted , has only a certain number of shots to fire and a certain number of combatants to expend . 
An empty cartridge-box , a man killed , can not be replaced . 
As repression has the army , it does not count its men , and , as it has Vincennes , it does not count its shots . 
Repression has as many regiments as the barricade has men , and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes . 
Thus they are struggles of one against a hundred , which always end in crushing the barricade ; unless the revolution , uprising suddenly , flings into the balance its flaming archangel 's sword . 
This does happen sometimes . 
Then everything rises , the pavements begin to seethe , popular redoubts abound . 
Paris quivers supremely , the quid divinum is given forth , a 10th of August is in the air , a 29th of July is in the air , a wonderful light appears , the yawning maw of force draws back , and the army , that lion , sees before it , erect and tranquil , that prophet , France . 
PASSING GLEAMS In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade , there is a little of everything ; there is bravery , there is youth , honor , enthusiasm , the ideal , conviction , the rage of the gambler , and , above all , intermittences of hope . 
One of these intermittences , one of these vague quivers of hope suddenly traversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at the moment when it was least expected . 
`` Listen , '' suddenly cried Enjolras , who was still on the watch , `` it seems to me that Paris is waking up . '' 
It is certain that , on the morning of the 6th of June , the insurrection broke out afresh for an hour or two , to a certain extent . 
The obstinacy of the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies . 
Barricades were begun in the Rue du Poirier and the Rue des Gravilliers . 
In front of the Porte Saint-Martin , a young man , armed with a rifle , attacked alone a squadron of cavalry . 
In plain sight , on the open boulevard , he placed one knee on the ground , shouldered his weapon , fired , killed the commander of the squadron , and turned away , saying : `` There 's another who will do us no more harm . '' 
He was put to the sword . 
In the Rue Saint-Denis , a woman fired on the National Guard from behind a lowered blind . 
The slats of the blind could be seen to tremble at every shot . 
A child fourteen years of age was arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie , with his pockets full of cartridges . 
Many posts were attacked . 
At the entrance to the Rue Bertin-Poiree , a very lively and utterly unexpected fusillade welcomed a regiment of cuirrassiers , at whose head marched Marshal General Cavaignac de Barague . 
In the Rue Planche-Mibray , they threw old pieces of pottery and household utensils down on the soldiers from the roofs ; a bad sign ; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult , Napoleon 's old lieutenant grew thoughtful , as he recalled Suchet 's saying at Saragossa : `` We are lost when the old women empty their pots de chambre on our heads . '' 
These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when it was thought that the uprising had been rendered local , this fever of wrath , these sparks which flew hither and thither above those deep masses of combustibles which are called the faubourgs of Paris , -- all this , taken together , disturbed the military chiefs . 
They made haste to stamp out these beginnings of conflagration . 
They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuee , de la Chanvrerie and Saint-Merry until these sparks had been extinguished , in order that they might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish them at one blow . 
Columns were thrown into the streets where there was fermentation , sweeping the large , sounding the small , right and left , now slowly and cautiously , now at full charge . 
The troops broke in the doors of houses whence shots had been fired ; at the same time , manoeuvres by the cavalry dispersed the groups on the boulevards . 
This repression was not effected without some commotion , and without that tumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and the people . 
This was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of the cannonade and the musketry . 
Moreover , he had seen wounded men passing the end of the street in litters , and he said to Courfeyrac : -- `` Those wounded do not come from us . '' 
Their hope did not last long ; the gleam was quickly eclipsed . 
In less than half an hour , what was in the air vanished , it was a flash of lightning unaccompanied by thunder , and the insurgents felt that sort of leaden cope , which the indifference of the people casts over obstinate and deserted men , fall over them once more . 
The general movement , which seemed to have assumed a vague outline , had miscarried ; and the attention of the minister of war and the strategy of the generals could now be concentrated on the three or four barricades which still remained standing . 
The sun was mounting above the horizon . 
An insurgent hailed Enjolras . 
`` We are hungry here . 
Are we really going to die like this , without anything to eat ? '' 
Enjolras , who was still leaning on his elbows at his embrasure , made an affirmative sign with his head , but without taking his eyes from the end of the street . 
WHEREIN WILL APPEAR THE NAME OF ENJOLRAS ' MISTRESS Courfeyrac , seated on a paving-stone beside Enjolras , continued to insult the cannon , and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectiles which is called grape-shot passed overhead with its terrible sound he assailed it with a burst of irony . 
`` You are wearing out your lungs , poor , brutal , old fellow , you pain me , you are wasting your row . 
That 's not thunder , it 's a cough . '' 
And the bystanders laughed . 
Courfeyrac and Bossuet , whose brave good humor increased with the peril , like Madame Scarron , replaced nourishment with pleasantry , and , as wine was lacking , they poured out gayety to all . 
`` I admire Enjolras , '' said Bossuet . 
`` His impassive temerity astounds me . 
He lives alone , which renders him a little sad , perhaps ; Enjolras complains of his greatness , which binds him to widowhood . 
The rest of us have mistresses , more or less , who make us crazy , that is to say , brave . 
When a man is as much in love as a tiger , the least that he can do is to fight like a lion . 
That is one way of taking our revenge for the capers that mesdames our grisettes play on us . 
Roland gets himself killed for Angelique ; all our heroism comes from our women . 
A man without a woman is a pistol without a trigger ; it is the woman that sets the man off . 
Well , Enjolras has no woman . 
He is not in love , and yet he manages to be intrepid . 
It is a thing unheard of that a man should be as cold as ice and as bold as fire . '' 
Enjolras did not appear to be listening , but had any one been near him , that person would have heard him mutter in a low voice : `` Patria . '' 
Bossuet was still laughing when Courfeyrac exclaimed : `` News ! '' 
And assuming the tone of an usher making an announcement , he added : `` My name is Eight-Pounder . '' 
In fact , a new personage had entered on the scene . 
This was a second piece of ordnance . 
The artillery-men rapidly performed their manoeuvres in force and placed this second piece in line with the first . 
This outlined the catastrophe . 
A few minutes later , the two pieces , rapidly served , were firing point-blank at the redoubt ; the platoon firing of the line and of the soldiers from the suburbs sustained the artillery . 
Another cannonade was audible at some distance . 
At the same time that the two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la Chanvrerie , two other cannons , trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis , the other from the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , were riddling the Saint-Merry barricade . 
The four cannons echoed each other mournfully . 
The barking of these sombre dogs of war replied to each other . 
One of the two pieces which was now battering the barricade on the Rue de la Chanvrerie was firing grape-shot , the other balls . 
The piece which was firing balls was pointed a little high , and the aim was calculated so that the ball struck the extreme edge of the upper crest of the barricade , and crumbled the stone down upon the insurgents , mingled with bursts of grape-shot . 
The object of this mode of firing was to drive the insurgents from the summit of the redoubt , and to compel them to gather close in the interior , that is to say , this announced the assault . 
The combatants once driven from the crest of the barricade by balls , and from the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot , the attacking columns could venture into the street without being picked off , perhaps , even , without being seen , could briskly and suddenly scale the redoubt , as on the preceding evening , and , who knows ? 
take it by surprise . 
`` It is absolutely necessary that the inconvenience of those guns should be diminished , '' said Enjolras , and he shouted : `` Fire on the artillery-men ! '' 
All were ready . 
The barricade , which had long been silent , poured forth a desperate fire ; seven or eight discharges followed , with a sort of rage and joy ; the street was filled with blinding smoke , and , at the end of a few minutes , athwart this mist all streaked with flame , two thirds of the gunners could be distinguished lying beneath the wheels of the cannons . 
Those who were left standing continued to serve the pieces with severe tranquillity , but the fire had slackened . 
`` Things are going well now , '' said Bossuet to Enjolras . 
`` Success . '' 
Enjolras shook his head and replied : `` Another quarter of an hour of this success , and there will not be any cartridges left in the barricade . '' 
It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark . 
GAVROCHE OUTSIDE Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the barricade , outside in the street , amid the bullets . 
Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop , had made his way out through the cut , and was quietly engaged in emptying the full cartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on the slope of the redoubt , into his basket . 
`` What are you doing there ? '' 
asked Courfeyrac . 
Gavroche raised his face : -- `` I 'm filling my basket , citizen . '' 
`` Do n't you see the grape-shot ? '' 
Gavroche replied : `` Well , it is raining . 
What then ? '' 
Courfeyrac shouted : -- `` Come in ! '' 
`` Instanter , '' said Gavroche . 
And with a single bound he plunged into the street . 
It will be remembered that Fannicot 's company had left behind it a trail of bodies . 
Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on the pavement , through the whole length of the street . 
Twenty cartouches for Gavroche meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade . 
The smoke in the street was like a fog . 
Whoever has beheld a cloud which has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments can imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows of lofty houses . 
It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed ; hence a twilight which made even the broad daylight turn pale . 
The combatants could hardly see each other from one end of the street to the other , short as it was . 
This obscurity , which had probably been desired and calculated on by the commanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade , was useful to Gavroche . 
Beneath the folds of this veil of smoke , and thanks to his small size , he could advance tolerably far into the street without being seen . 
He rifled the first seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger . 
He crawled flat on his belly , galloped on all fours , took his basket in his teeth , twisted , glided , undulated , wound from one dead body to another , and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a nut . 
They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade , which was quite near , for fear of attracting attention to him . 
On one body , that of a corporal , he found a powder-flask . 
`` For thirst , '' said he , putting it in his pocket . 
By dint of advancing , he reached a point where the fog of the fusillade became transparent . 
So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on the outlook behind their paving-stone dike and the sharpshooters of the banlieue massed at the corner of the street suddenly pointed out to each other something moving through the smoke . 
At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant , who was lying near a stone door-post , of his cartridges , a bullet struck the body . 
`` Fichtre ! '' 
ejaculated Gavroche . 
`` They are killing my dead men for me . '' 
A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him . 
-- A third overturned his basket . 
Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue . 
He sprang to his feet , stood erect , with his hair flying in the wind , his hands on his hips , his eyes fixed on the National Guardsmen who were firing , and sang : `` On est laid a Nanterre , `` Men are ugly at Nanterre , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Et bete a Palaiseau , And dull at Palaiseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Then he picked up his basket , replaced the cartridges which had fallen from it , without missing a single one , and , advancing towards the fusillade , set about plundering another cartridge-box . 
There a fourth bullet missed him , again . 
Gavroche sang : `` Je ne suis pas notaire , `` I am not a notary , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Je suis un petit oiseau , I 'm a little bird , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet . 
`` Joie est mon caractere , `` Joy is my character , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Misere est mon trousseau , Misery is my trousseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Thus it went on for some time . 
It was a charming and terrible sight . 
Gavroche , though shot at , was teasing the fusillade . 
He had the air of being greatly diverted . 
It was the sparrow pecking at the sportsmen . 
To each discharge he retorted with a couplet . 
They aimed at him constantly , and always missed him . 
The National Guardsmen and the soldiers laughed as they took aim at him . 
He lay down , sprang to his feet , hid in the corner of a doorway , then made a bound , disappeared , re-appeared , scampered away , returned , replied to the grape-shot with his thumb at his nose , and , all the while , went on pillaging the cartouches , emptying the cartridge-boxes , and filling his basket . 
The insurgents , panting with anxiety , followed him with their eyes . 
The barricade trembled ; he sang . 
He was not a child , he was not a man ; he was a strange gamin-fairy . 
He might have been called the invulnerable dwarf of the fray . 
The bullets flew after him , he was more nimble than they . 
He played a fearful game of hide and seek with death ; every time that the flat-nosed face of the spectre approached , the urchin administered to it a fillip . 
One bullet , however , better aimed or more treacherous than the rest , finally struck the will-o ' - the-wisp of a child . 
Gavroche was seen to stagger , then he sank to the earth . 
The whole barricade gave vent to a cry ; but there was something of Antaeus in that pygmy ; for the gamin to touch the pavement is the same as for the giant to touch the earth ; Gavroche had fallen only to rise again ; he remained in a sitting posture , a long thread of blood streaked his face , he raised both arms in the air , glanced in the direction whence the shot had come , and began to sing : `` Je suis tombe par terre , `` I have fallen to the earth , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Le nez dans le ruisseau , With my nose in the gutter , C'est la faute a ... '' 'T is the fault of ... '' He did not finish . 
A second bullet from the same marksman stopped him short . 
This time he fell face downward on the pavement , and moved no more . 
This grand little soul had taken its flight . 
HOW FROM A BROTHER ONE BECOMES A FATHER At that same moment , in the garden of the Luxembourg , -- for the gaze of the drama must be everywhere present , -- two children were holding each other by the hand . 
One might have been seven years old , the other five . 
The rain having soaked them , they were walking along the paths on the sunny side ; the elder was leading the younger ; they were pale and ragged ; they had the air of wild birds . 
The smaller of them said : `` I am very hungry . '' 
The elder , who was already somewhat of a protector , was leading his brother with his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick . 
They were alone in the garden . 
The garden was deserted , the gates had been closed by order of the police , on account of the insurrection . 
The troops who had been bivouacking there had departed for the exigencies of combat . 
How did those children come there ? 
Perhaps they had escaped from some guard-house which stood ajar ; perhaps there was in the vicinity , at the Barriere d'Enfer ; or on the Esplanade de l'Observatoire , or in the neighboring carrefour , dominated by the pediment on which could be read : Invenerunt parvulum pannis involutum , some mountebank 's booth from which they had fled ; perhaps they had , on the preceding evening , escaped the eye of the inspectors of the garden at the hour of closing , and had passed the night in some one of those sentry-boxes where people read the papers ? 
The fact is , they were stray lambs and they seemed free . 
To be astray and to seem free is to be lost . 
These poor little creatures were , in fact , lost . 
These two children were the same over whom Gavroche had been put to some trouble , as the reader will recollect . 
Children of the Thenardiers , leased out to Magnon , attributed to M. Gillenormand , and now leaves fallen from all these rootless branches , and swept over the ground by the wind . 
Their clothing , which had been clean in Magnon 's day , and which had served her as a prospectus with M. Gillenormand , had been converted into rags . 
Henceforth these beings belonged to the statistics as `` Abandoned children , '' whom the police take note of , collect , mislay and find again on the pavements of Paris . 
It required the disturbance of a day like that to account for these miserable little creatures being in that garden . 
If the superintendents had caught sight of them , they would have driven such rags forth . 
Poor little things do not enter public gardens ; still , people should reflect that , as children , they have a right to flowers . 
These children were there , thanks to the locked gates . 
They were there contrary to the regulations . 
They had slipped into the garden and there they remained . 
Closed gates do not dismiss the inspectors , oversight is supposed to continue , but it grows slack and reposes ; and the inspectors , moved by the public anxiety and more occupied with the outside than the inside , no longer glanced into the garden , and had not seen the two delinquents . 
It had rained the night before , and even a little in the morning . 
But in June , showers do not count for much . 
An hour after a storm , it can hardly be seen that the beautiful blonde day has wept . 
The earth , in summer , is as quickly dried as the cheek of a child . 
At that period of the solstice , the light of full noonday is , so to speak , poignant . 
It takes everything . 
It applies itself to the earth , and superposes itself with a sort of suction . 
One would say that the sun was thirsty . 
A shower is but a glass of water ; a rainstorm is instantly drunk up . 
In the morning everything was dripping , in the afternoon everything is powdered over . 
Nothing is so worthy of admiration as foliage washed by the rain and wiped by the rays of sunlight ; it is warm freshness . 
The gardens and meadows , having water at their roots , and sun in their flowers , become perfuming-pans of incense , and smoke with all their odors at once . 
Everything smiles , sings and offers itself . 
One feels gently intoxicated . 
The springtime is a provisional paradise , the sun helps man to have patience . 
There are beings who demand nothing further ; mortals , who , having the azure of heaven , say : `` It is enough ! '' 
dreamers absorbed in the wonderful , dipping into the idolatry of nature , indifferent to good and evil , contemplators of cosmos and radiantly forgetful of man , who do not understand how people can occupy themselves with the hunger of these , and the thirst of those , with the nudity of the poor in winter , with the lymphatic curvature of the little spinal column , with the pallet , the attic , the dungeon , and the rags of shivering young girls , when they can dream beneath the trees ; peaceful and terrible spirits they , and pitilessly satisfied . 
Strange to say , the infinite suffices them . 
That great need of man , the finite , which admits of embrace , they ignore . 
The finite which admits of progress and sublime toil , they do not think about . 
The indefinite , which is born from the human and divine combination of the infinite and the finite , escapes them . 
Provided that they are face to face with immensity , they smile . 
Joy never , ecstasy forever . 
Their life lies in surrendering their personality in contemplation . 
The history of humanity is for them only a detailed plan . 
All is not there ; the true All remains without ; what is the use of busying oneself over that detail , man ? 
Man suffers , that is quite possible ; but look at Aldebaran rising ! 
The mother has no more milk , the new-born babe is dying . 
I know nothing about that , but just look at this wonderful rosette which a slice of wood-cells of the pine presents under the microscope ! 
Compare the most beautiful Mechlin lace to that if you can ! 
These thinkers forget to love . 
The zodiac thrives with them to such a point that it prevents their seeing the weeping child . 
God eclipses their souls . 
This is a family of minds which are , at once , great and petty . 
Horace was one of them ; so was Goethe . 
La Fontaine perhaps ; magnificent egoists of the infinite , tranquil spectators of sorrow , who do not behold Nero if the weather be fair , for whom the sun conceals the funeral pile , who would look on at an execution by the guillotine in the search for an effect of light , who hear neither the cry nor the sob , nor the death rattle , nor the alarm peal , for whom everything is well , since there is a month of May , who , so long as there are clouds of purple and gold above their heads , declare themselves content , and who are determined to be happy until the radiance of the stars and the songs of the birds are exhausted . 
These are dark radiances . 
They have no suspicion that they are to be pitied . 
Certainly they are so . 
He who does not weep does not see . 
They are to be admired and pitied , as one would both pity and admire a being at once night and day , without eyes beneath his lashes but with a star on his brow . 
The indifference of these thinkers , is , according to some , a superior philosophy . 
That may be ; but in this superiority there is some infirmity . 
One may be immortal and yet limp : witness Vulcan . 
One may be more than man and less than man . 
There is incomplete immensity in nature . 
Who knows whether the sun is not a blind man ? 
But then , what ? 
In whom can we trust ? 
Solem quis dicere falsum audeat ? 
Who shall dare to say that the sun is false ? 
Thus certain geniuses , themselves , certain Very-Lofty mortals , man-stars , may be mistaken ? 
That which is on high at the summit , at the crest , at the zenith , that which sends down so much light on the earth , sees but little , sees badly , sees not at all ? 
Is not this a desperate state of things ? 
No . 
But what is there , then , above the sun ? 
The god . 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , about eleven o'clock in the morning , the Luxembourg , solitary and depopulated , was charming . 
The quincunxes and flower-beds shed forth balm and dazzling beauty into the sunlight . 
The branches , wild with the brilliant glow of midday , seemed endeavoring to embrace . 
In the sycamores there was an uproar of linnets , sparrows triumphed , woodpeckers climbed along the chestnut trees , administering little pecks on the bark . 
The flower-beds accepted the legitimate royalty of the lilies ; the most august of perfumes is that which emanates from whiteness . 
The peppery odor of the carnations was perceptible . 
The old crows of Marie de Medici were amorous in the tall trees . 
The sun gilded , empurpled , set fire to and lighted up the tulips , which are nothing but all the varieties of flame made into flowers . 
All around the banks of tulips the bees , the sparks of these flame-flowers , hummed . 
All was grace and gayety , even the impending rain ; this relapse , by which the lilies of the valley and the honeysuckles were destined to profit , had nothing disturbing about it ; the swallows indulged in the charming threat of flying low . 
He who was there aspired to happiness ; life smelled good ; all nature exhaled candor , help , assistance , paternity , caress , dawn . 
The thoughts which fell from heaven were as sweet as the tiny hand of a baby when one kisses it . 
The statues under the trees , white and nude , had robes of shadow pierced with light ; these goddesses were all tattered with sunlight ; rays hung from them on all sides . 
Around the great fountain , the earth was already dried up to the point of being burnt . 
There was sufficient breeze to raise little insurrections of dust here and there . 
A few yellow leaves , left over from the autumn , chased each other merrily , and seemed to be playing tricks on each other . 
This abundance of light had something indescribably reassuring about it . 
Life , sap , heat , odors overflowed ; one was conscious , beneath creation , of the enormous size of the source ; in all these breaths permeated with love , in this interchange of reverberations and reflections , in this marvellous expenditure of rays , in this infinite outpouring of liquid gold , one felt the prodigality of the inexhaustible ; and , behind this splendor as behind a curtain of flame , one caught a glimpse of God , that millionaire of stars . 
Thanks to the sand , there was not a speck of mud ; thanks to the rain , there was not a grain of ashes . 
The clumps of blossoms had just been bathed ; every sort of velvet , satin , gold and varnish , which springs from the earth in the form of flowers , was irreproachable . 
This magnificence was cleanly . 
The grand silence of happy nature filled the garden . 
A celestial silence that is compatible with a thousand sorts of music , the cooing of nests , the buzzing of swarms , the flutterings of the breeze . 
All the harmony of the season was complete in one gracious whole ; the entrances and exits of spring took place in proper order ; the lilacs ended ; the jasmines began ; some flowers were tardy , some insects in advance of their time ; the van-guard of the red June butterflies fraternized with the rear-guard of the white butterflies of May . 
The plantain trees were getting their new skins . 
The breeze hollowed out undulations in the magnificent enormity of the chestnut-trees . 
It was splendid . 
A veteran from the neighboring barracks , who was gazing through the fence , said : `` Here is the Spring presenting arms and in full uniform . '' 
All nature was breakfasting ; creation was at table ; this was its hour ; the great blue cloth was spread in the sky , and the great green cloth on earth ; the sun lighted it all up brilliantly . 
God was serving the universal repast . 
Each creature had his pasture or his mess . 
The ring-dove found his hemp-seed , the chaffinch found his millet , the goldfinch found chickweed , the red-breast found worms , the green finch found flies , the fly found infusoriae , the bee found flowers . 
They ate each other somewhat , it is true , which is the misery of evil mixed with good ; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach . 
The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of the grand fountain , and , rather bewildered by all this light , they tried to hide themselves , the instinct of the poor and the weak in the presence of even impersonal magnificence ; and they kept behind the swans ' hutch . 
Here and there , at intervals , when the wind blew , shouts , clamor , a sort of tumultuous death rattle , which was the firing , and dull blows , which were discharges of cannon , struck the ear confusedly . 
Smoke hung over the roofs in the direction of the Halles . 
A bell , which had the air of an appeal , was ringing in the distance . 
These children did not appear to notice these noises . 
The little one repeated from time to time : `` I am hungry . '' 
Almost at the same instant with the children , another couple approached the great basin . 
They consisted of a goodman , about fifty years of age , who was leading by the hand a little fellow of six . 
No doubt , a father and his son . 
The little man of six had a big brioche . 
At that epoch , certain houses abutting on the river , in the Rues Madame and d'Enfer , had keys to the Luxembourg garden , of which the lodgers enjoyed the use when the gates were shut , a privilege which was suppressed later on . 
This father and son came from one of these houses , no doubt . 
The two poor little creatures watched `` that gentleman '' approaching , and hid themselves a little more thoroughly . 
He was a bourgeois . 
The same person , perhaps , whom Marius had one day heard , through his love fever , near the same grand basin , counselling his son `` to avoid excesses . '' 
He had an affable and haughty air , and a mouth which was always smiling , since it did not shut . 
This mechanical smile , produced by too much jaw and too little skin , shows the teeth rather than the soul . 
The child , with his brioche , which he had bitten into but had not finished eating , seemed satiated . 
The child was dressed as a National Guardsman , owing to the insurrection , and the father had remained clad as a bourgeois out of prudence . 
Father and son halted near the fountain where two swans were sporting . 
This bourgeois appeared to cherish a special admiration for the swans . 
He resembled them in this sense , that he walked like them . 
For the moment , the swans were swimming , which is their principal talent , and they were superb . 
If the two poor little beings had listened and if they had been of an age to understand , they might have gathered the words of this grave man . 
The father was saying to his son : `` The sage lives content with little . 
Look at me , my son . 
I do not love pomp . 
I am never seen in clothes decked with gold lace and stones ; I leave that false splendor to badly organized souls . '' 
Here the deep shouts which proceeded from the direction of the Halles burst out with fresh force of bell and uproar . 
`` What is that ? '' 
inquired the child . 
The father replied : `` It is the Saturnalia . '' 
All at once , he caught sight of the two little ragged boys behind the green swan-hutch . 
`` There is the beginning , '' said he . 
And , after a pause , he added : `` Anarchy is entering this garden . '' 
In the meanwhile , his son took a bite of his brioche , spit it out , and , suddenly burst out crying . 
`` What are you crying about ? '' 
demanded his father . 
`` I am not hungry any more , '' said the child . 
The father 's smile became more accentuated . 
`` One does not need to be hungry in order to eat a cake . '' 
`` My cake tires me . 
It is stale . '' 
`` Do n't you want any more of it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
The father pointed to the swans . 
`` Throw it to those palmipeds . '' 
The child hesitated . 
A person may not want any more of his cake ; but that is no reason for giving it away . 
The father went on : `` Be humane . 
You must have compassion on animals . '' 
And , taking the cake from his son , he flung it into the basin . 
The cake fell very near the edge . 
The swans were far away , in the centre of the basin , and busy with some prey . 
They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche . 
The bourgeois , feeling that the cake was in danger of being wasted , and moved by this useless shipwreck , entered upon a telegraphic agitation , which finally attracted the attention of the swans . 
They perceived something floating , steered for the edge like ships , as they are , and slowly directed their course toward the brioche , with the stupid majesty which befits white creatures . 
`` The swans -LSB- cygnes -RSB- understand signs -LSB- signes -RSB- , '' said the bourgeois , delighted to make a jest . 
At that moment , the distant tumult of the city underwent another sudden increase . 
This time it was sinister . 
There are some gusts of wind which speak more distinctly than others . 
The one which was blowing at that moment brought clearly defined drum-beats , clamors , platoon firing , and the dismal replies of the tocsin and the cannon . 
This coincided with a black cloud which suddenly veiled the sun . 
The swans had not yet reached the brioche . 
`` Let us return home , '' said the father , `` they are attacking the Tuileries . '' 
He grasped his son 's hand again . 
Then he continued : `` From the Tuileries to the Luxembourg , there is but the distance which separates Royalty from the peerage ; that is not far . 
Shots will soon rain down . '' 
He glanced at the cloud . 
`` Perhaps it is rain itself that is about to shower down ; the sky is joining in ; the younger branch is condemned . 
Let us return home quickly . '' 
`` I should like to see the swans eat the brioche , '' said the child . 
The father replied : `` That would be imprudent . '' 
And he led his little bourgeois away . 
The son , regretting the swans , turned his head back toward the basin until a corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him . 
In the meanwhile , the two little waifs had approached the brioche at the same time as the swans . 
It was floating on the water . 
The smaller of them stared at the cake , the elder gazed after the retreating bourgeois . 
Father and son entered the labyrinth of walks which leads to the grand flight of steps near the clump of trees on the side of the Rue Madame . 
As soon as they had disappeared from view , the elder child hastily flung himself flat on his stomach on the rounding curb of the basin , and clinging to it with his left hand , and leaning over the water , on the verge of falling in , he stretched out his right hand with his stick towards the cake . 
The swans , perceiving the enemy , made haste , and in so doing , they produced an effect of their breasts which was of service to the little fisher ; the water flowed back before the swans , and one of these gentle concentric undulations softly floated the brioche towards the child 's wand . 
Just as the swans came up , the stick touched the cake . 
The child gave it a brisk rap , drew in the brioche , frightened away the swans , seized the cake , and sprang to his feet . 
The cake was wet ; but they were hungry and thirsty . 
The elder broke the cake into two portions , a large one and a small one , took the small one for himself , gave the large one to his brother , and said to him : `` Ram that into your muzzle . '' 
MORTUUS PATER FILIUM MORITURUM EXPECTAT Marius dashed out of the barricade , Combeferre followed him . 
But he was too late . 
Gavroche was dead . 
Combeferre brought back the basket of cartridges ; Marius bore the child . 
`` Alas ! '' 
he thought , `` that which the father had done for his father , he was requiting to the son ; only , Thenardier had brought back his father alive ; he was bringing back the child dead . '' 
When Marius re-entered the redoubt with Gavroche in his arms , his face , like the child , was inundated with blood . 
At the moment when he had stooped to lift Gavroche , a bullet had grazed his head ; he had not noticed it . 
Courfeyrac untied his cravat and with it bandaged Marius ' brow . 
They laid Gavroche on the same table with Mabeuf , and spread over the two corpses the black shawl . 
There was enough of it for both the old man and the child . 
Combeferre distributed the cartridges from the basket which he had brought in . 
This gave each man fifteen rounds to fire . 
Jean Valjean was still in the same place , motionless on his stone post . 
When Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges , he shook his head . 
`` Here 's a rare eccentric , '' said Combeferre in a low voice to Enjolras . 
`` He finds a way of not fighting in this barricade . '' 
`` Which does not prevent him from defending it , '' responded Enjolras . 
`` Heroism has its originals , '' resumed Combeferre . 
And Courfeyrac , who had overheard , added : `` He is another sort from Father Mabeuf . '' 
One thing which must be noted is , that the fire which was battering the barricade hardly disturbed the interior . 
Those who have never traversed the whirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singular moments of tranquillity mingled with these convulsions . 
Men go and come , they talk , they jest , they lounge . 
Some one whom we know heard a combatant say to him in the midst of the grape-shot : `` We are here as at a bachelor breakfast . '' 
The redoubt of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , we repeat , seemed very calm within . 
All mutations and all phases had been , or were about to be , exhausted . 
The position , from critical , had become menacing , and , from menacing , was probably about to become desperate . 
In proportion as the situation grew gloomy , the glow of heroism empurpled the barricade more and more . 
Enjolras , who was grave , dominated it , in the attitude of a young Spartan sacrificing his naked sword to the sombre genius , Epidotas . 
Combeferre , wearing an apron , was dressing the wounds : Bossuet and Feuilly were making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up by Gavroche on the dead corporal , and Bossuet said to Feuilly : `` We are soon to take the diligence for another planet '' ; Courfeyrac was disposing and arranging on some paving-stones which he had reserved for himself near Enjolras , a complete arsenal , his sword-cane , his gun , two holster pistols , and a cudgel , with the care of a young girl setting a small dunkerque in order . 
Jean Valjean stared silently at the wall opposite him . 
An artisan was fastening Mother Hucheloup 's big straw hat on his head with a string , `` for fear of sun-stroke , '' as he said . 
The young men from the Cougourde d'Aix were chatting merrily among themselves , as though eager to speak patois for the last time . 
Joly , who had taken Widow Hucheloup 's mirror from the wall , was examining his tongue in it . 
