`` Let us go to the king 's tailor , '' he said ; `` and since he measures the king , I think , by my faith , I may do worse than allow him to measure me ! '' 
: Who Messire Jean Percerin Was . 
The king 's tailor , Messire Jean Percerin , occupied a rather large house in the Rue St. Honore , near the Rue de l'Arbre Sec . 
He was a man of great taste in elegant stuffs , embroideries , and velvets , being hereditary tailor to the king . 
The preferment of his house reached as far back as the time of Charles IX. ; from whose reign dated , as we know , fancy in bravery difficult enough to gratify . 
The Percerin of that period was a Huguenot , like Ambrose Pare , and had been spared by the Queen of Navarre , the beautiful Margot , as they used to write and say , too , in those days ; because , in sooth , he was the only one who could make for her those wonderful riding-habits which she so loved to wear , seeing that they were marvelously well suited to hide certain anatomical defects , which the Queen of Navarre used very studiously to conceal . 
Percerin being saved , made , out of gratitude , some beautiful black bodices , very inexpensively indeed , for Queen Catherine , who ended by being pleased at the preservation of a Huguenot people , on whom she had long looked with detestation . 
But Percerin was a very prudent man ; and having heard it said that there was no more dangerous sign for a Protestant than to be smiled up on by Catherine , and having observed that her smiles were more frequent than usual , he speedily turned Catholic with all his family ; and having thus become irreproachable , attained the lofty position of master tailor to the Crown of France . 
Under Henry III. , gay king as he was , this position was a grand as the height of one of the loftiest peaks of the Cordilleras . 
Now Percerin had been a clever man all his life , and by way of keeping up his reputation beyond the grave , took very good care not to make a bad death of it , and so contrived to die very skillfully ; and that at the very moment he felt his powers of invention declining . 
