He left a son and a daughter , both worthy of the name they were called upon to bear ; the son , a cutter as unerring and exact as the square rule ; the daughter , apt at embroidery , and at designing ornaments . 
The marriage of Henry IV . 
and Marie de Medici , and the exquisite court-mourning for the afore-mentioned queen , together with a few words let fall by M. de Bassompiere , king of the beaux of the period , made the fortune of the second generation of Percerins . 
M. Concino Concini , and his wife Galligai , who subsequently shone at the French court , sought to Italianize the fashion , and introduced some Florentine tailors ; but Percerin , touched to the quick in his patriotism and his self-esteem , entirely defeated these foreigners , and that so well that Concino was the first to give up his compatriots , and held the French tailor in such esteem that he would never employ any other , and thus wore a doublet of his on the very day that Vitry blew out his brains with a pistol at the Pont du Louvre . 
And so it was a doublet issuing from M. Percerin 's workshop , which the Parisians rejoiced in hacking into so many pieces with the living human body it contained . 
Notwithstanding the favor Concino Concini had shown Percerin , the king , Louis XIII. , had the generosity to bear no malice to his tailor , and to retain him in his service . 
At the time that Louis the Just afforded this great example of equity , Percerin had brought up two sons , one of whom made his debut at the marriage of Anne of Austria , invented that admirable Spanish costume , in which Richelieu danced a saraband , made the costumes for the tragedy of `` Mirame , '' and stitched on to Buckingham 's mantle those famous pearls which were destined to be scattered about the pavements of the Louvre . 
A man becomes easily notable who has made the dresses of a Duke of Buckingham , a M. de Cinq - Mars , a Mademoiselle Ninon , a M. de Beaufort , and a Marion de Lorme . 
And thus Percerin the third had attained the summit of his glory when his father died . 
This same Percerin III. , old , famous and wealthy , yet further dressed Louis XIV. ; and having no son , which was a great cause of sorrow to him , seeing that with himself his dynasty would end , he had brought up several hopeful pupils . 
