We do not intend to describe the grand banquet , at which the royal guests were present , nor the concerts , nor the fairy-like and more than magic transformations and metamorphoses ; it will be enough for our purpose to depict the countenance the king assumed , which , from being gay , soon wore a very gloomy , constrained , and irritated expression . 
He remembered his own residence , royal though it was , and the mean and indifferent style of luxury that prevailed there , which comprised but little more than what was merely useful for the royal wants , without being his own personal property . 
The large vases of the Louvre , the older furniture and plate of Henry II. , of Francis I. , and of Louis XI. , were but historic monuments of earlier days ; nothing but specimens of art , the relics of his predecessors ; while with Fouquet , the value of the article was as much in the workmanship as in the article itself . 
Fouquet ate from a gold service , which artists in his own employ had modeled and cast for him alone . 
Fouquet drank wines of which the king of France did not even know the name , and drank them out of goblets each more valuable than the entire royal cellar . 
What , too , was to be said of the apartments , the hangings , the pictures , the servants and officers , of every description , of his household ? 
What of the mode of service in which etiquette was replaced by order ; stiff formality by personal , unrestrained comfort ; the happiness and contentment of the guest became the supreme law of all who obeyed the host ? 
The perfect swarm of busily engaged persons moving about noiselessly ; the multitude of guests , - who were , however , even less numerous than the servants who waited on them , - the myriad of exquisitely prepared dishes , of gold and silver vases ; the floods of dazzling light , the masses of unknown flowers of which the hot-houses had been despoiled , redundant with luxuriance of unequaled scent and beauty ; the perfect harmony of the surroundings , which , indeed , was no more than the prelude of the promised fete , charmed all who were there ; and they testified their admiration over and over again , not by voice or gesture , but by deep silence and rapt attention , those two languages of the courtier which acknowledge the hand of no master powerful enough to restrain them . 
As for the king , his eyes filled with tears ; he dared not look at the queen . 
Anne of Austria , whose pride was superior to that of any creature breathing , overwhelmed her host by the contempt with which she treated everything handed to her . 
