Formerly a temple of the Celtic divinities , when Belle-Isle was still called Kalonese , this grotto had beheld more than one human sacrifice accomplished in its mystic depths . 
The first entrance to the cavern was by a moderate descent , above which distorted rocks formed a weird arcade ; the interior , very uneven and dangerous from the inequalities of the vault , was subdivided into several compartments , which communicated with each other by means of rough and jagged steps , fixed right and left , in uncouth natural pillars . 
At the third compartment the vault was so low , the passage so narrow , that the bark would scarcely have passed without touching the side ; nevertheless , in moments of despair , wood softens and stone grows flexible beneath the human will . 
Such was the thought of Aramis , when , after having fought the fight , he decided upon flight - a flight most dangerous , since all the assailants were not dead ; and that , admitting the possibility of putting the bark to sea , they would have to fly in open day , before the conquered , so interested on recognizing their small number , in pursuing their conquerors . 
When the two discharges had killed ten men , Aramis , familiar with the windings of the cavern , went to reconnoiter them one by one , and counted them , for the smoke prevented seeing outside ; and he immediately commanded that the canoe should be rolled as far as the great stone , the closure of the liberating issue . 
Porthos collected all his strength , took the canoe in his arms , and raised it up , whilst the Bretons made it run rapidly along the rollers . 
They had descended into the third compartment ; they had arrived at the stone which walled the outlet . 
Porthos seized this gigantic stone at its base , applied his robust shoulder , and gave a heave which made the wall crack . 
A cloud of dust fell from the vault , with the ashes of ten thousand generations of sea birds , whose nests stuck like cement to the rock . 
At the third shock the stone gave way , and oscillated for a minute . 
