And then , M. Fouquet is a man of honor . 
Mordioux ! 
I have said so , and it must be so . '' 
And this was the way how , towards seven o'clock in the evening , without announcing his arrival by the din of trumpets , and without even his advanced guard , without out-riders or musketeers , the king presented himself before the gate of Vaux , where Fouquet , who had been informed of his royal guest 's approach , had been waiting for the last half-hour , with his head uncovered , surrounded by his household and his friends . 
: Nectar and Ambrosia . 
M. Fouquet held the stirrup of the king , who , having dismounted , bowed most graciously , and more graciously still held out his hand to him , which Fouquet , in spite of a slight resistance on the king 's part , carried respectfully to his lips . 
The king wished to wait in the first courtyard for the arrival of the carriages , nor had he long to wait , for the roads had been put into excellent order by the superintendent , and a stone would hardly have been found of the size of an egg the whole way from Melun to Vaux ; so that the carriages , rolling along as though on a carpet , brought the ladies to Vaux , without jolting or fatigue , by eight o'clock . 
They were received by Madame Fouquet , and at the moment they made their appearance , a light as bright as day burst forth from every quarter , trees , vases , and marble statues . 
This species of enchantment lasted until their majesties had retired into the palace . 
All these wonders and magical effects which the chronicler has heaped up , or rather embalmed , in his recital , at the risk of rivaling the brain-born scenes of romancers ; these splendors whereby night seemed vanquished and nature corrected , together with every delight and luxury combined for the satisfaction of all the senses , as well as the imagination , Fouquet did in real truth offer to his sovereign in that enchanting retreat of which no monarch could at that time boast of possessing an equal . 
