: Colbert . 
History will tell us , or rather history has told us , of the various events of the following day , of the splendid fetes given by the surintendant to his sovereign . 
Nothing but amusement and delight was allowed to prevail throughout the whole of the following day ; there was a promenade , a banquet , a comedy to be acted , and a comedy , too , in which , to his great amazement , Porthos recognized `` M. Coquelin de Voliere '' as one of the actors , in the piece called `` Les Facheux . '' 
Full of preoccupation , however , from the scene of the previous evening , and hardly recovered from the effects of the poison which Colbert had then administered to him , the king , during the whole of the day , so brilliant in its effects , so full of unexpected and startling novelties , in which all the wonders of the `` Arabian Night 's Entertainments '' seemed to be reproduced for his especial amusement - the king , we say , showed himself cold , reserved , and taciturn . 
Nothing could smooth the frowns upon his face ; every one who observed him noticed that a deep feeling of resentment , of remote origin , increased by slow degrees , as the source becomes a river , thanks to the thousand threads of water that increase its body , was keenly alive in the depths of the king 's heart . 
Towards the middle of the day only did he begin to resume a little serenity of manner , and by that time he had , in all probability , made up his mind . 
Aramis , who followed him step by step in his thoughts , as in his walk , concluded that the event he was expecting would not be long before it was announced . 
This time Colbert seemed to walk in concert with the bishop of Vannes , and had he received for every annoyance which he inflicted on the king a word of direction from Aramis , he could not have done better . 
During the whole of the day the king , who , in all probability , wished to free himself from some of the thoughts which disturbed his mind , seemed to seek La Valliere 's society as actively as he seemed to show his anxiety to flee that of M. Colbert or M. Fouquet . 
The evening came . 
