But there was no time ; the explosion thundered , earth gaped , the smoke which hurled through the clefts obscured the sky ; the sea flowed back as though driven by the blast of flame which darted from the grotto as if from the jaws of some gigantic fiery chimera ; the reflux took the bark out twenty toises ; the solid rocks cracked to their base , and separated like blocks beneath the operation of the wedge ; a portion of the vault was carried up towards heaven , as if it had been built of cardboard ; the green and blue and topaz conflagration and black lava of liquefactions clashed and combated an instant beneath a majestic dome of smoke ; then oscillated , declined , and fell successively the mighty monoliths of rock which the violence of the explosion had not been able to uproot from the bed of ages ; they bowed to each other like grave and stiff old men , then prostrating themselves , lay down forever in their dusty tomb . 
This frightful shock seemed to restore Porthos the strength that he had lost ; he arose , a giant among granite giants . 
But at the moment he was flying between the double hedge of granite phantoms , these latter , which were no longer supported by the corresponding links , began to roll and totter round our Titan , who looked as if precipitated from heaven amidst rocks which he had just been launching . 
Porthos felt the very earth beneath his feet becoming jelly-tremulous . 
He stretched both hands to repulse the falling rocks . 
A gigantic block was held back by each of his extended arms . 
He bent his head , and a third granite mass sank between his shoulders . 
For an instant the power of Porthos seemed about to fail him , but this new Hercules united all his force , and the two walls of the prison in which he was buried fell back slowly and gave him place . 
For an instant he appeared , in this frame of granite , like the angel of chaos , but in pushing back the lateral rocks , he lost his point of support , for the monolith which weighed upon his shoulders , and the boulder , pressing upon him with all its weight , brought the giant down upon his knees . 
The lateral rocks , for an instant pushed back , drew together again , and added their weight to the ponderous mass which would have been sufficient to crush ten men . 
