must experience an imperious desire for a private conversation with one whom the possession of such a secret placed on a level with the highest powers of the kingdom . 
But as to saying exactly what the king 's wish was , D'Artagnan found himself completely at a loss . 
The musketeer had no doubts , either , upon the reason which had urged the unfortunate Philippe to reveal his character and birth . 
Philippe , buried forever beneath a mask of steel , exiled to a country where the men seemed little more than slaves of the elements ; Philippe , deprived even of the society of D'Artagnan , who had loaded him with honors and delicate attentions , had nothing more to see than odious specters in this world , and , despair beginning to devour him , he poured himself forth in complaints , in the belief that his revelations would raise up some avenger for him . 
The manner in which the musketeer had been near killing his two best friends , the destiny which had so strangely brought Athos to participate in the great state secret , the farewell of Raoul , the obscurity of the future which threatened to end in a melancholy death ; all this threw D'Artagnan incessantly back on lamentable predictions and forebodings , which the rapidity of his pace did not dissipate , as it used formerly to do . 
D'Artagnan passed from these considerations to the remembrance of the proscribed Porthos and Aramis . 
He saw them both , fugitives , tracked , ruined - laborious architects of fortunes they had lost ; and as the king called for his man of execution in hours of vengeance and malice , D'Artagnan trembled at the very idea of receiving some commission that would make his very soul bleed . 
Sometimes , ascending hills , when the winded horse breathed hard from his red nostrils , and heaved his flanks , the captain , left to more freedom of thought , reflected on the prodigious genius of Aramis , a genius of acumen and intrigue , a match to which the Fronde and the civil war had produced but twice . 
Soldier , priest , diplomatist ; gallant , avaricious , cunning ; Aramis had never taken the good things of this life except as stepping - stones to rise to giddier ends . 
Generous in spirit , if not lofty in heart , he never did ill but for the sake of shining even yet more brilliantly . 
