In vivid contrast to the sad and terrible destiny of the king imprisoned in the Bastile , and tearing , in sheer despair , the bolts and bars of his dungeon , the rhetoric of the chroniclers of old would not fail to present , as a complete antithesis , the picture of Philippe lying asleep beneath the royal canopy . 
We do not pretend to say that such rhetoric is always bad , and always scatters , in places where they have no right to grow , the flowers with which it embellishes and enlivens history . 
But we shall , on the present occasion , carefully avoid polishing the antithesis in question , but shall proceed to draw another picture as minutely as possible , to serve as foil and counterfoil to the one in the preceding chapter . 
The young prince alighted from Aramis 's room , in the same way the king had descended from the apartment dedicated to Morpheus . 
The dome gradually and slowly sank down under Aramis 's pressure , and Philippe stood beside the royal bed , which had ascended again after having deposited its prisoner in the secret depths of the subterranean passage . 
Alone , in the presence of all the luxury which surrounded him ; alone , in the presence of his power ; alone , with the part he was about to be forced to act , Philippe for the first time felt his heart , and mind , and soul expand beneath the influence of a thousand mutable emotions , which are the vital throbs of a king 's heart . 
He could not help changing color when he looked upon the empty bed , still tumbled by his brother 's body . 
This mute accomplice had returned , after having completed the work it had been destined to perform ; it returned with the traces of the crime ; it spoke to the guilty author of that crime , with the frank and unreserved language which an accomplice never fears to use in the company of his companion in guilt ; for it spoke the truth . 
Philippe bent over the bed , and perceived a pocket-handkerchief lying on it , which was still damp from the cold sweat which had poured from Louis XIV . 
's face . 
