The king , D'Artagnan was told , behaved in the kindest manner to M. Fouquet , and did not allow him to be ever out of his sight ; but the surintendant , touched to the heart , like one of those fine trees a worm has punctured , was declining daily , in spite of the royal smile , that sun of court trees . 
D'Artagnan learned that Mademoiselle de la Valliere had become indispensable to the king ; that the king , during his sporting excursions , if he did not take her with him , wrote to her frequently , no longer verses , but , which was much worse , prose , and that whole pages at a time . 
Thus , as the political Pleiad of the day said , the first king in the world was seen descending from his horse with an ardor beyond compare , and on the crown of his hat scrawling bombastic phrases , which M. de Saint-Aignan , aide-de-camp in perpetuity , carried to La Valliere at the risk of foundering his horses . 
During this time , deer and pheasants were left to the free enjoyment of their nature , hunted so lazily that , it was said , the art of venery ran great risk of degenerating at the court of France . 
D'Artagnan then thought of the wishes of poor Raoul , of that desponding letter destined for a woman who passed her life in hoping , and as D'Artagnan loved to philosophize a little occasionally , he resolved to profit by the absence of the king to have a minute 's talk with Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
This was a very easy affair ; while the king was hunting , Louise was walking with some other ladies in one of the galleries of the Palais Royal , exactly where the captain of the musketeers had some guards to inspect . 
D'Artagnan did not doubt that , if he could but open the conversation on Raoul , Louise might give him grounds for writing a consolatory letter to the poor exile ; and hope , or at least consolation for Raoul , in the state of heart in which he had left him , was the sun , was life to two men , who were very dear to our captain . 
He directed his course , therefore , to the spot where he knew he should find Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
D'Artagnan found La Valliere the center of the circle . 
In her apparent solitude , the king 's favorite received , like a queen , more , perhaps , than the queen , a homage of which Madame had been so proud , when all the king 's looks were directed to her and commanded the looks of the courtiers . 
