Fouquet looked at him as he quitted the room , waited with a feverish impatience until the door was closed behind him , and as soon as it was shut , flew to his keys , opened two or three secret doors concealed in various articles of furniture in the room , looked vainly for certain papers , which doubtless he had left at Saint-Mande , and which he seemed to regret not having found in them ; then hurriedly seizing hold of letters , contracts , papers , writings , he heaped them up into a pile , which he burnt in the extremest haste upon the marble hearth of the fireplace , not even taking time to draw from the interior of it the vases and pots of flowers with which it was filled . 
As soon as he had finished , like a man who has just escaped an imminent danger , and whose strength abandons him as soon as the danger is past , he sank down , completely overcome , on a couch . 
When D'Artagnan returned , he found Fouquet in the same position ; the worthy musketeer had not the slightest doubt that Fouquet , having given his word , would not even think of failing to keep it , but he had thought it most likely that Fouquet would turn his -LRB- D'Artagnan 's -RRB- absence to the best advantage in getting rid of all the papers , memorandums , and contracts , which might possibly render his position , which was even now serious enough , more dangerous than ever . 
And so , lifting up his head like a dog who has regained the scent , he perceived an odor resembling smoke he had relied on finding in the atmosphere , and having found it , made a movement of his head in token of satisfaction . 
As D'Artagnan entered , Fouquet , on his side , raised his head , and not one of D'Artagnan 's movements escaped him . 
And then the looks of the two men met , and they both saw that they had understood each other without exchanging a syllable . 
`` Well ! '' 
asked Fouquet , the first to speak , `` and M. d'Herblay ? '' 
`` Upon my word , monseigneur , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` M. d'Herblay must be desperately fond of walking out at night , and composing verses by moonlight in the park of Vaux , with some of your poets , in all probability , for he is not in his own room . '' 
`` What ! 
