: High Treason . 
The ungovernable fury which took possession of the king at the sight and at the perusal of Fouquet 's letter to La Valliere by degrees subsided into a feeling of pain and extreme weariness . 
Youth , invigorated by health and lightness of spirits , requiring soon that what it loses should be immediately restored - youth knows not those endless , sleepless nights which enable us to realize the fable of the vulture unceasingly feeding on Prometheus . 
In cases where the man of middle life , in his acquired strength of will and purpose , and the old , in their state of natural exhaustion , find incessant augmentation of their bitter sorrow , a young man , surprised by the sudden appearance of misfortune , weakens himself in sighs , and groans , and tears , directly struggling with his grief , and is thereby far sooner overthrown by the inflexible enemy with whom he is engaged . 
Once overthrown , his struggles cease . 
Louis could not hold out more than a few minutes , at the end of which he had ceased to clench his hands , and scorch in fancy with his looks the invisible objects of his hatred ; he soon ceased to attack with his violent imprecations not M. Fouquet alone , but even La Valliere herself ; from fury he subsided into despair , and from despair to prostration . 
After he had thrown himself for a few minutes to and fro convulsively on his bed , his nerveless arms fell quietly down ; his head lay languidly on his pillow ; his limbs , exhausted with excessive emotion , still trembled occasionally , agitated by muscular contractions ; while from his breast faint and infrequent sighs still issued . 
Morpheus , the tutelary deity of the apartment , towards whom Louis raised his eyes , wearied by his anger and reconciled by his tears , showered down upon him the sleep-inducing poppies with which his hands are ever filled ; so presently the monarch closed his eyes and fell asleep . 
Then it seemed to him , as it often happens in that first sleep , so light and gentle , which raises the body above the couch , and the soul above the earth - it seemed to him , we say , as if the god Morpheus , painted on the ceiling , looked at him with eyes resembling human eyes ; that something shone brightly , and moved to and fro in the dome above the sleeper ; that the crowd of terrible dreams which thronged together in his brain , and which were interrupted for a moment , half revealed a human face , with a hand resting against the mouth , and in an attitude of deep and absorbed meditation . 
And strange enough , too , this man bore so wonderful a resemblance to the king himself , that Louis fancied he was looking at his own face reflected in a mirror ; with the exception , however , that the face was saddened by a feeling of the profoundest pity . 
