A body might stump his toe , and take pison , and fall down the well , and break his neck , and bust his brains out , and somebody come along and ask what killed him , and some numskull up and say , ` Why , he stumped his TOE . ' 
Would ther ' be any sense in that ? 
NO . 
And ther ' ai n't no sense in THIS , nuther . 
Is it ketching ? '' 
`` Is it KETCHING ? 
Why , how you talk . 
Is a HARROW catching -- in the dark ? 
If you do n't hitch on to one tooth , you 're bound to on another , ai n't you ? 
And you ca n't get away with that tooth without fetching the whole harrow along , can you ? 
Well , these kind of mumps is a kind of a harrow , as you may say -- and it ai n't no slouch of a harrow , nuther , you come to get it hitched on good . '' 
`` Well , it 's awful , I think , '' says the hare-lip . 
`` I 'll go to Uncle Harvey and -- '' `` Oh , yes , '' I says , `` I WOULD . 
Of COURSE I would . 
I would n't lose no time . '' 
`` Well , why would n't you ? '' 
`` Just look at it a minute , and maybe you can see . 
Hai n't your uncles obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can ? 
And do you reckon they 'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that journey by yourselves ? 
YOU know they 'll wait for you . 
So fur , so good . 
Your uncle Harvey 's a preacher , ai n't he ? 
Very well , then ; is a PREACHER going to deceive a steamboat clerk ? 
is he going to deceive a SHIP CLERK ? 
-- so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard ? 
Now YOU know he ai n't . 
What WILL he do , then ? 
Why , he 'll say , ` It 's a great pity , but my church matters has got to get along the best way they can ; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps , and so it 's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months it takes to show on her if she 's got it . ' 
But never mind , if you think it 's best to tell your uncle Harvey -- '' `` Shucks , and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane 's got it or not ? 
Why , you talk like a muggins . '' 
`` Well , anyway , maybe you 'd better tell some of the neighbors . '' 
`` Listen at that , now . 
You do beat all for natural stupidness . 
Ca n't you SEE that THEY 'D go and tell ? 
Ther ' ai n't no way but just to not tell anybody at ALL . '' 
`` Well , maybe you 're right -- yes , I judge you ARE right . '' 
`` But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she 's gone out a while , anyway , so he wo n't be uneasy about her ? '' 
`` Yes , Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that . 
She says , ` Tell them to give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss , and say I 've run over the river to see Mr. ' -- Mr. -- what IS the name of that rich family your uncle Peter used to think so much of ? 
-- I mean the one that -- '' `` Why , you must mean the Apthorps , ai n't it ? '' 
`` Of course ; bother them kind of names , a body ca n't ever seem to remember them , half the time , somehow . 
Yes , she said , say she has run over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy this house , because she allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had it than anybody else ; and she 's going to stick to them till they say they 'll come , and then , if she ai n't too tired , she 's coming home ; and if she is , she 'll be home in the morning anyway . 
She said , do n't say nothing about the Proctors , but only about the Apthorps -- which 'll be perfectly true , because she is going there to speak about their buying the house ; I know it , because she told me so herself . '' 
`` All right , '' they said , and cleared out to lay for their uncles , and give them the love and the kisses , and tell them the message . 
Everything was all right now . 
The girls would n't say nothing because they wanted to go to England ; and the king and the duke would ruther Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of Doctor Robinson . 
I felt very good ; I judged I had done it pretty neat -- I reckoned Tom Sawyer could n't a done it no neater himself . 
Of course he would a throwed more style into it , but I ca n't do that very handy , not being brung up to it . 
Well , they held the auction in the public square , along towards the end of the afternoon , and it strung along , and strung along , and the old man he was on hand and looking his level pisonest , up there longside of the auctioneer , and chipping in a little Scripture now and then , or a little goody-goody saying of some kind , and the duke he was around goo-gooing for sympathy all he knowed how , and just spreading himself generly . 
But by and by the thing dragged through , and everything was sold -- everything but a little old trifling lot in the graveyard . 
