So I went to him that night and told him pap was here again , for I found his tracks in the snow . 
What I wanted to know was , what he was going to do , and was he going to stay ? 
Jim got out his hair-ball and said something over it , and then he held it up and dropped it on the floor . 
It fell pretty solid , and only rolled about an inch . 
Jim tried it again , and then another time , and it acted just the same . 
Jim got down on his knees , and put his ear against it and listened . 
But it war n't no use ; he said it would n't talk . 
He said sometimes it would n't talk without money . 
I told him I had an old slick counterfeit quarter that war n't no good because the brass showed through the silver a little , and it would n't pass nohow , even if the brass did n't show , because it was so slick it felt greasy , and so that would tell on it every time . 
-LRB- I reckoned I would n't say nothing about the dollar I got from the judge . -RRB- 
I said it was pretty bad money , but maybe the hair-ball would take it , because maybe it would n't know the difference . 
Jim smelt it and bit it and rubbed it , and said he would manage so the hair-ball would think it was good . 
He said he would split open a raw Irish potato and stick the quarter in between and keep it there all night , and next morning you could n't see no brass , and it would n't feel greasy no more , and so anybody in town would take it in a minute , let alone a hair-ball . 
Well , I knowed a potato would do that before , but I had forgot it . 
Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball , and got down and listened again . 
This time he said the hair-ball was all right . 
He said it would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to . 
I says , go on . 
So the hair-ball talked to Jim , and Jim told it to me . 
He says : `` Yo ' ole father doan ' know yit what he 's a-gwyne to do . 
Sometimes he spec he 'll go ` way , en den agin he spec he 'll stay . 
De bes ' way is to res ' easy en let de ole man take his own way . 
Dey 's two angels hoverin ' roun ' ` bout him . 
One uv 'em is white en shiny , en t ` other one is black . 
De white one gits him to go right a little while , den de black one sail in en bust it all up . 
A body ca n't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch him at de las ' . 
But you is all right . 
You gwyne to have considable trouble in yo ' life , en considable joy . 
Sometimes you gwyne to git hurt , en sometimes you gwyne to git sick ; but every time you 's gwyne to git well agin . 
Dey 's two gals flyin ' ` bout you in yo ' life . 
One uv 'em 's light en t ` other one is dark . 
One is rich en t ` other is po ' . 
You 's gwyne to marry de po ' one fust en de rich one by en by . 
You wants to keep ` way fum de water as much as you kin , en do n't run no resk , ` kase it 's down in de bills dat you 's gwyne to git hung . '' 
When I lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap -- his own self ! 
I HAD shut the door to . 
Then I turned around and there he was . 
I used to be scared of him all the time , he tanned me so much . 
I reckoned I was scared now , too ; but in a minute I see I was mistaken -- that is , after the first jolt , as you may say , when my breath sort of hitched , he being so unexpected ; but right away after I see I war n't scared of him worth bothring about . 
He was most fifty , and he looked it . 
His hair was long and tangled and greasy , and hung down , and you could see his eyes shining through like he was behind vines . 
It was all black , no gray ; so was his long , mixed-up whiskers . 
There war n't no color in his face , where his face showed ; it was white ; not like another man 's white , but a white to make a body sick , a white to make a body 's flesh crawl -- a tree-toad white , a fish-belly white . 
As for his clothes -- just rags , that was all . 
He had one ankle resting on t ` other knee ; the boot on that foot was busted , and two of his toes stuck through , and he worked them now and then . 
His hat was laying on the floor -- an old black slouch with the top caved in , like a lid . 
I stood a-looking at him ; he set there a-looking at me , with his chair tilted back a little . 
I set the candle down . 
I noticed the window was up ; so he had clumb in by the shed . 
He kept a-looking me all over . 
