You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft . 
TWO or three days and nights went by ; I reckon I might say they swum by , they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely . 
Here is the way we put in the time . 
It was a monstrous big river down there -- sometimes a mile and a half wide ; we run nights , and laid up and hid daytimes ; soon as night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up -- nearly always in the dead water under a towhead ; and then cut young cottonwoods and willows , and hid the raft with them . 
Then we set out the lines . 
Next we slid into the river and had a swim , so as to freshen up and cool off ; then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep , and watched the daylight come . 
Not a sound anywheres -- perfectly still -- just like the whole world was asleep , only sometimes the bullfrogs a - cluttering , maybe . 
The first thing to see , looking away over the water , was a kind of dull line -- that was the woods on t ` other side ; you could n't make nothing else out ; then a pale place in the sky ; then more paleness spreading around ; then the river softened up away off , and war n't black any more , but gray ; you could see little dark spots drifting along ever so far away -- trading scows , and such things ; and long black streaks -- rafts ; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking ; or jumbled up voices , it was so still , and sounds come so far ; and by and by you could see a streak on the water which you know by the look of the streak that there 's a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and makes that streak look that way ; and you see the mist curl up off of the water , and the east reddens up , and the river , and you make out a log-cabin in the edge of the woods , away on the bank on t ` other side of the river , being a woodyard , likely , and piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog through it anywheres ; then the nice breeze springs up , and comes fanning you from over there , so cool and fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods and the flowers ; but sometimes not that way , because they 've left dead fish laying around , gars and such , and they do get pretty rank ; and next you 've got the full day , and everything smiling in the sun , and the song - birds just going it ! 
A little smoke could n't be noticed now , so we would take some fish off of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast . 
And afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river , and kind of lazy along , and by and by lazy off to sleep . 
Wake up by and by , and look to see what done it , and maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream , so far off towards the other side you could n't tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or side-wheel ; then for about an hour there would n't be nothing to hear nor nothing to see -- just solid lonesomeness . 
Next you 'd see a raft sliding by , away off yonder , and maybe a galoot on it chopping , because they 're most always doing it on a raft ; you 'd see the axe flash and come down -- you do n't hear nothing ; you see that axe go up again , and by the time it 's above the man 's head then you hear the K'CHUNK ! 
-- it had took all that time to come over the water . 
So we would put in the day , lazying around , listening to the stillness . 
Once there was a thick fog , and the rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats would n't run over them . 
A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and laughing -- heard them plain ; but we could n't see no sign of them ; it made you feel crawly ; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air . 
Jim said he believed it was spirits ; but I says : `` No ; spirits would n't say , ` Dern the dern fog . ' '' 
Soon as it was night out we shoved ; when we got her out to about the middle we let her alone , and let her float wherever the current wanted her to ; then we lit the pipes , and dangled our legs in the water , and talked about all kinds of things -- we was always naked , day and night , whenever the mosquitoes would let us -- the new clothes Buck 's folks made for me was too good to be comfortable , and besides I did n't go much on clothes , nohow . 
Sometimes we 'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time . 
Yonder was the banks and the islands , across the water ; and maybe a spark -- which was a candle in a cabin window ; and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or two -- on a raft or a scow , you know ; and maybe you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts . 
It 's lovely to live on a raft . 
We had the sky up there , all speckled with stars , and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them , and discuss about whether they was made or only just happened . 
Jim he allowed they was made , but I allowed they happened ; I judged it would have took too long to MAKE so many . 
Jim said the moon could a LAID them ; well , that looked kind of reasonable , so I did n't say nothing against it , because I 've seen a frog lay most as many , so of course it could be done . 
We used to watch the stars that fell , too , and see them streak down . 
Jim allowed they 'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest . 
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the dark , and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of her chimbleys , and they would rain down in the river and look awful pretty ; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and her powwow shut off and leave the river still again ; and by and by her waves would get to us , a long time after she was gone , and joggle the raft a bit , and after that you would n't hear nothing for you could n't tell how long , except maybe frogs or something . 
After midnight the people on shore went to bed , and then for two or three hours the shores was black -- no more sparks in the cabin windows . 
These sparks was our clock -- the first one that showed again meant morning was coming , so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away . 
One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to the main shore -- it was only two hundred yards -- and paddled about a mile up a crick amongst the cypress woods , to see if I could n't get some berries . 
Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed the crick , here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they could foot it . 
I thought I was a goner , for whenever anybody was after anybody I judged it was ME -- or maybe Jim . 
I was about to dig out from there in a hurry , but they was pretty close to me then , and sung out and begged me to save their lives -- said they had n't been doing nothing , and was being chased for it -- said there was men and dogs a-coming . 
They wanted to jump right in , but I says : `` Do n't you do it . 
I do n't hear the dogs and horses yet ; you 've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways ; then you take to the water and wade down to me and get in -- that 'll throw the dogs off the scent . '' 
They done it , and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our towhead , and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off , shouting . 
We heard them come along towards the crick , but could n't see them ; they seemed to stop and fool around a while ; then , as we got further and further away all the time , we could n't hardly hear them at all ; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the river , everything was quiet , and we paddled over to the towhead and hid in the cottonwoods and was safe . 
One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards , and had a bald head and very gray whiskers . 
He had an old battered-up slouch hat on , and a greasy blue woollen shirt , and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot-tops , and home-knit galluses -- no , he only had one . 
He had an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over his arm , and both of them had big , fat , ratty-looking carpet-bags . 
The other fellow was about thirty , and dressed about as ornery . 
After breakfast we all laid off and talked , and the first thing that come out was that these chaps did n't know one another . 
`` What got you into trouble ? '' 
says the baldhead to t ` other chap . 
`` Well , I 'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth -- and it does take it off , too , and generly the enamel along with it -- but I stayed about one night longer than I ought to , and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you on the trail this side of town , and you told me they were coming , and begged me to help you to get off . 
So I told you I was expecting trouble myself , and would scatter out WITH you . 
That 's the whole yarn -- what 's yourn ? 
`` Well , I 'd ben a-running ' a little temperance revival thar ` bout a week , and was the pet of the women folks , big and little , for I was makin ' it mighty warm for the rummies , I TELL you , and takin ' as much as five or six dollars a night -- ten cents a head , children and niggers free -- and business a-growin ' all the time , when somehow or another a little report got around last night that I had a way of puttin ' in my time with a private jug on the sly . 
A nigger rousted me out this mornin ' , and told me the people was getherin ' on the quiet with their dogs and horses , and they 'd be along pretty soon and give me ` bout half an hour 's start , and then run me down if they could ; and if they got me they 'd tar and feather me and ride me on a rail , sure . 
I did n't wait for no breakfast -- I war n't hungry . '' 
