That muleheaded old fool would n't give in THEN ! 
Indeed he would n't . 
Said it war n't no fair test . 
Said his brother William was the cussedest joker in the world , and had n't tried to write -- HE see William was going to play one of his jokes the minute he put the pen to paper . 
And so he warmed up and went warbling right along till he was actuly beginning to believe what he was saying HIMSELF ; but pretty soon the new gentleman broke in , and says : `` I 've thought of something . 
Is there anybody here that helped to lay out my br -- helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for burying ? '' 
`` Yes , '' says somebody , `` me and Ab Turner done it . 
We 're both here . '' 
Then the old man turns towards the king , and says : `` Peraps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast ? '' 
Blamed if the king did n't have to brace up mighty quick , or he 'd a squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut under , it took him so sudden ; and , mind you , it was a thing that was calculated to make most ANYBODY sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any notice , because how was HE going to know what was tattooed on the man ? 
He whitened a little ; he could n't help it ; and it was mighty still in there , and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him . 
Says I to myself , NOW he 'll throw up the sponge -- there ai n't no more use . 
Well , did he ? 
A body ca n't hardly believe it , but he did n't . 
I reckon he thought he 'd keep the thing up till he tired them people out , so they 'd thin out , and him and the duke could break loose and get away . 
Anyway , he set there , and pretty soon he begun to smile , and says : `` Mf ! 
It 's a VERY tough question , AI N'T it ! 
YES , sir , I k 'n tell you what 's tattooed on his breast . 
It 's jest a small , thin , blue arrow -- that 's what it is ; and if you do n't look clost , you ca n't see it . 
NOW what do you say -- hey ? '' 
Well , I never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out cheek . 
The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and his pard , and his eye lights up like he judged he 'd got the king THIS time , and says : `` There -- you 've heard what he said ! 
Was there any such mark on Peter Wilks ' breast ? '' 
Both of them spoke up and says : `` We did n't see no such mark . '' 
`` Good ! '' 
says the old gentleman . 
`` Now , what you DID see on his breast was a small dim P , and a B -LRB- which is an initial he dropped when he was young -RRB- , and a W , with dashes between them , so : P -- B -- W '' -- and he marked them that way on a piece of paper . 
`` Come , ai n't that what you saw ? '' 
Both of them spoke up again , and says : `` No , we DID N'T . 
We never seen any marks at all . '' 
Well , everybody WAS in a state of mind now , and they sings out : `` The whole BILIN ' of 'm 's frauds ! 
Le 's duck 'em ! 
le 's drown 'em ! 
le 's ride 'em on a rail ! '' 
and everybody was whooping at once , and there was a rattling powwow . 
But the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells , and says : `` Gentlemen -- gentleMEN ! 
Hear me just a word -- just a SINGLE word -- if you PLEASE ! 
There 's one way yet -- let 's go and dig up the corpse and look . '' 
That took them . 
`` Hooray ! '' 
they all shouted , and was starting right off ; but the lawyer and the doctor sung out : `` Hold on , hold on ! 
Collar all these four men and the boy , and fetch THEM along , too ! '' 
`` We 'll do it ! '' 
they all shouted ; `` and if we do n't find them marks we 'll lynch the whole gang ! '' 
I WAS scared , now , I tell you . 
But there war n't no getting away , you know . 
They gripped us all , and marched us right along , straight for the graveyard , which was a mile and a half down the river , and the whole town at our heels , for we made noise enough , and it was only nine in the evening . 
As we went by our house I wished I had n't sent Mary Jane out of town ; because now if I could tip her the wink she 'd light out and save me , and blow on our dead-beats . 
Well , we swarmed along down the river road , just carrying on like wildcats ; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up , and the lightning beginning to wink and flitter , and the wind to shiver amongst the leaves . 
This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever was in ; and I was kinder stunned ; everything was going so different from what I had allowed for ; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time if I wanted to , and see all the fun , and have Mary Jane at my back to save me and set me free when the close-fit come , here was nothing in the world betwixt me and sudden death but just them tattoo-marks . 
