But I could n't see no profit in it . 
One time Tom sent a boy to run about town with a blazing stick , which he called a slogan -LRB- which was the sign for the Gang to get together -RRB- , and then he said he had got secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish merchants and rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow with two hundred elephants , and six hundred camels , and over a thousand `` sumter '' mules , all loaded down with di ` monds , and they did n't have only a guard of four hundred soldiers , and so we would lay in ambuscade , as he called it , and kill the lot and scoop the things . 
He said we must slick up our swords and guns , and get ready . 
He never could go after even a turnip - cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it , though they was only lath and broomsticks , and you might scour at them till you rotted , and then they war n't worth a mouthful of ashes more than what they was before . 
I did n't believe we could lick such a crowd of Spaniards and A-rabs , but I wanted to see the camels and elephants , so I was on hand next day , Saturday , in the ambuscade ; and when we got the word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill . 
But there war n't no Spaniards and A-rabs , and there war n't no camels nor no elephants . 
It war n't anything but a Sunday-school picnic , and only a primer-class at that . 
We busted it up , and chased the children up the hollow ; but we never got anything but some doughnuts and jam , though Ben Rogers got a rag doll , and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract ; and then the teacher charged in , and made us drop everything and cut . 
I did n't see no di ` monds , and I told Tom Sawyer so . 
He said there was loads of them there , anyway ; and he said there was A-rabs there , too , and elephants and things . 
I said , why could n't we see them , then ? 
He said if I war n't so ignorant , but had read a book called Don Quixote , I would know without asking . 
He said it was all done by enchantment . 
He said there was hundreds of soldiers there , and elephants and treasure , and so on , but we had enemies which he called magicians ; and they had turned the whole thing into an infant Sunday-school , just out of spite . 
I said , all right ; then the thing for us to do was to go for the magicians . 
Tom Sawyer said I was a numskull . 
`` Why , '' said he , `` a magician could call up a lot of genies , and they would hash you up like nothing before you could say Jack Robinson . 
They are as tall as a tree and as big around as a church . '' 
`` Well , '' I says , `` s ` pose we got some genies to help US -- ca n't we lick the other crowd then ? '' 
`` How you going to get them ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
How do THEY get them ? '' 
`` Why , they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring , and then the genies come tearing in , with the thunder and lightning a-ripping around and the smoke a-rolling , and everything they 're told to do they up and do it . 
They do n't think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots , and belting a Sunday-school superintendent over the head with it -- or any other man . '' 
`` Who makes them tear around so ? '' 
`` Why , whoever rubs the lamp or the ring . 
They belong to whoever rubs the lamp or the ring , and they 've got to do whatever he says . 
If he tells them to build a palace forty miles long out of di ` monds , and fill it full of chewing-gum , or whatever you want , and fetch an emperor 's daughter from China for you to marry , they 've got to do it -- and they 've got to do it before sun-up next morning , too . 
And more : they 've got to waltz that palace around over the country wherever you want it , you understand . '' 
`` Well , '' says I , `` I think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping the palace themselves ` stead of fooling them away like that . 
And what 's more -- if I was one of them I would see a man in Jericho before I would drop my business and come to him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp . '' 
`` How you talk , Huck Finn . 
Why , you 'd HAVE to come when he rubbed it , whether you wanted to or not . '' 
`` What ! 
and I as high as a tree and as big as a church ? 
All right , then ; I WOULD come ; but I lay I 'd make that man climb the highest tree there was in the country . '' 
`` Shucks , it ai n't no use to talk to you , Huck Finn . 
You do n't seem to know anything , somehow -- perfect saphead . '' 
I thought all this over for two or three days , and then I reckoned I would see if there was anything in it . 
I got an old tin lamp and an iron ring , and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat like an Injun , calculating to build a palace and sell it ; but it war n't no use , none of the genies come . 
So then I judged that all that stuff was only just one of Tom Sawyer 's lies . 
I reckoned he believed in the A-rabs and the elephants , but as for me I think different . 
It had all the marks of a Sunday-school . 
WELL , three or four months run along , and it was well into the winter now . 
I had been to school most all the time and could spell and read and write just a little , and could say the multiplication table up to six times seven is thirty-five , and I do n't reckon I could ever get any further than that if I was to live forever . 
I do n't take no stock in mathematics , anyway . 
At first I hated the school , but by and by I got so I could stand it . 
Whenever I got uncommon tired I played hookey , and the hiding I got next day done me good and cheered me up . 
So the longer I went to school the easier it got to be . 
I was getting sort of used to the widow 's ways , too , and they war n't so raspy on me . 
