And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and things , and nonnamous letters from the robbers , and get up and down the lightning-rod , and dig the hole into the cabin , and made the rope ladder and send it in cooked up in a pie , and send in spoons and things to work with in your apron pocket -- '' `` Mercy sakes ! '' '' 
-- and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on , for company for Jim ; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that you come near spiling the whole business , because the men come before we was out of the cabin , and we had to rush , and they heard us and let drive at us , and I got my share , and we dodged out of the path and let them go by , and when the dogs come they war n't interested in us , but went for the most noise , and we got our canoe , and made for the raft , and was all safe , and Jim was a free man , and we done it all by ourselves , and WAS N'T it bully , Aunty ! '' 
`` Well , I never heard the likes of it in all my born days ! 
So it was YOU , you little rapscallions , that 's been making all this trouble , and turned everybody 's wits clean inside out and scared us all most to death . 
I 've as good a notion as ever I had in my life to take it out o ' you this very minute . 
To think , here I 've been , night after night , a -- YOU just get well once , you young scamp , and I lay I 'll tan the Old Harry out o ' both o ' ye ! '' 
But Tom , he WAS so proud and joyful , he just COULD N'T hold in , and his tongue just WENT it -- she a-chipping in , and spitting fire all along , and both of them going it at once , like a cat convention ; and she says : `` WELL , you get all the enjoyment you can out of it NOW , for mind I tell you if I catch you meddling with him again -- '' `` Meddling with WHO ? '' 
Tom says , dropping his smile and looking surprised . 
`` With WHO ? 
Why , the runaway nigger , of course . 
Who 'd you reckon ? '' 
Tom looks at me very grave , and says : `` Tom , did n't you just tell me he was all right ? 
Has n't he got away ? '' 
`` HIM ? '' 
says Aunt Sally ; `` the runaway nigger ? 
` Deed he has n't . 
They 've got him back , safe and sound , and he 's in that cabin again , on bread and water , and loaded down with chains , till he 's claimed or sold ! '' 
Tom rose square up in bed , with his eye hot , and his nostrils opening and shutting like gills , and sings out to me : `` They hai n't no RIGHT to shut him up ! 
SHOVE ! 
-- and do n't you lose a minute . 
Turn him loose ! 
he ai n't no slave ; he 's as free as any cretur that walks this earth ! '' 
`` What DOES the child mean ? '' 
`` I mean every word I SAY , Aunt Sally , and if somebody do n't go , I 'LL go . 
I 've knowed him all his life , and so has Tom , there . 
Old Miss Watson died two months ago , and she was ashamed she ever was going to sell him down the river , and SAID so ; and she set him free in her will . '' 
`` Then what on earth did YOU want to set him free for , seeing he was already free ? '' 
`` Well , that IS a question , I must say ; and just like women ! 
Why , I wanted the ADVENTURE of it ; and I 'd a waded neck-deep in blood to -- goodness alive , AUNT POLLY ! '' 
If she war n't standing right there , just inside the door , looking as sweet and contented as an angel half full of pie , I wish I may never ! 
Aunt Sally jumped for her , and most hugged the head off of her , and cried over her , and I found a good enough place for me under the bed , for it was getting pretty sultry for us , seemed to me . 
And I peeped out , and in a little while Tom 's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and stood there looking across at Tom over her spectacles -- kind of grinding him into the earth , you know . 
And then she says : `` Yes , you BETTER turn y' r head away -- I would if I was you , Tom . '' 
`` Oh , deary me ! '' 
says Aunt Sally ; `` IS he changed so ? 
Why , that ai n't TOM , it 's Sid ; Tom 's -- Tom 's -- why , where is Tom ? 
He was here a minute ago . '' 
`` You mean where 's Huck FINN -- that 's what you mean ! 
I reckon I hai n't raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I SEE him . 
That WOULD be a pretty howdy-do . 
Come out from under that bed , Huck Finn . '' 
So I done it . 
But not feeling brash . 
Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever see -- except one , and that was Uncle Silas , when he come in and they told it all to him . 
It kind of made him drunk , as you may say , and he did n't know nothing at all the rest of the day , and preached a prayer-meeting sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation , because the oldest man in the world could n't a understood it . 
So Tom 's Aunt Polly , she told all about who I was , and what ; and I had to up and tell how I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom Sawyer -- she chipped in and says , `` Oh , go on and call me Aunt Sally , I 'm used to it now , and ` tai n't no need to change '' -- that when Aunt Sally took me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand it -- there war n't no other way , and I knowed he would n't mind , because it would be nuts for him , being a mystery , and he 'd make an adventure out of it , and be perfectly satisfied . 
And so it turned out , and he let on to be Sid , and made things as soft as he could for me . 
And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting Jim free in her will ; and so , sure enough , Tom Sawyer had gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free ! 
and I could n't ever understand before , until that minute and that talk , how he COULD help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up . 
Well , Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and SID had come all right and safe , she says to herself : `` Look at that , now ! 
