Living in a house and sleeping in a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly , but before the cold weather I used to slide out and sleep in the woods sometimes , and so that was a rest to me . 
I liked the old ways best , but I was getting so I liked the new ones , too , a little bit . 
The widow said I was coming along slow but sure , and doing very satisfactory . 
She said she war n't ashamed of me . 
One morning I happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast . 
I reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left shoulder and keep off the bad luck , but Miss Watson was in ahead of me , and crossed me off . 
She says , `` Take your hands away , Huckleberry ; what a mess you are always making ! '' 
The widow put in a good word for me , but that war n't going to keep off the bad luck , I knowed that well enough . 
I started out , after breakfast , feeling worried and shaky , and wondering where it was going to fall on me , and what it was going to be . 
There is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck , but this was n't one of them kind ; so I never tried to do anything , but just poked along low-spirited and on the watch-out . 
I went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go through the high board fence . 
There was an inch of new snow on the ground , and I seen somebody 's tracks . 
They had come up from the quarry and stood around the stile a while , and then went on around the garden fence . 
It was funny they had n't come in , after standing around so . 
I could n't make it out . 
It was very curious , somehow . 
I was going to follow around , but I stooped down to look at the tracks first . 
I did n't notice anything at first , but next I did . 
There was a cross in the left boot-heel made with big nails , to keep off the devil . 
I was up in a second and shinning down the hill . 
I looked over my shoulder every now and then , but I did n't see nobody . 
I was at Judge Thatcher 's as quick as I could get there . 
He said : `` Why , my boy , you are all out of breath . 
Did you come for your interest ? '' 
`` No , sir , '' I says ; `` is there some for me ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , a half-yearly is in last night -- over a hundred and fifty dollars . 
Quite a fortune for you . 
You had better let me invest it along with your six thousand , because if you take it you 'll spend it . '' 
`` No , sir , '' I says , `` I do n't want to spend it . 
I do n't want it at all -- nor the six thousand , nuther . 
I want you to take it ; I want to give it to you -- the six thousand and all . '' 
He looked surprised . 
He could n't seem to make it out . 
He says : `` Why , what can you mean , my boy ? '' 
I says , `` Do n't you ask me no questions about it , please . 
You 'll take it -- wo n't you ? '' 
He says : `` Well , I 'm puzzled . 
Is something the matter ? '' 
`` Please take it , '' says I , `` and do n't ask me nothing -- then I wo n't have to tell no lies . '' 
He studied a while , and then he says : `` Oho-o ! 
I think I see . 
You want to SELL all your property to me -- not give it . 
That 's the correct idea . '' 
Then he wrote something on a paper and read it over , and says : `` There ; you see it says ` for a consideration . ' 
That means I have bought it of you and paid you for it . 
Here 's a dollar for you . 
Now you sign it . '' 
So I signed it , and left . 
Miss Watson 's nigger , Jim , had a hair-ball as big as your fist , which had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox , and he used to do magic with it . 
He said there was a spirit inside of it , and it knowed everything . 
