I was away below the ferry now . 
I rose up , and there was Jackson 's Island , about two mile and a half down stream , heavy timbered and standing up out of the middle of the river , big and dark and solid , like a steamboat without any lights . 
There war n't any signs of the bar at the head -- it was all under water now . 
It did n't take me long to get there . 
I shot past the head at a ripping rate , the current was so swift , and then I got into the dead water and landed on the side towards the Illinois shore . 
I run the canoe into a deep dent in the bank that I knowed about ; I had to part the willow branches to get in ; and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe from the outside . 
I went up and set down on a log at the head of the island , and looked out on the big river and the black driftwood and away over to the town , three mile away , where there was three or four lights twinkling . 
A monstrous big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream , coming along down , with a lantern in the middle of it . 
I watched it come creeping down , and when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say , `` Stern oars , there ! 
heave her head to stabboard ! '' 
I heard that just as plain as if the man was by my side . 
There was a little gray in the sky now ; so I stepped into the woods , and laid down for a nap before breakfast . 
THE sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight o'clock . 
I laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about things , and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied . 
I could see the sun out at one or two holes , but mostly it was big trees all about , and gloomy in there amongst them . 
There was freckled places on the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves , and the freckled places swapped about a little , showing there was a little breeze up there . 
A couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me very friendly . 
I was powerful lazy and comfortable -- did n't want to get up and cook breakfast . 
Well , I was dozing off again when I thinks I hears a deep sound of `` boom ! '' 
away up the river . 
I rouses up , and rests on my elbow and listens ; pretty soon I hears it again . 
I hopped up , and went and looked out at a hole in the leaves , and I see a bunch of smoke laying on the water a long ways up -- about abreast the ferry . 
And there was the ferryboat full of people floating along down . 
I knowed what was the matter now . 
`` Boom ! '' 
I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat 's side . 
You see , they was firing cannon over the water , trying to make my carcass come to the top . 
I was pretty hungry , but it war n't going to do for me to start a fire , because they might see the smoke . 
So I set there and watched the cannon - smoke and listened to the boom . 
The river was a mile wide there , and it always looks pretty on a summer morning -- so I was having a good enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if I only had a bite to eat . 
Well , then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver in loaves of bread and float them off , because they always go right to the drownded carcass and stop there . 
So , says I , I 'll keep a lookout , and if any of them 's floating around after me I 'll give them a show . 
I changed to the Illinois edge of the island to see what luck I could have , and I war n't disappointed . 
A big double loaf come along , and I most got it with a long stick , but my foot slipped and she floated out further . 
Of course I was where the current set in the closest to the shore -- I knowed enough for that . 
But by and by along comes another one , and this time I won . 
I took out the plug and shook out the little dab of quicksilver , and set my teeth in . 
It was `` baker 's bread '' -- what the quality eat ; none of your low-down corn-pone . 
I got a good place amongst the leaves , and set there on a log , munching the bread and watching the ferry-boat , and very well satisfied . 
And then something struck me . 
I says , now I reckon the widow or the parson or somebody prayed that this bread would find me , and here it has gone and done it . 
So there ai n't no doubt but there is something in that thing -- that is , there 's something in it when a body like the widow or the parson prays , but it do n't work for me , and I reckon it do n't work for only just the right kind . 
I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke , and went on watching . 
The ferryboat was floating with the current , and I allowed I 'd have a chance to see who was aboard when she come along , because she would come in close , where the bread did . 
When she 'd got pretty well along down towards me , I put out my pipe and went to where I fished out the bread , and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place . 
Where the log forked I could peep through . 
By and by she come along , and she drifted in so close that they could a run out a plank and walked ashore . 
Most everybody was on the boat . 
Pap , and Judge Thatcher , and Bessie Thatcher , and Jo Harper , and Tom Sawyer , and his old Aunt Polly , and Sid and Mary , and plenty more . 
Everybody was talking about the murder , but the captain broke in and says : `` Look sharp , now ; the current sets in the closest here , and maybe he 's washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water 's edge . 
