`` Oh , no , not everybody . 
A good many thinks he done it . 
But they 'll get the nigger pretty soon now , and maybe they can scare it out of him . '' 
`` Why , are they after him yet ? '' 
`` Well , you 're innocent , ai n't you ! 
Does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up ? 
Some folks think the nigger ai n't far from here . 
I 'm one of them -- but I hai n't talked it around . 
A few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log shanty , and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call Jackson 's Island . 
Do n't anybody live there ? 
says I. No , nobody , says they . 
I did n't say any more , but I done some thinking . 
I was pretty near certain I 'd seen smoke over there , about the head of the island , a day or two before that , so I says to myself , like as not that nigger 's hiding over there ; anyway , says I , it 's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt . 
I hai n't seen any smoke sence , so I reckon maybe he 's gone , if it was him ; but husband 's going over to see -- him and another man . 
He was gone up the river ; but he got back to-day , and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago . '' 
I had got so uneasy I could n't set still . 
I had to do something with my hands ; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it . 
My hands shook , and I was making a bad job of it . 
When the woman stopped talking I looked up , and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling a little . 
I put down the needle and thread , and let on to be interested -- and I was , too -- and says : `` Three hundred dollars is a power of money . 
I wish my mother could get it . 
Is your husband going over there to-night ? '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
He went up-town with the man I was telling you of , to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun . 
They 'll go over after midnight . '' 
`` Could n't they see better if they was to wait till daytime ? '' 
`` Yes . 
And could n't the nigger see better , too ? 
After midnight he 'll likely be asleep , and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark , if he 's got one . '' 
`` I did n't think of that . '' 
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious , and I did n't feel a bit comfortable . 
Pretty soon she says '' `` What did you say your name was , honey ? '' 
`` M -- Mary Williams . '' 
Somehow it did n't seem to me that I said it was Mary before , so I did n't look up -- seemed to me I said it was Sarah ; so I felt sort of cornered , and was afeared maybe I was looking it , too . 
I wished the woman would say something more ; the longer she set still the uneasier I was . 
But now she says : `` Honey , I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in ? '' 
`` Oh , yes 'm , I did . 
Sarah Mary Williams . 
Sarah 's my first name . 
Some calls me Sarah , some calls me Mary . '' 
`` Oh , that 's the way of it ? '' 
`` Yes 'm . '' 
I was feeling better then , but I wished I was out of there , anyway . 
I could n't look up yet . 
Well , the woman fell to talking about how hard times was , and how poor they had to live , and how the rats was as free as if they owned the place , and so forth and so on , and then I got easy again . 
She was right about the rats . 
You 'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner every little while . 
She said she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone , or they would n't give her no peace . 
She showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot , and said she was a good shot with it generly , but she 'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago , and did n't know whether she could throw true now . 
But she watched for a chance , and directly banged away at a rat ; but she missed him wide , and said `` Ouch ! '' 
