No ; nobody ever saw anything in the books like that . 
You fetch them to the cave , and you 're always as polite as pie to them ; and by and by they fall in love with you , and never want to go home any more . '' 
`` Well , if that 's the way I 'm agreed , but I do n't take no stock in it . 
Mighty soon we 'll have the cave so cluttered up with women , and fellows waiting to be ransomed , that there wo n't be no place for the robbers . 
But go ahead , I ai n't got nothing to say . '' 
Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now , and when they waked him up he was scared , and cried , and said he wanted to go home to his ma , and did n't want to be a robber any more . 
So they all made fun of him , and called him cry-baby , and that made him mad , and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets . 
But Tom give him five cents to keep quiet , and said we would all go home and meet next week , and rob somebody and kill some people . 
Ben Rogers said he could n't get out much , only Sundays , and so he wanted to begin next Sunday ; but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it on Sunday , and that settled the thing . 
They agreed to get together and fix a day as soon as they could , and then we elected Tom Sawyer first captain and Jo Harper second captain of the Gang , and so started home . 
I clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was breaking . 
My new clothes was all greased up and clayey , and I was dog - tired . 
WELL , I got a good going-over in the morning from old Miss Watson on account of my clothes ; but the widow she did n't scold , but only cleaned off the grease and clay , and looked so sorry that I thought I would behave awhile if I could . 
Then Miss Watson she took me in the closet and prayed , but nothing come of it . 
She told me to pray every day , and whatever I asked for I would get it . 
But it war n't so . 
I tried it . 
Once I got a fish-line , but no hooks . 
It war n't any good to me without hooks . 
I tried for the hooks three or four times , but somehow I could n't make it work . 
By and by , one day , I asked Miss Watson to try for me , but she said I was a fool . 
She never told me why , and I could n't make it out no way . 
I set down one time back in the woods , and had a long think about it . 
I says to myself , if a body can get anything they pray for , why do n't Deacon Winn get back the money he lost on pork ? 
Why ca n't the widow get back her silver snuffbox that was stole ? 
Why ca n't Miss Watson fat up ? 
No , says I to my self , there ai n't nothing in it . 
I went and told the widow about it , and she said the thing a body could get by praying for it was `` spiritual gifts . '' 
This was too many for me , but she told me what she meant -- I must help other people , and do everything I could for other people , and look out for them all the time , and never think about myself . 
This was including Miss Watson , as I took it . 
I went out in the woods and turned it over in my mind a long time , but I could n't see no advantage about it -- except for the other people ; so at last I reckoned I would n't worry about it any more , but just let it go . 
Sometimes the widow would take me one side and talk about Providence in a way to make a body 's mouth water ; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold and knock it all down again . 
I judged I could see that there was two Providences , and a poor chap would stand considerable show with the widow 's Providence , but if Miss Watson 's got him there war n't no help for him any more . 
I thought it all out , and reckoned I would belong to the widow 's if he wanted me , though I could n't make out how he was a-going to be any better off then than what he was before , seeing I was so ignorant , and so kind of low-down and ornery . 
Pap he had n't been seen for more than a year , and that was comfortable for me ; I did n't want to see him no more . 
He used to always whale me when he was sober and could get his hands on me ; though I used to take to the woods most of the time when he was around . 
Well , about this time he was found in the river drownded , about twelve mile above town , so people said . 
They judged it was him , anyway ; said this drownded man was just his size , and was ragged , and had uncommon long hair , which was all like pap ; but they could n't make nothing out of the face , because it had been in the water so long it war n't much like a face at all . 
They said he was floating on his back in the water . 
They took him and buried him on the bank . 
But I war n't comfortable long , because I happened to think of something . 
I knowed mighty well that a drownded man do n't float on his back , but on his face . 
So I knowed , then , that this war n't pap , but a woman dressed up in a man 's clothes . 
So I was uncomfortable again . 
I judged the old man would turn up again by and by , though I wished he would n't . 
We played robber now and then about a month , and then I resigned . 
All the boys did . 
We had n't robbed nobody , had n't killed any people , but only just pretended . 
We used to hop out of the woods and go charging down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market , but we never hived any of them . 
Tom Sawyer called the hogs `` ingots , '' and he called the turnips and stuff `` julery , '' and we would go to the cave and powwow over what we had done , and how many people we had killed and marked . 
