And ai n't that a big enough majority in any town ? '' 
So they got ready to go down stairs again . 
The duke says : `` I do n't think we put that money in a good place . '' 
That cheered me up . 
I 'd begun to think I war n't going to get a hint of no kind to help me . 
The king says : `` Why ? '' 
`` Because Mary Jane 'll be in mourning from this out ; and first you know the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up and put 'em away ; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of it ? '' 
`` Your head 's level agin , duke , '' says the king ; and he comes a-fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where I was . 
I stuck tight to the wall and kept mighty still , though quivery ; and I wondered what them fellows would say to me if they catched me ; and I tried to think what I 'd better do if they did catch me . 
But the king he got the bag before I could think more than about a half a thought , and he never suspicioned I was around . 
They took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather-bed , and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it was all right now , because a nigger only makes up the feather-bed , and do n't turn over the straw tick only about twice a year , and so it war n't in no danger of getting stole now . 
But I knowed better . 
I had it out of there before they was half-way down stairs . 
I groped along up to my cubby , and hid it there till I could get a chance to do better . 
I judged I better hide it outside of the house somewheres , because if they missed it they would give the house a good ransacking : I knowed that very well . 
Then I turned in , with my clothes all on ; but I could n't a gone to sleep if I 'd a wanted to , I was in such a sweat to get through with the business . 
By and by I heard the king and the duke come up ; so I rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder , and waited to see if anything was going to happen . 
But nothing did . 
So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones had n't begun yet ; and then I slipped down the ladder . 
I CREPT to their doors and listened ; they was snoring . 
So I tiptoed along , and got down stairs all right . 
There war n't a sound anywheres . 
I peeped through a crack of the dining-room door , and see the men that was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs . 
The door was open into the parlor , where the corpse was laying , and there was a candle in both rooms . 
I passed along , and the parlor door was open ; but I see there war n't nobody in there but the remainders of Peter ; so I shoved on by ; but the front door was locked , and the key was n't there . 
Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs , back behind me . 
I run in the parlor and took a swift look around , and the only place I see to hide the bag was in the coffin . 
The lid was shoved along about a foot , showing the dead man 's face down in there , with a wet cloth over it , and his shroud on . 
I tucked the money-bag in under the lid , just down beyond where his hands was crossed , which made me creep , they was so cold , and then I run back across the room and in behind the door . 
The person coming was Mary Jane . 
She went to the coffin , very soft , and kneeled down and looked in ; then she put up her handkerchief , and I see she begun to cry , though I could n't hear her , and her back was to me . 
I slid out , and as I passed the dining-room I thought I 'd make sure them watchers had n't seen me ; so I looked through the crack , and everything was all right . 
They had n't stirred . 
I slipped up to bed , feeling ruther blue , on accounts of the thing playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much resk about it . 
Says I , if it could stay where it is , all right ; because when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to Mary Jane , and she could dig him up again and get it ; but that ai n't the thing that 's going to happen ; the thing that 's going to happen is , the money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid . 
Then the king 'll get it again , and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody another chance to smouch it from him . 
Of course I WANTED to slide down and get it out of there , but I das n't try it . 
Every minute it was getting earlier now , and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin to stir , and I might get catched -- catched with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody had n't hired me to take care of . 
I do n't wish to be mixed up in no such business as that , I says to myself . 
When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up , and the watchers was gone . 
There war n't nobody around but the family and the widow Bartley and our tribe . 
I watched their faces to see if anything had been happening , but I could n't tell . 
Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man , and they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs , and then set all our chairs in rows , and borrowed more from the neighbors till the hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full . 
I see the coffin lid was the way it was before , but I das n't go to look in under it , with folks around . 
Then the people begun to flock in , and the beats and the girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin , and for a half an hour the people filed around slow , in single rank , and looked down at the dead man 's face a minute , and some dropped in a tear , and it was all very still and solemn , only the girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to their eyes and keeping their heads bent , and sobbing a little . 
There war n't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor and blowing noses -- because people always blows them more at a funeral than they do at other places except church . 
When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways , putting on the last touches , and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable , and making no more sound than a cat . 
He never spoke ; he moved people around , he squeezed in late ones , he opened up passageways , and done it with nods , and signs with his hands . 
Then he took his place over against the wall . 
He was the softest , glidingest , stealthiest man I ever see ; and there war n't no more smile to him than there is to a ham . 
