He WAS a blossom . 
He used to marry a new wife every day , and chop off her head next morning . 
And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs . 
` Fetch up Nell Gwynn , ' he says . 
They fetch her up . 
Next morning , ` Chop off her head ! ' 
And they chop it off . 
` Fetch up Jane Shore , ' he says ; and up she comes , Next morning , ` Chop off her head ' -- and they chop it off . 
` Ring up Fair Rosamun . ' 
Fair Rosamun answers the bell . 
Next morning , ` Chop off her head . ' 
And he made every one of them tell him a tale every night ; and he kept that up till he had hogged a thousand and one tales that way , and then he put them all in a book , and called it Domesday Book -- which was a good name and stated the case . 
You do n't know kings , Jim , but I know them ; and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I 've struck in history . 
Well , Henry he takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country . 
How does he go at it -- give notice ? 
-- give the country a show ? 
No . 
All of a sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard , and whacks out a declaration of independence , and dares them to come on . 
That was HIS style -- he never give anybody a chance . 
He had suspicions of his father , the Duke of Wellington . 
Well , what did he do ? 
Ask him to show up ? 
No -- drownded him in a butt of mamsey , like a cat . 
S'pose people left money laying around where he was -- what did he do ? 
He collared it . 
S'pose he contracted to do a thing , and you paid him , and did n't set down there and see that he done it -- what did he do ? 
He always done the other thing . 
S'pose he opened his mouth -- what then ? 
If he did n't shut it up powerful quick he 'd lose a lie every time . 
That 's the kind of a bug Henry was ; and if we 'd a had him along ` stead of our kings he 'd a fooled that town a heap worse than ourn done . 
I do n't say that ourn is lambs , because they ai n't , when you come right down to the cold facts ; but they ai n't nothing to THAT old ram , anyway . 
All I say is , kings is kings , and you got to make allowances . 
Take them all around , they 're a mighty ornery lot . 
It 's the way they 're raised . '' 
`` But dis one do SMELL so like de nation , Huck . '' 
`` Well , they all do , Jim . 
We ca n't help the way a king smells ; history do n't tell no way . '' 
`` Now de duke , he 's a tolerble likely man in some ways . '' 
`` Yes , a duke 's different . 
But not very different . 
This one 's a middling hard lot for a duke . 
When he 's drunk there ai n't no near-sighted man could tell him from a king . '' 
`` Well , anyways , I doan ' hanker for no mo ' un um , Huck . 
Dese is all I kin stan ' . '' 
`` It 's the way I feel , too , Jim . 
But we 've got them on our hands , and we got to remember what they are , and make allowances . 
Sometimes I wish we could hear of a country that 's out of kings . '' 
What was the use to tell Jim these war n't real kings and dukes ? 
It would n't a done no good ; and , besides , it was just as I said : you could n't tell them from the real kind . 
I went to sleep , and Jim did n't call me when it was my turn . 
