And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan . 
There ai n't no watchman to be drugged -- now there OUGHT to be a watchman . 
There ai n't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to . 
And there 's Jim chained by one leg , with a ten-foot chain , to the leg of his bed : why , all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain . 
And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody ; sends the key to the punkin-headed nigger , and do n't send nobody to watch the nigger . 
Jim could a got out of that window-hole before this , only there would n't be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg . 
Why , drat it , Huck , it 's the stupidest arrangement I ever see . 
You got to invent ALL the difficulties . 
Well , we ca n't help it ; we got to do the best we can with the materials we 've got . 
Anyhow , there 's one thing -- there 's more honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers , where there war n't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was their duty to furnish them , and you had to contrive them all out of your own head . 
Now look at just that one thing of the lantern . 
When you come down to the cold facts , we simply got to LET ON that a lantern 's resky . 
Why , we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to , I believe . 
Now , whilst I think of it , we got to hunt up something to make a saw out of the first chance we get . '' 
`` What do we want of a saw ? '' 
`` What do we WANT of a saw ? 
Hai n't we got to saw the leg of Jim 's bed off , so as to get the chain loose ? '' 
`` Why , you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain off . '' 
`` Well , if that ai n't just like you , Huck Finn . 
You CAN get up the infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing . 
Why , hai n't you ever read any books at all ? 
-- Baron Trenck , nor Casanova , nor Benvenuto Chelleeny , nor Henri IV. , nor none of them heroes ? 
Who ever heard of getting a prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that ? 
No ; the way all the best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two , and leave it just so , and swallow the sawdust , so it ca n't be found , and put some dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal ca n't see no sign of it 's being sawed , and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound . 
Then , the night you 're ready , fetch the leg a kick , down she goes ; slip off your chain , and there you are . 
Nothing to do but hitch your rope ladder to the battlements , shin down it , break your leg in the moat -- because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short , you know -- and there 's your horses and your trusty vassles , and they scoop you up and fling you across a saddle , and away you go to your native Langudoc , or Navarre , or wherever it is . 
It 's gaudy , Huck . 
I wish there was a moat to this cabin . 
If we get time , the night of the escape , we 'll dig one . '' 
I says : `` What do we want of a moat when we 're going to snake him out from under the cabin ? '' 
But he never heard me . 
He had forgot me and everything else . 
He had his chin in his hand , thinking . 
Pretty soon he sighs and shakes his head ; then sighs again , and says : `` No , it would n't do -- there ai n't necessity enough for it . '' 
`` For what ? '' 
I says . 
`` Why , to saw Jim 's leg off , '' he says . 
`` Good land ! '' 
I says ; `` why , there ai n't NO necessity for it . 
And what would you want to saw his leg off for , anyway ? '' 
`` Well , some of the best authorities has done it . 
They could n't get the chain off , so they just cut their hand off and shoved . 
And a leg would be better still . 
But we got to let that go . 
There ai n't necessity enough in this case ; and , besides , Jim 's a nigger , and would n't understand the reasons for it , and how it 's the custom in Europe ; so we 'll let it go . 
But there 's one thing -- he can have a rope ladder ; we can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough . 
And we can send it to him in a pie ; it 's mostly done that way . 
And I 've et worse pies . '' 
`` Why , Tom Sawyer , how you talk , '' I says ; `` Jim ai n't got no use for a rope ladder . '' 
`` He HAS got use for it . 
