So , along in the afternoon , he says : `` Looky here , Bilgewater , '' he says , `` I 'm nation sorry for you , but you ai n't the only person that 's had troubles like that . '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` No you ai n't . 
You ai n't the only person that 's ben snaked down wrongfully out 'n a high place . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
`` No , you ai n't the only person that 's had a secret of his birth . '' 
And , by jings , HE begins to cry . 
`` Hold ! 
What do you mean ? '' 
`` Bilgewater , kin I trust you ? '' 
says the old man , still sort of sobbing . 
`` To the bitter death ! '' 
He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it , and says , `` That secret of your being : speak ! '' 
`` Bilgewater , I am the late Dauphin ! '' 
You bet you , Jim and me stared this time . 
Then the duke says : `` You are what ? '' 
`` Yes , my friend , it is too true -- your eyes is lookin ' at this very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin , Looy the Seventeen , son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonette . '' 
`` You ! 
At your age ! 
No ! 
You mean you 're the late Charlemagne ; you must be six or seven hundred years old , at the very least . '' 
`` Trouble has done it , Bilgewater , trouble has done it ; trouble has brung these gray hairs and this premature balditude . 
Yes , gentlemen , you see before you , in blue jeans and misery , the wanderin ' , exiled , trampled-on , and sufferin ' rightful King of France . '' 
Well , he cried and took on so that me and Jim did n't know hardly what to do , we was so sorry -- and so glad and proud we 'd got him with us , too . 
So we set in , like we done before with the duke , and tried to comfort HIM . 
But he said it war n't no use , nothing but to be dead and done with it all could do him any good ; though he said it often made him feel easier and better for a while if people treated him according to his rights , and got down on one knee to speak to him , and always called him `` Your Majesty , '' and waited on him first at meals , and did n't set down in his presence till he asked them . 
So Jim and me set to majestying him , and doing this and that and t ` other for him , and standing up till he told us we might set down . 
This done him heaps of good , and so he got cheerful and comfortable . 
But the duke kind of soured on him , and did n't look a bit satisfied with the way things was going ; still , the king acted real friendly towards him , and said the duke 's great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a good deal thought of by HIS father , and was allowed to come to the palace considerable ; but the duke stayed huffy a good while , till by and by the king says : `` Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer raft , Bilgewater , and so what 's the use o ' your bein ' sour ? 
It 'll only make things oncomfortable . 
It ai n't my fault I war n't born a duke , it ai n't your fault you war n't born a king -- so what 's the use to worry ? 
Make the best o ' things the way you find 'em , says I -- that 's my motto . 
This ai n't no bad thing that we 've struck here -- plenty grub and an easy life -- come , give us your hand , duke , and le 's all be friends . '' 
The duke done it , and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it . 
It took away all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it , because it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the raft ; for what you want , above all things , on a raft , is for everybody to be satisfied , and feel right and kind towards the others . 
It did n't take me long to make up my mind that these liars war n't no kings nor dukes at all , but just low-down humbugs and frauds . 
But I never said nothing , never let on ; kept it to myself ; it 's the best way ; then you do n't have no quarrels , and do n't get into no trouble . 
If they wanted us to call them kings and dukes , I had n't no objections , ` long as it would keep peace in the family ; and it war n't no use to tell Jim , so I did n't tell him . 
If I never learnt nothing else out of pap , I learnt that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them have their own way . 
THEY asked us considerable many questions ; wanted to know what we covered up the raft that way for , and laid by in the daytime instead of running -- was Jim a runaway nigger ? 
Says I : `` Goodness sakes ! 
would a runaway nigger run SOUTH ? '' 
No , they allowed he would n't . 
I had to account for things some way , so I says : `` My folks was living in Pike County , in Missouri , where I was born , and they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike . 
Pa , he ` lowed he 'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben , who 's got a little one - horse place on the river , forty-four mile below Orleans . 
Pa was pretty poor , and had some debts ; so when he 'd squared up there war n't nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger , Jim . 
That war n't enough to take us fourteen hundred mile , deck passage nor no other way . 
Well , when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day ; he ketched this piece of a raft ; so we reckoned we 'd go down to Orleans on it . 
Pa 's luck did n't hold out ; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of the raft one night , and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel ; Jim and me come up all right , but pa was drunk , and Ike was only four years old , so they never come up no more . 
Well , for the next day or two we had considerable trouble , because people was always coming out in skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me , saying they believed he was a runaway nigger . 
