No , says I , I 'd feel bad -- I 'd feel just the same way I do now . 
Well , then , says I , what 's the use you learning to do right when it 's troublesome to do right and ai n't no trouble to do wrong , and the wages is just the same ? 
I was stuck . 
I could n't answer that . 
So I reckoned I would n't bother no more about it , but after this always do whichever come handiest at the time . 
I went into the wigwam ; Jim war n't there . 
I looked all around ; he war n't anywhere . 
I says : `` Jim ! '' 
`` Here I is , Huck . 
Is dey out o ' sight yit ? 
Do n't talk loud . '' 
He was in the river under the stern oar , with just his nose out . 
I told him they were out of sight , so he come aboard . 
He says : `` I was a-listenin ' to all de talk , en I slips into de river en was gwyne to shove for sho ' if dey come aboard . 
Den I was gwyne to swim to de raf ' agin when dey was gone . 
But lawsy , how you did fool 'em , Huck ! 
Dat WUZ de smartes ' dodge ! 
I tell you , chile , I ` spec it save ' ole Jim -- ole Jim ai n't going to forgit you for dat , honey . '' 
Then we talked about the money . 
It was a pretty good raise -- twenty dollars apiece . 
Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now , and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free States . 
He said twenty mile more war n't far for the raft to go , but he wished we was already there . 
Towards daybreak we tied up , and Jim was mighty particular about hiding the raft good . 
Then he worked all day fixing things in bundles , and getting all ready to quit rafting . 
That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down in a left-hand bend . 
I went off in the canoe to ask about it . 
Pretty soon I found a man out in the river with a skiff , setting a trot-line . 
I ranged up and says : `` Mister , is that town Cairo ? '' 
`` Cairo ? 
no . 
You must be a blame ' fool . '' 
`` What town is it , mister ? '' 
`` If you want to know , go and find out . 
If you stay here botherin ' around me for about a half a minute longer you 'll get something you wo n't want . '' 
I paddled to the raft . 
Jim was awful disappointed , but I said never mind , Cairo would be the next place , I reckoned . 
We passed another town before daylight , and I was going out again ; but it was high ground , so I did n't go . 
No high ground about Cairo , Jim said . 
I had forgot it . 
We laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable close to the left-hand bank . 
I begun to suspicion something . 
So did Jim . 
I says : `` Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night . '' 
He says : `` Doan ' le 's talk about it , Huck . 
Po ' niggers ca n't have no luck . 
I awluz ` spected dat rattlesnake-skin war n't done wid its work . '' 
`` I wish I 'd never seen that snake-skin , Jim -- I do wish I 'd never laid eyes on it . '' 
`` It ai n't yo ' fault , Huck ; you didn ' know . 
Do n't you blame yo ` self ` bout it . '' 
When it was daylight , here was the clear Ohio water inshore , sure enough , and outside was the old regular Muddy ! 
