I hope so , anyway . '' 
`` I did n't hope so . 
They all crowded up and leaned over the rails , nearly in my face , and kept still , watching with all their might . 
I could see them first-rate , but they could n't see me . 
Then the captain sung out : `` Stand away ! '' 
and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke , and I judged I was gone . 
If they 'd a had some bullets in , I reckon they 'd a got the corpse they was after . 
Well , I see I war n't hurt , thanks to goodness . 
The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder of the island . 
I could hear the booming now and then , further and further off , and by and by , after an hour , I did n't hear it no more . 
The island was three mile long . 
I judged they had got to the foot , and was giving it up . 
But they did n't yet a while . 
They turned around the foot of the island and started up the channel on the Missouri side , under steam , and booming once in a while as they went . 
I crossed over to that side and watched them . 
When they got abreast the head of the island they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri shore and went home to the town . 
I knowed I was all right now . 
Nobody else would come a-hunting after me . 
I got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick woods . 
I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things under so the rain could n't get at them . 
I catched a catfish and haggled him open with my saw , and towards sundown I started my camp fire and had supper . 
Then I set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast . 
When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking , and feeling pretty well satisfied ; but by and by it got sort of lonesome , and so I went and set on the bank and listened to the current swashing along , and counted the stars and drift logs and rafts that come down , and then went to bed ; there ai n't no better way to put in time when you are lonesome ; you ca n't stay so , you soon get over it . 
And so for three days and nights . 
No difference -- just the same thing . 
But the next day I went exploring around down through the island . 
I was boss of it ; it all belonged to me , so to say , and I wanted to know all about it ; but mainly I wanted to put in the time . 
I found plenty strawberries , ripe and prime ; and green summer grapes , and green razberries ; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show . 
They would all come handy by and by , I judged . 
Well , I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged I war n't far from the foot of the island . 
I had my gun along , but I had n't shot nothing ; it was for protection ; thought I would kill some game nigh home . 
About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake , and it went sliding off through the grass and flowers , and I after it , trying to get a shot at it . 
I clipped along , and all of a sudden I bounded right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking . 
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs . 
I never waited for to look further , but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as fast as ever I could . 
Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the thick leaves and listened , but my breath come so hard I could n't hear nothing else . 
I slunk along another piece further , then listened again ; and so on , and so on . 
If I see a stump , I took it for a man ; if I trod on a stick and broke it , it made me feel like a person had cut one of my breaths in two and I only got half , and the short half , too . 
When I got to camp I war n't feeling very brash , there war n't much sand in my craw ; but I says , this ai n't no time to be fooling around . 
So I got all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight , and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an old last year 's camp , and then clumb a tree . 
I reckon I was up in the tree two hours ; but I did n't see nothing , I did n't hear nothing -- I only THOUGHT I heard and seen as much as a thousand things . 
Well , I could n't stay up there forever ; so at last I got down , but I kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the time . 
All I could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast . 
By the time it was night I was pretty hungry . 
So when it was good and dark I slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the Illinois bank -- about a quarter of a mile . 
I went out in the woods and cooked a supper , and I had about made up my mind I would stay there all night when I hear a PLUNKETY-PLUNK , PLUNKETY-PLUNK , and says to myself , horses coming ; and next I hear people 's voices . 
I got everything into the canoe as quick as I could , and then went creeping through the woods to see what I could find out . 
I had n't got far when I hear a man say : `` We better camp here if we can find a good place ; the horses is about beat out . 
Let 's look around . '' 
I did n't wait , but shoved out and paddled away easy . 
