And he said that between the rats and the snakes and the grindstone there war n't no room in bed for him , skasely ; and when there was , a body could n't sleep , it was so lively , and it was always lively , he said , because THEY never all slept at one time , but took turn about , so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck , and when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch , so he always had one gang under him , in his way , and t ` other gang having a circus over him , and if he got up to hunt a new place the spiders would take a chance at him as he crossed over . 
He said if he ever got out this time he would n't ever be a prisoner again , not for a salary . 
Well , by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape . 
The shirt was sent in early , in a pie , and every time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh ; the pens was made , the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the grindstone ; the bed-leg was sawed in two , and we had et up the sawdust , and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache . 
We reckoned we was all going to die , but did n't . 
It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever see ; and Tom said the same . 
But as I was saying , we 'd got all the work done now , at last ; and we was all pretty much fagged out , too , but mainly Jim . 
The old man had wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their runaway nigger , but had n't got no answer , because there war n't no such plantation ; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans papers ; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it give me the cold shivers , and I see we had n't no time to lose . 
So Tom said , now for the nonnamous letters . 
`` What 's them ? '' 
I says . 
`` Warnings to the people that something is up . 
Sometimes it 's done one way , sometimes another . 
But there 's always somebody spying around that gives notice to the governor of the castle . 
When Louis XVI . 
was going to light out of the Tooleries a servant-girl done it . 
It 's a very good way , and so is the nonnamous letters . 
We 'll use them both . 
And it 's usual for the prisoner 's mother to change clothes with him , and she stays in , and he slides out in her clothes . 
We 'll do that , too . '' 
`` But looky here , Tom , what do we want to WARN anybody for that something 's up ? 
Let them find it out for themselves -- it 's their lookout . '' 
`` Yes , I know ; but you ca n't depend on them . 
It 's the way they 've acted from the very start -- left us to do EVERYTHING . 
They 're so confiding and mullet-headed they do n't take notice of nothing at all . 
So if we do n't GIVE them notice there wo n't be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us , and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go off perfectly flat ; wo n't amount to nothing -- wo n't be nothing TO it . '' 
`` Well , as for me , Tom , that 's the way I 'd like . '' 
`` Shucks ! '' 
he says , and looked disgusted . 
So I says : `` But I ai n't going to make no complaint . 
Any way that suits you suits me . 
What you going to do about the servant-girl ? '' 
`` You 'll be her . 
You slide in , in the middle of the night , and hook that yaller girl 's frock . '' 
`` Why , Tom , that 'll make trouble next morning ; because , of course , she prob ` bly hai n't got any but that one . '' 
`` I know ; but you do n't want it but fifteen minutes , to carry the nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door . '' 
`` All right , then , I 'll do it ; but I could carry it just as handy in my own togs . '' 
`` You would n't look like a servant-girl THEN , would you ? '' 
`` No , but there wo n't be nobody to see what I look like , ANYWAY . '' 
`` That ai n't got nothing to do with it . 
The thing for us to do is just to do our DUTY , and not worry about whether anybody SEES us do it or not . 
Hai n't you got no principle at all ? '' 
`` All right , I ai n't saying nothing ; I 'm the servant-girl . 
Who 's Jim 's mother ? '' 
`` I 'm his mother . 
I 'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally . '' 
`` Well , then , you 'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves . '' 
`` Not much . 
I 'll stuff Jim 's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed to represent his mother in disguise , and Jim 'll take the nigger woman 's gown off of me and wear it , and we 'll all evade together . 
When a prisoner of style escapes it 's called an evasion . 
