Only , they -- they -- told me you would . '' 
`` THEY told you I would . 
Whoever told you 's ANOTHER lunatic . 
I never heard the beat of it . 
Who 's THEY ? '' 
`` Why , everybody . 
They all said so , m ` am . '' 
It was all she could do to hold in ; and her eyes snapped , and her fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him ; and she says : `` Who 's ` everybody ' ? 
Out with their names , or ther 'll be an idiot short . '' 
He got up and looked distressed , and fumbled his hat , and says : `` I 'm sorry , and I war n't expecting it . 
They told me to . 
They all told me to . 
They all said , kiss her ; and said she 'd like it . 
They all said it -- every one of them . 
But I 'm sorry , m ` am , and I wo n't do it no more -- I wo n't , honest . '' 
`` You wo n't , wo n't you ? 
Well , I sh 'd RECKON you wo n't ! '' 
`` No 'm , I 'm honest about it ; I wo n't ever do it again -- till you ask me . '' 
`` Till I ASK you ! 
Well , I never see the beat of it in my born days ! 
I lay you 'll be the Methusalem-numskull of creation before ever I ask you -- or the likes of you . '' 
`` Well , '' he says , `` it does surprise me so . 
I ca n't make it out , somehow . 
They said you would , and I thought you would . 
But -- '' He stopped and looked around slow , like he wished he could run across a friendly eye somewheres , and fetched up on the old gentleman 's , and says , `` Did n't YOU think she 'd like me to kiss her , sir ? '' 
`` Why , no ; I -- I -- well , no , I b ` lieve I did n't . '' 
Then he looks on around the same way to me , and says : `` Tom , did n't YOU think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say , ` Sid Sawyer -- ' '' `` My land ! '' 
she says , breaking in and jumping for him , `` you impudent young rascal , to fool a body so -- '' and was going to hug him , but he fended her off , and says : `` No , not till you 've asked me first . '' 
So she did n't lose no time , but asked him ; and hugged him and kissed him over and over again , and then turned him over to the old man , and he took what was left . 
And after they got a little quiet again she says : `` Why , dear me , I never see such a surprise . 
We war n't looking for YOU at all , but only Tom . 
Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but him . '' 
`` It 's because it war n't INTENDED for any of us to come but Tom , '' he says ; `` but I begged and begged , and at the last minute she let me come , too ; so , coming down the river , me and Tom thought it would be a first-rate surprise for him to come here to the house first , and for me to by and by tag along and drop in , and let on to be a stranger . 
But it was a mistake , Aunt Sally . 
This ai n't no healthy place for a stranger to come . '' 
`` No -- not impudent whelps , Sid . 
You ought to had your jaws boxed ; I hai n't been so put out since I do n't know when . 
But I do n't care , I do n't mind the terms -- I 'd be willing to stand a thousand such jokes to have you here . 
Well , to think of that performance ! 
I do n't deny it , I was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack . '' 
We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and the kitchen ; and there was things enough on that table for seven families -- and all hot , too ; none of your flabby , tough meat that 's laid in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of old cold cannibal in the morning . 
Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long blessing over it , but it was worth it ; and it did n't cool it a bit , neither , the way I 've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times . 
There was a considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon , and me and Tom was on the lookout all the time ; but it war n't no use , they did n't happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger , and we was afraid to try to work up to it . 
But at supper , at night , one of the little boys says : `` Pa , may n't Tom and Sid and me go to the show ? '' 
`` No , '' says the old man , `` I reckon there ai n't going to be any ; and you could n't go if there was ; because the runaway nigger told Burton and me all about that scandalous show , and Burton said he would tell the people ; so I reckon they 've drove the owdacious loafers out of town before this time . '' 
So there it was ! 
-- but I could n't help it . 
Tom and me was to sleep in the same room and bed ; so , being tired , we bid good-night and went up to bed right after supper , and clumb out of the window and down the lightning - rod , and shoved for the town ; for I did n't believe anybody was going to give the king and the duke a hint , and so if I did n't hurry up and give them one they 'd get into trouble sure . 
On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered , and how pap disappeared pretty soon , and did n't come back no more , and what a stir there was when Jim run away ; and I told Tom all about our Royal Nonesuch rapscallions , and as much of the raft voyage as I had time to ; and as we struck into the town and up through the -- here comes a raging rush of people with torches , and an awful whooping and yelling , and banging tin pans and blowing horns ; and we jumped to one side to let them go by ; and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a rail -- that is , I knowed it WAS the king and the duke , though they was all over tar and feathers , and did n't look like nothing in the world that was human -- just looked like a couple of monstrous big soldier-plumes . 
Well , it made me sick to see it ; and I was sorry for them poor pitiful rascals , it seemed like I could n't ever feel any hardness against them any more in the world . 
