come with a contrite heart ! 
come in your rags and sin and dirt ! 
the waters that cleanse is free , the door of heaven stands open -- oh , enter in and be at rest ! '' 
-LRB- A-A-MEN ! 
GLORY , GLORY HALLELUJAH ! -RRB- 
And so on . 
You could n't make out what the preacher said any more , on account of the shouting and crying . 
Folks got up everywheres in the crowd , and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners ' bench , with the tears running down their faces ; and when all the mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd , they sung and shouted and flung themselves down on the straw , just crazy and wild . 
Well , the first I knowed the king got a-going , and you could hear him over everybody ; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform , and the preacher he begged him to speak to the people , and he done it . 
He told them he was a pirate -- been a pirate for thirty years out in the Indian Ocean -- and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in a fight , and he was home now to take out some fresh men , and thanks to goodness he 'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat without a cent , and he was glad of it ; it was the blessedest thing that ever happened to him , because he was a changed man now , and happy for the first time in his life ; and , poor as he was , he was going to start right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean , and put in the rest of his life trying to turn the pirates into the true path ; for he could do it better than anybody else , being acquainted with all pirate crews in that ocean ; and though it would take him a long time to get there without money , he would get there anyway , and every time he convinced a pirate he would say to him , `` Do n't you thank me , do n't you give me no credit ; it all belongs to them dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting , natural brothers and benefactors of the race , and that dear preacher there , the truest friend a pirate ever had ! '' 
And then he busted into tears , and so did everybody . 
Then somebody sings out , `` Take up a collection for him , take up a collection ! '' 
Well , a half a dozen made a jump to do it , but somebody sings out , `` Let HIM pass the hat around ! '' 
Then everybody said it , the preacher too . 
So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes , and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so good to the poor pirates away off there ; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls , with the tears running down their cheeks , would up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by ; and he always done it ; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or six times -- and he was invited to stay a week ; and everybody wanted him to live in their houses , and said they 'd think it was an honor ; but he said as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he could n't do no good , and besides he was in a sweat to get to the Indian Ocean right off and go to work on the pirates . 
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents . 
And then he had fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky , too , that he found under a wagon when he was starting home through the woods . 
The king said , take it all around , it laid over any day he 'd ever put in in the missionarying line . 
He said it war n't no use talking , heathens do n't amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with . 
The duke was thinking HE 'D been doing pretty well till the king come to show up , but after that he did n't think so so much . 
He had set up and printed off two little jobs for farmers in that printing-office -- horse bills -- and took the money , four dollars . 
And he had got in ten dollars ' worth of advertisements for the paper , which he said he would put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance -- so they done it . 
The price of the paper was two dollars a year , but he took in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him in advance ; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual , but he said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the price as low as he could afford it , and was going to run it for cash . 
He set up a little piece of poetry , which he made , himself , out of his own head -- three verses -- kind of sweet and saddish -- the name of it was , `` Yes , crush , cold world , this breaking heart '' -- and he left that all set up and ready to print in the paper , and did n't charge nothing for it . 
Well , he took in nine dollars and a half , and said he 'd done a pretty square day 's work for it . 
Then he showed us another little job he 'd printed and had n't charged for , because it was for us . 
It had a picture of a runaway nigger with a bundle on a stick over his shoulder , and `` $ 200 reward '' under it . 
The reading was all about Jim , and just described him to a dot . 
It said he run away from St. Jacques ' plantation , forty mile below New Orleans , last winter , and likely went north , and whoever would catch him and send him back he could have the reward and expenses . 
`` Now , '' says the duke , `` after to-night we can run in the daytime if we want to . 
Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope , and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we captured him up the river , and were too poor to travel on a steamboat , so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to get the reward . 
Handcuffs and chains would look still better on Jim , but it would n't go well with the story of us being so poor . 
Too much like jewelry . 
Ropes are the correct thing -- we must preserve the unities , as we say on the boards . '' 
We all said the duke was pretty smart , and there could n't be no trouble about running daytimes . 
We judged we could make miles enough that night to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke 's work in the printing office was going to make in that little town ; then we could boom right along if we wanted to . 
We laid low and kept still , and never shoved out till nearly ten o'clock ; then we slid by , pretty wide away from the town , and did n't hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it . 
When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning , he says : `` Huck , does you reck 'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo ' kings on dis trip ? '' 
`` No , '' I says , `` I reckon not . '' 
`` Well , '' says he , `` dat 's all right , den . 
I doan ' mine one er two kings , but dat 's enough . 
Dis one 's powerful drunk , en de duke ain ' much better . '' 
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French , so he could hear what it was like ; but he said he had been in this country so long , and had so much trouble , he 'd forgot it . 
IT was after sun-up now , but we went right on and did n't tie up . 
The king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty ; but after they 'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal . 
After breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft , and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches , and let his legs dangle in the water , so as to be comfortable , and lit his pipe , and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart . 
When he had got it pretty good him and the duke begun to practice it together . 
The duke had to learn him over and over again how to say every speech ; and he made him sigh , and put his hand on his heart , and after a while he said he done it pretty well ; `` only , '' he says , `` you must n't bellow out ROMEO ! 
that way , like a bull -- you must say it soft and sick and languishy , so -- R-o-o-meo ! 
that is the idea ; for Juliet 's a dear sweet mere child of a girl , you know , and she does n't bray like a jackass . '' 
