We lived in that old cabin , and he always locked the door and put the key under his head nights . 
He had a gun which he had stole , I reckon , and we fished and hunted , and that was what we lived on . 
Every little while he locked me in and went down to the store , three miles , to the ferry , and traded fish and game for whisky , and fetched it home and got drunk and had a good time , and licked me . 
The widow she found out where I was by and by , and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me ; but pap drove him off with the gun , and it war n't long after that till I was used to being where I was , and liked it -- all but the cowhide part . 
It was kind of lazy and jolly , laying off comfortable all day , smoking and fishing , and no books nor study . 
Two months or more run along , and my clothes got to be all rags and dirt , and I did n't see how I 'd ever got to like it so well at the widow 's , where you had to wash , and eat on a plate , and comb up , and go to bed and get up regular , and be forever bothering over a book , and have old Miss Watson pecking at you all the time . 
I did n't want to go back no more . 
I had stopped cussing , because the widow did n't like it ; but now I took to it again because pap had n't no objections . 
It was pretty good times up in the woods there , take it all around . 
But by and by pap got too handy with his hick ` ry , and I could n't stand it . 
I was all over welts . 
He got to going away so much , too , and locking me in . 
Once he locked me in and was gone three days . 
It was dreadful lonesome . 
I judged he had got drowned , and I was n't ever going to get out any more . 
I was scared . 
I made up my mind I would fix up some way to leave there . 
I had tried to get out of that cabin many a time , but I could n't find no way . 
There war n't a window to it big enough for a dog to get through . 
I could n't get up the chimbly ; it was too narrow . 
The door was thick , solid oak slabs . 
Pap was pretty careful not to leave a knife or anything in the cabin when he was away ; I reckon I had hunted the place over as much as a hundred times ; well , I was most all the time at it , because it was about the only way to put in the time . 
But this time I found something at last ; I found an old rusty wood-saw without any handle ; it was laid in between a rafter and the clapboards of the roof . 
I greased it up and went to work . 
There was an old horse-blanket nailed against the logs at the far end of the cabin behind the table , to keep the wind from blowing through the chinks and putting the candle out . 
I got under the table and raised the blanket , and went to work to saw a section of the big bottom log out -- big enough to let me through . 
Well , it was a good long job , but I was getting towards the end of it when I heard pap 's gun in the woods . 
I got rid of the signs of my work , and dropped the blanket and hid my saw , and pretty soon pap come in . 
Pap war n't in a good humor -- so he was his natural self . 
He said he was down town , and everything was going wrong . 
His lawyer said he reckoned he would win his lawsuit and get the money if they ever got started on the trial ; but then there was ways to put it off a long time , and Judge Thatcher knowed how to do it . 
And he said people allowed there 'd be another trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my guardian , and they guessed it would win this time . 
This shook me up considerable , because I did n't want to go back to the widow 's any more and be so cramped up and sivilized , as they called it . 
Then the old man got to cussing , and cussed everything and everybody he could think of , and then cussed them all over again to make sure he had n't skipped any , and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round , including a considerable parcel of people which he did n't know the names of , and so called them what 's - his-name when he got to them , and went right along with his cussing . 
He said he would like to see the widow get me . 
He said he would watch out , and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place six or seven mile off to stow me in , where they might hunt till they dropped and they could n't find me . 
That made me pretty uneasy again , but only for a minute ; I reckoned I would n't stay on hand till he got that chance . 
The old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had got . 
There was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal , and a side of bacon , ammunition , and a four-gallon jug of whisky , and an old book and two newspapers for wadding , besides some tow . 
I toted up a load , and went back and set down on the bow of the skiff to rest . 
I thought it all over , and I reckoned I would walk off with the gun and some lines , and take to the woods when I run away . 
I guessed I would n't stay in one place , but just tramp right across the country , mostly night times , and hunt and fish to keep alive , and so get so far away that the old man nor the widow could n't ever find me any more . 
I judged I would saw out and leave that night if pap got drunk enough , and I reckoned he would . 
I got so full of it I did n't notice how long I was staying till the old man hollered and asked me whether I was asleep or drownded . 
I got the things all up to the cabin , and then it was about dark . 
While I was cooking supper the old man took a swig or two and got sort of warmed up , and went to ripping again . 
He had been drunk over in town , and laid in the gutter all night , and he was a sight to look at . 
A body would a thought he was Adam -- he was just all mud . 
Whenever his liquor begun to work he most always went for the govment , this time he says : `` Call this a govment ! 
why , just look at it and see what it 's like . 
