It was about sundown . 
The doctor he led me along by the hand , and was plenty kind enough , but he never let go my hand . 
We all got in a big room in the hotel , and lit up some candles , and fetched in the new couple . 
First , the doctor says : `` I do n't wish to be too hard on these two men , but I think they 're frauds , and they may have complices that we do n't know nothing about . 
If they have , wo n't the complices get away with that bag of gold Peter Wilks left ? 
It ai n't unlikely . 
If these men ai n't frauds , they wo n't object to sending for that money and letting us keep it till they prove they 're all right -- ai n't that so ? '' 
Everybody agreed to that . 
So I judged they had our gang in a pretty tight place right at the outstart . 
But the king he only looked sorrowful , and says : `` Gentlemen , I wish the money was there , for I ai n't got no disposition to throw anything in the way of a fair , open , out-and-out investigation o ' this misable business ; but , alas , the money ai n't there ; you k 'n send and see , if you want to . '' 
`` Where is it , then ? '' 
`` Well , when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took and hid it inside o ' the straw tick o ' my bed , not wishin ' to bank it for the few days we 'd be here , and considerin ' the bed a safe place , we not bein ' used to niggers , and suppos 'n' 'em honest , like servants in England . 
The niggers stole it the very next mornin ' after I had went down stairs ; and when I sold 'em I had n't missed the money yit , so they got clean away with it . 
My servant here k 'n tell you ` bout it , gentlemen . '' 
The doctor and several said `` Shucks ! '' 
and I see nobody did n't altogether believe him . 
One man asked me if I see the niggers steal it . 
I said no , but I see them sneaking out of the room and hustling away , and I never thought nothing , only I reckoned they was afraid they had waked up my master and was trying to get away before he made trouble with them . 
That was all they asked me . 
Then the doctor whirls on me and says : `` Are YOU English , too ? '' 
I says yes ; and him and some others laughed , and said , `` Stuff ! '' 
Well , then they sailed in on the general investigation , and there we had it , up and down , hour in , hour out , and nobody never said a word about supper , nor ever seemed to think about it -- and so they kept it up , and kept it up ; and it WAS the worst mixed-up thing you ever see . 
They made the king tell his yarn , and they made the old gentleman tell his ` n ; and anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a SEEN that the old gentleman was spinning truth and t ` other one lies . 
And by and by they had me up to tell what I knowed . 
The king he give me a left-handed look out of the corner of his eye , and so I knowed enough to talk on the right side . 
I begun to tell about Sheffield , and how we lived there , and all about the English Wilkses , and so on ; but I did n't get pretty fur till the doctor begun to laugh ; and Levi Bell , the lawyer , says : `` Set down , my boy ; I would n't strain myself if I was you . 
I reckon you ai n't used to lying , it do n't seem to come handy ; what you want is practice . 
You do it pretty awkward . '' 
I did n't care nothing for the compliment , but I was glad to be let off , anyway . 
The doctor he started to say something , and turns and says : `` If you 'd been in town at first , Levi Bell -- '' The king broke in and reached out his hand , and says : `` Why , is this my poor dead brother 's old friend that he 's wrote so often about ? '' 
The lawyer and him shook hands , and the lawyer smiled and looked pleased , and they talked right along awhile , and then got to one side and talked low ; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says : `` That 'll fix it . 
I 'll take the order and send it , along with your brother 's , and then they 'll know it 's all right . '' 
So they got some paper and a pen , and the king he set down and twisted his head to one side , and chawed his tongue , and scrawled off something ; and then they give the pen to the duke -- and then for the first time the duke looked sick . 
But he took the pen and wrote . 
So then the lawyer turns to the new old gentleman and says : `` You and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names . '' 
The old gentleman wrote , but nobody could n't read it . 
The lawyer looked powerful astonished , and says : `` Well , it beats ME '' -- and snaked a lot of old letters out of his pocket , and examined them , and then examined the old man 's writing , and then THEM again ; and then says : `` These old letters is from Harvey Wilks ; and here 's THESE two handwritings , and anybody can see they did n't write them '' -LRB- the king and the duke looked sold and foolish , I tell you , to see how the lawyer had took them in -RRB- , `` and here 's THIS old gentleman 's hand writing , and anybody can tell , easy enough , HE did n't write them -- fact is , the scratches he makes ai n't properly WRITING at all . 
Now , here 's some letters from -- '' The new old gentleman says : `` If you please , let me explain . 
Nobody can read my hand but my brother there -- so he copies for me . 
It 's HIS hand you 've got there , not mine . '' 
`` WELL ! '' 
says the lawyer , `` this IS a state of things . 
I 've got some of William 's letters , too ; so if you 'll get him to write a line or so we can com -- '' `` He CA N'T write with his left hand , '' says the old gentleman . 
`` If he could use his right hand , you would see that he wrote his own letters and mine too . 
Look at both , please -- they 're by the same hand . '' 
The lawyer done it , and says : `` I believe it 's so -- and if it ai n't so , there 's a heap stronger resemblance than I 'd noticed before , anyway . 
Well , well , well ! 
I thought we was right on the track of a slution , but it 's gone to grass , partly . 
But anyway , one thing is proved -- THESE two ai n't either of 'em Wilkses '' -- and he wagged his head towards the king and the duke . 
Well , what do you think ? 
