I wish WE 'D a had the handling of Louis XVI. , there would n't a been no ` Son of Saint Louis , ascend to heaven ! ' 
wrote down in HIS biography ; no , sir , we 'd a whooped him over the BORDER -- that 's what we 'd a done with HIM -- and done it just as slick as nothing at all , too . 
Man the sweeps -- man the sweeps ! '' 
But me and Jim was consulting -- and thinking . 
And after we 'd thought a minute , I says : `` Say it , Jim . '' 
So he says : `` Well , den , dis is de way it look to me , Huck . 
Ef it wuz HIM dat ` uz bein ' sot free , en one er de boys wuz to git shot , would he say , ` Go on en save me , nemmine ` bout a doctor f ' r to save dis one ? ' 
Is dat like Mars Tom Sawyer ? 
Would he say dat ? 
You BET he would n't ! 
WELL , den , is JIM gywne to say it ? 
No , sah -- I doan ' budge a step out 'n dis place ` dout a DOCTOR , not if it 's forty year ! '' 
I knowed he was white inside , and I reckoned he 'd say what he did say -- so it was all right now , and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor . 
He raised considerable row about it , but me and Jim stuck to it and would n't budge ; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose himself ; but we would n't let him . 
Then he give us a piece of his mind , but it did n't do no good . 
So when he sees me getting the canoe ready , he says : `` Well , then , if you re bound to go , I 'll tell you the way to do when you get to the village . 
Shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight and fast , and make him swear to be silent as the grave , and put a purse full of gold in his hand , and then take and lead him all around the back alleys and everywheres in the dark , and then fetch him here in the canoe , in a roundabout way amongst the islands , and search him and take his chalk away from him , and do n't give it back to him till you get him back to the village , or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it again . 
It 's the way they all do . '' 
So I said I would , and left , and Jim was to hide in the woods when he see the doctor coming till he was gone again . 
THE doctor was an old man ; a very nice , kind-looking old man when I got him up . 
I told him me and my brother was over on Spanish Island hunting yesterday afternoon , and camped on a piece of a raft we found , and about midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams , for it went off and shot him in the leg , and we wanted him to go over there and fix it and not say nothing about it , nor let anybody know , because we wanted to come home this evening and surprise the folks . 
`` Who is your folks ? '' 
he says . 
`` The Phelpses , down yonder . '' 
`` Oh , '' he says . 
And after a minute , he says : `` How 'd you say he got shot ? '' 
`` He had a dream , '' I says , `` and it shot him . '' 
`` Singular dream , '' he says . 
So he lit up his lantern , and got his saddle-bags , and we started . 
But when he sees the canoe he did n't like the look of her -- said she was big enough for one , but did n't look pretty safe for two . 
I says : `` Oh , you need n't be afeard , sir , she carried the three of us easy enough . '' 
`` What three ? '' 
`` Why , me and Sid , and -- and -- and THE GUNS ; that 's what I mean . '' 
`` Oh , '' he says . 
But he put his foot on the gunnel and rocked her , and shook his head , and said he reckoned he 'd look around for a bigger one . 
But they was all locked and chained ; so he took my canoe , and said for me to wait till he come back , or I could hunt around further , or maybe I better go down home and get them ready for the surprise if I wanted to . 
But I said I did n't ; so I told him just how to find the raft , and then he started . 
I struck an idea pretty soon . 
I says to myself , spos 'n he ca n't fix that leg just in three shakes of a sheep 's tail , as the saying is ? 
spos 'n it takes him three or four days ? 
What are we going to do ? 
-- lay around there till he lets the cat out of the bag ? 
No , sir ; I know what I 'LL do . 
I 'll wait , and when he comes back if he says he 's got to go any more I 'll get down there , too , if I swim ; and we 'll take and tie him , and keep him , and shove out down the river ; and when Tom 's done with him we 'll give him what it 's worth , or all we got , and then let him get ashore . 
So then I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep ; and next time I waked up the sun was away up over my head ! 
I shot out and went for the doctor 's house , but they told me he 'd gone away in the night some time or other , and war n't back yet . 
Well , thinks I , that looks powerful bad for Tom , and I 'll dig out for the island right off . 
So away I shoved , and turned the corner , and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas 's stomach ! 
He says : `` Why , TOM ! 
Where you been all this time , you rascal ? '' 
