Then Tom said he had n't got candles enough , and he would slip in the kitchen and get some more . 
I did n't want him to try . 
I said Jim might wake up and come . 
But Tom wanted to resk it ; so we slid in there and got three candles , and Tom laid five cents on the table for pay . 
Then we got out , and I was in a sweat to get away ; but nothing would do Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was , on his hands and knees , and play something on him . 
I waited , and it seemed a good while , everything was so still and lonesome . 
As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path , around the garden fence , and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of the house . 
Tom said he slipped Jim 's hat off of his head and hung it on a limb right over him , and Jim stirred a little , but he did n't wake . 
Afterwards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance , and rode him all over the State , and then set him under the trees again , and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it . 
And next time Jim told it he said they rode him down to New Orleans ; and , after that , every time he told it he spread it more and more , till by and by he said they rode him all over the world , and tired him most to death , and his back was all over saddle-boils . 
Jim was monstrous proud about it , and he got so he would n't hardly notice the other niggers . 
Niggers would come miles to hear Jim tell about it , and he was more looked up to than any nigger in that country . 
Strange niggers would stand with their mouths open and look him all over , same as if he was a wonder . 
Niggers is always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire ; but whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about such things , Jim would happen in and say , `` Hm ! 
What you know ` bout witches ? '' 
and that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat . 
Jim always kept that five-center piece round his neck with a string , and said it was a charm the devil give to him with his own hands , and told him he could cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by saying something to it ; but he never told what it was he said to it . 
Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they had , just for a sight of that five-center piece ; but they would n't touch it , because the devil had had his hands on it . 
Jim was most ruined for a servant , because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil and been rode by witches . 
Well , when Tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling , where there was sick folks , maybe ; and the stars over us was sparkling ever so fine ; and down by the village was the river , a whole mile broad , and awful still and grand . 
We went down the hill and found Jo Harper and Ben Rogers , and two or three more of the boys , hid in the old tanyard . 
So we unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half , to the big scar on the hillside , and went ashore . 
We went to a clump of bushes , and Tom made everybody swear to keep the secret , and then showed them a hole in the hill , right in the thickest part of the bushes . 
Then we lit the candles , and crawled in on our hands and knees . 
We went about two hundred yards , and then the cave opened up . 
Tom poked about amongst the passages , and pretty soon ducked under a wall where you would n't a noticed that there was a hole . 
We went along a narrow place and got into a kind of room , all damp and sweaty and cold , and there we stopped . 
Tom says : `` Now , we 'll start this band of robbers and call it Tom Sawyer 's Gang . 
Everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath , and write his name in blood . '' 
Everybody was willing . 
So Tom got out a sheet of paper that he had wrote the oath on , and read it . 
It swore every boy to stick to the band , and never tell any of the secrets ; and if anybody done anything to any boy in the band , whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and his family must do it , and he must n't eat and he must n't sleep till he had killed them and hacked a cross in their breasts , which was the sign of the band . 
And nobody that did n't belong to the band could use that mark , and if he did he must be sued ; and if he done it again he must be killed . 
And if anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets , he must have his throat cut , and then have his carcass burnt up and the ashes scattered all around , and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never mentioned again by the gang , but have a curse put on it and be forgot forever . 
Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath , and asked Tom if he got it out of his own head . 
He said , some of it , but the rest was out of pirate-books and robber-books , and every gang that was high-toned had it . 
Some thought it would be good to kill the FAMILIES of boys that told the secrets . 
Tom said it was a good idea , so he took a pencil and wrote it in . 
Then Ben Rogers says : `` Here 's Huck Finn , he hai n't got no family ; what you going to do ` bout him ? '' 
`` Well , hai n't he got a father ? '' 
says Tom Sawyer . 
`` Yes , he 's got a father , but you ca n't never find him these days . 
He used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard , but he hai n't been seen in these parts for a year or more . '' 
They talked it over , and they was going to rule me out , because they said every boy must have a family or somebody to kill , or else it would n't be fair and square for the others . 
Well , nobody could think of anything to do -- everybody was stumped , and set still . 
I was most ready to cry ; but all at once I thought of a way , and so I offered them Miss Watson -- they could kill her . 
Everybody said : `` Oh , she 'll do . 
That 's all right . 
Huck can come in . '' 
Then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to sign with , and I made my mark on the paper . 
