And so he went on , calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue to , and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and going on . 
By and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five -- and he was a heap the best dressed man in that town , too -- steps out of the store , and the crowd drops back on each side to let him come . 
He says to Boggs , mighty ca 'm and slow -- he says : `` I 'm tired of this , but I 'll endure it till one o'clock . 
Till one o'clock , mind -- no longer . 
If you open your mouth against me only once after that time you ca n't travel so far but I will find you . '' 
Then he turns and goes in . 
The crowd looked mighty sober ; nobody stirred , and there war n't no more laughing . 
Boggs rode off blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell , all down the street ; and pretty soon back he comes and stops before the store , still keeping it up . 
Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up , but he would n't ; they told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes , and so he MUST go home -- he must go right away . 
But it did n't do no good . 
He cussed away with all his might , and throwed his hat down in the mud and rode over it , and pretty soon away he went a-raging down the street again , with his gray hair a-flying . 
Everybody that could get a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him up and get him sober ; but it war n't no use -- up the street he would tear again , and give Sherburn another cussing . 
By and by somebody says : `` Go for his daughter ! 
-- quick , go for his daughter ; sometimes he 'll listen to her . 
If anybody can persuade him , she can . '' 
So somebody started on a run . 
I walked down street a ways and stopped . 
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again , but not on his horse . 
He was a-reeling across the street towards me , bare-headed , with a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along . 
He was quiet , and looked uneasy ; and he war n't hanging back any , but was doing some of the hurrying himself . 
Somebody sings out : `` Boggs ! '' 
I looked over there to see who said it , and it was that Colonel Sherburn . 
He was standing perfectly still in the street , and had a pistol raised in his right hand -- not aiming it , but holding it out with the barrel tilted up towards the sky . 
The same second I see a young girl coming on the run , and two men with her . 
Boggs and the men turned round to see who called him , and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side , and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to a level -- both barrels cocked . 
Boggs throws up both of his hands and says , `` O Lord , do n't shoot ! '' 
Bang ! 
goes the first shot , and he staggers back , clawing at the air -- bang ! 
goes the second one , and he tumbles backwards on to the ground , heavy and solid , with his arms spread out . 
That young girl screamed out and comes rushing , and down she throws herself on her father , crying , and saying , `` Oh , he 's killed him , he 's killed him ! '' 
The crowd closed up around them , and shouldered and jammed one another , with their necks stretched , trying to see , and people on the inside trying to shove them back and shouting , `` Back , back ! 
give him air , give him air ! '' 
Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground , and turned around on his heels and walked off . 
They took Boggs to a little drug store , the crowd pressing around just the same , and the whole town following , and I rushed and got a good place at the window , where I was close to him and could see in . 
They laid him on the floor and put one large Bible under his head , and opened another one and spread it on his breast ; but they tore open his shirt first , and I seen where one of the bullets went in . 
He made about a dozen long gasps , his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in his breath , and letting it down again when he breathed it out -- and after that he laid still ; he was dead . 
Then they pulled his daughter away from him , screaming and crying , and took her off . 
She was about sixteen , and very sweet and gentle looking , but awful pale and scared . 
Well , pretty soon the whole town was there , squirming and scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look , but people that had the places would n't give them up , and folks behind them was saying all the time , `` Say , now , you 've looked enough , you fellows ; ` tai n't right and ` tai n't fair for you to stay thar all the time , and never give nobody a chance ; other folks has their rights as well as you . '' 
There was considerable jawing back , so I slid out , thinking maybe there was going to be trouble . 
The streets was full , and everybody was excited . 
Everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened , and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows , stretching their necks and listening . 
One long , lanky man , with long hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head , and a crooked-handled cane , marked out the places on the ground where Boggs stood and where Sherburn stood , and the people following him around from one place to t ` other and watching everything he done , and bobbing their heads to show they understood , and stooping a little and resting their hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with his cane ; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn had stood , frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes , and sung out , `` Boggs ! '' 
and then fetched his cane down slow to a level , and says `` Bang ! '' 
staggered backwards , says `` Bang ! '' 
again , and fell down flat on his back . 
The people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect ; said it was just exactly the way it all happened . 
Then as much as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him . 
Well , by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched . 
In about a minute everybody was saying it ; so away they went , mad and yelling , and snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with . 
