THEY swarmed up towards Sherburn 's house , a-whooping and raging like Injuns , and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped to mush , and it was awful to see . 
Children was heeling it ahead of the mob , screaming and trying to get out of the way ; and every window along the road was full of women 's heads , and there was nigger boys in every tree , and bucks and wenches looking over every fence ; and as soon as the mob would get nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of reach . 
Lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on , scared most to death . 
They swarmed up in front of Sherburn 's palings as thick as they could jam together , and you could n't hear yourself think for the noise . 
It was a little twenty-foot yard . 
Some sung out `` Tear down the fence ! 
tear down the fence ! '' 
Then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and smashing , and down she goes , and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like a wave . 
Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch , with a double-barrel gun in his hand , and takes his stand , perfectly ca 'm and deliberate , not saying a word . 
The racket stopped , and the wave sucked back . 
Sherburn never said a word -- just stood there , looking down . 
The stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable . 
Sherburn run his eye slow along the crowd ; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to out - gaze him , but they could n't ; they dropped their eyes and looked sneaky . 
Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed ; not the pleasant kind , but the kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread that 's got sand in it . 
Then he says , slow and scornful : `` The idea of YOU lynching anybody ! 
It 's amusing . 
The idea of you thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a MAN ! 
Because you 're brave enough to tar and feather poor friendless cast-out women that come along here , did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a MAN ? 
Why , a MAN 'S safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind -- as long as it 's daytime and you 're not behind him . 
`` Do I know you ? 
I know you clear through was born and raised in the South , and I 've lived in the North ; so I know the average all around . 
The average man 's a coward . 
In the North he lets anybody walk over him that wants to , and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it . 
In the South one man all by himself , has stopped a stage full of men in the daytime , and robbed the lot . 
Your newspapers call you a brave people so much that you think you are braver than any other people -- whereas you 're just AS brave , and no braver . 
Why do n't your juries hang murderers ? 
Because they 're afraid the man 's friends will shoot them in the back , in the dark -- and it 's just what they WOULD do . 
`` So they always acquit ; and then a MAN goes in the night , with a hundred masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal . 
Your mistake is , that you did n't bring a man with you ; that 's one mistake , and the other is that you did n't come in the dark and fetch your masks . 
You brought PART of a man -- Buck Harkness , there -- and if you had n't had him to start you , you 'd a taken it out in blowing . 
`` You did n't want to come . 
The average man do n't like trouble and danger . 
YOU do n't like trouble and danger . 
But if only HALF a man -- like Buck Harkness , there -- shouts ` Lynch him ! 
lynch him ! ' 
you 're afraid to back down -- afraid you 'll be found out to be what you are -- COWARDS -- and so you raise a yell , and hang yourselves on to that half-a-man 's coat-tail , and come raging up here , swearing what big things you 're going to do . 
The pitifulest thing out is a mob ; that 's what an army is -- a mob ; they do n't fight with courage that 's born in them , but with courage that 's borrowed from their mass , and from their officers . 
But a mob without any MAN at the head of it is BENEATH pitifulness . 
Now the thing for YOU to do is to droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole . 
If any real lynching 's going to be done it will be done in the dark , Southern fashion ; and when they come they 'll bring their masks , and fetch a MAN along . 
Now LEAVE -- and take your half-a-man with you '' -- tossing his gun up across his left arm and cocking it when he says this . 
The crowd washed back sudden , and then broke all apart , and went tearing off every which way , and Buck Harkness he heeled it after them , looking tolerable cheap . 
I could a stayed if I wanted to , but I did n't want to . 
I went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman went by , and then dived in under the tent . 
I had my twenty-dollar gold piece and some other money , but I reckoned I better save it , because there ai n't no telling how soon you are going to need it , away from home and amongst strangers that way . 
You ca n't be too careful . 
I ai n't opposed to spending money on circuses when there ai n't no other way , but there ai n't no use in WASTING it on them . 
It was a real bully circus . 
It was the splendidest sight that ever was when they all come riding in , two and two , a gentleman and lady , side by side , the men just in their drawers and undershirts , and no shoes nor stirrups , and resting their hands on their thighs easy and comfortable -- there must a been twenty of them -- and every lady with a lovely complexion , and perfectly beautiful , and looking just like a gang of real sure-enough queens , and dressed in clothes that cost millions of dollars , and just littered with diamonds . 
It was a powerful fine sight ; I never see anything so lovely . 
