Why , before , he looked like the orneriest old rip that ever was ; but now , when he 'd take off his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile , he looked that grand and good and pious that you 'd say he had walked right out of the ark , and maybe was old Leviticus himself . 
Jim cleaned up the canoe , and I got my paddle ready . 
There was a big steamboat laying at the shore away up under the point , about three mile above the town -- been there a couple of hours , taking on freight . 
Says the king : `` Seein ' how I 'm dressed , I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St. Louis or Cincinnati , or some other big place . 
Go for the steamboat , Huckleberry ; we 'll come down to the village on her . '' 
I did n't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride . 
I fetched the shore a half a mile above the village , and then went scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water . 
Pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face , for it was powerful warm weather ; and he had a couple of big carpet-bags by him . 
`` Run her nose in shore , '' says the king . 
I done it . 
`` Wher ' you bound for , young man ? '' 
`` For the steamboat ; going to Orleans . '' 
`` Git aboard , '' says the king . 
`` Hold on a minute , my servant 'll he ' p you with them bags . 
Jump out and he ' p the gentleman , Adolphus '' -- meaning me , I see . 
I done so , and then we all three started on again . 
The young chap was mighty thankful ; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather . 
He asked the king where he was going , and the king told him he 'd come down the river and landed at the other village this morning , and now he was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there . 
The young fellow says : `` When I first see you I says to myself , ` It 's Mr. Wilks , sure , and he come mighty near getting here in time . ' 
But then I says again , ` No , I reckon it ai n't him , or else he would n't be paddling up the river . ' 
You AI N'T him , are you ? '' 
`` No , my name 's Blodgett -- Elexander Blodgett -- REVEREND Elexander Blodgett , I s ` pose I must say , as I 'm one o ' the Lord 's poor servants . 
But still I 'm jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time , all the same , if he 's missed anything by it -- which I hope he has n't . '' 
`` Well , he do n't miss any property by it , because he 'll get that all right ; but he 's missed seeing his brother Peter die -- which he may n't mind , nobody can tell as to that -- but his brother would a give anything in this world to see HIM before he died ; never talked about nothing else all these three weeks ; had n't seen him since they was boys together -- and had n't ever seen his brother William at all -- that 's the deef and dumb one -- William ai n't more than thirty or thirty-five . 
Peter and George were the only ones that come out here ; George was the married brother ; him and his wife both died last year . 
Harvey and William 's the only ones that 's left now ; and , as I was saying , they have n't got here in time . '' 
`` Did anybody send 'em word ? '' 
`` Oh , yes ; a month or two ago , when Peter was first took ; because Peter said then that he sorter felt like he war n't going to get well this time . 
You see , he was pretty old , and George 's g ` yirls was too young to be much company for him , except Mary Jane , the red-headed one ; and so he was kinder lonesome after George and his wife died , and did n't seem to care much to live . 
He most desperately wanted to see Harvey -- and William , too , for that matter -- because he was one of them kind that ca n't bear to make a will . 
He left a letter behind for Harvey , and said he 'd told in it where his money was hid , and how he wanted the rest of the property divided up so George 's g ` yirls would be all right -- for George did n't leave nothing . 
And that letter was all they could get him to put a pen to . '' 
`` Why do you reckon Harvey do n't come ? 
Wher ' does he live ? '' 
`` Oh , he lives in England -- Sheffield -- preaches there -- has n't ever been in this country . 
He has n't had any too much time -- and besides he might n't a got the letter at all , you know . '' 
`` Too bad , too bad he could n't a lived to see his brothers , poor soul . 
You going to Orleans , you say ? '' 
`` Yes , but that ai n't only a part of it . 
I 'm going in a ship , next Wednesday , for Ryo Janeero , where my uncle lives . '' 
`` It 's a pretty long journey . 
But it 'll be lovely ; wisht I was a-going . 
Is Mary Jane the oldest ? 
How old is the others ? '' 
`` Mary Jane 's nineteen , Susan 's fifteen , and Joanna 's about fourteen -- that 's the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip . '' 
`` Poor things ! 
to be left alone in the cold world so . '' 
`` Well , they could be worse off . 
Old Peter had friends , and they ai n't going to let them come to no harm . 
There 's Hobson , the Babtis ' preacher ; and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , the lawyer ; and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley , and -- well , there 's a lot of them ; but these are the ones that Peter was thickest with , and used to write about sometimes , when he wrote home ; so Harvey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets here . '' 
