And then one by one they got up and stood , and went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful , the men looking ever so tall and airy and straight , with their heads bobbing and skimming along , away up there under the tent-roof , and every lady 's rose - leafy dress flapping soft and silky around her hips , and she looking like the most loveliest parasol . 
And then faster and faster they went , all of them dancing , first one foot out in the air and then the other , the horses leaning more and more , and the ringmaster going round and round the center-pole , cracking his whip and shouting `` Hi ! 
-- hi ! '' 
and the clown cracking jokes behind him ; and by and by all hands dropped the reins , and every lady put her knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his arms , and then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves ! 
And so one after the other they all skipped off into the ring , and made the sweetest bow I ever see , and then scampered out , and everybody clapped their hands and went just about wild . 
Well , all through the circus they done the most astonishing things ; and all the time that clown carried on so it most killed the people . 
The ringmaster could n't ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick as a wink with the funniest things a body ever said ; and how he ever COULD think of so many of them , and so sudden and so pat , was what I could n't noway understand . 
Why , I could n't a thought of them in a year . 
And by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring -- said he wanted to ride ; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was . 
They argued and tried to keep him out , but he would n't listen , and the whole show come to a standstill . 
Then the people begun to holler at him and make fun of him , and that made him mad , and he begun to rip and tear ; so that stirred up the people , and a lot of men begun to pile down off of the benches and swarm towards the ring , saying , `` Knock him down ! 
throw him out ! '' 
and one or two women begun to scream . 
So , then , the ringmaster he made a little speech , and said he hoped there would n't be no disturbance , and if the man would promise he would n't make no more trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse . 
So everybody laughed and said all right , and the man got on . 
The minute he was on , the horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort around , with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him , and the drunk man hanging on to his neck , and his heels flying in the air every jump , and the whole crowd of people standing up shouting and laughing till tears rolled down . 
And at last , sure enough , all the circus men could do , the horse broke loose , and away he went like the very nation , round and round the ring , with that sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck , with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side , and then t ` other one on t ` other side , and the people just crazy . 
It war n't funny to me , though ; I was all of a tremble to see his danger . 
But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle , a-reeling this way and that ; and the next minute he sprung up and dropped the bridle and stood ! 
and the horse a-going like a house afire too . 
He just stood up there , a - sailing around as easy and comfortable as if he war n't ever drunk in his life -- and then he begun to pull off his clothes and sling them . 
He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up the air , and altogether he shed seventeen suits . 
And , then , there he was , slim and handsome , and dressed the gaudiest and prettiest you ever saw , and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him fairly hum -- and finally skipped off , and made his bow and danced off to the dressing-room , and everybody just a-howling with pleasure and astonishment . 
Then the ringmaster he see how he had been fooled , and he WAS the sickest ringmaster you ever see , I reckon . 
Why , it was one of his own men ! 
He had got up that joke all out of his own head , and never let on to nobody . 
Well , I felt sheepish enough to be took in so , but I would n't a been in that ringmaster 's place , not for a thousand dollars . 
I do n't know ; there may be bullier circuses than what that one was , but I never struck them yet . 
Anyways , it was plenty good enough for ME ; and wherever I run across it , it can have all of MY custom every time . 
Well , that night we had OUR show ; but there war n't only about twelve people there -- just enough to pay expenses . 
And they laughed all the time , and that made the duke mad ; and everybody left , anyway , before the show was over , but one boy which was asleep . 
So the duke said these Arkansaw lunkheads could n't come up to Shakespeare ; what they wanted was low comedy -- and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy , he reckoned . 
He said he could size their style . 
So next morning he got some big sheets of wrapping paper and some black paint , and drawed off some handbills , and stuck them up all over the village . 
The bills said : AT THE COURT HOUSE ! 
FOR 3 NIGHTS ONLY ! 
The World-Renowned Tragedians DAVID GARRICK THE YOUNGER ! 
AND EDMUND KEAN THE ELDER ! 
Of the London and Continental Theatres , In their Thrilling Tragedy of THE KING 'S CAMELEOPARD , OR THE ROYAL NONESUCH ! ! ! 
Admission 50 cents . 
Then at the bottom was the biggest line of all , which said : LADIES AND CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED . 
`` There , '' says he , `` if that line do n't fetch them , I do n't know Arkansaw ! '' 
WELL , all day him and the king was hard at it , rigging up a stage and a curtain and a row of candles for footlights ; and that night the house was jam full of men in no time . 
When the place could n't hold no more , the duke he quit tending door and went around the back way and come on to the stage and stood up before the curtain and made a little speech , and praised up this tragedy , and said it was the most thrillingest one that ever was ; and so he went on a-bragging about the tragedy , and about Edmund Kean the Elder , which was to play the main principal part in it ; and at last when he 'd got everybody 's expectations up high enough , he rolled up the curtain , and the next minute the king come a-prancing out on all fours , naked ; and he was painted all over , ring-streaked-and - striped , all sorts of colors , as splendid as a rainbow . 
And -- but never mind the rest of his outfit ; it was just wild , but it was awful funny . 
The people most killed themselves laughing ; and when the king got done capering and capered off behind the scenes , they roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done it over again , and after that they made him do it another time . 
Well , it would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut . 
Then the duke he lets the curtain down , and bows to the people , and says the great tragedy will be performed only two nights more , on accounts of pressing London engagements , where the seats is all sold already for it in Drury Lane ; and then he makes them another bow , and says if he has succeeded in pleasing them and instructing them , he will be deeply obleeged if they will mention it to their friends and get them to come and see it . 
Twenty people sings out : `` What , is it over ? 
Is that ALL ? '' 
