And it did n't . 
He told me what it was , and I see in a minute it was worth fifteen of mine for style , and would make Jim just as free a man as mine would , and maybe get us all killed besides . 
So I was satisfied , and said we would waltz in on it . 
I need n't tell what it was here , because I knowed it would n't stay the way , it was . 
I knowed he would be changing it around every which way as we went along , and heaving in new bullinesses wherever he got a chance . 
And that is what he done . 
Well , one thing was dead sure , and that was that Tom Sawyer was in earnest , and was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery . 
That was the thing that was too many for me . 
Here was a boy that was respectable and well brung up ; and had a character to lose ; and folks at home that had characters ; and he was bright and not leather-headed ; and knowing and not ignorant ; and not mean , but kind ; and yet here he was , without any more pride , or rightness , or feeling , than to stoop to this business , and make himself a shame , and his family a shame , before everybody . 
I COULD N'T understand it no way at all . 
It was outrageous , and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so ; and so be his true friend , and let him quit the thing right where he was and save himself . 
And I DID start to tell him ; but he shut me up , and says : `` Do n't you reckon I know what I 'm about ? 
Do n't I generly know what I 'm about ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Did n't I SAY I was going to help steal the nigger ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` WELL , then . '' 
That 's all he said , and that 's all I said . 
It war n't no use to say any more ; because when he said he 'd do a thing , he always done it . 
But I could n't make out how he was willing to go into this thing ; so I just let it go , and never bothered no more about it . 
If he was bound to have it so , I could n't help it . 
When we got home the house was all dark and still ; so we went on down to the hut by the ash-hopper for to examine it . 
We went through the yard so as to see what the hounds would do . 
They knowed us , and did n't make no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by in the night . 
When we got to the cabin we took a look at the front and the two sides ; and on the side I war n't acquainted with -- which was the north side -- we found a square window-hole , up tolerable high , with just one stout board nailed across it . 
I says : `` Here 's the ticket . 
This hole 's big enough for Jim to get through if we wrench off the board . '' 
Tom says : `` It 's as simple as tit-tat-toe , three-in-a-row , and as easy as playing hooky . 
I should HOPE we can find a way that 's a little more complicated than THAT , Huck Finn . '' 
`` Well , then , '' I says , `` how 'll it do to saw him out , the way I done before I was murdered that time ? '' 
`` That 's more LIKE , '' he says . 
`` It 's real mysterious , and troublesome , and good , '' he says ; `` but I bet we can find a way that 's twice as long . 
There ai n't no hurry ; le 's keep on looking around . '' 
Betwixt the hut and the fence , on the back side , was a lean-to that joined the hut at the eaves , and was made out of plank . 
It was as long as the hut , but narrow -- only about six foot wide . 
The door to it was at the south end , and was padlocked . 
Tom he went to the soap-kettle and searched around , and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with ; so he took it and prized out one of the staples . 
The chain fell down , and we opened the door and went in , and shut it , and struck a match , and see the shed was only built against a cabin and had n't no connection with it ; and there war n't no floor to the shed , nor nothing in it but some old rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a crippled plow . 
The match went out , and so did we , and shoved in the staple again , and the door was locked as good as ever . 
Tom was joyful . 
He says ; `` Now we 're all right . 
We 'll DIG him out . 
It 'll take about a week ! '' 
Then we started for the house , and I went in the back door -- you only have to pull a buckskin latch-string , they do n't fasten the doors -- but that war n't romantical enough for Tom Sawyer ; no way would do him but he must climb up the lightning-rod . 
But after he got up half way about three times , and missed fire and fell every time , and the last time most busted his brains out , he thought he 'd got to give it up ; but after he was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck , and this time he made the trip . 
In the morning we was up at break of day , and down to the nigger cabins to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed Jim -- if it WAS Jim that was being fed . 
The niggers was just getting through breakfast and starting for the fields ; and Jim 's nigger was piling up a tin pan with bread and meat and things ; and whilst the others was leaving , the key come from the house . 
This nigger had a good-natured , chuckle-headed face , and his wool was all tied up in little bunches with thread . 
That was to keep witches off . 
He said the witches was pestering him awful these nights , and making him see all kinds of strange things , and hear all kinds of strange words and noises , and he did n't believe he was ever witched so long before in his life . 
