Here a captive heart busted . 
2 . 
Here a poor prisoner , forsook by the world and friends , fretted his sorrowful life . 
3 . 
Here a lonely heart broke , and a worn spirit went to its rest , after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity . 
4 . 
Here , homeless and friendless , after thirty-seven years of bitter captivity , perished a noble stranger , natural son of Louis XIV . 
Tom 's voice trembled whilst he was reading them , and he most broke down . 
When he got done he could n't no way make up his mind which one for Jim to scrabble on to the wall , they was all so good ; but at last he allowed he would let him scrabble them all on . 
Jim said it would take him a year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail , and he did n't know how to make letters , besides ; but Tom said he would block them out for him , and then he would n't have nothing to do but just follow the lines . 
Then pretty soon he says : `` Come to think , the logs ai n't a-going to do ; they do n't have log walls in a dungeon : we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock . 
We 'll fetch a rock . '' 
Jim said the rock was worse than the logs ; he said it would take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he would n't ever get out . 
But Tom said he would let me help him do it . 
Then he took a look to see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens . 
It was most pesky tedious hard work and slow , and did n't give my hands no show to get well of the sores , and we did n't seem to make no headway , hardly ; so Tom says : `` I know how to fix it . 
We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and mournful inscriptions , and we can kill two birds with that same rock . 
There 's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill , and we 'll smouch it , and carve the things on it , and file out the pens and the saw on it , too . '' 
It war n't no slouch of an idea ; and it war n't no slouch of a grindstone nuther ; but we allowed we 'd tackle it . 
It war n't quite midnight yet , so we cleared out for the mill , leaving Jim at work . 
We smouched the grindstone , and set out to roll her home , but it was a most nation tough job . 
Sometimes , do what we could , we could n't keep her from falling over , and she come mighty near mashing us every time . 
Tom said she was going to get one of us , sure , before we got through . 
We got her half way ; and then we was plumb played out , and most drownded with sweat . 
We see it war n't no use ; we got to go and fetch Jim So he raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg , and wrapt it round and round his neck , and we crawled out through our hole and down there , and Jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing ; and Tom superintended . 
He could out-superintend any boy I ever see . 
He knowed how to do everything . 
Our hole was pretty big , but it war n't big enough to get the grindstone through ; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough . 
Then Tom marked out them things on it with the nail , and set Jim to work on them , with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the lean - to for a hammer , and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit on him , and then he could go to bed , and hide the grindstone under his straw tick and sleep on it . 
Then we helped him fix his chain back on the bed - leg , and was ready for bed ourselves . 
But Tom thought of something , and says : `` You got any spiders in here , Jim ? '' 
`` No , sah , thanks to goodness I hai n't , Mars Tom . '' 
`` All right , we 'll get you some . '' 
`` But bless you , honey , I doan ' WANT none . 
I 's afeard un um . 
I jis ' 's soon have rattlesnakes aroun ' . '' 
Tom thought a minute or two , and says : `` It 's a good idea . 
And I reckon it 's been done . 
It MUST a been done ; it stands to reason . 
Yes , it 's a prime good idea . 
Where could you keep it ? '' 
`` Keep what , Mars Tom ? '' 
`` Why , a rattlesnake . '' 
`` De goodness gracious alive , Mars Tom ! 
Why , if dey was a rattlesnake to come in heah I 'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall , I would , wid my head . '' 
Why , Jim , you would n't be afraid of it after a little . 
You could tame it . '' 
`` TAME it ! '' 
`` Yes -- easy enough . 
Every animal is grateful for kindness and petting , and they would n't THINK of hurting a person that pets them . 
