Is it I , God , or who , that lifts this arm ? 
But if the great sun move not of himself ; but is as an errand-boy in heaven ; nor one single star can revolve , but by some invisible power ; how then can this one small heart beat ; this one small brain think thoughts ; unless God does that beating , does that thinking , does that living , and not I. By heaven , man , we are turned round and round in this world , like yonder windlass , and Fate is the handspike . 
And all the time , lo ! 
that smiling sky , and this unsounded sea ! 
Look ! 
see yon Albicore ! 
who put it into him to chase and fang that flying-fish ? 
Where do murderers go , man ! 
Who 's to doom , when the judge himself is dragged to the bar ? 
But it is a mild , mild wind , and a mild looking sky ; and the airs smells now , as if it blew from a far-away meadow ; they have been making hay somewhere under the slopes of the Andes , Starbuck , and the mowers are sleeping among the new-mown hay . 
Sleeping ? 
Aye , toil we how we may , we all sleep at last on the field . 
Sleep ? 
Aye , and rust amid greenness ; as last year 's scythes flung down , and left in the half-cut swarths -- Starbuck ! '' 
But blanched to a corpse 's hue with despair , the Mate had stolen away . 
Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side ; but started at two reflected , fixed eyes in the water there , Fedallah was motionlessly leaning over the same rail . 
The Chase - First Day That night , in the mid-watch when the old man -- as his wont at intervals -- stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned , and went to his pivot-hole , he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely , snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship 's dog will , in drawing nigh to some barbarous isle . 
He declared that a whale must be near . 
Soon that peculiar odor , sometimes to a great distance given forth by the living sperm whale , was palpable to all the watch ; nor was any mariner surprised when , after inspecting the compass , and then the dog-vane , and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as possible , Ahab rapidly ordered the ship 's course to be slightly altered , and the sail to be shortened . 
The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently vindicated at daybreak , by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly and lengthwise ahead , smooth as oil , and resembling in the pleated watery wrinkles bordering it , the polished metallic-like marks of some swift tide-rip , at the mouth of a deep , rapid stream . 
`` Man the mast-heads ! 
Call all hands ! '' 
Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the forecastle deck , Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that they seemed to exhale from the scuttle , so instantaneously did they appear with their clothes in their hands . 
`` What d'ye see ? '' 
cried Ahab , flattening his face to the sky . 
`` Nothing , nothing sir ! '' 
was the sound hailing down in reply . 
`` T'gallant sails ! 
-- stunsails ! 
alow and aloft , and on both sides ! '' 
All sail being set , he now cast loose the life-line , reserved for swaying him to the main royal-mast head ; and in a few moments they were hoisting him thither , when , while but two thirds of the way aloft , and while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between the main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail , he raised a gull-like cry in the air . 
`` There she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
A hump like a snow-hill ! 
It is Moby Dick ! '' 
Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three look-outs , the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous whale they had so long been pursuing . 
Ahab had now gained his final perch , some feet above the other look-outs , Tashtego standing just beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast , so that the Indian 's head was almost on a level with Ahab 's heel . 
From this height the whale was now seen some mile or so ahead , at every roll of the sea revealing his high sparkling hump , and regularly jetting his silent spout into the air . 
To the credulous mariners it seemed the same silent spout they had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and Indian Oceans . 
`` And did none of ye see it before ? '' 
cried Ahab , hailing the perched men all around him . 
`` I saw him almost that same instant , sir , that Captain Ahab did , and I cried out , '' said Tashtego . 
`` Not the same instant ; not the same -- no , the doubloon is mine , Fate reserved the doubloon for me . 
I only ; none of ye could have raised the White Whale first . 
There she blows ! 
there she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
There again ! 
-- there again ! '' 
