The first contained strong spirits , and was handed to Queequeg ; the second was Aunt Charity 's gift , and that was freely given to the waves . 
Stubb and Flask Kill a Right Whale ; and Then Have a Talk Over Him It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale 's prodigious head hanging to the Pequod 's side . 
But we must let it continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to it . 
For the present other matters press , and the best we can do now for the head , is to pray heaven the tackles may hold . 
Now , during the past night and forenoon , the Pequod had gradually drifted into a sea , which , by its occasional patches of yellow brit , gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales , a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near . 
And though all hands commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures ; and though the Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all , and though she had passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat ; yet now that a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded , to the surprise of all , the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day , if opportunity offered . 
Nor was this long wanting . 
Tall spouts were seen to leeward ; and two boats , Stubb 's and Flask 's , were detached in pursuit . 
Pulling further and further away , they at last became almost invisible to the men at the masthead . 
But suddenly in the distance , they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water , and soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast . 
An interval passed and the boats were in plain sight , in the act of being dragged right towards the ship by the towing whale . 
So close did the monster come to the hull , that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice ; but suddenly going down in a maelstrom , within three rods of the planks , he wholly disappeared from view , as if diving under the keel . 
`` Cut , cut ! '' 
was the cry from the ship to the boats , which , for one instant , seemed on the point of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel 's side . 
But having plenty of line yet in the tubs , and the whale not sounding very rapidly , they paid out abundance of rope , and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of the ship . 
For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical ; for while they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction , and still plied their oars in another , the contending strain threatened to take them under . 
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain . 
And they stuck to it till they did gain it ; when instantly , a swift tremor was felt running like lightning along the keel , as the strained line , scraping beneath the ship , suddenly rose to view under her bows , snapping and quivering ; and so flinging off its drippings , that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water , while the whale beyond also rose to sight , and once more the boats were free to fly . 
But the fagged whale abated his speed , and blindly altering his course , went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him , so that they performed a complete circuit . 
Meantime , they hauled more and more upon their lines , till close flanking him on both sides , Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance ; and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went , while the multitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale 's body , rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled , thirstily drinking at every new gash , as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock . 
At last his spout grew thick , and with a frightful roll and vomit , he turned upon his back a corpse . 
While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes , and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing , some conversation ensued between them . 
`` I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard , '' said Stubb , not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a leviathan . 
`` Wants with it ? '' 
said Flask , coiling some spare line in the boat 's bow , `` did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale 's head hoisted on her starboard side , and at the same time a Right Whale 's on the larboard ; did you never hear , Stubb , that that ship can never afterwards capsize ? '' 
`` Why not ? 
`` I do n't know , but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so , and he seems to know all about ships ' charms . 
But I sometimes think he 'll charm the ship to no good at last . 
I do n't half like that chap , Stubb . 
Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake 's head , Stubb ? '' 
`` Sink him ! 
I never look at him at all ; but if ever I get a chance of a dark night , and he standing hard by the bulwarks , and no one by ; look down there , Flask '' -- pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands -- `` Aye , will I ! 
Flask , I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise . 
Do you believe that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship ? 
He 's the devil , I say . 
The reason why you do n't see his tail , is because he tucks it up out of sight ; he carries it coiled away in his pocket , I guess . 
Blast him ! 
now that I think of it , he 's always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes of his boots . '' 
`` He sleeps in his boots , do n't he ? 
He has n't got any hammock ; but I 've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging . '' 
`` No doubt , and it 's because of his cursed tail ; he coils it down , do ye see , in the eye of the rigging . '' 
`` What 's the old man have so much to do with him for ? '' 
`` Striking up a swap or a bargain , I suppose . '' 
`` Bargain ? 
-- about what ? '' 
`` Why , do ye see , the old man is hard bent after that White Whale , and the devil there is trying to come round him , and get him to swap away his silver watch , or his soul , or something of that sort , and then he 'll surrender Moby Dick . '' 
`` Pooh ! 
Stubb , you are skylarking ; how can Fedallah do that ? '' 
`` I do n't know , Flask , but the devil is a curious chap , and a wicked one , I tell ye . 
Why , they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship once , switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike , and inquiring if the old governor was at home . 
