`` Is that the way they heave in the marchant service ? '' 
he roared . 
`` Spring , thou sheep-head ; spring , and break thy backbone ! 
Why do n't ye spring , I say , all of ye -- spring ! 
Quohog ! 
spring , thou chap with the red whiskers ; spring there , Scotch-cap ; spring , thou green pants . 
Spring , I say , all of ye , and spring your eyes out ! '' 
And so saying , he moved along the windlass , here and there using his leg very freely , while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his psalmody . 
Thinks I , Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-day . 
At last the anchor was up , the sails were set , and off we glided . 
It was a short , cold Christmas ; and as the short northern day merged into night , we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean , whose freezing spray cased us in ice , as in polished armor . 
The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight ; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge elephant , vast curving icicles depended from the bows . 
Lank Bildad , as pilot , headed the first watch , and ever and anon , as the old craft deep dived into the green seas , and sent the shivering frost all over her , and the winds howled , and the cordage rang , his steady notes were heard , -- `` Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood , Stand dressed in living green . 
So to the Jews old Canaan stood , While Jordan rolled between . '' 
Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then . 
They were full of hope and fruition . 
Spite of this frigid winter night in the boisterous Atlantic , spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket , there was yet , it then seemed to me , many a pleasant haven in store ; and meads and glades so eternally vernal , that the grass shot up by the spring , untrodden , unwilted , remains at midsummer . 
At last we gained such an offing , that the two pilots were needed no longer . 
The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began ranging alongside . 
It was curious and not unpleasing , how Peleg and Bildad were affected at this juncture , especially Captain Bildad . 
For loath to depart , yet ; very loath to leave , for good , a ship bound on so long and perilous a voyage -- beyond both stormy Capes ; a ship in which some thousands of his hardearned dollars were invested ; a ship , in which an old shipmate sailed as captain ; a man almost as old as he , once more starting to encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw ; loath to say good-bye to a thing so every way brimful of every interest to him , -- poor old Bildad lingered long ; paced the deck with anxious strides ; ran down into the cabin to speak another farewell word there ; again came on deck , and looked to windward ; looked towards the wide and endless waters , only bounded by the far-off unseen Eastern Continents ; looked towards the land ; looked aloft ; looked right and left ; looked everywhere and nowhere ; and at last , mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin , convulsively grasped stout Peleg by the hand , and holding up a lantern , for a moment stood gazing heroically in his face , as much as to say , `` Nevertheless , friend Peleg , I can stand it ; yes , I can . '' 
As for Peleg himself , he took it more like a philosopher ; but for all his philosophy , there was a tear twinkling in his eye , when the lantern came too near . 
And he , too , did not a little run from the cabin to deck -- now a word below , and now a word with Starbuck , the chief mate . 
But , at last , he turned to his comrade , with a final sort of look about him , -- `` Captain Bildad -- come , old shipmate , we must go . 
Back the mainyard there ! 
Boat ahoy ! 
Stand by to come close alongside , now ! 
Careful , careful ! 
-- come , Bildad , boy -- say your last . 
Luck to ye , Starbuck -- luck to ye , Mr. Stubb -- luck to ye , Mr. Flask -- good-bye and good luck to ye all -- and this day three years I 'll have a hot supper smoking for ye in old Nantucket . 
Hurrah and away ! '' 
`` God bless ye , and have ye in His holy keeping , men , '' murmured old Bildad , almost incoherently . 
`` I hope ye 'll have fine weather now , so that Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye -- a pleasant sun is all he needs , and ye 'll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go . 
Be careful in the hunt , ye mates . 
Do n't stave the boats needlessly , ye harpooneers ; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent within the year . 
Do n't forget your prayers , either . 
Mr. Starbuck , mind that cooper do n't waste the spare staves . 
Oh ! 
the sail-needles are in the green locker . 
Do n't whale it too much a ' Lord 's days , men ; but do n't miss a fair chance either , that 's rejecting Heaven 's good gifts . 
Have an eye to the molasses tierce , Mr. Stubb ; it was a little leaky , I thought . 
If ye touch at the islands , Mr. Flask , beware of fornication . 
Good-bye , good-bye ! 
Do n't keep that cheese too long down in the hold , Mr. Starbuck ; it 'll spoil . 
Be careful with the butter -- twenty cents the pound it was , and mind ye , if -- '' `` Come , come , Captain Bildad ; stop palavering , -- away ! '' 
and with that , Peleg hurried him over the side , and both dropt into the boat . 
Ship and boat diverged ; the cold , damp night breeze blew between ; a screaming gull flew overhead ; the two hulls wildly rolled ; we gave three heavy-hearted cheers , and blindly plunged like fate into the lone Atlantic . 
The Lee Shore Some chapters back , one Bulkington was spoken of , a tall , newlanded mariner , encountered in New Bedford at the inn . 
When on that shivering winter 's night , the Pequod thrust her vindictive bows into the cold malicious waves , who should I see standing at her helm but Bulkington ! 
I looked with sympathetic awe and fearfulness upon the man , who in mid-winter just landed from a four years ' dangerous voyage , could so unrestingly push off again for still another tempestuous term . 
