So rarely is it beheld , that though one and all of them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean , yet very few of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning its true nature and form ; notwithstanding , they believe it to furnish to the sperm whale his only food . 
For though other species of whales find their food above water , and may be seen by man in the act of feeding , the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below the surface ; and only by inference is it that any one can tell of what , precisely , that food consists . 
At times , when closely pursued , he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid ; some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length . 
They fancy that the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean ; and that the sperm whale , unlike other species , is supplied with teeth in order to attack and tear it . 
There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid . 
The manner in which the Bishop describes it , as alternately rising and sinking , with some other particulars he narrates , in all this the two correspond . 
But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk he assigns it . 
By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysterious creature , here spoken of , it is included among the class of cuttle-fish , to which , indeed , in certain external respects it would seem to belong , but only as the Anak of the tribe . 
The Line With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described , as well as for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere presented , I have here to speak of the magical , sometimes horrible whale-line . 
The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp , slightly vapored with tar , not impregnated with it , as in the case of ordinary ropes ; for while tar , as ordinarily used , makes the hemp more pliable to the rope-maker , and also renders the rope itself more convenient to the sailor for common ship use ; yet , not only would the ordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it must be subjected ; but as most seamen are beginning to learn , tar in general by no means adds to the rope 's durability or strength , however much it may give it compactness and gloss . 
Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almost entirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines ; for , though not so durable as hemp , it is stronger , and far more soft and elastic ; and I will add -LRB- since there is an aesthetics in all things -RRB- , is much more handsome and becoming to the boat , than hemp . 
Hemp is a dusky , dark fellow , a sort of Indian ; but Manilla is as a golden-haired Circassian to behold . 
The whale-line is only two thirds of an inch in thickness . 
At first sight , you would not think it so strong as it really is . 
By experiment its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of one hundred and twenty pounds ; so that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equal to three tons . 
In length , the common sperm whale-line measures something over two hundred fathoms . 
Towards the stern of the boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub , not like the worm-pipe of a still though , but so as to form one round , cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded `` sheaves , '' or layers of concentric spiralizations , without any hollow but the `` heart , '' or minute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese . 
As the least tangle or kink in the coiling would , in running out , infallibly take somebody 's arm , leg , or entire body off , the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in its tub . 
Some harpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this business , carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downwards through a block towards the tub , so as in the act of coiling to free it from all possible wrinkles and twists . 
In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one ; the same line being continuously coiled in both tubs . 
There is some advantage in this ; because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more readily into the boat , and do not strain it so much ; whereas , the American tub , nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth , makes a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one-half inch in thickness ; for the bottom of the whale-boat is like critical ice , which will bear up a considerable distributed weight , but not very much of a concentrated one . 
When the painted canvas cover is clapped on the american line-tub , the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales . 
Both ends of the line are exposed ; the lower end terminating in an eye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of the tub , and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything . 
This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts . 
First : In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additional line from a neighboring boat , in case the stricken whale should sound so deep as to threaten to carry off the entire line originally attached to the harpoon . 
In these instances , the whale of course is shifted like a mug of ale , as it were , from the one boat to the other ; though the first boat always hovers at hand to assist its consort . 
Second : This arrangement is indispensable for common safety 's sake ; for were the lower end of the line in any way attached to the boat , and were the whale then to run the line out to the end almost in a single , smoking minute as he sometimes does , he would not stop there , for the doomed boat would infallibly be dragged down after him into the profundity of the sea ; and in that case no town-crier would ever find her again . 
Before lowering the boat for the chase , the upper end of the line is taken aft from the tub , and passing round the loggerhead there , is again carried forward the entire length of the boat , resting crosswise upon the loom or handle of every man 's oar , so that it jogs against his wrist in rowing ; and also passing between the men , as they alternately sit at the opposite gunwales , to the leaded chocks or grooves in the extreme pointed prow of the boat , where a wooden pin or skewer the size of a common quill , prevents it from slipping out . 
From the chocks it hangs in a slight festoon over the bows , and is then passed inside the boat again ; and some ten or twenty fathoms -LRB- called box-line -RRB- being coiled upon the box in the bows , it continues its way to the gunwale still a little further aft , and is then attached to the short-warp -- the rope which is immediately connected with the harpoon ; but previous to that connexion , the short-warp goes through sundry mystifications too tedious to detail . 
Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils , twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction . 
All the oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions ; so that to the timid eye of the landsman , they seem as Indian jugglers , with the deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs . 
Nor can any son of mortal woman , for the first time , seat himself amid those hempen intricacies , and while straining his utmost at the oar , bethink him that at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted , and all these horrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings ; he can not be thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly . 
Yet habit -- strange thing ! 
what can not habit accomplish ? 
-- Gayer sallies , more merry mirth , better jokes , and brighter repartees , you never heard over your mahogany , than you will hear over the half-inch white cedar of the whaleboat , when thus hung in hangman 's nooses ; and , like the six burghers of Calais before King Edward , the six men composing the crew pull into the jaws of death , with a halter around every neck , as you may say . 
Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account for those repeated whaling disasters -- some few of which are casually chronicled -- of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by the line , and lost . 
For , when the line is darting out , to be seated then in the boat , is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings of a steam-engine in full play , when every flying beam , and shaft , and wheel , is grazing you . 
It is worse ; for you can not sit motionless in the heart of these perils , because the boat is rocking like a cradle , and you are pitched one way and the other , without the slightest warning ; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness of volition and action , can you escape being made a Mazeppa of , and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could never pierce you out . 
Again : as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and prophesies of the storm , is perhaps more awful than the storm itself ; for , indeed , the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm ; and contains it in itself , as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatal powder , and the ball , and the explosion ; so the graceful repose of the line , as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being brought into actual play -- this is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other aspect of this dangerous affair . 
But why say more ? 
All men live enveloped in whale-lines . 
All are born with halters round their necks ; but it is only when caught in the swift , sudden turn of death , that mortals realize the silent , subtle , everpresent perils of life . 
And if you be a philosopher , though seated in the whale-boat , you would not at heart feel one whit more of terror , than though seated before your evening fire with a poker , and not a harpoon , by your side . 
Stubb Kills a Whale If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents , to Queequeg it was quite a different object . 
`` When you see him ` quid , '' said the savage , honing his harpoon in the bow of his hoisted boat , `` then you quick see him ` parm whale . '' 
The next day was exceedingly still and sultry , and with nothing special to engage them , the Pequod 's crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced by such a vacant sea . 
For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground ; that is , it affords fewer glimpses of porpoises , dolphins , flying-fish , and other vivacious denizens of more stirring waters , than those off the Rio de la Plata , or the in-shore ground off Peru . 
It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head ; and with my shoulders leaning against the slackened royal shrouds , to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed an enchanted air . 
No resolution could withstand it ; in that dreamy mood losing all consciousness , at last my soul went out of my body ; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum will , long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn . 
Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me , I had noticed that the seamen at the main and mizzen mast-heads were already drowsy . 
