In various sorts of whales , they form such irregular combinations ; or , in the case of any one of them detached , such an irregular isolation ; as utterly to defy all general methodization formed upon such a basis . 
On this rock every one of the whale-naturalists has split . 
But it may possibly be conceived that , in the internal parts of the whale , in his anatomy -- there , at least , we shall be able to hit the right classification . 
Nay ; what thing , for example , is there in the Greenland whale 's anatomy more striking than his baleen ? 
Yet we have seen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify the Greenland whale . 
And if you descend into the bowels of the various leviathans , why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part as available to the systematizer as those external ones already enumerated . 
What then remains ? 
nothing but to take hold of the whales bodily , in their entire liberal volume , and boldly sort them that way . 
And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted ; and it is the only one that can possibly succeed , for it alone is practicable . 
To proceed . 
Thus ends BOOK I. -LRB- Folio -RRB- , and now begins BOOK II . 
-LRB- Octavo -RRB- . 
OCTAVOES . 
* These embrace the whales of middling magnitude , among which at present may be numbered : -- I. , the Grampus ; II. , the Black Fish ; III. , the Narwhale ; IV. , the Thrasher ; V. , the Killer . 
* Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain . 
Because , while the whales of this order , though smaller than those of the former order , nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to them in figure , yet the bookbinder 's Quarto volume in its dimensioned form does not preserve the shape of the Folio volume , but the Octavo volume does . 
by the Narwhale -- however that may be -- it would certainly be very convenient to him for a folder in reading pamphlets . 
The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked whale , the Horned whale , and the Unicorn whale . 
He is certainly a curious example of the Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom of animated nature . 
From certain cloistered old authors I have gathered that this same sea-unicorn 's horn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote against poison , and as such , preparations of it brought immense prices . 
It was also distilled to a volatile salts for fainting ladies the same way that the horns of the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn . 
Originally it was in itself accounted an object of great curiosity . 
Black Letter tells me that Sir Martin Frobisher on his return from that voyage , when Queen Bess did gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of Greenwich Palace , as his bold ship sailed down the Thames ; `` when Sir Martin returned from that voyage , '' saith Black Letter , `` on bended knees he presented to her highness a prodigious long horn of the Narwhale , which for a long period after hung in the castle at Windsor . '' 
An Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester , on bended knees , did likewise present to her highness another horn , pertaining to a land beast of the unicorn nature . 
The Narwhale has a very picturesque , leopard-like look , being of a milk-white ground color , dotted with round and oblong spots of black . 
His oil is very superior , clear and fine ; but there is little of it , and he is seldom hunted . 
He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas . 
Thus ends BOOK II . 
-LRB- Octavo -RRB- , and begins BOOK III , -LRB- Duodecimo . -RRB- 
DUODECIMOES . 
-- These include the smaller whales . 
I . 
The Huzza Porpoise . 
II . 
The Algerine Porpoise . 
III . 
The Mealy-mouthed Porpoise . 
To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject , it may possibly seem strange , that fishes not commonly exceeding four or five feet should be marshalled among WHALES -- a word , which , in the popular sense , always conveys an idea of hugeness . 
But the creatures set down above as Duodecimoes are infallibly whales , by the terms of my definition of what a whale is -- i.e. a spouting fish , with a horizontal tail . 
miniature . 
Beyond the DUODECIMO , this system does not proceed , inasmuch as the Porpoise is the smallest of the whales . 
Above , you have all the Leviathans of note . 
But there are a rabble of uncertain , fugitive , half-fabulous whales , which , as an American whaleman , I know by reputation , but not personally . 
I shall enumerate them by their fore-castle appellations ; for possibly such a list may be valuable to future investigators , who may complete what I have here but begun . 
If any of the following whales , shall hereafter be caught and marked , then he can readily be incorporated into this System , according to his Folio , Octavo , or Duodecimo magnitude : -- The Bottle-Nose Whale ; the Junk Whale ; the Pudding-Headed Whale ; the Cape Whale ; the Leading Whale ; the Cannon Whale ; the Scragg Whale ; the Coppered Whale ; the Elephant Whale ; the Iceberg Whale ; the Quog Whale ; the Blue Whale ; & c. From Icelandic , Dutch , and old English authorities , there might be quoted other lists of uncertain whales , blessed with all manner of uncouth names . 
But I omit them as altogether obsolete ; and can hardly help suspecting them for mere sounds , full of Leviathanism , but signifying nothing . 
Finally : It was stated at the outset , that this system would not be here , and at once , perfected . 
You can not but plainly see that I have kept my word . 
But I now leave my cetological System standing thus unfinished , even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left , with the cranes still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower . 
For small erections may be finished by their first architects ; grand ones , true ones , ever leave the copestone to posterity . 
