It had been thus with the Pequod . 
The wooden reel and angular log attached hung , long untouched , just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks . 
Rains and spray had damped it ; the sun and wind had warped it ; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly . 
But heedless of all this , his mood seized Ahab , as he happened to glance upon the reel , not many hours after the magnet scene , and he remembered how his quadrant was no more , and recalled his frantic oath about the level log and line . 
The ship was sailing plungingly ; astern the billows rolled in riots . 
`` Forward , there ! 
Heave the log ! '' 
Two seamen came . 
The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman . 
`` Take the reel , one of ye , I 'll heave . '' 
They went towards the extreme stern , on the ship 's lee side , where the deck , with the oblique energy of the wind , was now almost dipping into the creamy , sidelong-rushing sea . 
The Manxman took the reel , and holding it high up , by the projecting handle-ends of the spindle , round which the spool of line revolved , so stood with the angular log hanging downwards , till Ahab advanced to him . 
Ahab stood before him , and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard , when the old Manxman , who was intently eyeing both him and the line , made bold to speak . 
`` Sir , I mistrust it ; this line looks far gone , long heat and wet have spoiled it . '' '' 
` Twill hold , old gentleman . 
Long heat and wet , have they spoiled thee ? 
Thou seem ` st to hold . 
Or , truer perhaps , life holds thee ; not thou it . '' 
`` I hold the spool , sir . 
But just as my captain says . 
With these grey hairs of mine 't is not worth while disputing , ` specially with a superior , who 'll ne'er confess . '' 
`` What 's that ? 
There now 's a patched professor in Queen Nature 's granite-founded College ; but methinks he 's too subservient . 
Where wert thou born ? '' 
`` In the little rocky Isle of Man , sir . '' 
`` Excellent ! 
Thou ` st hit the world by that . '' 
`` I know not , sir , but I was born there . '' 
`` In the Isle of Man , hey ? 
Well , the other way , it 's good . 
Here 's a man from Man ; a man born in once independent Man , and now unmanned of Man ; which is sucked in -- by what ? 
Up with the reel ! 
The dead , blind wall butts all inquiring heads at last . 
Up with it ! 
So . '' 
The log was heaved . 
The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long dragging line astern , and then , instantly , the reel began to whirl . 
In turn , jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows , the towing resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely . 
`` Hold hard ! '' 
Snap ! 
the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon ; the tugging log was gone . 
`` I crush the quadrant , the thunder turns the needles , and now the mad sea parts the log-line . 
But Ahab can mend all . 
Haul in here , Tahitian ; reel up , Manxman . 
And look ye , let the carpenter make another log , and mend thou the line . 
See to it . '' 
`` There he goes now ; to him nothing 's happened ; but to me , the skewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world . 
Haul in , haul in , Tahitian ! 
These lines run whole , and whirling out : come in broken , and dragging slow . 
Ha , Pip ? 
