it 's bad for the digestion ! 
Take a tonic , follow me ! 
-LRB- Sings , and all follow -RRB- Our captain stood upon the deck , A spy-glass in his hand , A viewing of those gallant whales That blew at every strand . 
Oh , your tubs in your boats , my boys , And by your braces stand , And we 'll have one of those fine whales , Hand , boys , over hand ! 
So , be cheery , my lads ! 
may your hearts never fail ! 
While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! 
MATE 'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK Eight bells there , forward ! 
2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR Avast the chorus ! 
Eight bells there ! 
d'ye hear , bell-boy ? 
Strike the bell eight , thou Pip ! 
thou blackling ! 
and let me call the watch . 
I 've the sort of mouth for that -- the hogshead mouth . 
So , so , -LRB- thrusts his head down the scuttle , -RRB- Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s , a-h-o-y ! 
Eight bells there below ! 
Tumble up ! 
DUTCH SAILOR Grand snoozing to-night , maty ; fat night for that . 
I mark this in our old Mogul 's wine ; it 's quite as deadening to some as filliping to others . 
We sing ; they sleep -- aye , lie down there , like ground-tier butts . 
At 'em again ! 
There , take this copper-pump , and hail 'em through it . 
Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lassies . 
Tell 'em it 's the resurrection ; they must kiss their last , and come to judgment . 
That 's the way -- that 's it ; thy throat ai n't spoiled with eating Amsterdam butter . 
FRENCH SAILOR Hist , boys ! 
let 's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in Blanket Bay . 
What say ye ? 
There comes the other watch . 
Stand by all legs ! 
Pip ! 
little Pip ! 
hurrah with your tambourine ! 
PIP -LRB- Sulky and sleepy -RRB- Do n't know where it is . 
FRENCH SAILOR Beat thy belly , then , and wag thy ears . 
Jig it , men , I say ; merry 's the word ; hurrah ! 
Damn me , wo n't you dance ? 
Form , now , Indian-file , and gallop into the double-shuffle ? 
Throw yourselves ! 
Legs ! 
legs ! 
ICELAND SAILOR I do n't like your floor , maty ; it 's too springy to my taste . 
I 'm used to ice-floors . 
I 'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject ; but excuse me . 
MALTESE SAILOR Me too ; where 's your girls ? 
Who but a fool would take his left hand by his right , and say to himself , how d'ye do ? 
Partners ! 
I must have partners ! 
SICILIAN SAILOR Aye ; girls and a green ! 
