the deck is thine , sir ! '' 
And so saying , he placed himself half way within the scuttle , and slouching his hat , stood there till dawn , except when at intervals rousing himself to see how the night wore on . 
The Chase - Second Day At day-break , the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh . 
`` D'ye see him ? '' 
cried Ahab after allowing a little space for the light to spread . 
`` See nothing , sir . '' 
`` Turn up all hands and make sail ! 
he travels faster than I thought for ; -- the top-gallant sails ! 
-- aye , they should have been kept on her all night . 
But no matter -- 't is but resting for the rush . '' 
Here be it said , that this pertinacious pursuit of one particular whale , continued through day into night , and through night into day , is a thing by no means unprecedented in the South sea fishery . 
For such is the wonderful skill , prescience of experience , and invincible confidence acquired by some great natural geniuses among the Nantucket commanders ; that from the simple observation of a whale when last descried , they will , under certain given circumstances , pretty accurately foretell both the direction in which he will continue to swim for a time , while out of sight , as well as his probable rate of progression during that period . 
And , in these cases , somewhat as a pilot , when about losing sight of a coast , whose general trending he well knows , and which he desires shortly to return to again , but at some further point ; like as this pilot stands by his compass , and takes the precise bearing of the cape at present visible , in order the more certainly to hit aright the remote , unseen headland , eventually to be visited : so does the fisherman , at his compass , with the whale ; for after being chased , and diligently marked , through several hours of daylight , then , when night obscures the fish , the creature 's future wake through the darkness is almost as established to the sagacious mind of the hunter , as the pilot 's coast is to him . 
So that to this hunter 's wondrous skill , the proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in water , a wake , is to all desired purposes well nigh as reliable as the steadfast land . 
And as the mighty iron Leviathan of the modern railway is so familiarly known in its every pace , that , with watches in their hands , men time his rate as doctors that of a baby 's pulse ; and lightly say of it , the up train or the down train will reach such or such a spot , at such or such an hour ; even so , almost , there are occasions when these Nantucketers time that other Leviathan of the deep , according to the observed humor of his speed ; and say to themselves , so many hours hence this whale will have gone two hundred miles , will have about reached this or that degree of latitude or longitude . 
But to render this acuteness at all successful in the end , the wind and the sea must be the whaleman 's allies ; for of what present avail to the becalmed or wind-bound mariner is the skill that assures him he is exactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port ? 
Inferable from these statements , are many collateral subtile matters touching the chase of whales . 
The ship tore on ; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when a cannonball , missent , becomes a plough-share and turns up the level field . 
`` By salt and hemp ! '' 
cried Stubb , `` but this swift motion of the deck creeps up one 's legs and tingles at the heart . 
This ship and I are two brave fellows ! 
-- Ha , ha ! 
Some one take me up , and launch me , spine-wise , on the sea , -- for by live-oaks ! 
my spine 's a keel . 
Ha , ha ! 
we go the gait that leaves no dust behind ! '' 
`` There she blows -- she blows ! 
-- she blows ! 
-- right ahead ! '' 
was now the mast-head cry . 
`` Aye , aye ! '' 
cried Stubb , `` I knew it -- ye ca n't escape -- blow on and split your spout , O whale ! 
the mad fiend himself is after ye ! 
blow your trump -- blister your lungs ! 
-- Ahab will dam off your blood , as a miller shuts his watergate upon the stream ! '' 
And Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew . 
The frenzies of the chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up , like old wine worked anew . 
Whatever pale fears and forebodings some of them might have felt before ; these were not only now kept out of sight through the growing awe of Ahab , but they were broken up , and on all sides routed , as timid prairie hares that scatter before the bounding bison . 
The hand of Fate had snatched all their souls ; and by the stirring perils of the previous day ; the rack of the past night 's suspense ; the fixed , unfearing , blind , reckless way in which their wild craft went plunging towards its flying mark ; by all these things , their hearts were bowled along . 
The wind that made great bellies of their sails , and rushed the vessel on by arms invisible as irresistible ; this seemed the symbol of that unseen agency which so enslaved them to the race . 
They were one man , not thirty . 
For as the one ship that held them all ; though it was put together of all contrasting things -- oak , and maple , and pine wood ; iron , and pitch , and hemp -- yet all these ran into each other in the one concrete hull , which shot on its way , both balanced and directed by the long central keel ; even so , all the individualities of the crew , this man 's valor , that man 's fear ; guilt and guiltiness , all varieties were welded into oneness , and were all directed to that fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel did point to . 
The rigging lived . 
The mast-heads , like the tops of tall palms , were outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs . 
Clinging to a spar with one hand , some reached forth the other with impatient wavings ; others , shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight , sat far out on the rocking yards ; all the spars in full bearing of mortals , ready and ripe for their fate . 
Ah ! 
how they still strove through that infinite blueness to seek out the thing that might destroy them ! 
`` Why sing ye not out for him , if ye see him ? '' 
cried Ahab , when , after the lapse of some minutes since the first cry , no more had been heard . 
`` Sway me up , men ; ye have been deceived ; not Moby Dick casts one odd jet that way , and then disappears . '' 
