Now , as it shortly turned out , what made this incident of the Rachel 's the more melancholy , was the circumstance , that not only was one of the Captain 's sons among the number of the missing boat 's crew ; but among the number of the other boats ' crews , at the same time , but on the other hand , separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase , there had been still another son ; as that for a time , the wretched father was plunged to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity ; which was only solved for him by his chief mate 's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whaleship in such emergencies , that is , when placed between jeopardized but divided boats , always to pick up the majority first . 
But the captain , for some unknown constitutional reason , had refrained from mentioning all this , and not till forced to it by Ahab 's iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy ; a little lad , but twelve years old , whose father with the earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer 's paternal love , had thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race . 
Nor does it unfrequently occur , that Nantucket captains will send a son of such tender age away from them , for a protracted three or four years ' voyage in some other ship than their own ; so that their first knowledge of a whaleman 's career shall be unenervated by any chance display of a father 's natural but untimely partiality , or undue apprehensiveness and concern . 
Meantime , now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab ; and Ahab still stood like an anvil , receiving every shock , but without the least quivering of his own . 
`` I will not go , '' said the stranger , `` till you say aye to me . 
Do to me as you would have me do to you in the like case . 
For you too have a boy , Captain Ahab -- though but a child , and nestling safely at home now -- a child of your old age too -- Yes , yes , you relent ; I see it -- run , run , men , now , and stand by to square in the yards . '' 
`` Avast , '' cried Ahab -- `` touch not a rope-yarn '' ; then in a voice that prolongingly moulded every word -- `` Captain Gardiner , I will not do it . 
Even now I lose time , Good-bye , good-bye . 
God bless ye , man , and may I forgive myself , but I must go . 
Mr. Starbuck , look at the binnacle watch , and in three minutes from this present instant warn off all strangers ; then brace forward again , and let the ship sail as before . '' 
Hurriedly turning , with averted face , he descended into his cabin , leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so earnest suit . 
But starting from his enchantment , Gardiner silently hurried to the side ; more fell than stepped into his boat , and returned to his ship . 
Soon the two ships diverged their wakes ; and long as the strange vessel was in view , she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot , however small , on the sea . 
This way and that her yards were swung around ; starboard and larboard , she continued to tack ; now she beat against a head sea ; and again it pushed her before it ; while all the while , her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men , as three tall cherry trees , when the boys are cherrying among the boughs . 
But by her still halting course and winding , woeful way , you plainly saw that this ship that so wept with spray , still remained without comfort . 
She was Rachel , weeping for her children , because they were not . 
The Cabin -LRB- Ahab moving to go on deck ; Pip catches him by the hand to follow . -RRB- 
Lad , lad , I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now . 
The hour is coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him , yet would not have thee by him . 
There is that in thee , poor lad , which I feel too curing to my malady . 
Like cures like ; and for this hunt , my malady becomes my most desired health . 
Do thou abide below here , where they shall serve thee , as if thou wert the captain . 
Aye , lad , thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair ; another screw to it , thou must be . '' 
`` No , no , no ! 
ye have not a whole body , sir ; do ye but use poor me for your one lost leg ; only tread upon me , sir ; I ask no more , so I remain a part of ye . '' 
`` Oh ! 
spite of million villains , this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity of man ! 
-- and a black ! 
and crazy ! 
-- but methinks like-cures-like applies to him too ; he grows so sane again . '' 
`` They tell me , sir , that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip , whose drowned bones now show white , for all the blackness of his living skin . 
But I will never desert ye , sir , as Stubb did him . 
Sir , I must go with ye . '' 
`` If thou speakest thus to me much more , Ahab 's purpose keels up in him . 
I tell thee no ; it can not be . '' 
`` Oh good master , master , master ! 
`` Weep so , and I will murder thee ! 
have a care , for Ahab too is mad . 
Listen , and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck , and still know that I am there . 
And now I quit thee . 
Thy hand ! 
-- Met ! 
True art thou , lad , as the circumference to its centre . 
So : God for ever bless thee ; and if it come to that , -- God for ever save thee , let what will befall . '' 
-LRB- Ahab goes ; Pip steps one step forward . -RRB- 
`` Here he this instant stood , I stand in his air , -- but I 'm alone . 
Now were even poor Pip here I could endure it , but he 's missing . 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
