shirr ! 
-- but spoken of once ! 
and only this evening -- it makes me jingle all over like my tambourine -- that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in to hunt him ! 
Oh ! 
thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness , have mercy on this small black boy down here ; preserve him from all men that have no bowels to feel fear ! 
Moby Dick I , Ishmael , was one of that crew ; my shouts had gone up with the rest ; my oath had been welded with theirs ; and stronger I shouted , and more did I hammer and clinch my oath , because of the dread in my soul . 
A wild , mystical , sympathetical feeling was in me ; Ahab 's quenchless feud seemed mine . 
With greedy ears I learned the history of that murderous monster against whom I and all the others had taken our oaths of violence and revenge . 
For some time past , though at intervals only , the unaccompanied , secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostly frequented by the Sperm Whale fishermen . 
But not all of them knew of his existence ; only a few of them , comparatively , had knowingly seen him ; while the number who as yet had actually and knowingly given battle to him , was small indeed . 
For , owing to the large number of whale-cruisers ; the disorderly way they were sprinkled over the entire watery circumference , many of them adventurously pushing their quest along solitary latitudes , so as seldom or never for a whole twelvemonth or more on a stretch , to encounter a single news-telling sail of any sort ; the inordinate length of each separate voyage ; the irregularity of the times of sailing from home ; all these , with other circumstances , direct and indirect , long obstructed the spread through the whole world-wide whaling-fleet of the special individualizing tidings concerning Moby Dick . 
It was hardly to be doubted , that several vessels reported to have encountered , at such or such a time , or on such or such a meridian , a Sperm Whale of uncommon magnitude and malignity , which whale , after doing great mischief to his assailants , has completely escaped them ; to some minds it was not an unfair presumption , I say , that the whale in question must have been no other than Moby Dick . 
Yet as of late the Sperm Whale fishery had been marked by various and not unfrequent instances of great ferocity , cunning , and malice in the monster attacked ; therefore it was , that those who by accident ignorantly gave battle to Moby Dick ; such hunters , perhaps , for the most part , were content to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred , more , as it were , to the perils of the Sperm Whale fishery at large , than to the individual cause . 
In that way , mostly , the disastrous encounter between Ahab and the whale had hitherto been popularly regarded . 
And as for those who , previously hearing of the White Whale , by chance caught sight of him ; in the beginning of the thing they had every one of them , almost , as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him , as for any other whale of that species . 
But at length , such calamities did ensue in these assaults -- not restricted to sprained wrists and ankles , broken limbs , or devouring amputations -- but fatal to the last degree of fatality ; those repeated disastrous repulses , all accumulating and piling their terrors upon Moby Dick ; those things had gone far to shake the fortitude of many brave hunters , to whom the story of the White Whale had eventually come . 
Nor did wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate , and still the more horrify the true histories of these deadly encounters . 
For not only do fabulous rumors naturally grow out of the very body of all surprising terrible events , -- as the smitten tree gives birth to its fungi ; but , in maritime life , far more than in that of terra firma , wild rumors abound , wherever there is any adequate reality for them to cling to . 
And as the sea surpasses the land in this matter , so the whale fishery surpasses every other sort of maritime life , in the wonderfulness and fearfulness of the rumors which sometimes circulate there . 
For not only are whalemen as a body unexempt from that ignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors ; but of all sailors , they are by all odds the most directly brought into contact with whatever is appallingly astonishing in the sea ; face to face they not only eye its greatest marvels , but , hand to jaw , give battle to them . 
Alone , in such remotest waters , that though you sailed a thousand miles , and passed a thousand shores , you would not come to any chiselled hearth-stone , or aught hospitable beneath that part of the sun ; in such latitudes and longitudes , pursuing too such a calling as he does , the whaleman is wrapped by influences all tending to make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth . 
No wonder , then , that ever gathering volume from the mere transit over the wildest watery spaces , the outblown rumors of the White Whale did in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints , and half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies , which eventually invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed from anything that visibly appears . 
So that in many cases such a panic did he finally strike , that few who by those rumors , at least , had heard of the White Whale , few of those hunters were willing to encounter the perils of his jaw . 
But there were still other and more vital practical influences at work . 
Nor even at the present day has the original prestige of the Sperm Whale , as fearfully distinguished from all other species of the leviathan , died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body . 
There are those this day among them , who , though intelligent and courageous enough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale , would perhaps -- either from professional inexperience , or incompetency , or timidity , decline a contest with the Sperm Whale ; at any rate , there are plenty of whalemen , especially among those whaling nations not sailing under the American flag , who have never hostilely encountered the Sperm Whale , but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is restricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North ; seated on their hatches , these men will hearken with a childish fireside interest and awe , to the wild , strange tales of Southern whaling . 
Nor is the preeminent tremendousness of the great Sperm Whale anywhere more feelingly comprehended , than on board of those prows which stem him . 
And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendary times thrown its shadow before it ; we find some book naturalists -- Olassen and Povelson -- declaring the Sperm Whale not only to be a consternation to every other creature in the sea , but also to be so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human blood . 
Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier 's , were these or almost similar impressions effaced . 
For in his Natural History , the Baron himself affirms that at sight of the Sperm Whale , all fish -LRB- sharks included -RRB- are `` struck with the most lively terrors , '' and `` often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against the rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death . '' 
And however the general experiences in the fishery may amend such reports as these ; yet in their full terribleness , even to the bloodthirsty item of Povelson , the superstitious belief in them is , in some vicissitudes of their vocation , revived in the minds of the hunters . 
So that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him , not a few of the fishermen recalled , in reference to Moby Dick , the earlier days of the Sperm Whale fishery , when it was oftentimes hard to induce long practised Right whalemen to embark in the perils of this new and daring warfare ; such men protesting that although other leviathans might be hopefully pursued , yet to chase and point lances at such an apparition as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man . 
That to attempt it , would be inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity . 
On this head , there are some remarkable documents that may be consulted . 
Nevertheless , some there were , who even in the face of these things were ready to give chase to Moby Dick ; and a still greater number who , chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely , without the specific details of any certain calamity , and without superstitious accompaniments were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle if offered . 
One of the wild suggestions referred to , as at last coming to be linked with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiously inclined , was the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was ubiquitous ; that he had actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the same instant of time . 
Nor , credulous as such minds must have been , was this conceit altogether without some faint show of superstitious probability . 
For as the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet been divulged , even to the most erudite research ; so the hidden ways of the Sperm Whale when beneath the surface remain , in great part , unaccountable to his pursuers ; and from time to time have originated the most curious and contradictory speculations regarding them , especially concerning the mystic modes whereby , after sounding to a great depth , he transports himself with such vast swiftness to the most widely distant points . 
It is a thing well known to both American and English whale-ships , and as well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago by Scoresby , that some whales have been captured far north in the Pacific , in whose bodies have been found the barbs of harpoons darted in the Greenland seas . 
Nor is it to be gainsaid , that in some of these instances it has been declared that the interval of time between the two assaults could not have exceeded very many days . 
Hence , by inference , it has been believed by some whalemen , that the Nor ' West Passage , so long a problem to man , was never a problem to the whale . 
So that here , in the real living experience of living men , the prodigies related in old times of the inland Strello mountain in Portugal -LRB- near whose top there was said to be a lake in which the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface -RRB- ; and that still more wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain near Syracuse -LRB- whose waters were believed to have come from the Holy Land by an underground passage -RRB- ; these fabulous narrations are almost fully equalled by the realities of the whalemen . 
Forced into familiarity , then , with such prodigies as these ; and knowing that after repeated , intrepid assaults , the White Whale had escaped alive ; it can not be much matter of surprise that some whalemen should go still further in their superstitions ; declaring Moby Dick not only ubiquitous , but immortal -LRB- for immortality is but ubiquity in time -RRB- ; that though groves of spears should be planted in his flanks , he would still swim away unharmed ; or if indeed he should ever be made to spout thick blood , such a sight would be but a ghastly deception ; for again in unensanguined billows hundreds of leagues away , his unsullied jet would once more be seen . 
But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings , there was enough in the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster to strike the imagination with unwonted power . 
For , it was not so much his uncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm whales , but , as was elsewhere thrown out -- a peculiar snow-white wrinkled forehead , and a high , pyramidical white hump . 
These were his prominent features ; the tokens whereby , even in the limitless , uncharted seas , he revealed his identity , at a long distance , to those who knew him . 
The rest of his body was so streaked , and spotted , and marbled with the same shrouded hue , that , in the end , he had gained his distinctive appellation of the White Whale ; a name , indeed , literally justified by his vivid aspect , when seen gliding at high noon through a dark blue sea , leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam , all spangled with golden gleamings . 
Nor was it his unwonted magnitude , nor his remarkable hue , nor yet his deformed lower jaw , that so much invested the whale with natural terror , as that unexampled , intelligent malignity which , according to specific accounts , he had over and over again evinced in his assaults . 
More than all , his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than perhaps aught else . 
For , when swimming before his exulting pursuers , with every apparent symptom of alarm , he had several times been known to turn around suddenly , and , bearing down upon them , either stave their boats to splinters , or drive them back in consternation to their ship . 
