Suspended over the side in one of the stages , Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple of keen whale-spades , wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could reach . 
This procedure of theirs , to be sure , was very disinterested and benevolent of them . 
They meant Queequeg 's best happiness , I admit ; but in their hasty zeal to befriend him , and from the circumstance that both he and the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water , those indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tall . 
But poor Queequeg , I suppose , straining and gasping there with that great iron hook -- poor Queequeg , I suppose , only prayed to his Yojo , and gave up his life into the hands of his gods . 
Well , well , my dear comrade and twin-brother , thought I , as I drew in and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea -- what matters it , after all ? 
Are you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world ? 
That unsounded ocean you gasp in , is Life ; those sharks , your foes ; those spades , your friends ; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril , poor lad . 
But courage ! 
there is good cheer in store for you , Queequeg . 
For now , as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side ; the steward advances , and with a benevolent , consolatory glance hands him -- what ? 
Some hot Cognac ? 
No ! 
hands him , ye gods ! 
hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water ! 
`` Ginger ? 
Do I smell ginger ? '' 
suspiciously asked Stubb , coming near . 
`` Yes , this must be ginger , '' peering into the as yet untasted cup . 
Then standing as if incredulous for a while , he calmly walked towards the astonished steward slowly saying , `` Ginger ? 
ginger ? 
and will you have the goodness to tell me , Mr. Dough-Boy , where lies the virtue of ginger ? 
Ginger ! 
is ginger the sort of fuel you use , Dough-boy , to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal ? 
Ginger ! 
-- what the devil is ginger ? 
-- sea-coal ? 
firewood ? 
-- lucifer matches ? 
-- tinder ? 
-- gunpowder ? 
-- what the devil is ginger , I say , that you offer this cup to our poor Queequeg here . '' 
`` There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business , '' he suddenly added , now approaching Starbuck , who had just come from forward . 
`` Will you look at that kannakin , sir ; smell of it , if you please . '' 
Then watching the mate 's countenance , he added , `` The steward , Mr. Starbuck , had the face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg , there , this instant off the whale . 
Is the steward an apothecary , sir ? 
and may I ask whether this is the sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man ? '' 
`` I trust not , '' said Starbuck , `` it is poor stuff enough . '' 
`` Aye , aye , steward , '' cried Stubb , `` we 'll teach you to drug it harpooneer ; none of your apothecary 's medicine here ; you want to poison us , do ye ? 
You have got out insurances on our lives and want to give way with their oars , and pocket the proceeds , do ye ? '' 
`` It was not me , '' cried Dough-Boy , `` it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger on board ; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits , but only this ginger-jub -- so she called it . '' 
`` Ginger-jub ! 
you gingerly rascal ! 
take that ! 
and run along with ye to the lockers , and get something better . 
I hope I do no wrong , Mr. Starbuck . 
It is the captain 's orders -- grog for the harpooneer on a whale . '' 
`` Enough , '' replied Starbuck , `` only do n't hit him again , but - '' `` Oh , I never hurt when I hit , except when I hit a whale or something of that sort ; and this fellow 's a weazel . 
What were you about saying , sir ? '' 
`` Only this : go down with him , and get what thou wantest thyself . '' 
When Stubb reappeared , he came with a dark flask in one hand , and a sort of tea-caddy in the other . 
