Hark ! 
`` HIST ! 
Did you hear that noise , Cabaco ? 
It was the middle-watch : a fair moonlight ; the seamen were standing in a cordon , extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the waist , to the scuttle-butt near the taffrail . 
In this manner , they passed the buckets to fill the scuttle-butt . 
Standing , for the most part , on the hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck , they were careful not to speak or rustle their feet . 
From hand to hand , the buckets went in the deepest silence , only broken by the occasional flap of a sail , and the steady hum of the unceasingly advancing keel . 
It was in the midst of this repose , that Archy , one of the cordon , whose post was near the after-hatches , whispered to his neighbor , a Cholo , the words above . 
`` Hist ! 
did you hear that noise , Cabaco ? '' 
`` Take the bucket , will ye , Archy ? 
what noise d'ye mean ? '' 
`` There it is again -- under the hatches -- do n't you hear it -- a cough -- it sounded like a cough . '' 
`` Cough be damned ! 
Pass along that return bucket . '' 
`` There again -- there it is ! 
-- it sounds like two or three sleepers turning over , now ! '' 
`` Caramba ! 
have done , shipmate , will ye ? 
It 's the three soaked biscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye -- nothing else . 
Look to the bucket ! '' 
`` Say what ye will , shipmate ; I 've sharp ears . '' 
`` Aye , you are the chap , ai n't ye , that heard the hum of the old Quakeress 's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket ; you 're the chap . '' 
`` Grin away ; we 'll see what turns up . 
Hark ye , Cabaco , there is somebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck ; and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too . 
I heard Stubb tell Flask , one morning watch , that there was something of that sort in the wind . '' 
`` Tish ! 
the bucket ! '' 
The Chart Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall that took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of his purpose with his crew , you would have seen him go to a locker in the transom , and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea charts , spread them before him on his screwed-down table . 
Then seating himself before it , you would have seen him intently study the various lines and shadings which there met his eye ; and with slow but steady pencil trace additional courses over spaces that before were blank . 
At intervals , he would refer to piles of old log-books beside him , wherein were set down the seasons and places in which , on various former voyages of various ships , sperm whales had been captured or seen . 
While thus employed , the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains over his head , continually rocked with the motion of the ship , and for ever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled brow , till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out lines and courses on the wrinkled charts , some invisible pencil was also tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead . 
But it was not this night in particular that , in the solitude of his cabin , Ahab thus pondered over his charts . 
Almost every night they were brought out ; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced , and others were substituted . 
For with the charts of all four oceans before him , Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies , with a view to the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul . 
Now , to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans , it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet . 
But not so did it seem to Ahab , who knew the sets of all tides and currents ; and thereby calculating the driftings of the sperm whale 's food ; and , also calling to mind the regular , ascertained seasons for hunting him in particular latitudes ; could arrive at reasonable surmises , almost approaching to certainties , concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or that ground in search of his prey . 
So assured , indeed , is the fact concerning the periodicalness of the sperm whale 's resorting to given waters , that many hunters believe that , could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world ; were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully collated , then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to correspond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the flights of swallows . 
On this hint , attempts have been made to construct elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale . 
* * Since the above was written , the statement is happily borne out by an official circular , issued by Lieutenant Maury , of the National Observatory , Washington , April 16th , 1851 . 
By that circular , it appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion ; and portions of it are presented in the circular . 
`` This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees of longitude ; perpendicularly through each of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months ; and horizontally through each of which districts are three lines ; one to show the number of days that have been spent in each month in every district , and the two others to show the number of days in which whales , sperm or right , have been seen . '' 
Besides , when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another , the sperm whales , guided by some infallible instinct -- say , rather , secret intelligence from the Deity -- mostly swim in veins , as they are called ; continuing their way along a given ocean-line with such undeviating exactitude , that no ship ever sailed her course , by any chart , with one tithe of such marvellous precision . 
Though , in these cases , the direction taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor 's parallel , and though the line of advance be strictly confined to its own unavoidable , straight wake , yet the arbitrary vein in which at these times he is said to swim , generally embraces some few miles in width -LRB- more or less , as the vein is presumed to expand or contract -RRB- ; but never exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship 's mast-heads , when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone . 
The sum is , that at particular seasons within that breadth and along that path , migrating whales may with great confidence be looked for . 
And hence not only at substantiated times , upon well known separate feeding-grounds , could Ahab hope to encounter his prey ; but in crossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could , by his art , so place and time himself on his way , as even then not to be wholly without prospect of a meeting . 
There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle his delirious but still methodical scheme . 
But not so in the reality , perhaps . 
Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasons for particular grounds , yet in general you can not conclude that the herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year , say , will turn out to be identically the same with those that were found there the preceding season ; though there are peculiar and unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has proved true . 
In general , the same remark , only within a less wide limit , applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured , aged sperm whales . 
