`` Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader , each in his own separate soul had suddenly lighted , it would seem , upon the same piece of treachery , namely : to be the foremost in breaking out , in order to be the first of the three , though the last of the ten , to surrender ; and thereby secure whatever small chance of pardon such conduct might merit . 
But when Steelkilt made known his determination still to lead them to the last , they in some way , by some subtle chemistry of villany , mixed their before secret treacheries together ; and when their leader fell into a doze , verbally opened their souls to each other in three sentences ; and bound the sleeper with cords , and gagged him with cords ; and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight . 
`` Thinking murder at hand , and smelling in the dark for the blood , he and all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle . 
In a few minutes the scuttle was opened , and , bound hand and foot , the still struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious allies , who at once claimed the honor of securing a man who had been fully ripe for murder . 
But all these were collared , and dragged along the deck like dead cattle ; and , side by side , were seized up into the mizzen rigging , like three quarters of meat , and there they hung till morning . 
` Damn ye , ' cried the Captain , pacing to and fro before them , ` the vultures would not touch ye , ye villains ! ' 
`` At sunrise he summoned all hands ; and separating those who had rebelled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny , he told the former that he had a good mind to flog them all round -- thought , upon the while , he would do so -- he ought to -- justice demanded it ; but for the present , considering their timely surrender , he would let them go with a reprimand , which he accordingly administered in the vernacular . '' 
` But as for you , ye carrion rogues , ' turning to the three men in the rigging -- ` for you , I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots ; ' and , seizing a rope , he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two traitors , till they yelled no more , but lifelessly hung their heads sideways , as the two crucified thieves are drawn . '' 
` My wrist is sprained with ye ! ' 
he cried , at last ; ` but there is still rope enough left for you , my fine bantam , that would n't give up . 
Take that gag from his mouth , and let us hear what he can say for himself . ' 
`` For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his cramped jaws , and then painfully twisting round his head , said in a sort of hiss , ` What I say is this -- and mind it well -- if you flog me , I murder you ! ' '' 
` Say ye so ? 
then see how ye frighten me ' -- and the Captain drew off with the rope to strike . '' 
` Best not , ' hissed the Lakeman . '' 
` But I must , ' -- and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke . 
`` Steelkilt here hissed out something , inaudible to all but the Captain ; who , to the amazement of all hands , started back , paced the deck rapidly two or three times , and then suddenly throwing down his rope , said , ' I wo n't do it -- let him go -- cut him down : d'ye hear ? ' 
But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order , a pale man , with a bandaged head , arrested them -- Radney the chief mate . 
Ever since the blow , he had lain in his berth ; but that morning , hearing the tumult on the deck , he had crept out , and thus far had watched the whole scene . 
Such was the state of his mouth , that he could hardly speak ; but mumbling something about his being willing and able to do what the captain dared not attempt , he snatched the rope and advanced to his pinioned foe . '' 
` You are a coward ! ' 
hissed the Lakeman . '' 
` So I am , but take that . ' 
The mate was in the very act of striking , when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm . 
He paused : and then pausing no more , made good his word , spite of Steelkilt 's threat , whatever that might have been . 
The three men were then cut down , all hands were turned to , and , sullenly worked by the moody seamen , the iron pumps clanged as before . 
`` Just after dark that day , when one watch had retired below , a clamor was heard in the forecastle ; and the two trembling traitors running up , besieged the cabin door , saying they durst not consort with the crew . 
Entreaties , cuffs , and kicks could not drive them back , so at their own instance they were put down in the ship 's run for salvation . 
Still , no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest . 
On the contrary , it seemed , that mainly at Steelkilt 's instigation , they had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness , obey all orders to the last , and , when the ship reached port , desert her in a body . 
But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage , they all agreed to another thing -- namely , not to sing out for whales , in case any should be discovered . 
For , spite of her leak , and spite of all her other perils , the Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads , and her captain was just as willing to lower for a fish that moment , as on the day his craft first struck the cruising ground ; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his berth for a boat , and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of the whale . 
`` But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of passiveness in their conduct , he kept his own counsel -LRB- at least till all was over -RRB- concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man who had stung him in the ventricles of his heart . 
He was in Radney the chief mate 's watch ; and as if the infatuated man sought to run more than half way to meet his doom , after the scene at the rigging , he insisted , against the express counsel of the captain , upon resuming the head of his watch at night . 
Upon this , and one or two other circumstances , Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his revenge . 
`` During the night , Radney had an unseaman-like way of sitting on the bulwarks of the quarterdeck , and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which was hoisted up there , a little above the ship 's side . 
In this attitude , it was well known , he sometimes dozed . 
There was a considerable vacancy between the boat and the ship , and down between this was the sea . 
Steelkilt calculated his time , and found that his next trick at the helm would come round at two o'clock , in the morning of the third day from that in which he had been betrayed . 
At his leisure , he employed the interval in braiding something very carefully in his watches below . '' 
` What are you making there ? ' 
said a shipmate . '' 
` What do you think ? 
what does it look like ? ' '' 
` Like a lanyard for your bag ; but it 's an odd one , seems to me . ' 
` Yes , rather oddish , ' said the Lakeman , holding it at arm 's length before him ; ` but I think it will answer . 
Shipmate , I have n't enough twine , -- have you any ? ' 
`` But there was none in the forecastle . '' 
` Then I must get some from old Rad ; ' and he rose to go aft . '' 
` You do n't mean to go a begging to him ! ' 
