By the lord , Flask , I had no sooner said that , than he turned round his stern to me , bent over , and dragging up a lot of seaweed he had for a clout -- what do you think , I saw ? 
-- why thunder alive , man , his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes , with the points out . 
Says I on second thought , ' I guess I wo n't kick you , old fellow . ' 
` Wise Stubb , ' said he , ` wise Stubb ; ' and kept muttering it all the time , a sort of eating of his own gums like a chimney hag . 
Seeing he was n't going to stop saying over his ` wise Stubb , wise Stubb , ' I thought I might as well fall to kicking the pyramid again . 
But I had only just lifted my foot for it , when he roared out , ` Stop that kicking ! ' 
` Halloa , ' says I , ` what 's the matter now , old fellow ? ' 
` Look ye here , ' says he ; ` let 's argue the insult . 
Captain Ahab kicked ye , did n't he ? ' 
` Yes , he did , ' says I -- ` right here it was . ' 
` Very good , ' says he -- ` he used his ivory leg , did n't he ? ' 
` Yes , he did , ' says I. ` Well then , ' says he , ` wise Stubb , what have you to complain of ? 
Did n't he kick with right good will ? 
it was n't a common pitch pine leg he kicked with , was it ? 
No , you were kicked by a great man , and with a beautiful ivory leg , Stubb . 
It 's an honor ; I consider it an honor . 
Listen , wise Stubb . 
In old England the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a queen , and made garter-knights of ; but , be your boast , Stubb , that ye were kicked by old Ahab , and made a wise man of . 
Remember what I say ; be kicked by him ; account his kicks honors ; and on no account kick back ; for you ca n't help yourself , wise Stubb . 
Do n't you see that pyramid ? ' 
With that , he all of a sudden seemed somehow , in some queer fashion , to swim off into the air . 
I snored ; rolled over ; and there I was in my hammock ! 
Now , what do you think of that dream , Flask ? '' 
`` I do n't know ; it seems a sort of foolish to me , tho . ' '' 
`` May be ; may be . 
But it 's made a wise man of me , Flask . 
D'ye see Ahab standing there , sideways looking over the stern ? 
Well , the best thing you can do , Flask , is to let the old man alone ; never speak to him , whatever he says . 
Halloa ! 
What 's that he shouts ? 
Hark ! '' 
`` Mast-head , there ! 
Look sharp , all of ye ! 
There are whales hereabouts ! 
If ye see a white one , split your lungs for him ! 
`` What do you think of that now , Flask ? 
ai n't there a small drop of something queer about that , eh ? 
A white whale -- did ye mark that , man ? 
Look ye -- there 's something special in the wind . 
Stand by for it , Flask . 
Ahab has that that 's bloody on his mind . 
But , mum ; he comes this way . '' 
Cetology Already we are boldly launched upon the deep ; but soon we shall be lost in its unshored harborless immensities . 
Ere that come to pass ; ere the Pequod 's weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls of the leviathan ; at the outset it is but well to attend to a matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts which are to follow . 
It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera , that I would now fain put before you . 
Yet is it no easy task . 
The classification of the constituents of a chaos , nothing less is here essayed . 
Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down . 
`` No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitled Cetology , '' says Captain Scoresby , A.D. 1820 . 
`` It is not my intention , were it in my power , to enter into the inquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups and families ... . 
