But that night , in particular , a strange -LRB- and ever since inexplicable -RRB- thing occurred to me . 
Starting from a brief standing sleep , I was horribly conscious of something fatally wrong . 
The jaw-bone tiller smote my side , which leaned against it ; in my ears was the low hum of sails , just beginning to shake in the wind ; I thought my eyes were open ; I was half conscious of putting my fingers to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart . 
But , spite of all this , I could see no compass before me to steer by ; though it seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card , by the steady binnacle lamp illuminating it . 
Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom , now and then made ghastly by flashes of redness . 
Uppermost was the impression , that whatever swift , rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to any haven ahead as rushing from all havens astern . 
A stark , bewildered feeling , as of death , came over me . 
Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller , but with the crazy conceit that the tiller was , somehow , in some enchanted way , inverted . 
My God ! 
what is the matter with me ? 
thought I. Lo ! 
in my brief sleep I had turned myself about , and was fronting the ship 's stern , with my back to her prow and the compass . 
In an instant I faced back , just in time to prevent the vessel from flying up into the wind , and very probably capsizing her . 
How glad and how grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night , and the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee ! 
Look not too long in the face of the fire , O man ! 
Never dream with thy hand on the helm ! 
Turn not thy back to the compass ; accept the first hint of the hitching tiller ; believe not the artificial fire , when its redness makes all things look ghastly . 
To-morrow , in the natural sun , the skies will be bright ; those who glared like devils in the forking flames , the morn will show in far other , at least gentler , relief ; the glorious , golden , glad sun , the only true lamp -- all others but liars ! 
Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia 's Dismal Swamp , nor Rome 's accursed Campagna , nor wide Sahara , nor all the millions of miles of deserts and of griefs beneath the moon . 
The sun hides not the ocean , which is the dark side of this earth , and which is two thirds of this earth . 
So , therefore , that mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow in him , that mortal man can not be true -- not true , or undeveloped . 
With books the same . 
The truest of all men was the Man of Sorrows , and the truest of all books is Solomon 's , and Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of woe . 
`` All is vanity . '' 
ALL . 
This wilful world hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon 's wisdom yet . 
But he who dodges hospitals and jails , and walks fast crossing graveyards , and would rather talk of operas than hell ; calls Cowper , Young , Pascal , Rousseau , poor devils all of sick men ; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing wise , and therefore jolly ; -- not that man is fitted to sit down on tomb-stones , and break the green damp mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon . 
But even Solomon , he says , `` the man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain '' -LRB- i.e. even while living -RRB- `` in the congregation of the dead . '' 
Give not thyself up , then , to fire , lest it invert thee , deaden thee ; as for the time it did me . 
There is a wisdom that is woe ; but there is a woe that is madness . 
And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down into the blackest gorges , and soar out of them again and become invisible in the sunny spaces . 
And even if he for ever flies within the gorge , that gorge is in the mountains ; so that even in his lowest swoop the mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain , even though they soar . 
The Lamp Had you descended from the Pequod 's try-works to the Pequod 's forecastle , where the off duty watch were sleeping , for one single moment you would have almost thought you were standing in some illuminated shrine of canonized kings and counsellors . 
There they lay in their triangular oaken vaults , each mariner a chiselled muteness ; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes . 
In merchantmen , oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of queens . 
To dress in the dark , and eat in the dark , and stumble in darkness to his pallet , this is his usual lot . 
But the whaleman , as he seeks the food of light , so he lives in light . 
He makes his berth an Aladdin 's lamp , and lays him down in it ; so that in the pitchiest night the ship 's black hull still houses an illumination . 
See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of lamps -- often but old bottles and vials , though -- to the copper cooler at the tryworks , and replenishes them there , as mugs of ale at a vat . 
He burns , too , the purest of oil , in its unmanufactured , and , therefore , unvitiated state ; a fluid unknown to solar , lunar , or astral contrivances ashore . 
It is sweet as early grass butter in April . 
He goes and hunts for his oil , so as to be sure of its freshness and genuineness , even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his own supper of game . 
Stowing Down and Clearing Up Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off descried from the mast-head ; how he is chased over the watery moors , and slaughtered in the valleys of the deep ; how he is then towed alongside and beheaded ; and how -LRB- on the principle which entitled the headsman of old to the garments in which the beheaded was killed -RRB- his great padded surtout becomes the property of his executioner ; how , in due time , he is condemned to the pots , and , like Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego , his spermaceti , oil , and bone pass unscathed through the fire ; -- but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part of the description by rehearsing -- singing , if I may -- the romantic proceeding of decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold , where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities , sliding along beneath the surface : is before ; but , alas ! 
never more to rise and blow . 
While still warm , the oil , like hot punch , is received into the six-barrel casks ; and while , perhaps , the ship is pitching and rolling this way and that in the midnight sea , the enormous casks are slewed round and headed over , end for end , and sometimes perilously scoot across the slippery deck , like so many land slides , till at last man-handled and stayed in their course ; and all round the hoops , rap , rap , go as many hammers as can play upon them , for now , ex officio , every sailor is a cooper . 
At length , when the last pint is casked , and all is cool , then the great hatchways are unsealed , the bowels of the ship are thrown open , and down go the casks to their final rest in the sea . 
This done , the hatches are replaced , and hermetically closed , like a closet walled up . 
In the sperm fishery , this is perhaps one of the most remarkable incidents in all the business of whaling . 
One day the planks stream with freshets of blood and oil ; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses of the whale 's head are profanely piled ; great rusty casks lie about , as in a brewery yard ; the smoke from the try-works has besooted all the bulwarks ; the mariners go about suffused with unctuousness ; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself ; while on all hands the din is deafening . 
But a day or two after , you look about you , and prick your ears in this self-same ship ! 
