The eternal sap runs up in Ahab 's bones again ! 
Set the sail ; out oars ; the helm ! '' 
It is often the case that when a boat is stove , its crew , being picked up by another boat , help to work that second boat ; and the chase is thus continued with what is called double-banked oars . 
It was thus now . 
But the added power of the boat did not equal the added power of the whale , for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin ; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed , that if now , under these circumstances , pushed on , the chase would prove an indefinitely prolonged , if not a hopeless one ; nor could any crew endure for so long a period , such an unintermitted , intense straining at the oar ; a thing barely tolerable only in some one brief vicissitude . 
The ship itself , then , as it sometimes happens , offered the most promising intermediate means of overtaking the chase . 
Accordingly , the boats now made for her , and were soon swayed up to their cranes -- the two parts of the wrecked boat having been previously secured by her -- and then hoisting everything to her side , and stacking her canvas high up , and sideways outstretching it with stunsails , like the double-jointed wings of an albatross ; the Pequod bore down in the leeward wake of Moby Dick . 
At the well known , methodic intervals , the whale 's glittering spout was regularly announced from the manned mast-heads ; and when he would be reported as just gone down , Ahab would take the time , and then pacing the deck , binnacle-watch in hand , so soon as the last second of the allotted hour expired , his voice was heard . 
-- `` Whose is the doubloon now ? 
D'ye see him ? '' 
and if the reply was No , sir ! 
straightway he commanded them to lift him to his perch . 
In this way the day wore on ; Ahab , now aloft and motionless ; anon , unrestingly pacing the planks . 
As he was thus walking , uttering no sound , except to hail the men aloft , or to bid them hoist a sail still higher , or to spread one to a still greater breadth -- thus to and fro pacing , beneath his slouched hat , at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat , which had been dropped upon the quarter-deck , and lay there reversed ; broken bow to shattered stern . 
At last he paused before it ; and as in an already over-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across , so over the old man 's face there now stole some such added gloom as this . 
Stubb saw him pause ; and perhaps intending , not vainly , though , to evince his own unabated fortitude , and thus keep up a valiant place in his Captain 's mind , he advanced , and eyeing the wreck exclaimed -- `` The thistle the ass refused ; it pricked his mouth too keenly , sir ; ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! '' 
`` What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck ? 
Man , man ! 
did I not know thee brave as fearless fire -LRB- and as mechanical -RRB- I could swear thou wert a poltroon . 
Groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck . '' 
`` Aye , sir , '' said Starbuck drawing near , '' 't is a solemn sight ; an omen , and an ill one . '' 
`` Omen ? 
omen ? 
-- the dictionary ! 
If the gods think to speak outright to man , they will honorably speak outright ; not shake their heads , and give an old wives ' darkling hint . 
-- Begone ! 
Ye two are the opposite poles of one thing ; Starbuck is Stubb reversed , and Stubb is Starbuck ; and ye two are all mankind ; and Ahab stands alone among the millions of the peopled earth , nor gods nor men his neighbors ! 
Cold , cold -- I shiver ! 
-- How now ? 
Aloft there ! 
D'ye see him ? 
Sing out for every spout , though he spout ten times a second ! '' 
The day was nearly done ; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling . 
Soon it was almost dark , but the look-out men still remained unset . 
`` Ca n't see the spout now , sir ; -- too dark '' -- cried a voice from the air . 
`` How heading when last seen ? '' 
`` As before , sir , -- straight to leeward . '' 
`` Good ! 
he will travel slower now 't is night . 
Down royals and top-gallant stunsails , Mr. Starbuck . 
We must not run over him before morning ; he 's making a passage now , and may heave-to a while . 
Helm there ! 
keep her full before the wind ! 
-- Aloft ! 
come down ! 
-- Mr. Stubb , send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head , and see it manned till morning . '' 
-- Then advancing towards the doubloon in the main-mast -- `` Men , this gold is mine , for I earned it ; but I shall let it abide here till the White Whale is dead ; and then , whosoever of ye first raises him , upon the day he shall be killed , this gold is that man 's ; and if on that day I shall again raise him , then , ten times its sum shall be divided among all of ye ! 
Away now ! 
