Holding a light in one hand , and that identical New Zealand head in the other , the stranger entered the room , and without looking towards the bed , placed his candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner , and then began working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being in the room . 
I was all eagerness to see his face , but he kept it averted for some time while employed in unlacing the bag 's mouth . 
This accomplished , however , he turned round -- when , good heavens ; what a sight ! 
Such a face ! 
It was of a dark , purplish , yellow color , here and there stuck over with large blackish looking squares . 
Yes , it 's just as I thought , he 's a terrible bedfellow ; he 's been in a fight , got dreadfully cut , and here he is , just from the surgeon . 
But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards the light , that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all , those black squares on his cheeks . 
They were stains of some sort or other . 
At first I knew not what to make of this ; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to me . 
I remembered a story of a white man -- a whaleman too -- who , falling among the cannibals , had been tattooed by them . 
I concluded that this harpooneer , in the course of his distant voyages , must have met with a similar adventure . 
And what is it , thought I , after all ! 
It 's only his outside ; a man can be honest in any sort of skin . 
But then , what to make of his unearthly complexion , that part of it , I mean , lying round about , and completely independent of the squares of tattooing . 
To be sure , it might be nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning ; but I never heard of a hot sun 's tanning a white man into a purplish yellow one . 
However , I had never been in the South Seas ; and perhaps the sun there produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin . 
Now , while all these ideas were passing through me like lightning , this harpooneer never noticed me at all . 
But , after some difficulty having opened his bag , he commenced fumbling in it , and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk , and a seal-skin wallet with the hair on . 
Placing these on the old chest in the middle of the room , he then took the New Zealand head -- a ghastly thing enough -- and crammed it down into the bag . 
He now took off his hat -- a new beaver hat -- when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise . 
There was no hair on his head -- none to speak of at least -- nothing but a small scalp-knot twisted up on his forehead . 
His bald purplish head now looked for all the world like a mildewed skull . 
Had not the stranger stood between me and the door , I would have bolted out of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner . 
Even as it was , I thought something of slipping out of the window , but it was the second floor back . 
I am no coward , but what to make of this headpeddling purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension . 
Ignorance is the parent of fear , and being completely nonplussed and confounded about the stranger , I confess I was now as much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had thus broken into my room at the dead of night . 
In fact , I was so afraid of him that I was not game enough just then to address him , and demand a satisfactory answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him . 
Meanwhile , he continued the business of undressing , and at last showed his chest and arms . 
As I live , these covered parts of him were checkered with the same squares as his face , his back , too , was all over the same dark squares ; he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years ' War , and just escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt . 
Still more , his very legs were marked , as if a parcel of dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young palms . 
It was now quite plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard of a whaleman in the South Seas , and so landed in this Christian country . 
I quaked to think of it . 
A peddler of heads too -- perhaps the heads of his own brothers . 
He might take a fancy to mine -- heavens ! 
look at that tomahawk ! 
But there was no time for shuddering , for now the savage went about something that completely fascinated my attention , and convinced me that he must indeed be a heathen . 
Going to his heavy grego , or wrapall , or dreadnaught , which he had previously hung on a chair , he fumbled in the pockets , and produced at length a curious little deformed image with a hunch on its back , and exactly the color of a three days ' old Congo baby . 
Remembering the embalmed head , at first I almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby preserved in some similar manner . 
But seeing that it was not at all limber , and that it glistened a good deal like polished ebony , I concluded that it must be nothing but a wooden idol , which indeed it proved to be . 
For now the savage goes up to the empty fire-place , and removing the papered fire-board , sets up this little hunch-backed image , like a tenpin , between the andirons . 
The chimney jambs and all the bricks inside were very sooty , so that I thought this fire-place made a very appropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol . 
I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image , feeling but ill at ease meantime -- to see what was next to follow . 
First he takes about a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket , and places them carefully before the idol ; then laying a bit of ship biscuit on top and applying the flame from the lamp , he kindled the shavings into a sacrificial blaze . 
Presently , after many hasty snatches into the fire , and still hastier withdrawals of his fingers -LRB- whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly -RRB- , he at last succeeded in drawing out the biscuit ; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little , he made a polite offer of it to the little negro . 
But the little devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all ; he never moved his lips . 
All these strange antics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from the devotee , who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan psalmody or other , during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural manner . 
At last extinguishing the fire , he took the idol up very unceremoniously , and bagged it again in his grego pocket as carelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock . 
All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness , and seeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business operations , and jumping into bed with me , I thought it was high time , now or never , before the light was put out , to break the spell in which I had so long been bound . 
But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say , was a fatal one . 
Taking up his tomahawk from the table , he examined the head of it for an instant , and then holding it to the light , with his mouth at the handle , he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke . 
