`` Aye , aye , I thought so . 
Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship . '' 
`` I am mistaken then . 
I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself . '' 
`` Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg -- that 's who ye are speaking to , young man . 
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the voyage , and supplied with all her needs , including crew . 
We are part owners and agents . 
But as I was going to say , if thou wantest to know what whaling is , as thou tellest ye do , I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it , past backing out . 
Clap eye on Captain Ahab , young man , and thou wilt find that he has only one leg . '' 
`` What do you mean , sir ? 
Was the other one lost by a whale ? '' 
`` Lost by a whale ! 
Young man , come nearer to me : it was devoured , chewed up , crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat ! 
-- ah , ah ! '' 
I was a little alarmed by his energy , perhaps also a little touched at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation , but said as calmly as I could , `` What you say is no doubt true enough , sir ; but how could I know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale , though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident . '' 
`` Look ye now , young man , thy lungs are a sort of soft , d'ye see ; thou dost not talk shark a bit . 
Sure , ye 've been to sea before now ; sure of that ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said I , `` I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the merchant - '' `` Hard down out of that ! 
Mind what I said about the marchant service -- do n't aggravate me -- I wo n't have it . 
But let us understand each other . 
I have given thee a hint about what whaling is ! 
do ye yet feel inclined for it ? '' 
`` I do , sir . '' 
`` Very good . 
Now , art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale 's throat , and then jump after it ? 
Answer , quick ! '' 
`` I am , sir , if it should be positively indispensable to do so ; not to be got rid of , that is ; which I do n't take to be the fact . '' 
`` Good again . 
Now then , thou not only wantest to go a-whaling , to find out by experience what whaling is , but ye also want to go in order to see the world ? 
Was not that what ye said ? 
I thought so . 
Well then , just step forward there , and take a peep over the weather bow , and then back to me and tell me what ye see there . '' 
For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request , not knowing exactly how to take it , whether humorously or in earnest . 
But concentrating all his crow 's feet into one scowl , Captain Peleg started me on the errand . 
Going forward and glancing over the weather bow , I perceived that the ship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide , was now obliquely pointing towards the open ocean . 
The prospect was unlimited , but exceedingly monotonous and forbidding ; not the slightest variety that I could see . 
`` Well , what 's the report ? '' 
said Peleg when I came back ; `` what did ye see ? '' 
`` Not much , '' I replied -- `` nothing but water ; considerable horizon though , and there 's a squall coming up , I think . '' 
`` Well , what dost thou think then of seeing the world ? 
Do ye wish to go round Cape Horn to see any more of it , eh ? 
Ca n't ye see the world where you stand ? '' 
I was a little staggered , but go a-whaling I must , and I would ; and the Pequod was as good a ship as any -- I thought the best -- and all this I now repeated to Peleg . 
Seeing me so determined , he expressed his willingness to ship me . 
`` And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off , '' he added -- `` come along with ye . '' 
And so saying , he led the way below deck into the cabin . 
Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising figure . 
It turned out to be Captain Bildad who along with Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel ; the other shares , as is sometimes the case in these ports , being held by a crowd of old annuitants ; widows , fatherless children , and chancery wards ; each owning about the value of a timber head , or a foot of plank , or a nail or two in the ship . 
People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels , the same way that you do yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest . 
Now , Bildad , like Peleg , and indeed many other Nantucketers , was a Quaker , the island having been originally settled by that sect ; and to this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the Quaker , only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous . 
