The headsman should stay in the bows from first to last ; he should both dart the harpoon and the lance , and no rowing whatever should be expected of him , except under circumstances obvious to any fisherman . 
I know that this would sometimes involve a slight loss of speed in the chase ; but long experience in various whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me that in the vast majority of failures in the fishery , it has not by any means been so much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the harpooneer that has caused them . 
To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart , the harpooneers of this world must start to their feet from out of idleness , and not from out of toil . 
The Crotch Out of the trunk , the branches grow ; out of them , the twigs . 
So , in productive subjects , grow the chapters . 
The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention . 
It is a notched stick of a peculiar form , some two feet in length , which is perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow , for the purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of the harpoons , whose other naked , barbed end slopingly projects from the prow . 
Thereby the weapon is instantly at hand to its hurler , who snatches it up as readily from its rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall . 
It is customary to have two harpoons reposing in the crotch , respectively called the first and second irons . 
But these two harpoons , each by its own cord , are both connected with the line ; the object being this : to dart them both , if possible , one instantly after the other into the same whale ; so that if , in the coming drag , one should draw out , the other may still retain a hold . 
It is a doubling of the chances . 
But it very often happens that owing to the instantaneous , violent , convulsive running of the whale upon receiving the first iron , it becomes impossible for the harpooneer , however lightning-like in his movements , to pitch the second iron into him . 
Nevertheless , as the second iron is already connected with the line , and the line is running , hence that weapon must , at all events , be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat , somehow and somewhere ; else the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands . 
Tumbled into the water , it accordingly is in such cases ; the spare coils of box line -LRB- mentioned in a preceding chapter -RRB- making this feat , in most instances , prudently practicable . 
But this critical act is not always unattended with the saddest and most fatal casualties . 
Furthermore : you must know that when the second iron is thrown overboard , it thenceforth becomes a dangling , sharp-edged terror , skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale , entangling the lines , or cutting them , and making a prodigious sensation in all directions . 
Nor , in general , is it possible to secure it again until the whale is fairly captured and a corpse . 
Consider , now , how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging one unusually strong , active , and knowing whale ; when owing to these qualities in him , as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of such an audacious enterprise , eight or ten loose second irons may be simultaneously dangling about him . 
For , of course , each boat is supplied with several harpoons to bend on to the line should the first one be ineffectually darted without recovery . 
All these particulars are faithfully narrated here , as they will not fail to elucidate several most important however intricate passages , in scenes hereafter to be painted . 
Stubb 's Supper Stubb 's whale had been killed some distance from the ship . 
It was a calm ; so , forming a tandem of three boats , we commenced the slow business of towing the trophy to the Pequod . 
And now , as we eighteen men with our thirty-six arms , and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers , slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert , sluggish corpse in the sea ; and it seemed hardly to budge at all , except at long intervals ; good evidence was hereby furnished of the enormousness of the mass we moved . 
For , upon the great canal of Hang-Ho , or whatever they call it , in China , four or five laborers on the foot-path will draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour ; but this grand argosy we towed heavily forged along , as if laden with piglead in bulk . 
Darkness came on ; but three lights up and down in the Pequod 's main-rigging dimly guided our way ; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab dropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks . 
Vacantly eyeing the heaving whale for a moment , he issued the usual orders for securing it for the night , and then handing his lantern to a seaman , went his way into the cabin , and did not come forward again until morning . 
Though , in overseeing the pursuit of this whale , Captain Ahab had evinced his customary activity , to call it so ; yet now that the creature was dead , some vague dissatisfaction , or impatience , or despair , seemed working in him ; as if the sight of that dead body reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain ; and though a thousand other whales were brought to his ship , all that would not one jot advance his grand , monomaniac object . 
Very soon you would have thought from the sound on the Pequod 's decks , that all hands were preparing to cast anchor in the deep ; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck , and thrust rattling out of the port-holes . 
But by those clanking links , the vast corpse itself , not the ship , is to be moored . 
Tied by the head to the stern , and by the tail to the bows , the whale now lies with its black hull close to the vessel 's , and seen through the darkness of the night , which obscured the spars and rigging aloft , the two -- ship and whale , seemed yoked together like colossal bullocks , whereof one reclines while the other remains standing . 
* * A little item may as well be related here . 
The strongest and most reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside , is by the flukes or tail ; and as from its greater density that part is relatively heavier than any other -LRB- excepting the side-fins -RRB- , its flexibility even in death , causes it to sink low beneath the surface ; so that with the hand you can not get at it from the boat , in order to put the chain round it . 
But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome : a small , strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end , and a weight in its middle , while the other end is secured to the ship . 
By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side of the mass , so that now having girdled the whale , the chain is readily made to follow suit ; and being slipped along the body , is at last locked fast round the smallest part of the tail , at the point of junction with its broad flukes or lobes . 
If moody Ahab was now all quiescence , at least so far as could be known on deck , Stubb , his second mate , flushed with conquest , betrayed an unusual but still good-natured excitement . 
Such an unwonted bustle was he in that the staid Starbuck , his official superior , quietly resigned to him for the time the sole management of affairs . 
One small , helping cause of all this liveliness in Stubb , was soon made strangely manifest . 
Stubb was a high liver ; he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his palate . 
`` A steak , a steak , ere I sleep ! 
You , Daggoo ! 
overboard you go , and cut me one from his small ! '' 
Here be it known , that though these wild fishermen do not , as a general thing , and according to the great military maxim , make the enemy defray the current expenses of the war -LRB- at least before realizing the proceeds of the voyage -RRB- , yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish for that particular part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb ; comprising the tapering extremity of the body . 
About midnight that steak was cut and cooked ; and lighted by two lanterns of sperm oil , Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper at the capstan-head , as if that capstan were a sideboard . 
Nor was Stubb the only banqueter on whale 's flesh that night . 
Mingling their mumblings with his own mastications , thousands on thousands of sharks , swarming round the dead leviathan , smackingly feasted on its fatness . 
The few sleepers below in their bunks were often startled by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull , within a few inches of the sleepers ' hearts . 
Peering over the side you could just see them -LRB- as before you heard them -RRB- wallowing in the sullen , black waters , and turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of the whale of the bigness of a human head . 
This particular feat of the shark seems all but miraculous . 
How at such an apparently unassailable surface , they contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls , remains a part of the universal problem of all things . 
The mark they thus leave on the whale , may best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a screw . 
