But here a curious difficulty presented itself . 
In the excitement of the moment , Ahab had forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had never once stepped on board of any vessel at sea but his own , and then it was always by an ingenious and very handy mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod , and a thing not to be rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment 's warning . 
Now , it is no very easy matter for anybody -- except those who are almost hourly used to it , like whalemen -- to clamber up a ship 's side from a boat on the open sea ; for the great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks , and then instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson . 
So , deprived of one leg , and the strange ship of course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly invention , Ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again ; hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope to attain . 
It has before been hinted , perhaps , that every little untoward circumstance that befell him , and which indirectly sprang from his luckless mishap , almost invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab . 
And in the present instance , all this was heightened by the sight of the two officers of the strange ship , leaning over the side , by the perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there , and swinging towards him a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes ; for at first they did not seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a cripple to use their sea bannisters . 
But this awkwardness only lasted a minute , because the strange captain , observing at a glance how affairs stood , cried out , `` I see , I see ! 
-- avast heaving there ! 
Jump , boys , and swing over the cutting-tackle . '' 
As good luck would have it , they had had a whale alongside a day or two previous , and the great tackles were still aloft , and the massive curved blubber-hook , now clean and dry , was still attached to the end . 
This was quickly lowered to Ahab , who at once comprehending it all , slid his solitary thigh into the curve of the hook -LRB- it was like sitting in the fluke of an anchor , or the crotch of an apple tree -RRB- , and then giving the word , held himself fast , and at the same time also helped to hoist his own weight , by pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts of the tackle . 
Soon he was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks , and gently landed upon the capstan head . 
With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome , the other captain advanced , and Ahab , putting out his ivory leg , and crossing the ivory arm -LRB- like two sword-fish blades -RRB- cried out in his walrus way , `` Aye , aye , hearty ! 
let us shake bones together ! 
-- an arm and a leg ! 
-- an arm that never can shrink , d'ye see ; and a leg that never can run . 
Where did ` st thou see the White Whale ? 
-- how long ago ? '' 
`` The White Whale , '' said the Englishman , pointing his ivory arm towards the East , and taking a rueful sight along it , as if it had been a telescope ; There I saw him , on the Line , last season . '' 
`` And he took that arm off , did he ? '' 
asked Ahab , now sliding down from the capstan , and resting on the Englishman 's shoulder , as he did so . 
`` Aye , he was the cause of it , at least ; and that leg , too ? '' 
`` Spin me the yarn , '' said Ahab ; `` how was it ? '' 
`` It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line , '' began the Englishman . 
`` I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time . 
Well , one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales , and my boat fastened to one of them ; a regular circus horse he was , too , that went milling and milling round so that my boat 's crew could only trim dish , by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale . 
Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing great whale , with a milky-white head and hump , all crows ' feet and wrinkles . '' 
`` It was he , it was he ! '' 
cried Ahab , suddenly letting out his suspended breath . 
`` And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin . 
Aye , aye -- they were mine -- my irons , '' cried Ahab , exultingly -- `` but on ! '' 
`` Give me a chance , then , '' said the Englishman , good-humoredly . 
`` Well , this old great-grandfather , with the white head and hump , runs all afoam into the pod , and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line ! 
`` Aye , I see ! 
-- wanted to part it ; free the fast-fish -- an old trick -- I know him . '' 
`` How it was exactly , '' continued the one-armed commander , `` I do not know ; but in biting the line , it got foul of his teeth , caught there somehow ; but we did n't know it then ; so that when we afterwards pulled on the line , bounce we came plump on to his hump ! 
instead of the other whale 's ; that went off to windward , all fluking . 
Seeing how matters stood , and what a noble great whale it was -- the noblest and biggest I ever saw , sir , in my life -- I resolved to capture him , spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in . 
And thinking the hap-hazard line would get loose , or the tooth it was tangled to might draw -LRB- for I have a devil of a boat 's crew for a pull on a whale-line -RRB- ; seeing all this , I say , I jumped into my first mate 's boat -- Mr. Mounttop 's here -LRB- by the way , Captain -- Mounttop ; Mounttop -- the captain -RRB- ; -- as I was saying , I jumped into Mounttop 's boat , which , d'ye see , was gunwale and gunwale with mine , then ; and snatching the first harpoon , let this old great-grandfather have it . 
But , Lord , look you , sir -- hearts and souls alive , man -- the next instant , in a jiff , I was blind as a bat -- both eyes out -- all befogged and bedeadened with black foam -- the whale 's tail looming straight up out of it , perpendicular in the air , like a marble steeple . 
No use sterning all , then ; but as I was groping at midday , with a blinding sun , all crown-jewels ; as I was groping , I say , after the second iron , to toss it overboard -- down comes the tail like a Lima tower , cutting my boat in two , leaving each half in splinters ; and , flukes first , the white hump backed through the wreck , as though it was all chips . 
We all struck out . 
To escape his terrible flailings , I seized hold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him , and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish . 
But a combing sea dashed me off , and at the same instant , the fish , taking one good dart forwards , went down like a flash ; and the barb of that cursed second iron towing along near me caught me here '' -LRB- clapping his hand just below his shoulder -RRB- ; `` yes , caught me just here , I say , and bore me down to Hell 's flames , I was thinking ; when , when , all of a sudden , thank the good God , the barb ript its way along the flesh -- clear along the whole length of my arm -- came out nigh my wrist , and up I floated ; -- and that gentleman there will tell you the rest -LRB- by the way , captain -- Dr. Bunger , ship 's surgeon : Bunger , my lad , -- the captain -RRB- . 
Now , Bunger boy , spin your part of the yarn . '' 
The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out , had been all the time standing near them , with nothing specific visible , to denote his gentlemanly rank on board . 
His face was an exceedingly round but sober one ; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt , and patched trowsers ; and had thus far been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand , and a pill-box held in the other , occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs of the two crippled captains . 
But , at his superior 's introduction of him to Ahab , he politely bowed , and straightway went on to do his captain 's bidding . 
`` It was a shocking bad wound , '' began the whale-surgeon ; `` and , taking my advice , Captain Boomer here , stood our old Sammy - '' `` Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship , '' interrupted the one-armed captain , addressing Ahab ; `` go on , boy . '' 
`` Stood our old Sammy off to the northward , to get out of the blazing hot weather there on the Line . 
