`` Clam or Cod ? '' 
she repeated . 
`` A clam for supper ? 
a cold clam ; is that what you mean , Mrs. Hussey ? '' 
says I , `` but that 's a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time , ai n't it , Mrs. Hussey ? '' 
But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple shirt who was waiting for it in the entry , and seeming to hear nothing but the word `` clam , '' Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen , and bawling out `` clam for two , '' disappeared . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on one clam ? '' 
However , a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently cheerless prospect before us . 
But when that smoking chowder came in , the mystery was delightfully explained . 
Oh ! 
sweet friends , hearken to me . 
It was made of small juicy clams , scarcely bigger than hazel nuts , mixed with pounded ship biscuits , and salted pork cut up into little flakes ! 
the whole enriched with butter , and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt . 
Our appetites being sharpened by the frosty voyage , and in particular , Queequeg seeing his favourite fishing food before him , and the chowder being surpassingly excellent , we despatched it with great expedition : when leaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey 's clam and cod announcement , I thought I would try a little experiment . 
Stepping to the kitchen door , I uttered the word `` cod '' with great emphasis , and resumed my seat . 
In a few moments the savoury steam came forth again , but with a different flavor , and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed before us . 
We resumed business ; and while plying our spoons in the bowl , thinks I to myself , I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head ? 
What 's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people ? 
`` But look , Queequeg , ai n't that a live eel in your bowl ? 
Where 's your harpoon ? '' 
Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots , which well deserved its name ; for the pots there were always boiling chowders . 
Chowder for breakfast , and chowder for dinner , and chowder for supper , till you began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes . 
The area before the house was paved with clam-shells . 
Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra ; and Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin . 
There was a fishy flavor to the milk , too , which I could not at all account for , till one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen 's boats , I saw Hosea 's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants , and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod 's decapitated head , looking very slipshod , I assure ye . 
Supper concluded , we received a lamp , and directions from Mrs. Hussey concerning the nearest way to bed ; but , as Queequeg was about to precede me up the stairs , the lady reached forth her arm , and demanded his harpoon ; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers . 
`` Why not ? 
said I ; `` every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon -- but why not ? '' 
`` Because it 's dangerous , '' says she . 
`` Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort ` nt v ` y' ge of his , when he was gone four years and a half , with only three barrels of ile , was found dead in my first floor back , with his harpoon in his side ; ever since then I allow no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night . 
So , Mr. Queequeg '' -LRB- for she had learned his name -RRB- , `` I will just take this here iron , and keep it for you till morning . 
But the chowder ; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast , men ? '' 
`` Both , '' says I ; `` and let 's have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety . '' 
The Ship In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow . 
But to my surprise and no small concern , Queequeg now gave me to understand , that he had been diligently consulting Yojo -- the name of his black little god -- and Yojo had told him two or three times over , and strongly insisted upon it everyway , that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor , and in concert selecting our craft ; instead of this , I say , Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly with me , inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us ; and , in order to do so , had already pitched upon a vessel , which , if left to myself , I , Ishmael , should infallibly light upon , for all the world as though it had turned out by chance ; and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself , for the present irrespective of Queequeg . 
I have forgotten to mention that , in many things , Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of Yojo 's judgment and surprising forecast of things ; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem , as a rather good sort of god , who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole , but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs . 
Now , this plan of Queequeg 's or rather Yojo 's , touching the selection of our craft ; I did not like that plan at all . 
I had not a little relied on Queequeg 's sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely . 
But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg , I was obliged to acquiesce ; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor , that should quickly settle that trifling little affair . 
Next morning early , leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom -- for it seemed that it was some sort of Lent or Ramadan , or day of fasting , humiliation , and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day ; how it was I never could find out , for , though I applied myself to it several times , I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles -- leaving Queequeg , then , fasting on his tomahawk pipe , and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings , I sallied out among the shipping . 
After much prolonged sauntering , and many random inquiries , I learnt that there were three ships up for three-years ' voyages -- The Devil-Dam the Tit-bit , and the Pequod . 
Devil-dam , I do not know the origin of ; Tit-bit is obvious ; Pequod you will no doubt remember , was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians ; now extinct as the ancient Medes . 
I peered and pryed about the Devil-Dam ; from her , hopped over to the Tit-bit ; and finally , going on board the Pequod , looked around her for a moment , and then decided that this was the very ship for us . 
You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day , for aught I know ; -- square-toed luggers ; mountainous Japanese junks ; butter-box galliots , and what not ; but take my word for it , you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod . 
She was a ship of the old school , rather small if anything ; with an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her . 
Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans , her old hull 's complexion was darkened like a French grenadier 's , who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia . 
Her venerable bows looked bearded . 
Her masts -- cut somewhere on the coast of Japan , where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale -- her masts stood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne . 
Her ancient decks were worn and wrinkled , like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in Canterbury Cathedral where Beckett bled . 
But to all these her old antiquities , were added new and marvellous features , pertaining to the wild business that for more than half a century she had followed . 
