Locks so grey did never grow but from out some ashes ! 
But do I look very old , so very , very old , Starbuck ? 
I feel deadly faint , bowed , and humped , as though I were Adam , staggering beneath the piled centuries since Paradise . 
God ! 
God ! 
God ! 
-- crack my heart ! 
-- stave my brain ! 
-- mockery ! 
mockery ! 
bitter , biting mockery of grey hairs , have I lived enough joy to wear ye ; and seem and feel thus intolerably old ? 
Close ! 
stand close to me , Starbuck ; let me look into a human eye ; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky ; better than to gaze upon God . 
By the green land ; by the bright hearthstone ! 
this is the magic glass , man ; I see my wife and my child in thine eye . 
No , no ; stay on board , on board ! 
-- lower not when I do ; when branded Ahab gives chase to Moby Dick . 
That hazard shall not be thine . 
No , no ! 
not with the far away home I see in that eye ! '' 
`` Oh , my Captain ! 
my Captain ! 
noble soul ! 
grand old heart , after all ! 
why should any one give chase to that hated fish ! 
Away with me ! 
let us fly these deadly waters ! 
let us home ! 
Wife and child , too , are Starbuck 's -- wife and child of his brotherly , sisterly , play-fellow youth ; even as thine , sir , are the wife and child of thy loving , longing , paternal old age ! 
Away ! 
let us away ! 
-- this instant let me alter the course ! 
How cheerily , how hilariously , O my Captain , would we bowl on our way to see old Nantucket again ! 
I think , sir , they have some such mild blue days , even as this , in Nantucket . '' 
`` They have , they have . 
I have seen them -- some summer days in the morning . 
About this time -- yes , it is his noon nap now -- the boy vivaciously wakes ; sits up in bed ; and his mother tells him of me , of cannibal old me ; how I am abroad upon the deep , but will yet come back to dance him again . '' '' 
'T is my Mary , my Mary herself ! 
She promised that my boy , every morning , should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of his father 's sail ! 
Yes , yes ! 
no more ! 
it is done ! 
we head for Nantucket ! 
Come , my Captain , study out the course , and let us away ! 
See , see ! 
the boy 's face from the window ! 
the boy 's hand on the hill ! '' 
But Ahab 's glance was averted ; like a blighted fruit tree he shook , and cast his last , cindered apple to the soil . 
`` What is it , what nameless , inscrutable , unearthly thing is it ; what cozening , hidden lord and master , and cruel , remorseless emperor commands me ; that against all natural lovings and longings , I so keep pushing , and crowding , and jamming myself on all the time ; recklessly making me ready to do what in my own proper , natural heart , I durst not so much as dare ? 
Is Ahab , Ahab ? 
