Next : how shall we define the whale , by his obvious externals , so as conspicuously to label him for all time to come . 
To be short , then , a whale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail . 
There you have him . 
However contracted , that definition is the result of expanded meditation . 
A walrus spouts much like a whale , but the walrus is not a fish , because he is amphibious . 
But the last term of the definition is still more cogent , as coupled with the first . 
Almost any one must have noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat , but a vertical , or up-and-down tail . 
Whereas , among spouting fish the tail , though it may be similarly shaped , invariably assumes a horizontal position . 
By the above definition of what a whale is , I do by no means exclude from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identified with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers ; nor , on the other hand , link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as alien . 
* Hence , all the smaller , spouting and horizontal tailed fish must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology . 
Now , then , come the grand divisions of the entire whale host . 
* I am aware that down to the present time , the fish styled Lamatins and Dugongs -LRB- Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket -RRB- are included by many naturalists among the whales . 
But as these pig-fish are a noisy , contemptible set , mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers , and feeding on wet hay , and especially as they do not spout , I deny their credentials as whales ; and have presented them with their passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology . 
First : According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary BOOKS -LRB- subdivisible into CHAPTERS -RRB- , and these shall comprehend them all , both small and large . 
I . 
THE FOLIO WHALE ; II . 
the OCTAVO WHALE ; III . 
the DUODECIMO WHALE . 
As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale ; of the OCTAVO , the Grampus ; of the DUODECIMO , the Porpoise . 
FOLIOS . 
Among these I here include the following chapters : -- I . 
The Sperm Whale ; II . 
the Right Whale ; III . 
the Fin Back Whale ; IV . 
the Humpbacked Whale ; V. the Razor Back Whale ; VI . 
the Sulphur Bottom Whale . 
Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of the English and the right whale of the Americans . 
But they precisely agree in all their grand features ; nor has there yet been presented a single determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction . 
It is by endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive differences , that some departments of natural history become so repellingly intricate . 
The right whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length , with reference to elucidating the sperm whale . 
names of Fin-Back , Tall-Spout , and Long-John , has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly the whale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing the Atlantic , in the New York packet-tracks . 
In the length he attains , and in his baleen , the Fin-back resembles the right whale , but is of a less portly girth , and a lighter color , approaching to olive . 
His great lips present a cable-like aspect , formed by the intertwisting , slanting folds of large wrinkles . 
His grand distinguishing feature , the fin , from which he derives his name , is often a conspicuous object . 
This fin is some three or four feet long , growing vertically from the hinder part of the back , of an angular shape , and with a very sharp pointed end . 
Even if not the slightest other part of the creature be visible , this isolated fin will , at times , be seen plainly projecting from the surface . 
When the sea is moderately calm , and slightly marked with spherical ripples , and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon the wrinkled surface , it may well be supposed that the watery circle surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial , with its style and wavy hour-lines graved on it . 
On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goes back . 
The Fin-Back is not gregarious . 
He seems a whale-hater , as some men are man-haters . 
Very shy ; always going solitary ; unexpectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullen waters ; his straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain ; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity in swimming , as to defy all present pursuit from man ; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race , bearing for his mark that style upon his back . 
From having the baleen in his mouth , the Fin-Back is sometimes included with the right whale , among a theoretic species denominated Whalebone whales , that is , whales with baleen . 
Of these so-called Whalebone whales , there would seem to be several varieties , most of which , however , are little known . 
Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales ; pike-headed whales ; bunched whales ; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales , are the fisherman 's names for a few sorts . 
In connexion with this appellative of `` Whalebone whales , '' it is of great importance to mention , that however such a nomenclature may be convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales , yet it is in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan , founded upon either his baleen , or hump , or fin , or teeth ; notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system of Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions , which the whale , in his kinds , presents . 
How then ? 
The baleen , hump , back-fin , and teeth ; these are things whose peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales , without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in other and more essential particulars . 
Thus , the sperm whale and the humpbacked whale , each has a hump ; but there the similitude ceases . 
Then this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale , each of these has baleen ; but there again the similitude ceases . 
And it is just the same with the other parts above mentioned . 
