he cried , in long-drawn , lingering , methodic tones , attuned to the gradual prolongings of the whale 's visible jets . 
`` He 's going to sound ! 
In stunsails ! 
Down top-gallant-sails ! 
Stand by three boats . 
Mr. Starbuck , remember , stay on board , and keep the ship . 
Helm there ! 
Luff , luff a point ! 
So ; steady , man , steady ! 
There go flukes ! 
No , no ; only black water ! 
All ready the boats there ? 
Stand by , stand by ! 
Lower me , Mr. Starbuck ; lower , lower , -- quick , quicker ! '' 
and he slid through the air to the deck . 
`` He is heading straight to leeward , sir , '' cried Stubb , `` right away from us ; can not have seen the ship yet . '' 
`` Be dumb , man ! 
Stand by the braces ! 
Hard down the helm ! 
-- brace up ! 
Shiver her ! 
-- shiver her ! 
-- So ; well that ! 
Boats , boats ! '' 
Soon all the boats but Starbuck 's were dropped ; all the boat-sails set -- all the paddles plying ; with rippling swiftness , shooting to leeward ; and Ahab heading the onset . 
A pale , death-glimmer lit up Fedallah 's sunken eyes ; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth . 
Like noiseless nautilus shells , their light prows sped through the sea ; but only slowly they neared the foe . 
As they neared him , the ocean grew still more smooth ; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves ; seemed a noon-meadow , so serenely it spread . 
At length the breathless hunter came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey , that his entire dazzling hump was distinctly visible , sliding along the sea as if an isolated thing , and continually set in a revolving ring of finest , fleecy , greenish foam . 
He saw the vast , involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting head beyond . 
Before it , far out on the soft Turkish-rugged waters , went the glistening white shadow from his broad , milky forehead , a musical rippling playfully accompanying the shade ; and behind , the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into the moving valley of his steady wake ; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and danced by his side . 
But these were broken again by the light toes of hundreds of gay fowls softly feathering the sea , alternate with their fitful flight ; and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull of an argosy , the tall but shattered pole of a recent lance projected from the white whale 's back ; and at intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering , and to and fro skimming like a canopy over the fish , silently perched and rocked on this pole , the long tail feathers streaming like pennons . 
A gentle joyousness -- a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness , invested the gliding whale . 
Not the white bull Jupiter swimming away with ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns ; his lovely , leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid ; with smooth bewitching fleetness , rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete ; not Jove , not that great majesty Supreme ! 
did surpass the glorified White Whale as he so divinely swam . 
On each soft side -- coincident with the parted swell , that but once leaving him then flowed so wide away -- on each bright side , the whale shed off enticings . 
No wonder there had been some among the hunters who namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity , had ventured to assail it ; but had fatally found that quietude but the vesture of tornadoes . 
Yet calm , enticing calm , oh , whale ! 
thou glidest on , to all who for the first time eye thee , no matter how many in that same way thou mayst have bejuggled and destroyed before . 
And thus , through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea , among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture , Moby Dick moved on , still withholding from sight the full terrors of his submerged trunk , entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw . 
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water ; for an instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch , like Virginia 's Natural Bridge , and warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air , the grand god revealed himself , sounded and went out of sight . 
Hoveringly halting , and dipping on the wing , the white sea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left . 
With oars apeak , and paddles down , the sheets of their sails adrift , the three boats now stilly floated , awaiting Moby Dick 's reappearance . 
`` An hour , '' said Ahab , standing rooted in his boat 's stern ; and he gazed beyond the whale 's place , towards the dim blue spaces and wide wooing vacancies to leeward . 
It was only an instant ; for again his eyes seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle . 
The breeze now freshened ; the sea began to swell . 
`` The birds ! 
-- the birds ! '' 
cried Tashtego . 
In long Indian file , as when herons take wing , the white birds were now all flying towards Ahab 's boat ; and when within a few yards began fluttering over the water there , wheeling round and round , with joyous , expectant cries . 
