And it was so light too ; the sun shining in at the window , and a great rattling of coaches in the streets , and the sound of gay voices all over the house . 
I felt worse and worse -- at last I got up , dressed , and softly going down in my stockinged feet , sought out my stepmother , and suddenly threw myself at her feet , beseeching her as a particular favor to give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour : anything indeed but condemning me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time . 
But she was the best and most conscientious of stepmothers , and back I had to go to my room . 
For several hours I lay there broad awake , feeling a great deal worse than I have ever done since , even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes . 
At last I must have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze ; and slowly waking from it -- half steeped in dreams -- I opened my eyes , and the before sunlit room was now wrapped in outer darkness . 
Instantly I felt a shock running through all my frame ; nothing was to be seen , and nothing was to be heard ; but a supernatural hand seemed placed in mine . 
My arm hung over the counterpane , and the nameless , unimaginable , silent form or phantom , to which the hand belonged , seemed closely seated by my bed-side . 
For what seemed ages piled on ages , I lay there , frozen with the most awful fears , not daring to drag away my hand ; yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch , the horrid spell would be broken . 
I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away from me ; but waking in the morning , I shudderingly remembered it all , and for days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding attempts to explain the mystery . 
Nay , to this very hour , I often puzzle myself with it . 
Now , take away the awful fear , and my sensations at feeling the supernatural hand in mine were very similar , in their strangeness , to those which I experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg 's pagan arm thrown round me . 
But at length all the past night 's events soberly recurred , one by one , in fixed reality , and then I lay only alive to the comical predicament . 
For though I tried to move his arm -- unlock his bridegroom clasp -- yet , sleeping as he was , he still hugged me tightly , as though naught but death should part us twain . 
I now strove to rouse him -- `` Queequeg ! '' 
-- but his only answer was a snore . 
I then rolled over , my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar ; and suddenly felt a slight scratch . 
Throwing aside the counterpane , there lay the tomahawk sleeping by the savage 's side , as if it were a hatchet-faced baby . 
A pretty pickle , truly , thought I ; abed here in a strange house in the broad day , with a cannibal and a tomahawk ! 
`` Queequeg ! 
-- in the name of goodness , Queequeg , wake ! '' 
At length , by dint of much wriggling , and loud and incessant expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that matrimonial sort of style , I succeeded in extracting a grunt ; and presently , he drew back his arm , shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from the water , and sat up in bed , stiff as a pike-staff , looking at me , and rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether remember how I came to be there , though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning over him . 
Meanwhile , I lay quietly eyeing him , having no serious misgivings now , and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature . 
When , at last , his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow , and he became , as it were , reconciled to the fact ; he jumped out upon the floor , and by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that , if it pleased me , he would dress first and then leave me to dress afterwards , leaving the whole apartment to myself . 
Thinks I , Queequeg , under the circumstances , this is a very civilized overture ; but , the truth is , these savages have an innate sense of delicacy , say what you will ; it is marvellous how essentially polite they are . 
I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg , because he treated me with so much civility and consideration , while I was guilty of great rudeness ; staring at him from the bed , and watching all his toilette motions ; for the time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding . 
Nevertheless , a man like Queequeg you do n't see every day , he and his ways were well worth unusual regarding . 
He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat , a very tall one , by the by , and then -- still minus his trowsers -- he hunted up his boots . 
What under the heavens he did it for , I can not tell , but his next movement was to crush himself -- boots in hand , and hat on -- under the bed ; when , from sundry violent gaspings and strainings , I inferred he was hard at work booting himself ; though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of , is any man required to be private when putting on his boots . 
But Queequeg , do you see , was a creature in the transition state -- neither caterpillar nor butterfly . 
He was just enough civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manner . 
His education was not yet completed . 
He was an undergraduate . 
If he had not been a small degree civilized , he very probably would not have troubled himself with boots at all ; but then , if he had not been still a savage , he never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on . 
At last , he emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes , and began creaking and limping about the room , as if , not being much accustomed to boots , his pair of damp , wrinkled cowhide ones -- probably not made to order either -- rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold morning . 
Seeing , now , that there were no curtains to the window , and that the street being very narrow , the house opposite commanded a plain view into the room , and observing more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg made , staving about with little else but his hat and boots on ; I begged him as well as I could , to accelerate his toilet somewhat , and particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon as possible . 
He complied , and then proceeded to wash himself . 
At that time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face ; but Queequeg , to my amazement , contented himself with restricting his ablutions to his chest , arms , and hands . 
He then donned his waistcoat , and taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table , dipped it into water and commenced lathering his face . 
I was watching to see where he kept his razor , when lo and behold , he takes the harpoon from the bed corner , slips out the long wooden stock , unsheathes the head , whets it a little on his boot , and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall , begins a vigorous scraping , or rather harpooning of his cheeks . 
Thinks I , Queequeg , this is using Rogers 's best cutlery with a vengeance . 
Afterwards I wondered the less at this operation when I came to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon is made , and how exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept . 
The rest of his toilet was soon achieved , and he proudly marched out of the room , wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket , and sporting his harpoon like a marshal 's baton . 
Breakfast I quickly followed suit , and descending into the bar-room accosted the grinning landlord very pleasantly . 
I cherished no malice towards him , though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my bedfellow . 
However , a good laugh is a mighty good thing , and rather too scarce a good thing ; the more 's the pity . 
So , if any one man , in his own proper person , afford stuff for a good joke to anybody , let him not be backward , but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and to be spent in that way . 
And the man that has anything bountifully laughable about him , be sure there is more in that man than you perhaps think for . 
The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the night previous , and whom I had not as yet had a good look at . 
They were nearly all whalemen ; chief mates , and second mates , and third mates , and sea carpenters , and sea coopers , and sea blacksmiths , and harpooneers , and ship keepers ; a brown and brawny company , with bosky beards ; an unshorn , shaggy set , all wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns . 
You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore . 
