Jonah , that 's another stab . 
But he swiftly calls away the Captain from that scent . 
` I 'll sail with ye , ' -- he says , -- ` the passage money how much is that ? 
-- I 'll pay now . ' 
For it is particularly written , shipmates , as if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history , ` that he paid the fare thereof ' ere the craft did sail . 
And taken with the context , this is full of meaning . 
`` Now Jonah 's Captain , shipmates , was one whose discernment detects crime in any , but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless . 
In this world , shipmates , sin that pays its way can travel freely and without a passport ; whereas Virtue , if a pauper , is stopped at all frontiers . 
So Jonah 's Captain prepares to test the length of Jonah 's purse , ere he judge him openly . 
He charges him thrice the usual sum ; and it 's assented to . 
Then the Captain knows that Jonah is a fugitive ; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear with gold . 
Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse , prudent suspicions still molest the Captain . 
He rings every coin to find a counterfeit . 
Not a forger , any way , he mutters ; and Jonah is put down for his passage . 
` Point out my state-room , Sir , ' says Jonah now , ` I 'm travel-weary ; I need sleep . '' 
`` Thou look ` st like it , ' says the Captain , ` there 's thy room . ' 
Jonah enters , and would lock the door , but the lock contains no key . 
Hearing him foolishly fumbling there , the Captain laughs lowly to himself , and mutters something about the doors of convicts ' cells being never allowed to be locked within . 
All dressed and dusty as he is , Jonah throws himself into his berth , and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead . 
The air is close , and Jonah gasps . 
Then , in that contracted hole , sunk , too , beneath the ship 's water-line , Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that stifling hour , when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels ' wards . 
`` Screwed at its axis against the side , a swinging lamp slightly oscillates in Jonah 's room ; and the ship , heeling over towards the wharf with the weight of the last bales received , the lamp , flame and all , though in slight motion , still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to the room ; though , in truth , infallibly straight itself , it but made obvious the false , lying levels among which it hung . 
The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah ; as lying in his berth his tormented eyes roll round the place , and this thus far successful fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance . 
But that contradiction in the lamp more and more appals him . 
The floor , the ceiling , and the side , are all awry . 
` Oh ! 
so my conscience hangs in me ! ' 
he groans , `` straight upward , so it burns ; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness ! ' 
`` Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed , still reeling , but with conscience yet pricking him , as the plungings of the Roman race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags into him ; as one who in that miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish , praying God for annihilation until the fit be passed ; and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels , a deep stupor steals over him , as over the man who bleeds to death , for conscience is the wound , and there 's naught to staunch it ; so , after sore wrestling in his berth , Jonah 's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning down to sleep . 
`` And now the time of tide has come ; the ship casts off her cables ; and from the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish , all careening , glides to sea . 
That ship , my friends , was the first of recorded smugglers ! 
the contraband was Jonah . 
But the sea rebels ; he will not bear the wicked burden . 
A dreadful storm comes on , the ship is like to break . 
But now when the boatswain calls all hands to lighten her ; when boxes , bales , and jars are clattering overboard ; when the wind is shrieking , and the men are yelling , and every plank thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah 's head ; in all this raging tumult , Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep . 
He sees no black sky and raging sea , feels not the reeling timbers , and little hears he or heeds he the far rush of the mighty whale , which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas after him . 
Aye , shipmates , Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship -- a berth in the cabin as I have taken it , and was fast asleep . 
But the frightened master comes to him , and shrieks in his dead ear , ` What meanest thou , O , sleeper ! 
arise ! ' 
Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry , Jonah staggers to his feet , and stumbling to the deck , grasps a shroud , to look out upon the sea . 
But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping over the bulwarks . 
Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship , and finding no speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft , till the mariners come nigh to drowning while yet afloat . 
And ever , as the white moon shows her affrighted face from the steep gullies in the blackness overhead , aghast Jonah sees the rearing bowsprit pointing high upward , but soon beat downward again towards the tormented deep . 
`` Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul . 
In all his cringing attitudes , the God-fugitive is now too plainly known . 
The sailors mark him ; more and more certain grow their suspicions of him , and at last , fully to test the truth , by referring the whole matter to high Heaven , they all-outward to casting lots , to see for whose cause this great tempest was upon them . 
The lot is Jonah 's ; that discovered , then how furiously they mob him with their questions . 
` What is thine occupation ? 
Whence comest thou ? 
Thy country ? 
