Like the great dome of St. Peter 's , and like the great whale , retain , O man ! 
in all seasons a temperature of thine own . 
But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things ! 
Of erections , how few are domed like St. Peter 's ! 
of creatures , how few vast as the whale ! 
The Funeral Haul in the chains ! 
Let the carcase go astern ! 
The vast tackles have now done their duty . 
The peeled white body of the beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre ; though changed in hue , it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk . 
It is still colossal . 
Slowly it floats more and more away , the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate sharks , and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls , whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale.The vast white headless phantom floats further and further from the ship , and every rod that it so floats , what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls , augment the murderous din . 
For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship that hideous sight is seen . 
Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky , upon the fair face of the pleasant sea , wafted by the joyous breezes , that great mass of death floats on and on , till lost in infinite perspectives . 
There 's a most doleful and most mocking funeral ! 
The sea-vultures all in pious mourning , the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled . 
In life but few of them would have helped the whale , I ween , if peradventure he had needed it ; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce . 
Oh , horrible vulturism of earth ! 
from which not the mightiest whale is free . 
Nor is this the end . 
Desecrated as the body is , a vengeful ghost survives and hovers over it to scare . 
Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering discovery-vessel from afar , when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls , nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun , and the white spray heaving high against it ; straightway the whale 's unharming corpse , with trembling fingers is set down in the log -- shoals , rocks , and breakers hereabouts : beware ! 
And for years afterwards , perhaps , ships shun the place ; leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum , because their leader originally leaped there when a stick was held . 
There 's your law of precedents ; there 's your utility of traditions ; there 's the story of your obstinate survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth , and now not even hovering in the air ! 
There 's orthodoxy ! 
Thus , while in the life the great whale 's body may have been a real terror to his foes , in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world . 
Are you a believer in ghosts , my friend ? 
There are other ghosts than the Cock-Lane one , and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them . 
The Sphynx It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body of the leviathan , he was beheaded . 
Now , the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat , upon which experienced whale surgeons very much pride themselves : and not without reason . 
Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck ; on the contrary , where his head and body seem to join , there , in that very place , is the thickest part of him . 
Remember , also , that the surgeon must operate from above , some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject , and that subject almost hidden in a discolored , rolling , and oftentimes tumultuous and bursting sea . 
Bear in mind , too , that under these untoward circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh ; and in that subterraneous manner , without so much as getting one single peep into the ever-contracting gash thus made , he must skilfully steer clear of all adjacent , interdicted parts , and exactly divide the spine at a critical point hard by its insertion into the skull . 
Do you not marvel , then , at Stubb 's boast , that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale ? 
When first severed , the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till the body is stripped . 
That done , if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of . 
But , with a full grown leviathan this is impossible ; for the sperm whale 's head embraces nearly one third of his entire bulk , and completely to suspend such a burden as that , even by the immense tackles of a whaler , this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing a Dutch barn in jewellers ' scales . 
The Pequod 's whale being decapitated and the body stripped , the head was hoisted against the ship 's side -- about half way out of the sea , so that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element . 
And there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it , by reason of the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head , and every yard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over the waves ; there , that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod 's waist like the giant Holofernes 's from the girdle of Judith . 
When this last task was accomplished it was noon , and the seamen went below to their dinner . 
Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted deck . 
An intense copper calm , like a universal yellow lotus , was more and more unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea . 
A short space elapsed , and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his cabin . 
Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck , he paused to gaze over the side , then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb 's long spade still remaining there after the whale 's decapitation and striking it into the lower part of the half-suspended mass , placed its other end crutchwise under one arm , and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head . 
It was a black and hooded head ; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a calm , it seemed the Sphynx 's in the desert . 
`` Speak , thou vast and venerable head , '' muttered Ahab , `` which , though ungarnished with a beard , yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses ; speak , mighty head , and tell us the secret thing that is in thee . 
Of all divers , thou hast dived the deepest . 
That head upon which the upper sun now gleams , has moved amid this world 's foundations . 
Where unrecorded names and navies rust , and untold hopes and anchors rot ; where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of millions of the drowned ; there , in that awful water-land , there was thy most familiar home . 
Thou hast been where bell or diver never went ; hast slept by many a sailor 's side , where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay them down . 
Thou saw ` st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship ; heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave ; true to each other , when heaven seemed false to them . 
