Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself , as his measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others . 
But it is time to return to the Pequod . 
`` I fear not thy epidemic , man , '' said Ahab from the bulwarks , to Captain Mayhew , who stood in the boat 's stern ; `` come on board . '' 
But now Gabriel started to his feet . 
`` Think , think of the fevers , yellow and bilious ! 
Beware of the horrible plague ! '' 
`` Gabriel ! 
Gabriel ! '' 
cried Captain Mayhew ; `` thou must either - '' But that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead , and its seethings drowned all speech . 
`` Hast thou seen the White Whale ? '' 
demanded Ahab , when the boat drifted back . 
`` Think , think of thy whale-boat , stoven and sunk ! 
Beware of the horrible tail ! '' 
`` I tell thee again , Gabriel , that - '' But again the boat tore ahead as if dragged by fiends . 
Nothing was said for some moments , while a succession of riotous waves rolled by which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling , not heaving it . 
Meantime , the hoisted sperm whale 's head jogged about very violently , and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant . 
When this interlude was over , Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning Moby Dick ; not , however , without frequent interruptions from Gabriel , whenever his name was mentioned , and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him . 
It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home , when upon speaking a whale-ship , her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick , and the havoc he had made . 
Greedily sucking in this intelligence , Gabriel solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale , in case the monster should be seen ; in his gibbering insanity , pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated ; the Shakers receiving the Bible . 
But when , some year or two afterwards , Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads , Macey , the chief mate , burned with ardor to encounter him ; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the opportunity , despite all the archangel 's denunciations and forewarnings , Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat . 
With them he pushed off ; and , after much weary pulling , and many perilous , unsuccessful onsets , he at last succeeded in getting one iron fast . 
Meantime , Gabriel , ascending to the main-royal mast-head , was tossing one arm in frantic gestures , and hurling forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity . 
Now , while Macey , the mate , was standing up in his boat 's bow , and with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations upon the whale , and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance , lo ! 
a broad white shadow rose from the sea ; by its quick , fanning motion , temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen . 
Next instant , the luckless mate , so full of furious life , was smitten bodily into the air , and making a long arc in his descent , fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty yards . 
Not a chip of the boat was harmed , nor a hair of any oarsman 's head ; but the mate for ever sank . 
It is well to parenthesize here , that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-Whale Fishery , this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any . 
Sometimes , nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated ; oftener the boat 's bow is knocked off , or the thigh-board , on which the headsman stands , is torn from its place and accompanies the body . 
But strangest of all is the circumstance , that in more instances than one , when the body has been recovered , not a single mark of violence is discernible the man being stark dead . 
The whole calamity , with the falling form of Macey , was plainly descried from the ship . 
Raising a piercing shriek -- `` The vial ! 
the vial ! '' 
Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale . 
This terrible event clothed the archangel with added influence ; because his credulous disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it , instead of only making a general prophecy , which any one might have done , and so have chanced to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed . 
He became a nameless terror to the ship . 
Mayhew having concluded his narration , Ahab put such questions to him , that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt the White Whale , if opportunity should offer . 
To which Ahab answered -- `` Aye . '' 
Straightway , then , Gabriel once more started to his feet , glaring upon the old man , and vehemently exclaimed , with downward pointed finger -- `` Think , think of the blasphemer -- dead , and down there ! 
-- beware of the blasphemer 's end ! '' 
Ahab stolidly turned aside ; then said to Mayhew , `` Captain , I have just bethought me of my letter-bag ; there is a letter for one of thy officers , if I mistake not . 
Starbuck , look over the bag . '' 
Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships , whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed , depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans . 
Thus , most letters never reach their mark ; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three years or more . 
Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand . 
It was sorely tumbled , damp , and covered with a dull , spotted , green mould , in consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin . 
Of such a letter , Death himself might well have been the post-boy . 
`` Can ` st not read it ? '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Give it me , man . 
Aye , aye , aye it 's but a dim scrawl ; -- what 's this ? '' 
