What people ? 
But mark now , my shipmates , the behavior of poor Jonah . 
The eager mariners but ask him who he is , and where from ; whereas , they not only receive an answer to those questions , but likewise another answer to a question not put by them , but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him . '' ' 
I am a Hebrew , ' he cries -- and then -- ' I fear the Lord the God of Heaven who hath made the sea and the dry land ! ' 
Fear him , O Jonah ? 
Aye , well mightest thou fear the Lord God then ! 
Straightway , he now goes on to make a full confession ; whereupon the mariners became more and more appalled , but still are pitiful . 
For when Jonah , not yet supplicating God for mercy , since he but too well knew the darkness of his deserts , -- when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take him and cast him forth into the sea , for he knew that for his sake this great tempest was upon them ; they mercifully turn from him , and seek by other means to save the ship . 
But all in vain ; the indignant gale howls louder ; then , with one hand raised invokingly to God , with the other they not unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah . 
`` And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea ; when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east , and the sea is still , as Jonah carries down the gale with him , leaving smooth water behind . 
He goes down in the whirling heart of such a masterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him ; and the whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth , like so many white bolts , upon his prison . 
Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish 's belly . 
But observe his prayer , and so many white bolts , upon his prison . 
Then Jonah prayed unto learn a weighty lesson . 
For sinful as he is , Jonah does not weep and wail for direct deliverance . 
He feels that his dreadful punishment is just . 
He leaves all his deliverance to God , contenting himself with this , that spite of all his pains and pangs , he will still look towards His holy temple . 
And here , shipmates , is true and faithful repentance ; not clamorous for pardon , but grateful for punishment . 
And how pleasing to God was this conduct in Jonah , is shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the whale . 
Shipmates , I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin but I do place him before you as a model for repentance . 
Sin not ; but if you do , take heed to repent of it like Jonah . '' 
While he was speaking these words , the howling of the shrieking , slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher , who , when describing Jonah 's sea-storm , seemed tossed by a storm himself . 
His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell ; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work ; and the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow , and the light leaping from his eye , made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to them . 
There now came a lull in his look , as he silently turned over the leaves of the Book once more ; and , at last , standing motionless , with closed eyes , for the moment , seemed communing with God and himself . 
But again he leaned over towards the people , and bowing his head lowly , with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility , he spake these words : `` Shipmates , God has laid but one hand upon you ; both his hands press upon me . 
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches to all sinners ; and therefore to ye , and still more to me , for I am a greater sinner than ye . 
And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches there where you sit , and listen as you listen , while some one of you reads me that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to me , as a pilot of the living God . 
How being an anointed pilot-prophet , or speaker of true things and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the ears of a wicked Nineveh , Jonah , appalled at the hostility he should raise , fled from his mission , and sought to escape his duty and his God by taking ship at Joppa . 
But God is everywhere ; Tarshish he never reached . 
As we have seen , God came upon him in the whale , and swallowed him down to living gulfs of doom , and with swift slantings tore him along ` into the midst of the seas , ' where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down , and ` the weeds were wrapped about his head , ' and all the watery world of woe bowled over him . 
Yet even then beyond the reach of any plummet -- ` out of the belly of hell ' -- when the whale grounded upon the ocean 's utmost bones , even then , God heard the engulphed , repenting prophet when he cried . 
Then God spake unto the fish ; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea , the whale came breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun , and all the delights of air and earth ; and ` vomited out Jonah upon the dry land ; ' when the word of the Lord came a second time ; and Jonah , bruised and beaten -- his ears , like two sea-shells , still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean -- Jonah did the Almighty 's bidding . 
And what was that , shipmates ? 
To preach the Truth to the face of Falsehood ! 
That was it ! 
`` This , shipmates , this is that other lesson ; and woe to that pilot of the living God who slights it . 
Woe to him whom this world charms from Gospel duty ! 
Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God has brewed them into a gale ! 
Woe to him who seeks to please rather than to appal ! 
Woe to him whose good name is more to him than goodness ! 
Woe to him who , in this world , courts not dishonor ! 
Woe to him who would not be true , even though to be false were salvation ! 
Yea , woe to him who as the great Pilot Paul has it , while preaching to others is himself a castaway ! 
He drooped and fell away from himself for a moment ; then lifting his face to them again , showed a deep joy in his eyes , as he cried out with a heavenly enthusiasm , -- `` But oh ! 
shipmates ! 
on the starboard hand of every woe , there is a sure delight ; and higher the top of that delight , than the bottom of the woe is deep . 
Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low ? 
Delight is to him -- a far , far upward , and inward delight -- who against the proud gods and commodores of this earth , ever stands forth his own inexorable self . 
Delight is to him whose strong arms yet support him , when the ship of this base treacherous world has gone down beneath him . 
Delight is to him , who gives no quarter in the truth , and kills , burns , and destroys all sin though he pluck it out from under the robes of Senators and Judges . 
