`` Thou knowest best , '' was the sepulchral reply , `` the seven hundred and seventy-seventh would n't be too much , would it ? 
-- ` where moth and rust do corrupt , but lay - ' '' Lay , indeed , thought I , and such a lay ! 
the seven hundred and seventy-seventh ! 
Well , old Bildad , you are determined that I , for one , shall not lay up many lays here below , where moth and rust do corrupt . 
It was an exceedingly long lay that , indeed ; and though from the magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a landsman , yet the slightest consideration will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large number , yet , when you come to make a teenth of it , you will then see , I say , that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons ; and so I thought at the time . 
`` Why , blast your eyes , Bildad , '' cried Peleg , Thou dost not want to swindle this young man ! 
he must have more than that . '' 
`` Seven hundred and seventy-seventh , '' again said Bildad , without lifting his eyes ; and then went on mumbling -- `` for where your treasure is , there will your heart be also . '' 
`` I am going to put him down for the three hundredth , '' said Peleg , `` do ye hear that , Bildad ! 
The three hundredth lay , I say . '' 
Bildad laid down his book , and turning solemnly towards him said , `` Captain Peleg , thou hast a generous heart ; but thou must consider the duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship -- widows and orphans , many of them -- and that if we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man , we may be taking the bread from those widows and those orphans . 
The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay , Captain Peleg . '' 
`` Thou Bildad ! '' 
roared Peleg , starting up and clattering about the cabin . 
`` Blast ye , Captain Bildad , if I had followed thy advice in these matters , I would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn . '' 
`` Captain Peleg , '' said Bildad steadily , `` thy conscience may be drawing ten inches of water , or ten fathoms , I ca n't tell ; but as thou art still an impenitent man , Captain Peleg , I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a leaky one ; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit , Captain Peleg . '' 
`` Fiery pit ! 
fiery pit ! 
ye insult me , man ; past all natural bearing , ye insult me . 
It 's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he 's bound to hell . 
Flukes and flames ! 
Bildad , say that again to me , and start my soulbolts , but I 'll -- I 'll -- yes , I 'll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns on . 
Out of the cabin , ye canting , drab-colored son of a wooden gun -- a straight wake with ye ! '' 
As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad , but with a marvellous oblique , sliding celerity , Bildad for that time eluded him . 
Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible owners of the ship , and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded , I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad , who , I made no doubt , was all eagerness to vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg . 
But to my astonishment , he sat down again on the transom very quietly , and seemed to have not the slightest intention of withdrawing . 
He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his ways . 
As for Peleg , after letting off his rage as he had , there seemed no more left in him , and he , too , sat down like a lamb , though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated . 
`` Whew ! '' 
he whistled at last -- `` the squall 's gone off to leeward , I think . 
Bildad , thou used to be good at sharpening a lance , mend that pen , will ye . 
My jack-knife here needs the grindstone . 
That 's he ; thank ye , Bildad . 
Now then , my young man , Ishmael 's thy name , did n't ye say ? 
Well then , down ye go here , Ishmael , for the three hundredth lay . '' 
`` Captain Peleg , '' said I , `` I have a friend with me who wants to ship too -- shall I bring him down to-morrow ? '' 
`` To be sure , '' said Peleg . 
`` Fetch him along , and we 'll look at him . '' 
`` What lay does he want ? '' 
groaned Bildad , glancing up from the Book in which he had again been burying himself . 
`` Oh ! 
never thee mind about that , Bildad , '' said Peleg . 
`` Has he ever whaled it any ? '' 
turning to me . 
`` Killed more whales than I can count , Captain Peleg . '' 
`` Well , bring him along then . '' 
And , after signing the papers , off I went ; nothing doubting but that I had done a good morning 's work , and that the Pequod was the identical ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape . 
But I had not proceeded far , when I began to bethink me that the Captain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me ; though , indeed , in many cases , a whale-ship will be completely fitted out , and receive all her crew on board , ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command ; for sometimes these voyages are so prolonged , and the shore intervals at home so exceedingly brief , that if the captain have a family , or any absorbing concernment of that sort , he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port , but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea . 
However , it is always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself into his hands . 
Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg , inquiring where Captain Ahab was to be found . 
