-- Mr. Stubb , Mr. Flask , come forward with me . '' 
`` He goes off in a huff . 
The whole he can endure ; at the parts he baulks . 
Now I do n't like this . 
I make a leg for Captain Ahab , and he wears it like a gentleman ; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg , and he wo n't put his head into it . 
Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin ? 
And now I 'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it . 
It 's like turning an old coat ; going to bring the flesh on the other side now . 
I do n't like this cobbling sort of business -- I do n't like it at all ; it 's undignified ; it 's not my place . 
Let tinkers ' brats do tinkerings ; we are their betters . 
I like to take in hand none but clean , virgin , fair-and-square mathematical jobs , something that regularly begins at the beginning , and is at the middle when midway , and comes to an end at the conclusion ; not a cobbler 's job , that 's at an end in the middle , and at the beginning at the end . 
It 's the old woman 's tricks to be giving cobbling jobs . 
Lord ! 
what an affection all old women have for tinkers . 
I know an old woman of sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once . 
And that 's the reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore when I kept my job-shop in the Vineyard ; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads to run off with me . 
But heigh-ho ! 
there are no caps at sea but snow-caps . 
Let me see . 
Nail down the lid ; caulk the seams ; pay over the same with pitch ; batten them down tight , and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship 's stern . 
Were ever such things done before with a coffin ? 
Some superstitious old carpenters , now , would be tied up in the rigging , ere they would do the job . 
But I 'm made of knotty Aroostook hemlock ; I do n't budge . 
Cruppered with a coffin ! 
Sailing about with a grave-yard tray ! 
But never mind . 
We workers in woods make bridal bedsteads and card-tables , as well as coffins and hearses . 
We work by the month , or by the job , or by the profit ; not for us to ask the why and wherefore of our work , unless it be too confounded cobbling , and then we stash it if we can . 
Hem ! 
I 'll do the job , now , tenderly . 
I 'll have me -- let 's see -- how many in the ship 's company , all told ? 
But I 've forgotten . 
Any way , I 'll have me thirty separate , Turk 's - headed life-lines , each three feet long hanging all round to the coffin . 
Then , if the hull go down , there 'll be thirty lively fellows all fighting for one coffin , a sight not seen very often beneath the sun ! 
Come hammer , caulking-iron , pitch-pot , and marling-spike ! 
Let 's to it . '' 
The Deck The coffin laid upon two line-tubs , between the vice-bench and the open hatchway ; the Carpenter caulking its seams ; the string of twisted oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock . 
-- Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway , and hears Pip following him . 
Back lad ; I will be with ye again presently . 
He goes ! 
Not this hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy . 
-- Middle aisle of a church ! 
What 's here ? '' 
`` Life-buoy , sir . 
Mr. Starbuck 's orders . 
Oh , look , sir ! 
Beware the hatchway ! '' 
`` Thank ye , man . 
Thy coffin lies handy to the vault . '' 
`` Sir ? 
