again . '' 
looks ; we look , ye look , they look . '' 
and we , ye , and they , are all bats ; and I 'm a crow , especially when I stand a ` top of this caw ! 
caw ! 
caw ! 
caw ! 
caw ! 
Ai n't I a crow ? 
And where 's the scare-crow ? 
There he stands ; a pair of old trowsers , and two more poked into the sleeves of an old jacket . '' 
`` Wonder if he means me ? 
-- complimentary -- poor lad ! 
-- I could go hang myself . 
Any way , for the present , I 'll quit Pip 's vicinity . 
I can stand the rest , for they have plain wits ; but he 's too crazy-witty for my sanity . 
So , so , I leave him muttering . '' 
`` Here 's the ship 's navel , this doubloon here , and they are all one fire to unscrew it . 
But , unscrew your navel , and what 's the consequence ? 
Then again , if it stays here , that is ugly , too , for when aught 's nailed to the mast it 's a sign that things grow desperate . 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
old Ahab ! 
the White Whale ; he 'll nail ye ! 
This is a pine tree . 
My father , in old Tolland county , cut down a pine tree once , and found a silver ring grown over in it ; some old darkey 's wedding ring . 
How did it get there ? 
And so they 'll say in the resurrection , when they come to fish up this old mast , and find a doubloon lodged in it , with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark . 
Oh , the gold ! 
the precious , precious gold ! 
-- the green miser 'll hoard ye soon ! 
Hish ! 
hish ! 
God goes ` mong the worlds blackberrying . 
Cook ! 
ho , cook ! 
and cook us ! 
Jenny ! 
hey , hey , hey , hey , hey , Jenny , Jenny ! 
and get your hoe-cake done ! '' 
Leg and Arm The Pequod of Nantucket , Meets the Samuel Enderby , of London `` Ship , ahoy ! 
Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
So cried Ahab , once more hailing a ship showing English colors , bearing down under the stern . 
Trumpet to mouth , the old man was standing in his hoisted quarter-deck , his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain , who was carelessly reclining in his own boat 's bow . 
He was a darkly-tanned , burly , goodnatured , fine-looking man , of sixty or thereabouts , dressed in a spacious roundabout , that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth ; and one empty arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a huzzar 's surcoat . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ! '' 
`` See you this ? '' 
and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it , he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone , terminating in a wooden head like a mallet . 
`` Man my boat ! '' 
cried Ahab , impetuously , and tossing about the oars near him -- `` Stand by to lower ! '' 
In less than a minute , without quitting his little craft , he and his crew were dropped to the water , and were soon alongside of the stranger . 
