Though by the repeated bloody chastisements they have received at the hands of European cruisers , the audacity of these corsairs has of late been somewhat repressed ; yet , even at the present day , we occasionally hear of English and American vessels , which , in those waters , have been remorselessly boarded and pillaged . 
With a fair , fresh wind , the Pequod was now drawing nigh to these straits ; Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Java sea , and thence , cruising northwards , over waters known to be frequented here and there by the Sperm Whale , sweep inshore by the Philippine Islands , and gain the far coast of Japan , in time for the great whaling season there . 
By these means , the circumnavigating Pequod would sweep almost all the known Sperm Whale cruising grounds of the world , previous to descending upon the Line in the Pacific ; where Ahab , though everywhere else foiled in his pursuit , firmly counted upon giving battle to Moby Dick , in the sea he was most known to frequent ; and at a season when he might most reasonably be presumed to be haunting it . 
But how now ? 
in this zoned quest , does Ahab touch no land ? 
does his crew drink air ? 
Surely , he will stop for water . 
Nay . 
For a long time , now , the circus-running sun has raced within his fiery ring , and needs no sustenance but what 's in himself . 
So Ahab . 
Mark this , too , in the whaler . 
While other hulls are loaded down with alien stuff , to be transferred to foreign wharves ; the world-wandering whale-ship carries no cargo but herself and crew , their weapons and their wants . 
She has a whole lake 's contents bottled in her ample hold . 
She is ballasted with utilities ; not altogether with unusable pig-lead and kentledge . 
She carries years ' water in her . 
Clear old prime Nantucket water ; which , when three years afloat , the Nantucketer , in the Pacific , prefers to drink before the brackish fluid , but yesterday rafted off in casks , from the Peruvian or Indian streams . 
Hence it is , that , while other ships may have gone to China from New York , and back again , touching at a score of ports , the whale-ship , in all that interval , may not have sighted one grain of soil ; her crew having seen no man but floating seamen like themselves . 
So that did you carry them the news that another flood had come ; they would only answer -- `` Well , boys , here 's the ark ! '' 
Now , as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western coast of Java , in the near vicinity of the Straits of Sunda ; indeed , as most of the ground , roundabout , was generally recognised by the fishermen as an excellent spot for cruising ; therefore , as the Pequod gained more and more upon Java Head , the look-outs were repeatedly hailed , and admonished to keep wide awake . 
But though the green palmy cliffs of the land soon loomed on the starboard bow , and with delighted nostrils the fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air , yet not a single jet was descried . 
Almost renouncing all thought of falling in with any game hereabouts , the ship had well nigh entered the straits , when the customary cheering cry was heard from aloft , and ere long a spectacle of singular magnificence saluted us . 
But here be it premised , that owing to the unwearied activity with which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans , the Sperm Whales , instead of almost invariably sailing in small detached companies , as in former times , are now frequently met with in extensive herds , sometimes embracing so great a multitude , that it would almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemn league and covenant for mutual assistance and protection . 
To this aggregation of the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans , may be imputed the circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds , you may now sometimes sail for weeks and months together , without being greeted by a single spout ; and then be suddenly saluted by what sometimes seems thousands on thousands . 
Broad on both bows , at the distance of some two or three miles , and forming a great semicircle , embracing one half of the level horizon , a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in the noon-day air . 
Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of the Right Whale , which , dividing at top , falls over in two branches , like the cleft drooping boughs of a willow , the single forward-slanting spout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist , continually rising and falling away to leeward . 
Seen from the Pequod 's deck , then , as she would rise on a high hill of the sea , this host of vapory spouts , individually curling up into the air , and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze , showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis , descried of a balmy autumnal morning , by some horseman on a height . 
As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains , accelerate their march , all eagerness to place that perilous passage in their rear , and once more expand in comparative security upon the plain ; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward through the straits ; gradually contracting the wings of their semicircle , and swimming on , in one solid , but still crescentic centre . 
Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them ; the harpooneers handling their weapons , and loudly cheering from the heads of their yet suspended boats . 
If the wind only held , little doubt had they , that chased through these Straits of Sunda , the vast host would only deploy into the Oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few of their number . 
And who could tell whether , in that congregated caravan , Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming , like the worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession of the Siamese ! 
So with stun-sail piled on stun-sail , we sailed along , driving these leviathans before us ; when , of a sudden , the voice of Tashtego was heard , loudly directing attention to something in our wake . 
Corresponding to the crescent in our van , we beheld another in our rear . 
It seemed formed of detached white vapors , rising and falling something like the spouts of the whales ; only they did not so completely come and go ; for they constantly hovered , without finally disappearing . 
Levelling his glass at this sight , Ahab quickly revolved in his pivot-hole , crying , `` Aloft there , and rig whips and buckets to wet the sails ; -- Malays , sir , and after us ! '' 
As if too long lurking behind the headlands , till the Pequod should fairly have entered the straits , these rascally Asiatics were now in hot pursuit , to make up for their over-cautious delay . 
But when the swift Pequod , with a fresh leading wind , was herself in hot chase ; how very kind of these tawny philanthropists to assist in speeding her on to her own chosen pursuit , -- mere riding-whips and rowels to her , that they were . 
As with glass under arm , Ahab to-and-fro paced the deck ; in his forward turn beholding the monsters he chased , and in the after one the bloodthirsty pirates chasing him ; some such fancy as the above seemed his . 
And when he glanced upon the green walls of the watery defile in which the ship was then sailing , and bethought him that through that gate lay the route to his vengeance , and beheld , how that through that same gate he was now both chasing and being chased to his deadly end ; and not only that , but a herd of remorseless wild pirates and inhuman atheistical devils were infernally cheering him on with their curses ; -- when all these conceits had passed through his brain , Ahab 's brow was left gaunt and ribbed , like the black sand beach after some stormy tide has been gnawing it , without being able to drag the firm thing from its place . 
But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew ; and when , after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern , the Pequod at last shot by the vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatra side , emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond ; then , the harpooneers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been gaining upon the ship , than to rejoice that the ship had so victoriously gained upon the Malays . 
But still driving on in the wake of the whales , at length they seemed abating their speed ; gradually the ship neared them ; and the wind now dying away , word was passed to spring to the boats . 
But no sooner did the herd , by some presumed wonderful instinct of the Sperm Whale , become notified of the three keels that were after them , -- though as yet a mile in their rear , -- than they rallied again , and forming in close ranks and battalions , so that their spouts all looked like flashing lines of stacked bayonets , moved on with redoubled velocity . 
Stripped to our shirts and drawers , we sprang to the white-ash , and after several hours ' pulling were almost disposed to renounce the chase , when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave animating tokens that they were now at last under the influence of that strange perplexity of inert irresolution , which , when the fishermen perceive it in the whale , they say he is gallied * . 
The compact martial columns in which they had been hitherto rapidly and steadily swimming , were now broken up in one measureless rout ; and like King Porus ' elephants in the Indian battle with Alexander , they seemed going mad with consternation . 
In all directions expanding in vast irregular circles , and aimlessly swimming hither and thither , by their short thick spoutings , they plainly betrayed their distraction of panic . 
This was still more strangely evinced by those of their number , who , completely paralysed as it were , helplessly floated like water-logged dismantled ships on the sea . 
Had these Leviathans been but a flock of simple sheep , pursued over the pasture by three fierce wolves , they could not possibly have evinced such excessive dismay . 
But this occasional timidity is characteristic of almost all herding creatures . 
Though banding together in tens of thousands , the lion-maned buffaloes of the West have fled before a solitary horseman . 
Witness , too , all human beings , how when herded together in the sheepfold of a theatre 's pit , they will , at the slightest alarm of fire , rush helter-skelter for the outlets , crowding , trampling , jamming , and remorselessly dashing each other to death . 
Best , therefore , withhold any amazement at the strangely gallied whales before us , for there is no folly of the beasts of the earth which is not infinitely outdone by the madness of men . 
