What a relief it was to choking Stubb , when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below . 
And poor little Flask , he was the youngest son , and little boy of this weary family party . 
His were the shin-bones of the saline beef ; his would have been the drumsticks . 
For Flask to have presumed to help himself , this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first degree . 
Had he helped himself at that table , doubtless , never more would he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world ; nevertheless , strange to say , Ahab never forbade him . 
And had Flask helped himself , the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it . 
Least of all , did Flask presume to help himself to butter . 
Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him , on account of its clotting his clear , sunny complexion ; or whether he deemed that , on so long a voyage in such marketless waters , butter was at a premium , and therefore was not for him , a subaltern ; however it was , Flask , alas ! 
was a butterless man ! 
Another thing . 
Flask was the last person down at the dinner , and Flask is the first man up . 
Consider ! 
For hereby Flask 's dinner was badly jammed in point of time . 
Starbuck and Stubb both had the start of him ; and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear . 
If Stubb even , who is but a peg higher than Flask , happens to have but a small appetite , and soon shows symptoms of concluding his repast , then Flask must bestir himself , he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day ; for it is against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the deck . 
Therefore it was that Flask once admitted in private , that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an officer , from that moment he had never known what it was to be otherwise than hungry , more or less . 
For what he ate did not so much relieve his hunger , as keep it immortal in him . 
Peace and satisfaction , thought Flask , have for ever departed from my stomach . 
I am an officer ; but , how I wish I could fist a bit of old-fashioned beef in the fore-castle , as I used to when I was before the mast . 
There 's the fruits of promotion now ; there 's the vanity of glory : there 's the insanity of life ! 
Besides , if it were so that any mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask 's official capacity , all that sailor had to do , in order to obtain ample vengeance , was to go aft at dinnertime , and get a peep at Flask through the cabin sky-light , sitting silly and dumfoundered before awful Ahab . 
Now , Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first table in the Pequod 's cabin . 
After their departure , taking place in inverted order to their arrival , the canvas cloth was cleared , or rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward . 
And then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast , they being its residuary legatees . 
They made a sort of temporary servants ' hall of the high and mighty cabin . 
In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and nameless invisible domineerings of the captain 's table , was the entire care-free license and ease , the almost frantic democracy of those inferior fellows the harpooneers . 
While their masters , the mates , seemed afraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws , the harpooneers chewed their food with such a relish that there was a report to it . 
They dined like lords ; they filled their bellies like Indian ships all day loading with spices . 
Such portentous appetites had Queequeg and Tashtego , that to fill out the vacancies made by the previous repast , often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great baron of salt-junk , seemingly quarried out of the solid ox . 
And if he were not lively about it , if he did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump , then Tashtego had an ungentlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a fork at his back , harpoon-wise . 
And once Daggoo , seized with a sudden humor , assisted Dough-Boy 's memory by snatching him up bodily , and thrusting his head into a great empty wooden trencher , while Tashtego , knife in hand , began laying out the circle preliminary to scalping him . 
He was naturally a very nervous , shuddering sort of little fellow , this bread-faced steward ; the progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse . 
And what with the standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab , and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three savages , Dough-Boy 's whole life was one continual lip-quiver . 
Commonly , after seeing the harpooneers furnished with all things they demanded , he would escape from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining , and fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door , till all was over . 
It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego , opposing his filed teeth to the Indian 's ; crosswise to them , Daggoo seated on the floor , for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head to the low carlines ; at every motion of his colossal limbs , making the low cabin framework to shake , as when an African elephant goes passenger in a ship . 
But for all this , the great negro was wonderfully abstemious , not to say dainty . 
It seemed hardly possible that by such comparatively small mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused through so broad , baronial , and superb a person . 
But , doubtless , this noble savage fed strong and drank deep of the abounding element of air ; and through his dilated nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds . 
Not by beef or by bread , are giants made or nourished . 
But Queequeg , he had a mortal , barbaric smack of the lip in eating -- an ugly sound enough -- so much so , that the trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms . 
And when he would hear Tashtego singing out for him to produce himself , that his bones might be picked , the simple-witted Steward all but shattered the crockery hanging round him in the pantry , by his sudden fits of the palsy . 
Nor did the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets , for their lances and other weapons ; and with which whetstones , at dinner , they would ostentatiously sharpen their knives ; that grating sound did not at all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy . 
How could he forget that in his Island days , Queequeg , for one , must certainly have been guilty of some murderous , convivial indiscretion . 
Alas ! 
Dough-Boy ! 
hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals . 
Not a napkin should he carry on his arm , but a buckler . 
In good time , though , to his great delight , the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart ; to his credulous , fable-mongering ears , all their martial bones jingling in them at every step , like Moorish scimetars in scabbards . 
But , though these barbarians dined in the cabin , and nominally lived there ; still , being anything but sedentary in their habits , they were scarcely ever in it except at mealtimes , and just before sleeping-time , when they passed through it to their own peculiar quarters . 
In this one matter , Ahab seemed no exception to most American whale captains , who , as a set , rather incline to the opinion that by rights the ship 's cabin belongs to them ; and that it is by courtesy alone that anybody else is , at any time , permitted there . 
