In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine dish . 
The casket of the skull is broken into with an axe , and the two plump , whitish lobes being withdrawn -LRB- precisely resembling two large puddings -RRB- , they are then mixed with flour , and cooked into a most delectable mess , in flavor somewhat resembling calves ' head , which is quite a dish among some epicures ; and every one knows that some young bucks among the epicures , by continually dining upon calves ' brains , by and by get to have a little brains of their own , so as to be able to tell a calf 's head from their own heads ; which , indeed , requires uncommon discrimination . 
And that is the reason why a young buck with an intelligent looking calf 's head before him , is somehow one of the saddest sights you can see . 
The head looks a sort of reproachfully at him , with an `` Et tu Brute ! '' 
expression . 
It is not , perhaps , entirely because the whale is so excessively unctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence ; that appears to result , in some way , from the consideration before mentioned : i.e. that a man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea , and eat it too by its own light . 
But no doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a murderer ; perhaps he was hung ; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen , he certainly would have been ; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does . 
Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds . 
Does not that sight take a tooth out of the cannibal 's jaw ? 
Cannibals ? 
who is not a cannibal ? 
I tell you it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a coming famine ; it will be more tolerable for that provident Fejee , I say , in the day of judgment , than for thee , civilized and enlightened gourmand , who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy pate-de-foie-gras . 
But Stubb , he eats the whale by its own light , does he ? 
and that is adding insult to injury , is it ? 
Look at your knife-handle , there , my civilized and enlightened gourmand , dining off that roast beef , what is that handle made of ? 
-- what but the bones of the brother of the very ox you are eating ? 
And what do you pick your teeth with , after devouring that fat goose ? 
With a feather of the same fowl . 
And with what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the Suppression of Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars ? 
It is only within the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to patronize nothing but steel pens . 
The Shark Massacre When in the Southern Fishery a captured Sperm Whale , after long and weary toil , is brought alongside late at night , it is not , as a general thing at least , customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in . 
For that business is an exceedingly laborious one ; is not very soon completed ; and requires all hands to set about it . 
Therefore , the common usage is to take in all sail ; lash the helm a ` lee ; and then send every one below to his hammock till daylight , with the reservation that , until that time , anchor-watches shall be kept ; that is , two and two for an hour , each couple , the crew in rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well . 
But sometimes , especially upon the Line in the Pacific , this plan will not answer at all ; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the moored carcase , that were he left so for six hours , say , on a stretch , little more than the skeleton would be visible by morning . 
In most other parts of the ocean , however , where these fish do not so largely abound , their wondrous voracity can be at times considerably diminished , by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades , a procedure notwithstanding , which , in some instances , only seems to tickle them into still greater activity . 
But it was not thus in the present case with the Pequod 's sharks ; though , to be sure , any man unaccustomed to such sights , to have looked over her side that night , would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese , and those sharks the maggots in it . 
Nevertheless , upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was concluded ; and when , accordingly Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on deck , no small excitement was created among the sharks ; for immediately suspending the cutting stages over the side , and lowering three lanterns , so that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea , these two mariners , darting their long whaling-spades , * kept up an incessant murdering of the sharks , by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls , seemingly their only vital part . 
But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling hosts , the marksmen could not always hit their mark ; and this brought about new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe . 
They viciously snapped , not only at each other 's disembowelments , but like flexible bows , bent round , and bit their own ; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by the same mouth , to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound . 
Nor was this all . 
It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures . 
A sort of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very joints and bones , after what might be called the individual life had departed . 
Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin , one of these sharks almost took poor Queequeg 's hand off , when he tried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw . 
* The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel ; is about the bigness of a man 's spread hand ; and in general shape , corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named ; only its sides are perfectly flat , and its upper end considerably narrower than the lower . 
This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible ; and when being used is occasionally honed , just like a razor . 
In its socket , a stiff pole , from twenty to thirty feet long , is inserted for a handle . 
`` Queequeg no care what god made him shark , '' said the savage , agonizingly lifting his hand up and down ; `` wedder Fejee god or Nantucket god ; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin . '' 
Cutting In It was a Saturday night , and such a Sabbath as followed ! 
Ex officio professors of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen . 
The ivory Pequod was turned into what seemed a shamble ; every sailor a butcher . 
You would have thought we were offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods . 
In the first place , the enormous cutting tackles , among other ponderous things comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green , and which no single man can possibly lift -- this vast bunch of grapes was swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head , the strongest point anywhere above a ship 's deck . 
The end of the hawser-like rope winding through these intricacies , was then conducted to the windlass , and the huge lower block of the tackles was swung over the whale ; to this block the great blubber hook , weighing some one hundred pounds , was attached . 
And now suspended in stages over the side , Starbuck and Stubb , the mates , armed with their long spades , began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above the nearest of the two side-fins . 
This done , a broad , semicircular line is cut round the hole , the hook is inserted , and the main body of the crew striking up a wild chorus , now commence heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass . 
When instantly , the entire ship careens over on her side ; every bolt in her starts like the nailheads of an old house in frosty weather ; she trembles , quivers , and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky . 
More and more she leans over to the whale , while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a helping heave from the billows ; till at last , a swift , startling snap is heard ; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale , and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged semicircular end of the first strip of blubber . 
Now as the blubber envelopes the whale precisely as the rind does an orange , so is it stripped off from the body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it . 
For the strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps the whale rolling over and over in the water , and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels off along the line called the `` scarf , '' simultaneously cut by the spades of Starbuck and Stubb , the mates ; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off , and indeed by that very act itself , it is all the time being hoisted higher and higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top ; the men at the windlass then cease heaving , and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping mass sways to and fro as if let down from the sky , and every one present must take good heed to dodge it when it swings , else it may box his ears and pitch him headlong overboard . 
One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long , keen weapon called a boarding-sword , and watching his chance he dexterously slices out a considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass . 
