After supper , and another social chat and smoke , we went to our room together . 
He made me a present of his embalmed head ; took out his enormous tobacco wallet , and groping under the tobacco , drew out some thirty dollars in silver ; then spreading them on the table , and mechanically dividing them into two equal portions , pushed one of them towards me , and said it was mine . 
I was going to remonstrate ; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers ' pockets . 
I let them stay . 
He then went about his evening prayers , took out his idol , and removed the paper firebrand . 
By certain signs and symptoms , I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him ; but well knowing what was to follow , I deliberated a moment whether , in case he invited me , I would comply or otherwise . 
I was a good Christian ; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible Presbyterian Church . 
How then could I unite with this wild idolator in worshipping his piece of wood ? 
But what is worship ? 
thought I. Do you suppose now , Ishmael , that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth -- pagans and all included -- can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood ? 
Impossible ! 
But what is worship ? 
-- to do the will of God ? 
that is worship . 
And what is the will of God ? 
-- to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow man to do to me -- that is the will of God . 
Now , Queequeg is my fellow man . 
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me ? 
Why , unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship . 
Consequently , I must then unite with him in his ; ergo , I must turn idolator . 
So I kindled the shavings ; helped prop up the innocent little idol ; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg ; salamed before him twice or thrice ; kissed his nose ; and that done , we undressed and went to bed , at peace with our own consciences and all the world . 
But we did not go to sleep without some little chat . 
How it is I know not ; but there is no place like a bed for confidential disclosures between friends . 
Man and wife , they say , there open the very bottom of their souls to each other ; and some old couples often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning . 
Thus , then , in our hearts ' honeymoon , lay I and Queequeg -- a cosy , loving pair . 
Nightgown We had lain thus in bed , chatting and napping at short intervals , and Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine , and then drawing them back ; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we ; when , at last , by reason of our confabulations , what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed , and we felt like getting up again , though day-break was yet some way down the future . 
Yes , we became very wakeful ; so much so that our recumbent position began to grow wearisome , and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up ; the clothes well tucked around us , leaning against the headboard with our four knees drawn up close together , and our two noses bending over them , as if our knee-pans were warming-pans . 
We felt very nice and snug , the more so since it was so chilly out of doors ; indeed out of bed-clothes too , seeing that there was no fire in the room . 
The more so , I say , because truly to enjoy bodily warmth , some small part of you must be cold , for there is no quality in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast . 
Nothing exists in itself . 
If you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable , and have been so a long time , then you can not be said to be comfortable any more . 
But if , like Queequeg and me in the bed , the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled , why then , indeed , in the general consciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm . 
For this reason a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a fire , which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich . 
For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to have nothing but the blankets between you and your snugness and the cold of the outer air . 
Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal . 
We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time , when all at once I thought I would open my eyes ; for when between sheets , whether by day or by night , and whether asleep or awake , I have a way of always keeping my eyes shut , in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed . 
Because no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed ; as if , darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences , though light be more congenial to our clayey part . 
Upon opening my eyes then , and coming out of my own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night , I experienced a disagreeable revulsion . 
Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it were best to strike a light , seeing that we were so wide awake ; and besides he felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk . 
Be it said , that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the night before , yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once love comes to bend them . 
For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg smoking by me , even in bed , because he seemed to be full of such serene household joy then . 
I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord 's policy of insurance . 
I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend . 
With our shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders , we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other , till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke , illuminated by the flame of the new-lit lamp . 
Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far distant scenes , I know not , but he now spoke of his native island ; and , eager to hear his history , I begged him to go on and tell it . 
He gladly complied . 
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words , yet subsequent disclosures , when I had become more familiar with his broken phraseology , now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in the mere skeleton I give . 
Biographical Queequeg was a native of Kokovoko , an island far away to the West and South . 
It is not down on any map ; true places never are . 
When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass clout , followed by the nibbling goats , as if he were a green sapling ; even then , in Queequeg 's ambitious soul , lurked a strong desire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two . 
