ETYMOLOGY -LRB- Supplied by a Late Consumptive Usher to a Grammar School -RRB- The pale Usher -- threadbare in coat , heart , body , and brain ; I see him now . 
He was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars , with a queer handkerchief , mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of all the known nations of the world . 
He loved to dust his old grammars ; it somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality . 
`` While you take in hand to school others , and to teach them by what name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue leaving out , through ignorance , the letter H , which almost alone maketh the signification of the word , you deliver that which is not true . '' 
-- HACKLUYT `` WHALE . 
... Sw . 
and Dan . 
hval . 
This animal is named from roundness or rolling ; for in Dan . 
hvalt is arched or vaulted . '' 
-- WEBSTER 'S DICTIONARY `` WHALE . 
... It is more immediately from the Dut . 
and Ger . 
Wallen ; A.S. Walw-ian , to roll , to wallow . '' 
-- RICHARDSON 'S DICTIONARY KETOS , Greek . 
CETUS , Latin . 
WHOEL , Anglo-Saxon . 
HVALT , Danish . 
WAL , Dutch . 
HWAL , Swedish . 
WHALE , Icelandic . 
WHALE , English . 
BALEINE , French . 
BALLENA , Spanish . 
PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE , Fegee . 
PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE , Erromangoan . 
EXTRACTS -LRB- Supplied by a Sub-Sub-Librarian -RRB- It will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub-worm of a poor devil of a Sub-Sub appears to have gone through the long Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth , picking up whatever random allusions to whales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever , sacred or profane . 
therefore you must not , in every case at least , take the higgledy-piggledy whale statements , however authentic , in these extracts , for veritable gospel cetology . 
Far from it . 
As touching the ancient authors generally , as well as the poets here appearing , these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining , as affording a glancing bird 's eye view of what has been promiscuously said , thought , fancied , and sung of Leviathan , by many nations and generations , including our own . 
So fare thee well , poor devil of a Sub-Sub , whose commentator I am . 
Thou belongest to that hopeless , sallow tribe which no wine of this world will ever warm ; and for whom even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong ; but with whom one sometimes loves to sit , and feel poor-devilish , too ; and grow convivial upon tears ; and say to them bluntly , with full eyes and empty glasses , and in not altogether unpleasant sadness -- Give it up , Sub-Subs ! 
For by how much more pains ye take to please the world , by so much the more shall ye for ever go thankless ! 
Would that I could clear out Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye ! 
But gulp down your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts ; for your friends who have gone before are clearing out the seven-storied heavens , and making refugees of long pampered Gabriel , Michael , and Raphael , against your coming . 
Here ye strike but splintered hearts together -- there , ye shall strike unsplinterable glasses ! 
`` And God created great whales . '' 
-- GENESIS . 
`` Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him ; One would think the deep to be hoary . '' 
-- JOB . 
`` Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah . '' 
-- JONAH . 
`` There go the ships ; there is that Leviathan whom thou hast made to play therein . '' 
-- PSALMS . 
`` In that day , the Lord with his sore , and great , and strong sword , shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent , even Leviathan that crooked serpent ; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea . '' 
-- ISAIAH `` And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of this monster 's mouth , be it beast , boat , or stone , down it goes all incontinently that foul great swallow of his , and perisheth in the bottomless gulf of his paunch . '' 
-- HOLLAND 'S PLUTARCH 'S MORALS . 
`` The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes that are : among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called Balaene , take up as much in length as four acres or arpens of land . '' 
-- HOLLAND 'S PLINY . 
`` Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea , when about sunrise a great many Whales and other monsters of the sea , appeared . 
